CATHECHISMVS, That is to say a short Instruction into Christian Religion for
the synguler commodity and profit of children and young people. Set forth by
the most reverend father in God Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of
all England and Metropolitan.

Gualterus Lynne excudebat.

1548.

The King ought to be feared as the roaryng of a Lyo^, who provoke him unto
anger, offe^deth against his own soul* pro. xx



Let not the book of this law depart out of your mouths. B^ record therein
day and night, that you may do according* all that is written therein.
Joshua* i, x. Deuteronomy. xvii.d.

To the most excellent prince Edward the.VI. by the grace of God king of
England, France and Irelande, defendour of the Faith, and in earth of the
church of England and Irelande immediately under God supreme heed, your
graces humble subject and Chaplayne Thomas Archebysshop of Canterbury,
wissheth abounda^ce of al grace and godlynes with a long and prosperous reign.
IT is not unknown unto the hole world (most excellent Prince) yt your graces
father a King of most famous memory of a fervent and ernest godly
disposition and tender zele toward ye setting forth of gods glory, most
diligently trauaylled for a true and a right reformation and a quiet concord
in Christ's religion thorowout al his dominions, wherein undoubtedly he brought
many things to a godly purpose and effect, and did abolyshe and take away
much blyndnes and ignorance of God, many great errors, fond and pernicious
superstitions and abuses, that had crepte into this church of England, and
Irelande a long time. And I perceiving that your magestie by thaduyse of your
most dear uncle my lord Protector, and the rest of your graces most
honorable counsel, is most desirous perfytly to finyshe and bring to pass,
that your father did most Godly begin, do think that there is nothing
more necessary, for the furthera^ce hereof, then that it might be forseen,
how the youth and tender age of your loving subjects, may be brought up
and traded in the truth of Gods holy word. For it is thought not to me
only, but to many others, that neither your graces father should have been
enforced in his time, to have taken so great pains for the reformation of
Christ's religion, neither yet your hyghnes in this your time should need
with such great difficulty go about to further gods cause and his true
service, with so many laws, injunctions and proclamations if so great
negligence of theducation of the youth had not been so much suffered, and the
necessary points and articles of our religion and profession omitted of those
whose office and bounden dewty was to have most diligently instructed the
youth in the same. Or if the aunciente and laudable ceremony of Confirmation
had continued in the old state, and been duly used of the ministers in time
convenient, where an exact and strayghte examination was had of all such as
were of full age, both of their profession that they made in baptism touching
their belefe and keeping of gods commandments, with a general solemn
rehersall of the said commandments and of all tharticles of their faith.
Surely there can be no greater hope of any kind of persons, other to be
brought to all honest conversation of living, or to be more apt to set forth
and maintain all Godlynes and true religion, then of such as have been from
childhode noryshed and fed with the sweet milk, and as it were the pappe of
gods holy word, and brydled and kept in awe with his holy commandments.
For commenly as we are in youth brought up, so we continue in age, and sauer
longest of that thing that we first receive and taist of. And as a fair
table fynely pulyshed, tho it de never so apt to receive either pyctures or
wrytinges, yet it does neither delight any men's eyes, neither yet profit any
thing, except the paynter take his pensill, set to his hand, and with labor
and cunnyng replenyshe it with scriptures or fygures as apertaineth to his
science, even so the tender wits of young children, being yet naked and bare
of all knowledge through the grace of God be apt to receive gods gifts, if
they be applied and instructed by such schole masters, as have knowledge to
bring them up and lead them forwards therein. And what can be more apt to be
graven or painted in the tender hertes of youth, then Gods holy word? what
can lead them a ryghter way to god, to thobedience of their Prince and to al
virtue and honesty of life, then the sincere understanding of Gods word?
which alone shows the way how to know him, to love him and to serve him.
What can better keep and stay them, that they do not suddenly and lightly fall
again from their faith? What can cause them more constantly to wythstande
thassaultes of the devil the world and the flesh, and manfullye to bear the
cross of Christ, the^ to learn in their youth to practice the same? And verily
it seems no new thing that the children of them yt be godly, should be thus
instructed in the faith and commandments of God, even from their infancye.
For does not God command his people to teach his law, Deuteronomy. xi.
unto their children and chylders children? Has not this knowledge continued
from time to time, amongst them to whom God promised to be their God, and
they his people? Does it not appear by plain expressed words of Paul, that
Timothe was brought up even from a child in holy scriptures? ii. Tim. iii.
Has not the commandments of almyghtye God, thartycles of the Christian
faith, and the Lords prayer, been ever necessarelye (sense Christ's time)
required of all, both young and old, that professed Christ's name, yea though
they were not learned to read? For doutles in these three points is shortly
and plainly included the necessary knowledge, of the whole sum of Christ's
religion, and of all things appertaynyng unto everlasting life. In
consyderation whereof in this time of your gracious reformation of all
ungodliness, and the setting forth of Gods true glory. I knowing my self as
a subject greatly bounden, (and much the more by reason of my vocation) to
set forward the same, am persuaded that this my small trauayll in this behalf
taken, shall not a little help the sooner to bring to pass your godly
purpose. For by this little treatise, not only ye youth of your graces realm,
may learn to know God, and how they may most purelye and syncerelye honor
glorify and serve him, and may also learn their office and dewtie, how they
ought to behave themselfes, first toward God, secondly toward your
Magestie, and so toward all ministers under the same, toward their fathers
and mothers, and all other persons of what sort or degree soever they be: but
also many of the older sort, (such as love God, and have a zele to his
honor and glory, and yet in their youth through negligence were brought up
in ygnoraunce) may by hearing of their children, learn in their age, that
which passed them in their youth.

And as mine intent and endeavor is to profytte both, and according to mine
office, to bring both to the right knowledge of God, so my most earnest and
humble prayer unto God contynuallye, shall be that my good mind and desire may
have good success, and take effect according to mine expectacion. Which
thing I assuredly hope shall come to pass, if it would please your highness,
to suffer this little book by me offered unto your Magestie to be read,
taught and learned of the children of your most loving subjects, in whom
is great hope of al grace godlynes and virtue.

Your Graces humble subject and Chaplayne Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury.

A short Instruction into Christian religion for the synguler commodity and
profit of children and young people. Ouersene and corrected by the most
reverend father in God the Archebyshoppe of Canterbury. The preface.
THis treatice gentile reader, is not written for the Curattes and preachers,
for many of them have so much knowledge in holy scripture (thanks be to God)
that they be already sufficiently instructed in these matters: But it is
written for the behoue of the young children, which must be brought up with
plain and short lessons. For we see daily by experience, that who so ever
will teach children, must use much discretion and wisdom, not to give them
to much at one time, (lest he dull and oppress their wits) and yet that
which he gives them, he must often and many times rehearse and repete unto
them again, as nere as he can after one manner of wise, and with the same
words. For if they teach them now this, now that, now with these words, now
with other, then the children learn little or nothing, they keep almost nothing
in memory, and beside that, they wax weary of learning, and conceive a
lothsomnes thereto, and be more slothful and unapt to learn. Forasmuch
therefore as it was to be feared, that every pastor would not take the pains
to draw out such a short form of teaching to the children, nor we thought
good to burden every one with so great labors, and also if every pastor
severally should devise a form for his parish, it might chance that there
should be as many soundrye forms, as there be pastors, which diversity might
engender much division and controuercie, and be also much hinderaunce to the
children, if in one place they learn one form, and in an other place an other
form. For to exchewe the said inconveniences, we have thought good to devise
this short manner and form tynstructe children and young men, whereby they may
both shortly and easily learn the chief pryncipilles and beginning of
Christian religion and doctrine, and learn as well how they ought to live, as
also what they should believe. And when they have learned this in their tender
age, they shall not only understand godly sermons and al other godly doctrine
and books ye better, but also they shall become godly men, and wise, lovers of
true religion and godlynes, and to al states and orders of life, as well
ecclesiastical as civil be more apt and toward, unto which godly purpose,
all fathers and mothers, Curattes and preachers and al christian Magestrates and
officers, should with all their mind and endeuore give their aid and help.
Whereunto God of his grace grant his favor and assistaunce. Amen.

A short Instruction concerning the ten commandments.
A general beginning for all sermons.
GRace peace and mercy be with you all / from God the father and from his
only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord. Ame^. That we may profectablie
and with fruit teach and learn the word of God / let us call for grace and
pray the Lords prayer.

Pater noster.

A general preface to be rehearsed after the prayer, in the beginning of each
sermon made upon the ten commandments.



THe Prophet David good Children like a common scholemaster in the schole of
God does preach on this faschyon in the xxxiiii. psalm, Psa. xxxiiii.
come hither he says my sons, 1. Pet. iii.
harken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord who so ever desires
to live, and would feign see good days, let him refeaine his tongue from
evil. and his lyppes yt they speak no deceit, let him eschew euel, and do
good. Proverb. xii.xiii, xxi
Let him seek peace and pursue it. Iac. i.iii.


Now my derely beloved children I know suerly that there is none among you,
but that he would wyshe to see good days, and lead a Godly and quiet life.
Then must you follow the counsel of the prophet David, with all dilygence to
learn the fear of the Lord whilst ye are yet young and tender of age. For yt
which me^ learn not in their youth ye same do they learn in their age with
more difficulty. Therefore learn now with all diligence the fear of the Lord
dear children, then shall you ware men of excellent virtue, and lead a godly
life, and shall see good days. For a blessed and quiet life is not bought with
riches nor gotten by ^^^oure, but by learning the fear of God. And he that
fears his maker, as an almyghtye God and Lord, which does mercifully healpe
them that be good, and grievously punysheth the wicked, he will dyligentlye take heed, that he does nothing contrary to gods pleasure, but will keep his
commandments so much as is in his power. And such godly children prove
learned and wise men, which may be able to profit other and the commen wealth
also, as David says in an other place. The fear of the Lord is the beginning
of wisdom. Psalm. cxi.


Wherefore if you fear God and have a desire to be occupied in godlynes, then
learn the ten commandments, whereby God has taught us, what pleases and
what dyspleaseth him, what thing is good and what is evil. And if you learn
these lessons perfectly, then thereby you shall purchase unto you the beginning
of true and godly wisdom, which is such wisdom, that many men well stricken
in years, do not attain to it. And yet this wisdom and knowledge of the ten
commandments, is but only the beginning of sapience, for it is the teaching
of the law. But when the doctrine of faith in Christ is taught unto you,
then you learn a greater and higher wisdom, the which the ungodly or
unfaithful do not understand nor perceive, but god only does give it down
from heaven, to make us fear him and believe his holy word. Wherefore good
children, learn now dylygently the beginning of wisdom, that is to say,
tholy ten commandments, and give so good ear unto them, that you may
learn them without book, and rehearse them when you come home.

Here follow the ten commandments, which must be recited so tretably and
distinctly, that children by often hearing of them, may print them in their
memories and faye them by rote.

These are the holy ten commandments of the Lord our God.
The first. I Am the Lord thy God / thou shall have none other Gods but me*
The second. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain / for he
shall not be gyltles before the Lord / that takes his name in vain. The
third. Remember that thou sanctifye the Sabbath day. The fourth. Honor thy
father and thy mother / that thou may live a long life in the land which
the lord thy God shall give unto thee. The fifthe. Thou shall not kill. The
sixte. Thou shall commit no adulterye: The seventh. Thou shall not steal The
eight. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. The nynthe.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house. The tenth. Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife / nor his man servant / nor his maid servant / nor his ox
/ nor his ass / nor any thing that is thy neighbors.
Now good children these are the ten holy commandments of the lord God,
in the which he has opened his will unto us, and has declared what is godly
and what is ungodly, what we should do, and what we should not do. These ye
shall learn with great diligence, not only to rehearse them but also to
understand what is meant by them, and what the lord God does require of us in
these his commandments: to thinte^t that when you be asked any questian of
them, you may answer to y^ purpose, and that also in time to come you may
teach your children to fear God after such sort and manner as you your selfs
be now instructed. For it is a great shame, both before God and the world,
for a Christen man to be ignorant in the commandments of God, and not to
know that doctrine that perteyneth to every Christen man, seeing that every
Christen man is bound, openly to declare his doctrine, and to give a rekenyng
of his faith, when need shall so require, and to bring up his children in the
same.

The first sermon.
Thou shall have none other Gods but me. Exo. xxxii


A declaration of the first commandment.

TO thintente good children that you may the better understand the law of
the ten commandments, you must first of all know, that God gave to
Moses the ten commandments, written in two tables of stone, wherefore they be
divided in two parts. In the first table were written the three first
commandments, pertaining to God, which teach us how we should behave
our selves toward God, as well inwardelye in heart and mind, as outwardly in
words and deades. In the other table were graven seven precepts, perteynynge to
our neighbors, which teach us how we ought to order our selves toward
our Princes, magistrates and rulers, toward our wives children and
servants and toward all states of men, teaching us that we should not be
dysobedient, that we do wrong to no man, that we hurt no man, that we ley not
in wait to kill any man, that we defloure not other men's wyfes, and to be
short, that we hurt not our neighbors, neither in body, goods nor good name.

But now let us consider the first commandment, and the declaracion of the
same. I am the Lord thy God, thou shalt have none other gods but me. This
commandment good children, teaches us how we ought to use our hearts
toward God. First that we ought to acknoulege with all our heart, that God
made heaven and earth and all things contained therein, and to take him only
to be the true God and to be our God. Secondarely this commandment teaches
us to fear him, as a living God, because he does punyshe the ungodly, and to
cleave unto him with a sure faith, because he is true and faithful and does
not deceive us in any thing, which he has spoken or promised. Thyrdly this
commandment teaches us to love him with all our heart, for of him we receive
our life, our breath, our health, and all other gifts both bodyly and
goostly. And we have not the least of his gifts by our deserts, but he
pours them all upon us freely, through his infinite goodness and endless mercy.
Contrariwise we ought not to receive into our hertes as God any creature either
in heaven or in earth, that is to say, we ought to fear no creature neither
in heaven nor in earth so much as God, neither ought we to put such co^fide^ce
and trust in any thing, neither should we so heartily love any creature as our
Lord God omnipotent. For if we attribute to any creature so much fear,
trust, love as apperteyneth only to him that made all creatures, by and by we
make that creature our God* and of it we frame to our selves an Ydoll. The
which is a very heinous, an abominable and horrible sin, directly against
the first table and the first and chefest commandment of God. Therefore such
great offenses the true and lyuinge Lord God will not leave unpunished, for
he himself says: I am the Lord, my title and my name is the Lord, I will
not give my glory to another: meaning thereby that he will not suffer that any
other thing should be esteemed as God besides himself, or that we should
give godly honor in heart, affection word or deed to any creature, but
only to him that was never created, and yet did create all things.

But here peradventure you will muse good children, askyng this question: How
can we have other gods before the Lord, seeing there is but one God, one
Lord, which has made heaven and earth. To this I answer that in deed
there is none other God but that most excellent and omnipotent Lord. Ley sure
hold on this article with a steadfast faith good children* believe this, dowbting
nothing therein, cleave surely to this rock. But yet this not withstandyng,
fools, infidels, and ungodly men, take some other thing for their God, the
which in deed is not god, nor can be by any means. For like as many times we
take some men for honest, rich or noble, which be not so in deed: so
oftentimes we fear something as much as we do God, which is not God in deed.
And of creatures we make gods three manner of ways,

The first is, when a man fears any creature, and thinks thus with
himself, if such a thing be taken away from me, if such a great man be angrye
with me, if I escape not such a daungier: then I am utterly undone, then I
know not whether to run for aid and succoure, whether then shall I goo? who
shall save or help me? if thou have any such thought of any creature, trewly
in thine heart thou make it a God, although with thy mouth thou do not
call it God. And this affeccion lies lurckynge so deaply hid within many
men's hearts, that they theimselfes scaselye feale or perceive it. But this
fear ought to be removed far from us. For we must cleave steadfastly by
faith to the true and living God, and in all kind of adversity reason on
this faschion. Although men of great power be mine enemies, although this or
that perrell does press me very sore, although I see nothing before mine
eyes but present death or danger, yet will I not despair, yet will I not
mystrust God, yet will I not hurt my soul with sin. For I am sure that this
creature which so sore persecuteth, vexes or troubles me, is no God, but is
under the hand and power of ye true lyuinge God: I know that one here of my
head can not be taken away from me, without the will of him, that is only and
alone the true living god. He is my maker my lord and my god, him will I fear
more then the mighty power of any man, more then the crafty imaginations of
mine enemies; yea more then any creature in heaven or in earth. If I be
wrongfully entreated, and do suffer iniustli, he can easily deliver me* and so
preserve me, that no parrel shall touch me.

The second way is when men put their hole confidence in other things than in
God, and have these or such like thoughts within themselfes. I would I had
such riches or lands, I would such a man were my friend, then should I be
rich, happy and blessed, the^ should I be sufficiently defended and armed
against all chances that may happen unto me in this world. They that think
thus, have such riches lands and creatures for a God* although with their
tongue they say not so, yea although this affection lie hid in our heart so
secretly, that we our selfs should scantly know of it. But the godly may
not suffer any such thoughts to enter in to their hearts, but ought thus to
reason with theimselues. Although I have veraye great abundance of friends
and riches, although I flow in pleasures honor and glory, and in all worldely
things which a man can desire, yet by these things I have not true
salvation. For these creatures are not God, wherefore they can not save me,
neither deliver me from the tyranny of the devil or the wrath of God. But the
lord is God alone. If I shall displease him, he is able to take al my friends
and riches away from me, or else otherwise to bring to pass that all these
things shall work my distructio^. Wherefore he alone is to be feared, and in
him alone we must fasten the anchor of our trust and confidence.

The third way is when a man so hartly loves and delights in any thing
besides God, that for it he does and suffers willingly all things that are
to be done or suffered, not greatly regarding whether it pleases or
dyspleaseth God, then this man makes this creature (which he so fervently
loves) his god, although in words he does not utter it.

But let Christian people weed out from the botome of their hearts the roots
of such inordinate love of any creature. And let them think after this sort,
wherefore should I offend God for this or that thing, I know that this lucre
or this honor upon the which I am tempted and do so much set my heart, is not
God, it is but a creature, which can not save me, nether deliver me from death,
or any other aduersite. Wherefore I will love only my God with all mine heart,
I will do all things for his sake chiefly, and I will only above all things
obey him.

Hitherto you have herd how by these three ways, by fearing, by trustyng, and
by loving, we may easily make a God of a creature, which in deed is no God
but rather an ydoll, set up by our own fantasy. But this is an horrible
sin against the first commandment of God, and so much the more parrellous,
because it lurketh in the corners of man's heart most secretly. The world is
full of this sin, and specially they that have hypocrite hearts, for all their
painted holiness, are infected with the rustenes of these vices. And to thentent
that you may the better know these heinous offenses against the first
commandment and the sooner eschew them, I will declare them unto you, by a
few and short examples. Some there be yt do so greatly fear the co^iu^ctions
and influencis of the heavenly planettes and bodies above, that when they judge
by their learning in Astronomye, or hear say of other men, that the signs in
heaven do threaten commen plages or calamities, by and by they tremble for
fear, and not casting their hope and trust in God, they be so amassed that
they can not tell whether to run to avoid the danger. Other there be that
think, that when the Son, Moon, or any other planetes is in this or yt
sign, it is an unlucky thing to enterprise this or that, and upon such
dismolde days (as they call them) they will begin no new enterprise, because
they think yt it should not have good success or prosperous end. And many
like kinds of ydolatrye is used even among christen people. But ye prophet
Hieremie does expressly forbid this in the.x. chapter, sayng. Fear not the
signs of the sky, as the hethen do. Furthermore many there be that stand in
such awe to tyrannes that for fear of them they deny the true word of God.
These me^ take tyrannes, and rulers of this world for gods. For they
imagyne, that if such men favor them, the^ they shall be safe for ever. But
the prophet David in the.cxlvi. psalm does give contrary counsel sayng thus.
Put not your confidence in princes, in the sons of men, in ye which is no
salvation.

Some men also put their hole affiaunce in money, and phantesie that they
which have plentye of money can lack nothing. Therefore they give themselfes
holy to couetusnes and to the desire to hurd up riches, they set their mind
upon filthy lucre, they scratche what they can, not regarding whether they get
by right or by wrong. Such men wurship their riches for their God. But saint
Paul in the.iii. chapter to the Colossians says. Forsake couetusnes which
is a service to ydolles.

Some set their trust in their own wourkes, thinkyng that by them they may be
delivered from sin, reconcyled to the favor of God, justified before him,
and by them also to atteyne eternal salvation. These have their merits and
wourkes in the stead of God. This is the greatest ydolatrie that can be under
the sun, and a plain denial of the faith in christ, as here after it shall
be declared unto you at large in the treatise of faith. Other there be that be
servants to their own belyes gyuynge them selves holly to eating and
drynking, and bodily pleasures, so much yt in co^pariso^ of bodily pleasures
they either despise or else forget God. Such men make their belie their God,
as saint Paul writes of the^ saying. Some therbe which sellyng the wourde of
God do teach peruersely whose God is their belie. But that thing where in
they do now glory, shall be their confusion. By these examples you may easelye
perceive, how by to much fearing, trusting and loving, we make a God of a
creature, which in deed is not God. And besides these abuses, there is an other
that makes an ydoll of yt true and living God. And that is when we imagyn by
our own heads an other form or shape of god and his will, than is true in
deed, and otherwise tha^ he himself has declared to us in his wourde. As for
an example, when we believe that God is a bodily thing having hands, fete and
other members like a man, or that he is more pleased with wearynge of a graye
friars coule or hallowed garments, than with any other semely apparel, or that
he delighte with our wilworkes and worshyppynges, which he never commanded,
but we of our brains have devised them. Such fantasy and false opinion, I
say, makes an ydoll of the true God, and it is a great offense against ye
first and chief commandment. But of this you shall hear more in other
sermons.

Wherefore good children take heed of such ymaginations that you frame not to
your selfs with in the temple of your hearts any strange god or ydoll. But
suffer the lord to be your God, for he does offer himself very lovingly and
with a fatherly affection, to be your God. Therefore he says to each of you,
I am the Lord thy God, that is to say, I am your lord and your father, and
I would feign that you should take me for your very God only. If I am your
Lord, where is the fear dew unto me? Only fear me as your Lord, obey me
with all your heart, trust in me, pray to me, call upon me, and love me good
children as your father.

Yt were our bounden duty, to pray unto him with most fervent desire, that
he would vouchesafe to be our God. But his goodness is somuche inclyned toward
us, that he preuentethe us, and before we desiere him, he offers himself to
us, saying. I am the Lord thy God, only acknowledge me for God. When he says
I am thy God, it is as much as if he should say, I will power all kinds of
benefits upon thee, what soever kind of adversity troubles the, make the
moon to me, when soever you lackest any thing, ask it of me. I am not far
from the, I am thy God. At all times I will be present with the, and I will
help the in all things.

Now good children, dyligently learn ye this lesson, and grave it into your
memories: So you shall love God, and put your trust in him. For this is the
meaning of this first commandment that we ought to fear and love the Lord
God, above all thing, and fasten our hope in him. Wherefore good children with
all dilygence learn you this rule. And when this question shall be demanded of
you, how do you vndrestand the first commandment? then shall ye answer thus.
In this precept we be commanded to fear and love God with all our heart, and
to put our whole trust and confidence in him.

The conclusion.
Now ye have heard good children in a brief sum, the true sincere and
plain exposition of ye first commandment, bear away I pray you this
doctrine, and diligently record it, walk in the fear of the Lord, that you
transgress not these commandments. For what soever God byddeth, that is
right, just, good and holy, what soever he forbids, that is wrong, unjust,
evil and sin. He himself requires of us, to keep his commandments, and
not despise them. For he says. I am the Lord thy God, Exo. xx.
a strong and a ielous God, which do punyshe the children yt do hate me, even
to the third and fourth generation, for the iniquite of their parents. And
contrariwyse, I do show mercy to a thousand generacions of them that love me
and keep my commandments. In these wourdes God does threaten grievous
punyshementes to all them that break these commandments, wherefore it is
our dewtie, to fear his indignation and punishment and not to provoke his
wrath upon us by our disobedience. And contrary he does promise his favor and
goodness to all them that keep these his commau^deme^tes. Therefore we ought to
love him, cast our affiaunce in him, and obey his commandments. And
specially ye good childerne ought to fear God, keep his precepts, and to
desire grace and help of him, yt you may perform and fulfill them. For the
fear of God is the beginning of all wisdom, and it makes men godly and
disposes them to all good works. And such having the favor of God, may
profit many, both in commen and private affairs. Out of this fear of God,
springs also a good conscience, peace and quietness of the same, as you have
herd out of the spalme which was rehearsed in the beginning of the preface,
and if we continue to the end of our life's in this true knowledge and faith of
God, tha^ he over and beside the forsaide benefits, will give unto us life
everlasting yt which he grant to you that is blessed for ever Amen. Note that
both ye preface, and the conclusion also, of this first sermon shall be repeted,
(the one in the beginning and the other in the later end) in every sermon made for
the residew of the commandments.

YE have herd good children in the former sermon, that all manner of Idolatry
is forbid by this commandment. Thou shall have none other Gods but me. Where
also it was declared unto you, how you may commit spiritual ydolatrie, by
over much fearyng, trusting and loving of creatures. But now I will speak
of the most gross ydolatrie, which stands in wourshyppynge of images,
either of creatures or of God himself. And this ydolatrye is forbyde by
express words in this commandment, where God says thus.

Thou shall make the no graue^ image / nor any likeness of any thing which
is in heaven above / or in earth benethe / or in the water under the earth.
Thou shall not bow down unto it / nor wourship it. These words (by most
interpretors of late time belong to the first commandment, although after
the interpretation of many ancient autors they be the second commandment)
in which wourdes it is to be noted, that it is not without great cause, that
God with so plain and express words does forbydde wourshyppynge of images.
For he saw that man's corrupt nature from the first time that he fell from
God, has ever ben inclined and ready to ydolatry, and to bow down to
creatures, rather than to look up to God that made him. Wherefore he inhibiteth
all occations of the same. God did also forsee, that in the latter days men
should come which would maynteine worshyppyng of images. Not only with
painted colors, but also with painted words, saying. We kneel not to the
image, but before the image, we worship not the image, but the thing which is
represented by the image, we worship not the creatures, but the creatore in
the creatures. And such like excuses the greatest ydolaters did always
pretend. But to thentente they should not so deceive you, God does oftentimes
in holy scripture call upon you saying. Thou shalt not make to the any
graven image or lykenes of any creature, thou shall not kneel, nor bow thy
self down to it.

For what can be more contrary to the dignity of man, then he, whom God has
made Lord over all creatures to kneel or to do reverence to the image of a
creature. God has so fashioned man, that he has given him a body standing
streighte up, and a countenance to look upward into heaven. And why then
should he bow himself downward to the earth, or to creatures made of earth,
which be rather to be trodden under his fete, then to be worshipped of him.
There is nothing more against reason, then that he which has life, sense,
and reason, should worship that thing, which can neither see, feel, move,
hear nor understand. Wherefore God says plainly, thou shall not worship
images, that is to say, thou shalt not gylte them, and set them in costlye
tabernacles, and deck them with coats or shertes, thou shalt not sense
them, make vows or pilgremages to them, set candelles before them, and offer
unto them, thou shall not kiss their feet, and bow down unto them.

For God says I am a jealous God, and will not give my honor to any
creature, but will greuouslye punyshe them that break this my commandment.
Yea I will punyshe their children and posterity unto the third and fourth
generation.

And this indignation of god against ydolaters, has at sundry times be showed
by greuouse punishementes for our examples. For Salomons idolatry, ye
kingdoms of Israel and Judah were divided, and thereof did ensue a continual
dyscorde between these two kingdoms. And for ydolatrye God commanded Moses to
hang the capitaines of the people, and of the people were slain xxiiii.
thousand. And the books of the Judges, Kings, and the Prophets be full of
like histories, how almyghtye God for ydolatrie was offended with the
Israelites, and gave them into the hands of their enemies, and into the
subjection and bondage of all nations about them, which did persecute and kyl
them. And when they in their afflictions cried unto ye lord, he refused them
saying. Go and cry to the gods which you have chosen, they will save you in
the time of your necessity.

What greater punyshemente can there be then this? to be cast away from God,
when we have most need of his help and comfort? And in Deuteronomie
almyghtye God commanded by his prophet Moses, saying. Cursed be he, that shall
make a graven or molten image, abominable before ye Lord, the work of an
artificers hand, and shall set it in a secret place. And all the people shall
answer and say. Amen.

Here you see how he is accursed of god, that sets but one image in a secret
corner of his own house to wourshippe it. But much more danger it is, to set
up images in the temple of God which is ye open and common place to honor the
only living god. But peradventure some will say, that we are forbidden to
worship images, but not to have images. To this I answer. First as touching
the image of God, that when God spoke unto the children of Israel in the mount
of Oreb they heard a voice, but they saw no manner of image or lykenes of any
creature. And the cause was this. Lest if he had appeared in the similitude of
a man or woman or of any beast upon earth, or of any bird in the air, or
fish in the water, or of any other creature, the ignorant people would
paraduenture have made an image like thereto, and have worshipped it. Therefore
they did se no manner of image, because they should make no image of God. Least
that if they had made any image of god, they would also have worshipped it. And
forasmuch as God is a ghost not only invisible but also inco^prehensible,
therefore he ca^ neither be made with hands, nor compassed by wit, nether is it
possible, yt any thing made by man's hand should represent God unto us, as
his image, so far those two be unlike, God, and an image made by man. For God
is a ghost, without end, without measure, without mixture, without corruption
and most perfect. But an image is a body, has an end, may be compassed and
measured, it is myxed, corruptible and vnparfit. God is life in him self, of
whom al things have life, but images can nether hear, see, nor move, nor have
neither reason, understanding nor life. Therefore says God him self by his
prophet Esaie, that no similitude nor image, can be made of him. God showed
himself unto the people in the mount of Oreb, but in a cloud, smoke and fire,
declaring thereby that no man can come to the parfite knowledge of God, as he
is in him self. The Propiciatorie also, whereby God was signified, was hid
and not seen, as well for that it stood in sancta sanctorum where the people
never came, as also for because the Cherubynes covered it with their wings.
But in case any paynter or caruer were so connyng, that he cold make an image,
which should perfytly represent unto us God, (which is impossible) yet he ought
to make no such image. And if it were made, it ought to be destroyed, because
god has forbid any image to be made of him.

For as it is forbydde to have any strange gods, so it is also forbide to
have any image of ye true living God. And if any will say, that it is forbyde to
make an image of God, to the intent to wourshippe it, but I do not worship it,
nor have it for that intent, but only that it may stere me to the remembrance
and knowledge of God. To this I answer, that God did forbide the making of his
image. least this parrell should follow, that thou should worship it.
Therefore thou do offend, although thou do not worship it, and that
not only, because thou do against gods word and commandment, but also
because thou putteste thy self wilfully in very great peril and danger,
specially seeing that of our corrupt nature we be most highly enclyned to
Idolatry and superstition, as experience from time to time has taught us,
even from the beginning of the world. And here appears ye abuse of our time,
which following rather the phantasye of caruers or paynters, than ye word of
God have set up in churches the image (as they call it) of ye Trinity, where
they portured God ye father like an old man with a long hoar berd. And what
can simple people learn herby, but errore, and ignorance? Have not mani
thought that God the father is a bodyly substance, and that he has a face,
and berd, hands, and fete, because they see him so painted? And for this
consideracion says saint Austen, it is a detestable thing for Christen men to
have any such image of God in the church, whereby it appears that in saint
Austens times, there were no such images in christen churches, but that it is an
invention of ye papists brought in of later years, which brings us not
unto the true knowledge of god, but leads us into errors and ignorance of
God.

But if you will lift up your minds to god good children, to know his divine
majesty, his infinite power, wisdom, goodness, and other his godly
perfections, look not upon a deaf, domme, blind, lame, and dead image, made
by a painter or caruers hands, but look upon heaven and other creatures, made
by gods own handy work, look upon man who ca^ speak, see, smell, hear,
feale, and go and has life, will, and reason, and whom no man but God himself
made to be his lively image and similitude.

We have also ye holy scriptures which declare unto us the wonderful works of
God, by which things we may be led to the knowledge of God without painted
or carved images. Now paradue^ture some will say that Christ has a body, and
likewise have saints, and therefore of them we may have images although of God
there can be made no image. And further they will say, that the cause why images
were forbid, was perryl of ydolatry, and worshipping of them. So that where
there is no such peril, we may have images.

Yet as I will not utterly deny but they may be had, so I think it more
convenient for christian religion that they should be taken out of Christen men's
churches, then that they should be placed in the temple of God. And of this my
opinion I will show you certain good grounds, to thintente that when you be
demanded, why we English men have no images in our churches, you may be able
to make thereunto a reasonable answer, and that also in time to come you may
declare to your children what abuses have crepte into the church by the
occasion of images. That if any man shall hereafter god about craftily to
bring in images again for his own lucre sake, they may the sooner perceive
his Iuglynge, and so the better avoid the peril and danger. First it is
certain, that we neither have commandment, counsel nor example of the
scripture, nor of the primative church in thapostilles time, nor many years
after to set up images in our churches. As it may appear by the holy man
Epiphanius Bishop of Cypres, a man of great estimation an.xi. hundredth years
passed, for his great lernyng and virtue, and by whom not only in his life
time, but also after his death, god wrought many miracles. He in an epistle
which he wrote to the Bishop of Jerusalem (which epistle saint Hierome did
translate out of Greek into Latin) writes, that as he passed ye country about
Jerusalem, he found in a church a cloth painted, having the image of Christ,
or of a saint. And wha^ I saw (said he) an image of a man hang in the church
of Christ, contrary to the authority of the scripture, I cut it in pieces,
and counseled the^ to buri some pore dead man therein. And after he wrote to the
Bishop of Jerusalem, that he should command all the priests, not to suffer
such images, being contrary to our religion, to hang in the church of
christ. Whereby it appears yt in those days images were not allowed to be
set up in churches among christen men (yea al though it were the image of
Christ or any sayncte) but that the usage of images began after that time.

And if we will believe ancient Histories, images were brought into churches, by
the pollicye and force of the Bishops of Rome, many good christian Emperors,
withstanding the same to their power. But Idolatry by the bishops of Rome
prevailed, and seduced many Christen Realms.

Moreover many images teach nothing else but erroneous and supersticiouse
doctrine. For what reachethe the picture of sayncte Mychael waying souls, and
our lady putting her beads in the balaunce. Forsooth nothing else, but
superstitiousnes of beads, and confidence in our own merits, and the
merits of saints, and nothing in the merits of Christ.

For whereas our good works be not able to way against the deuel, our lady
must lay her beads in balau^ce, that is to say, will works divised of our
own brains not commanded of God, and by them to save us. Which doctrine is
very false and iniuriouse to Christ. What did ye image of saint Sunday
teach? But that Sunday was an holy man, according to the which teaching,
beggars asked their alms for saynct Sondayes sake. But I will leave to speak
of the evil doctrine which was taught by Images, and I will declare unto you
ye images have been so abused, that all the goodness which might come by them,
was never co^parable to the great ignorance and blyndnes, the superstition and
idolatry, which have been brought in and committed by means of the^. The
which abuses good children, your own fathers, if you ask them, can well
declare unto you. For they themselfes were greatly seduced by certain famous
and notoriouse images, as by our lady of walsingham, our lady of Ippeswiche,
Saint Thomas of Canterbury, Saint Anne of Buckestone, the roode of Grace, and
such like, whom many of your parents vilitide yearly, leauinge their own
houses and familyes. To the^ they made vows and pilgrimages, thinkyng that God
would hear their prayers in that place rather than in another place. They
kissed their feet deuoutrly, and to them they offered candles and images of
wax, rings, beads, gold, and silver, abundantly. And because they that so
taught them had there by great commodity, they maintained the same with feigned
miracles, and erroniouse doctrine, teaching the people that God would hear
their prayers made before this image, rather than before another image, or in
another place, whereas the Prophet Esaias says, that God does hear those that
be truly penitent in every place a like. But peradventure some will say, they
did never teach us to kneel to ye image, but before the image. But who I pray
you gave them commission to teach you to kneel before the image, if you make
your prayers to God, why lift you not both your eyes and hands to heaven
where God is, why look you rather upon the walls, upon stocks and stones,
then thitherward where you know he is, to whom you make your prayers. What
nedest thou which art the image of God, to kneel before the image of man.

Again they that be grieved with taking down of images out of the churches,
will parchaunce say. We worshipped not ye image but the saint, whom the image
did signifye. And who I pray you commands you after this fashion to worship
any saint, why should we give that honor to saints now after their
death, which they themselfes, when they were on live did utterly refuse? If a
Christen man although in deed he were a very holy man, and a living saint,
should set himself upon an altar in the church, you would say to him come down
sir, that is no place for you to stand in. And why should than do^me images
stand there, when they be dead, where thou can not suffer the true images
and me^bres of Christ and lively saints to be placed? Peter refused to be
wourshipped of Cornelius, and likewise did Paul and Barnabas to be honored of
men, and the aungel also refused to be honored of a man forasmuch as special
honor and service, appertains only to god. Nevertheless in civil honor
and service, we be subject to kings, princes, parents, masters, and al
superiors, to honor and serve the^ of duty as God of us requires. But al
these things cesse after their death, and they that will say, that they nether
worship images, nor the saints in images, but God only in the saints and
images, they pretend the same excuse that the heathen Idolatrers did. For they
said likewise, that they worshypped not blocks nor stones, but God in them,
and yet they were great ydolatrers. But these men that pretend so many excuses
for their ydolatrye (as all ydolatrers ever have done) yet in very deed they
worship not only creatures but also the images of creatures. When they knele,
kiss, and sense them. For when they see an image of the Crucyfyx, or of a
saint by the way, do they not bow down, and put of their cappes unto it. But
they do that (say they) not to ye image but to Christ But why than do they it,
when they se the image, and not before? Marye (say they) for the image puts
us in remembrance of christ But let them truly answer this, as they think in
their hearts. As often times as they remember Christ before they see the
image, do they bow down and put of their cappes or no? Certain it is that
they do not, but as soon as they come to the image they do. And therefore in
veraye deed, they do that honor to the image, and not to Christ, nor to the
saint, whatsoever they pretend. But they fantasy some holiness or virtue to be
in the images, specially when they be set upon high in the church, the commen
place to honor god alone, and therefore they run rather to one church than
to another, and honor one Image rather than another for else why are not the
images in the caruers and painters shop as well kneled unto and worshipped as
they yt be set in ye church And if they did their reverence to christ and not
to the image, seeing that Christ is in heaven, to heaven they should look up,
where christ hi^ self is, and not gase upon an image. Seeing therefore that it is
an horrible ydolatry, to wurshyp the Sun, which is a most goodly creature of
God, and represents unto us the wonderful work of God. Let every man
consydre how diuilyshe ydolatry it is, to worship our own images made by our
awn hands.

Yt is not also taught you in all the scripture that you should desire saint
Rock to preserve you from the pestilence, to pray to saint Barbara to defend
you from thondre or gonneshot, to offer to saint Loy an horse of wax, a
pigge to saint Anthonye, a candel to saint Sith. But I should be to long
if I should rehearse unto you all the superstitions that have grow out of the
invocation and praying to saints departed, wherewith men have been seduced, and
gods honor given to creatures.

This was also no small abuse, that we called the images by the names of the
things, whom they did represent. For we were wont to say. This is saint
Annes altar, my father is goone a pilgrimage to our lady of walsyngame, in our
church saint James stands on the right hand of the high altar. These
speches, we were wont to use, although they be not to be commended. For saint
Austen in thexposition of the.cxiii. psalm affirms, yt they, who do call
such images as the carpenter has made, by the names of those things which
God has made, do change the truth of god into a ly. It is not also taught you
in all scripture. Thus good children I have declared how we were wo^t to abuse
images, not that hereby I condemn your fathers, who were men of great
devotion, and had an ernest love toward God, altoughe their zeal in all
points was not ruled and governed by true knowledge, but they were seduced and
blinded, partly by the commen ignorance that rayned in their time partly by
the couetuousnes of their teachers, who abused the simplicity of the unlearned
people to the mayntenaunce of their own lucre and glory. But this have I
spoken to show you how crafty the devil and his ministers have been even of
late time to allure Christen me^ to Idolatry under the pretense and title of
devotion, holiness, and religion, that you being warned of such abuses may the
better know and avoid them incase at any time Satan or his messengers would
entyse you unto such superstition again. For if mariners yt have passed ye
dangers of the seas, and are safelye entered into the haue^, be naturally moved
to show to such as sail to those places, from whence they came, what
parrelles they shall pass by, and how also they may avoid the same. How
much more ought we that have already passed the diepe seas and dangers of
superstition, to warn you good children, of these perrelles, and to teach you
which are now (as it were) entering into the troublesome seas of this world
how you may avoid these so great daungyers. And it is very necessary for
preachers at all times to admonyshe, exhort, and call upon you to avoid this
most haynouse and detestable sin of ydolatrye. For not only the prophets
in tholde testamente were very ernest to call upon the Jews to eschew this
sin of ydolatry, but thappostles also be very diligent to dissuade Christian
me^ from ye same. And we have to much experience in the world that of images
comes, worshippyng of them and ydolatry. For saint Austen upon the.cxiii.
psalm affirms that simple men be more moved and stirred to bow down to
images and worship the^, because they have mouths, eyes, ears, noses, hands
and feet then they be moved to conte^pne the^, although they perceive they ca^
neither speak, see, smell, feale, nor goo.

It cannot be said that images be necessary, for then we condemn the
appostilles, and all the holy men in the primative church, yea and Christ
himself also because they used no such thing, nor yet that they be
profitable, for if they had, either Christ would have taught it or the holy
ghost would have reveled it, unto the appostles which they did not. And if
they did, the appostilles, were very neelygente that would not make some
mention of it, and speak some good word for images, seeing yt they speak so
many against them. And by this means Antichriste and his holy papists, had
more knowledge or feruente zeal to give us godly things, and profitable for
us, tha^ had the very holy saints of Christ, yea more than Christ himself,
and the holy ghost. Now forasmuch good children, as images be neither necessary
nor profitable in our churches and temples, nor were not used at the beginning
in Christ nor thapostilles time, nor many years after, and that at length they
were brought in by Bishops of Rome maugre The^perours tethe, and seeing also
that they be very slanderous to Christ's relygion, for by them the name of God
is blasphemed among the infideles, Turks, and Jews, which because of our
images do call christen religion Idolatry and wourshipping of images. And for
as much also as they have been so wonderfully abused within this Ralme, to the
high contumelye and dyshonor of God, and have been great cause of blyndnes,
and of much contention among the kings majesty's loving subjects, and were
like so to be still if they should remain, and chiefly seeing gods word
speaks somuche against the^. You may herby right well consydre, what great
causes and grounds the kings majesty had, to take them away within his
Realm, following herin the example of the godly king Ezechias, who brake down
the brazen serpent, when he saw it worshypped and was therefore greatly
praised of God, not withstanding at the first, the same was made and set up
by gods commandment, and was not only a remembrance of gods benefits,
before received, but also a figure of Christ to come. And not only Ezechias,
but also Manasses, and Iosophat and Josias the best kings that were of the
Jews, did pull down images in the time of their Reygne. Consider than how
Godly anacte is this to take away so many images, not made by gods
commandments, whereunto contrary to gods commandments and his honor were
so many Idolatries committed. For unto Christian Princes office, and cure
appertains ye defense of gods true word and Christian relygion, and to take
away all those things, which hinder or let true godlynes and relygion, or make
trouble and contention, within their realms. So good children you have herd
the true meaning of these words. Thou shall make to the no graue^ image, thou
shall not bow down and worship ye same, the which I pray you grave depely in
your memories, yt when you be demanded, what is meant by the words heretofore
rehearsed, you may answer. This commandment forbids us al kind of ydolatry
as well bodily as goostly, and inhibiteth us to give ye honor which is due unto
god to any creature or image of creature, but to worship God alone. And now
note further good children, yt to thinte^t we should honor only God, and obey
him. He says yt he is ye Lord our God, in whom be al good things, and of
who^ we have all. He says also yt he is strong and of such force, yt he can
ponishe us at his pleasure if we dysobey him. Moreover he calls him self
Ialose because he can abide no co^panio^, but as a man, ye more pure and chaste
he is, ye more he is grieved if he perceue his wife to set her love upon any
other, even so is god, who has taken us to his spouse, if he se us defiled with
filthy ydolatry. Furthermore he says yt he will revenge his majesty and glory,
if any man will translate yt unto any creature picture or image, and yt with such
vengeance, yt it shall exte^de unto their children, nephews and nephews
children. Like as on ye other side he promises his mercy and goodness to their
posterite, that keep his law and commandments. Employ therefore your hole
hearts and minds to his precepts good children, and exchewi^g al ydolatry or
honoring of caruinges or painti^ges give to god only his due honor and glory
now and from hensforth world without end. Ame^.

The second sermon.
YE have herd the declaracio^ of ye first commandment, in ye which we be
taught how we ought to behave our selves toward god in our hertes, now
follows ye second commandment which is this.

Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain / for he shall not
be gyltles in the sight of the Lord / that takes his name in vain. Leui.
xxiiii.


THis commandment good children teaches us how we ought to behave our
selfs toward God in wourdes, biddynge us not to speak of the name of God in
vain or without great cause, but to use it only when it tends to ye praise
and glory of God, and to the profit of our neighbor, that every man may
perceive by our wourdes and communication, that we in our hearts do
reuerentlye and humbly fear, magnify and worship God and his holy name. For
by this our good example other men are provoked and encoraged to glorifye ye
name of God. And contrariwyse when in scoffing and iestyng we be light to
abuse the name of God, then other me^ are offended, and thereby also are made
more vnreuerent toward God and less pass of god and godly things, and so by
this means we burden our selves with an other man's sin. For Christ says
in the ghospel of Matthew the.xviii. chapter. Mat. xviii
He that gives cause of offense to any of the weak brethren, it were better
for him that a mil stone were hanged about his neck, and so drowned in the
botome of the sea. Wherefore I pray you, diligently beware, that you give no
such kind of offense to your brethren. Wherefore you shall now learn how the
name of God is taken in vain, to thente^t you may ye sooner eschew this syn.
For ye name of god is taken in vain diverse ways.

The first is when men give the title and name of God, to those things which
are not God in deed. As the heathen did call the Son the Moon, and the
stars, gods, also they called certain men as kings and tyrannes gods, and
as ye Jews did, which made a calfe of gold and said: This is the God which
brought us out of Egypt. (...)
And this (good children) is so heinous a fault, that God in the old
testamente commanded him to suffer death that should commit this sin, and
if any city had so offended, he willed ye same city to be burned and utterly
destroyed, and all that were found therein to be killed. Therefore let us
dilygently eschew this offense, or else God will horriblye punyshe us.

The second way of taking the name of God in vain, is when we forswere our
selves, or swear deceiptfully, other in commen judgment, or in our daily
affairs and communicacion, entendynge thereby to deceive our neighbor.
Wherefore you must diligently take heed that you use not to swer lightly
thorough an evil custom but do as Christ teaches us. Let your communicacion
be yea, Math. vi.
yea, and nay, nay. But when necessite dryueth you to an oath, or ye publyke
officer commands you to swear, then be not forsworn, but speak the truth
and faithfullye perform and observe that thing that you have sworn. And if
it shall chaunche any of you in time to come, when you shall come to man's
state, to be called to any office in the commen wealth, beware that you give no
cause nor occasion to oaths not necessary. For whatsoever sin is committed
by such oaths, that God doethe impute to thofficer which exactethe the same,
and not to the subjects which are bownde to obey, not only for fear of
punyshemente, but also for conscience sake.

Thirdely we abuse the name of God not only in vain but also very ungodly,
when with horrible cursyng and bannynge by the name of God we wyshe to other
the ve^geaunce of God. The which syn now in our time is much used. Insomuche
that now a days you shall hear not only men, but also women and children
outragiouslye curse and banne both themselfes and other, saying after this
wise. By gods soul I would I had never been borne, or I would the
ground should open and swalowe me up. By Gods body I would thou were
hanged, by gods passion I would the deuell had the, by gods wounds I
would it were on a wild fire, or such other like deuylyshe cursiges, and
wishi^ges which offense is not only abominable before god, but also so
shameful before the world that it abhors good christen ears to hear
such heinous blasphemy. For saint Paul in the second chapter of thepistle
to the Philippians writes thus. In the name of God all knees do bow down,
both in heaven in earth and under the earth, that is to say. Not only
Aungelles and men do wourship our Lord and God Jesus, Christ, but also the
damned spirits and deuelles in hell, do quake at his name, and by their
tre^blyng do declare that they most reverently acknowledge the name of his
majesty.. But these more then deuylishe swerers banners and cursers, without
reverence to the most honorable name of God, without curtesye or bowing to
him, who with a beck makes all the world to shake, do blow and bluster out
of their ungodly mouths such blasphemies as by the same they do not only
hyghly dishonor God, but also do wyshe to their neighbors, all kind of
miseries, plages and adversities that can be imagined, whereas our duty is to
love our neighbor and wish well to him, as to ourselfes. Now consider what a
great wickedness it is, to wyshe evil things to men by the name of God,
seeing that by this name we ought to desire and pray for all good things,
both to our selves and to our neighbors. Wherefore when ye hear any man
using such spytefull curses and blasphemies of gods name, doubt not but yt he
in yt deed is wurse then the devil himself. For the devil when he hears
god named trembles thereat, and dateth not so irreverently behave himself to
that most holy mane where as these wretched and most ungodly persons, do
show no fear nor reverence thereto at all. But ye good children take heed for
gods sake, that you accustom not your selfs to such kind of blasphemies.
And when you shall hear other outragyng with such horrible curses, fly from
them as from pestilence, and think this with your self. I will convey me
out of this naughty company, lest peradventure I also may be infected with
this contagious custom of swearynge and cursing, and so may be made at the
length more abominable in this point, than is the devil him self.

Fourthly the name of God is taken in vain, when men do abuse the word of God
purposelye making false expositions upon holy scripture, and wrestynge the
same from the true sense to their evil purpose, or when men make a trifle or a
lawghynge sport of the words of holy scripture as these papists do which
say that this verse of ye Psalm. He shall drink of the broke by the way, and
therefore he shall lift up his hedde, is verefied of the gose and the gaundre.
This abuse does bread a contempt of the word of God, and it does corrupt or
mynishe the authority of Gods doctrine.

Fyftly they do misuse the name of God, which do abuse it to charms,
witchcraft, sorceries, nicroma^cies, inchau^teme^tes, and co^iuringes. And this
is not only a great syn, but a thing of his own nature most vain and
folishe. For persuade your selfs this thing for a suertie, good children,
that all kind of witchecraft is of his own nature nothing else but lies, gyles
and subtilenes, to deceive ygnoraunt and simple me^, as many have proved by
experience to their great loss and utter vndowynge. Wherefore beware of them,
believe them not, do not learn them, neither fear that an another man's
inchauntementes are hable to hurt you. For they be nothing else but the devils
instruments, by the which he does provoke men to horrible sins, that the
name of God may be blasphemed diverse ways, yt we may defile our souls with
detestable ydolatrie, that one man may suspecte an other, that anger, envy and
hatred might be sown among men, and that out of this root might spring up
backbytyng slau^deryng and al myschief. This vice pleases well the devil, but
God has forbid it, and commanded in ye old law that whitches, sorcerers and
co^iurers should suffer punishment of death.

Wherefore good childeren, fear the Lord, and take not his holy name in vain,
beware of ydolatrye forsware not, abstain from oaths and curses, refrain your
tongues, from al untruths, raylynges, skoffes and iestes when you talk of
holy scripture or matiers concerning religion, fly from all kind of
wytchecrafte and inchauntementes. For to this commau^deme^t god has added a
special threatenynge, saynige thus. He shall not be giltles before the lord
that takes his name in vain. Believe surely good children, that these be very
weyghty wourdes and of great importance, and think not thus with your selfs,
what? is this so great a matter? I spoke not these wourdes in ernest, but in
board. I pray you for Christ's sake do not defend your fault with such
excuses, but beware that you take not in vain the name of God* nether in
ernest nor in sport. For the holy name of God is to be wourshipped with all
honor and religion and he that does not obey this commandment, him the lord
shall not count gyltles but shall punish him grievously. And when God
punishes, he sends among us sycknesses, pestilence, hungre, derth, battle,
robberies, sedition, manslaughter, and such like, with these plages he takes
vengeance on our sins. Therefore we ought to fear his wrath, and not to take
his name in vain. Hither to you have heard five ways whereby we may take the
name of God in vain, now it shall be declared unto you how you should
rightly and duly use the name of God. Considre that we be professed in to our
religion, and baptized by ye name of God, wherefore good childerne listen
diligently to this lesson, and learn that we ought to use the name of God three
ways, by invocation and calling upon him, by confession of his name and his
wourd, and by thanks gyuyng.

As touching the first, we be bound in all our necessities and parrels to
call upon the name of God, to fly to him for succoure, with all our hope and
confidence, and not to run to witchecraftes, charms, sorceries, and such
like vanities, for God himself says, call upon me in ye day of thy
tribulation, I will deliver the, and thou shall glorifye me. Here ye hear good
children, that God does command us to call upon him, and not upon any other
creatures besides him, and he says in express words, call upon me in the
time of thy tribulation in aduersytye, when thou art in need and danger.
Wherefore no man should dyspaire what soever kind of afflyctions does chance
unto him, but pray for help from heaven and call upon the name of the Lord
who by his mighty and strong hand is able, and by his fatherly affeccio^ will
deliver and help us, what soever and how great soever affliction and te^tatio^
ouerwhelmeth us, and therefore he says, I will hear thy prayer.

Here mark good childerne, that it is your bounden dewtie to pray to God, and
that they do sin heynouslye which do not pray, wherefore ye shall learn the
Lords prayer which Christ him self has taught and appointed, and ye shall
say it daily. For this commandment does bind us to pray, forasmuch as
it forbids thabuse of gods name and commands his name to be handled
reverently and religiously. But we (...) deliver the, and thou shall honor and
glorify me. Here you perceive good children, that God our heavenly father does
hear our prayers. and heapeth upon us infinite benefits, for this cause,
purpose and intent, yt we should be glad and joyful to praise him, and with
all our heart re^dre thanks unto him. Wherefore when soever we pray, before we
ask any new benefit, we ought to thank him for tholde, and to glorifye his
name for ye great treasures of gifts heretofore given unto us.

And by this means both he will be the more willing to hear our prayers and
also our faith shall be the more strengthened and confirmed. For when we call
to our remembrance, how God oftentimes heretofore has herd our
supplications, and delivered us out of many and perrellous daungiers, we be
thereby moved less to doubt of his goodness, and stedfastlye to hope, that he
now also, will be as merciful unto us, as he was wont to be in times passed.
Therefore says the prophet David, I will call upon the Lord praysyng him, and
he will save me from mine enemies. Now therefore good children, ye shall learn
this lesson and practice it dilygently, first of al to praise and thank God
for all his benefits, and afterward to call upon him in all your necessities:
So God will be the more redye to hear your peticions, and your faith also
thereby shall be the more nourished and increased. For he that will trewely and
effectuallye pray, before al other things must believe and persuade himself
for a suertie, yt God will hear his prayer.

Wherefore good children, now I pray you learn so to understand this second
commandment, that ye take not the name of God in vain, that ye give not your
selfs to Idolatrye, that ye swear not customablye nor without a necessary
cause, that ye never commit perjury, yt you curse no body, yt ye abuse not
the name and word of God to untruth, unclean and dishonest co^municatio^, that
ye apply not your minds to witchcraftes and sorceries. Luke, xxi,
For these faults as yet never escaped unpunished before God. Contrarywyse you
shall reuerentlye use the name of God to his glory and to the profit of your
neighbor, by calling upon him, by praying and giuyng thanks unto him, and by
open profession of his doctrine and religion.

And when ye shall be demanded, how vndrestande ye the second commandment,
ye shall answer. We ought to love and fear God above all thing, and not to
abuse his name to ydolatrye, charms, perjury, oaths, curses, ribaldrye and
scoffs, that under the pretense and color of his name we begyle no man by
swearynge, forswearynge and lyinge, but in all our needs we should call upon
him, magnifye and praise him, and with our tongues confess, utter and declare
our faith in him and his doctrine.

The third sermon.
YE have herd, how the second commaundeme^te is to be understood, in the
which we learn how we ought to order our selfs toward God, both in heart
and in words. Now follows the third precepte, which is this.

Remember that thou sa^ctifye the Sabbath day. Nume. xv


THis commandment good children teaches how we should behave our selfs
toward God in works. For when we have a mind to serve God and to show to him
as to our Lord and maker the greatest pleasure that we can; then we must not
chose by thaduyse of our own imagination, nether this nor that work, but we
must sa^ctifie the sabbath day, yt is to say employe and bestow it upon godly
and holy works and business. And here note good children, that ye Jews in the
old testament were commanded to keep the Sabbath day, and they observed it
every seventh day called the sabbot or satterday. But we Christen men in the
new testament are not bound to such commandments of Moses law concerning
dyfferences of times, days and meats, but have liberty and fredo^ to use
other days for our sabbath days, therein to hear ye word God and to keep an
holy rest. And therefore that this Christian lybertye may be kept and
mainteyned, we now keep no more the sabbath or saturday as ye Jews do, but we
observe the Sunday and certain other days, as ye magestrates do judge it
convenient, whom in this thing we ought to obey. And to the^tent you may the
better perceive such things as shall be spoken herin, considre I pray you how
wonderful a commandment this is. When worldly lords and masters receive
men into their service, they bid them not keep holy day, but they set the^ on
work and appoynte them diverse labors to be done for their service and
behofe. But our Lord God does not so with us in this commandment. He
bids not us to do neither this nor that work, he commands us not, to
gadde hither and thither on pilgrimage, to paynt, gyl^e, or clothe saints
images, to set up candels before them, nor to exercise any such feigned
man's works and false honorynge of God, (as the deceiptefull Monks and
Friars were wont to teache us) but he bids us to rest from labors, and
commands us to keep holy day. But yet note good children, that when you
hear say that God has commanded to rest from works, you must not gather
hereof, that you should cesse from such good works by the which your
neighbor is releued, as to give alms to the poor, to preach the word of
God, to instruct ye ignorant and such like (for god has commanded such
works to be done, and he does ernestly require them of us) but although we do
these works never so dilygently, yet by them we only serve and healpe our
neighbor for Gods sake. But when we will serve God only with such a kind
of work that perteyneth not to our neighbor but is propre and several to God
alone, than God commands you not to set before your eyes any outward work,
but to rest from such works. For this God requires of us in this
commandment.

And now good children listen unto me and you shall know the cause why god does
thus. He is so rich a God and his majesty is so mighty, yt he has no need of
our outward works nor wourshyppinges. Again he is so gentle, lyberal and
merciful, that of his own accord he desires to do good to all men, whereby
his name is praised and honored. Therefore he yt will do pure service and honor
to God, let him give himself to rest and quietness, not workyng to be made holy
by his own outward works, but let him keep holy day, let him suffer the
benefits of God to be powered lyberally and freely upon him. For to believe that
we receive all good things freely from God, and to acknowledge them with a true
faith, and gladly to praise and thank God for the same, is the most excellent
and highest honor, that can be yielded to him in this life. But it is not
sufficient for us to keep ye Sabbath day. But the Lord says, Thou shalt
sanctify the Sabbath day, that is to say, we shall bestow that day about
holy heavenly and godly things.

Now if ye desire to know with what holy works you should pass away this
day, you shall understand that we can do no geater holy works tha^ to hear ye
word of god and to learn ye true fear of God, and the right faith in him,
and to prepare our selfs that we may worthily be partakers of the Lords
table, thereby to receive great comfort to the quiet of our consciences and
confirmation of our faith. And moreover on such days cheflye we ought in
faith and spirit fervently to pray to God, to give us all good things that
we lack and have need of, and to defend and deliver us from all ill things.
And thus praing we shall not fail to be heard.

These be ye chief holy day works, by the which God rather serves and
works for us then we for him. For when he by his mynisters causes his wourde
to be preached unto us, when he distributeth to us ineffable gifts of his
sacraments, when he hears our prayers, he is rather beneficial unto us the^
we be to him. Therefore theffecte and su^me of this commandment is as God
should say thus. Good childerne, will you serve me, and do that thing that may
please me, then trust not in your own works, nor put your confidence in
them. For I have no need of your labor and works. Come hither I will teach
you what ye ought to believe and to do, I will comfort you with the marvelous
gifts of my sacraments, I will hear your prayers, you can not give to me
greater honor, the^ to repair to me, and to suffer me yt I may power my
benefits upon you, that you may acknowledge me to be your father, that you may
cast your hole affiance in me, and yt you may love me as children loves their
fathers and mothers. But of this matter you shall hear more in the Creed or
articles of the faith.

In the mean time you shall specially mark, that although every man has
need to labor daily for his daily fode, yet God has given us Sabbath days or
resting times, in the which he has commanded not only the masters
themselves but also their servants and cattle to cesse from bodily labores.
And yet on those days he fedeth us as well as on the workynge days. By the
which, he signifies unto us, that although we toil not continually until we
be weary, yet he will give us abou^dantly all things necessary, when we obey
his will, and first of all, seek the kingdom of God, that all other things
may be given us.

Hitherto good children you have been taught in what holy works you ought to
spend the Sabbath day, now it shall be declared unto you, how great a sin it
is, not to sanctifye the same. The which sin is then committed when we upon
the holy days do not hear with great dilygence and reverence, sermons and
the most fruitful word of God, when we do not give our minds to prayer, and
other Godly works, but to idleness, eatinge, drinking, bankettynge, dauncynge,
lechery, dicing, cardynge, backebytynge, slaunderyng and other ungodly works.
For the which abuse of holy days God is grievously provoked and punishes us
greuouslye with diverse kinds of plages, but specially with need and poverty.
For so God threateneth in the.xxviii. chapter of Deuteronomie, deu. xxvi^
that me^ shall labor and toil both day and night, and yet shall not be
able to work themselves out of poverty. And it is no meruell. For when God
gives them resting days, they do not sanctify the same, they do not hear
the word of God, nor pray to him, but wickedly despise God and his honor,
spendyng the sabbath day in the above named sinful and ungodly life. wherefore
God justly punishes them with poverty. But peradventure you will say God does
not punish all ye breakers of this commandment with need and poverty.
Truth it is in deed, some there be which God does not punish in this life,
but defferreth their punishment until the hour of death, when they be
utterly forsaken of him, (which is a pain most horrible) and euerlastyngly
condemned if they amend not in due time. Therefore good children eschew these
sins, that be so heinous in the sight of god, sanctify your Sabbath day,
be desirouse to hear the word of God, pray continually, and give thanks to
God for all his benefits. In so doing you shall surely please him, and he
shall send you his grace, favor and blessing that all thing may prosper
with you, that you may with joy and gladness serve your Lord God, and enjoy
many sabbothes or restyng days. For God is well content that we have many
resting days, so that we spend them well in holy and godly exercises, and
cause not only our bodies to rest from labors, but also our minds from
sin. For we must keep the Sabbothe day not only with our body but also
with our hearts and minds, which we do, when we bridle our own will and
fleshely lusts, and with all reverence humble our selves to Gods will, so
that when we rehearse the Lords prayer, we may say trewly and hertely: Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. For so God testifies by the prophet
Esaie in the.lviii. chapter saying, Esa. lviii.
if thou will absteyne from doing thy will on my holy day, then thou shall be
called a pleasant Sabbath day, that is to say, when we submit our will to the
holy will of God, and patiently suffer those things which he works in us and
wills us to suffer, then we shall trewlye keep the Sabbath day and therein
laud and praise our Lord God. For this is no true keeping of ye Sabbath day,
when ye body cesseth from labors, and in the mean season a man's mind is
holly occupied how he may deceive his neighbor, how he may obtain his
pleasures, how he may revenge him self on his enemies. Or else when a man's
heart boyleth with murmuring, grudgynge and impatiencie, and does not
obediently bend himself to the will of God, nor patiently suffers his
works, but tosseth and turmoyleth himself with his own cares, thoughts and
compassynges. For when shall such an heart keep a Sabbath or resting day, or
earnestly praise God? wherefore let us learn to keep holy day not only from
bodily labors, but also from all evil thoughts and carnal desiers. But these
matters (good children) paraduenture does pass your capacities. For men have
busynes enough all their life time, perfytely to learn and practyse this
lesson, wherefore at this time I will require no more of you good children, but
only to bear away this plain and short instruction, that the cheuest
worshippyng of God stands not in outward works, but when we keape the
Sabbothe day as well with mind as with body, when we hear the word of God,
when by prayer we call upon his name, and be partakers of his sacraments. By
which things we be monished, instructed, stre^gthened and defended to be the
more constante in our faith. And this is the true sense and meaning of this
precepte. Wherefore good children mark it well I pray you, and when it shall
chance you to be demanded, how understand you the third commandment? Ye
shall answer, we ought to fear and love our Lord God above al things to hear
diligently and reuerentlye his holy word and with all diligence to follow the
same.

The fourth sermon.
A declaration of the fourth commandment.
YOu have heard the third commandment whereby we learn how to use our
selves toward God in our deeds and works, now follows the fourth
commandment which is this.

Honor thy father and thy mother that thou may lead a long life in the
land which the lord God shall give unto the. Gene. lx.


THis good children is ye first and chief commandment of the second table,
which doethe teach us, how we ought to behave our selfs toward our
neighbor. And this commandment speaks of the most excellent and most
dear personages unto us that live upon the earth, as of our parents and
rulers of the commen wealth, and it teaches how we should order our selves
toward them, that is to say, to honor and dread them. It entreats of
no small or trifelyng things, but contains matiers of very great
importance, and it gives great wisdom to all them that do rightlye
understand it. Wherefore good children lysten to it dylygentlye, that you may
know the true meaning thereof. And first of all ye shall understand, that
God did give us these ten commandments for this cause that by them we might
learn what does please him. For this is a doctrine most certain, that we
upon earth can interpryse or work nothing that may better please him, than
to keep his commandments. And they be most foles of all, that go about to
serve God and win his favor with such works as he himself has not
commanded. For of such Christ says in the xv. chapter of Mathewe. They
wourshippe me in vain with the commandments of men. Mat. xv.
But this we may be sure of, that it pleases God that we should honor our
father and mother and obey them. And for this cause, all the works also which
they command us to do, do please God, yea the most vile works yt they
appoint us unto, as to swepe the house, to pour water into the lauer and such
like. Now this is a very great comfort for us to know for a suertie yt these
small and druggynge works do highlye please god, because in doing the^ we obey
our parents. Contrariwise those kinds of wourshyppynge God, those ceremonies
and wourkes which be done to please God without his commandment and besides
his wourde, do nothing at al please him, although the world do never so highly
esteem and praise them. For it is the commandment of God, only and nothing
else ye makes our works holy and precious in his sight. Now here god
commands us to honor our father and mother, that is to say, to stand in
awe of them, wyllyngly to obey them, to love them and have them in reverence,
and to help them with all the means we can. For these wourdes, honor thy
father, and mother, do co^teine al these things. And we be bound to yield
unto the^ this honor, forasmuch as God has given them unto us as masters,
tutors, governors, and rulers, in his stead, and by the^ has powered upon us
many high and great benefits, whereby we be most streyghtly bound to honor them
and not to dyspise them. But when we do not fear them, when we lightly regard
them, when they be angrye with us, then we despise them. And this is a very
heinous sin before God. For in no wise we should contemn them, but ought to
take very great heed that we displease them not, no not in trifelyng things.
Also when we do not obey the^ wyllynglye, then also we despise them, for he
that does not obei his father and mother, he is a presumptuous person, and
thinks himself wiser or better then they, and this is a great contempt and
an heinous sin before god. Wherefore good children do not so despise your
fathers and mothers, but obey them with all your heart, and be subject unto
the^. Furthermore when we do not love our fathers and mothers, then it is not
possible that we should heartily honor them, wherefore we must bear an hearty
and feruents love toward them, specially, seeing that God has thorough
them powered so many benefits upon us, as we shall declare more at large
herafter. Besides this it is our bownden dewtie to use all kind of gentleness
and lyberalytie toward our fathers and mothers and in all things to show
kindness unto them before all other parsons. For when we do any pleasure to
other men, we look yt they should thank us for ye same. But of our fathers
and mothers, we ought to look for no thanks but with our benefits we must
honor the^ yt is to say, we must order ourselves toward the^, no otherwise
then we would do toward kings, princes, and lords, to whom when we offer
any present, we think not that they be bound to render unto us any great
thanks for the same, but we humblye fall on our knees before them, instantly
desyryng them, that they will vouchesafe to take in good part so small a gift,
wherein we declare our good will far to pass our ability and with all
reverence we sue unto them, that of their clemency they will accept our good
hearts and minds. On this fashion we ought to behave our selves toward our
fathers and mothers, and when so ever we be able to do them any pleasure, we
must honor them after the said manner, and reverently beseech the^, that they
will take well in worth such small tokens of our deutye and love toward
them. For we can not render unto our fathers and mothers, any gift or present
so weyghty, yt shall be able to cou^terpoyse the kyndnes which they have
deserved at our hands, or can in any part recumpense the great goodness and
benefits which they have heaped upon us without nu^bre.

So good children note well I pray you what is meant by this word, honor,
which in this place comprehe^deth fear, dread, reverence, obedience, and
love toward our parents, and that it is our dewtie to lade them with all
kinds of gentleness and lyberalitie. And when we have done all that we can do,
yet not to look for thanks again at their hands, but rather to thank them,
that they would vouchesafe so gently to accept our small benefytes. For god
has appointed the^ to be our masters, tutors, and governors, over us,
wherefore of duty we owe unto them this service and obedience. And unless we
order our selves to our parents after such manner as is before rehearsed, God
will be grievously offended with us, and sore punish us. As it is plainly
declared in Moses law in the.xxi. chapter of Deuteronomie where these words
are written. Deuteronomy. xxi.
If a man have a froward and stubburne child, which will not hear his
fathers and mothers commandment and being corrected disdaines to obey them,
they shall take him and bring him before the judges of the city, and shall
say thus. This our son is stubburne and disobedyent, he will not hear us,
nor be ruled by us, he is a ryoter and lives ungodly. Then all the people
shall stone him to death, that this myscheuous wede may be weded out of ye
congregation, and all the people may hear of his punishment, and fear to
commit like offense Hereby you may learn good children, how greatly this
sin dyspleaseth God, seeing that in his law he has appointed so payneful a
punishment for dysobedient children. Hitherto you have herd what it is to
honor your pare^tes, now hear also the cause why God has so diligently
commanded this thing. Our lord God has given us so many benefits by our
fathers and mothers yt no tongue can worthily express them. For God uses our
parents as his means by whom he gives us life, breath, fode and al things
necessary to the maintenau^ce of this life. Therefore we ought to wourshyp
them, as the chosen instruments of God. And forasmuch as God himself is
invisible to us here in earth, whom we neither se bodily nor hear his voice,
therefore he has appointed our fathers and mothers in his stead to talk with
us, and to teach us what we ought to do, and what to eschew. Even as the
scholemaster does oftentimes commyt his scholars to his vscher, that he in the
scholemasters absence may teach and govern them, and him they ought to
reverence and obey. And as the scholemaster does sharply correct and
chastises those scholars yt will not be ruled by his vscher, so God will
grievously punyshe those children, yt does not obey their fathers and mothers.
For he has appointed them to be his deputies and vschers in ye educatio^ and
gouerna^ce of us his children. For God is the chefeste worker and maker of all
things, he is the highest scholemaker, and our fathers and mothers are the
instruments and toils, whereby God does work us, make us and fashyoneth us.
For God is the eternal and most marvelous creator, and he daily does
create. But when he entendeth to make man, he makes him not now of a glod of
earth (as he did when he first made Adam) but he uses our pare^tes to this
strange and wondrefull work and makes us by them. And this is the first
and greatest benefit, that God by our parents, does give us both body and
soul. And after that young chylderne be borne into this world, we se how they
lie certain years crying in their cradels, not able to help themselves. At what
time except God did nouryshe us by our fathers and mothers, there were no
remedy but yt we must neades peryshe. And when god does entend to feade us in
our cradels he does not send down bread from heaven (as he did Ma^na) but he
wonderfully fylleth our mothers dugges full of milk, wherwyth she may give
suck to us, and also he sends to our fathers sufficient riches whereby they
may bring up their children. And this is the second benefit, that God, by
our parents does nurse us, feade us, and bring us up, more tendrely then the
hen does her young chekyns. Furthermore God sends us Christian pare^tes,
which cause us to be baptized and grafted into Christ, and to be made the
children of God. For if our parents were not christened we were like to be
wrapped in continual blindness and errors. (For you see no Jews children come
to be baptized) and if we should have heathen parents and dye without
baptism, we should be damned everlastingly And in case we died not in our
infancy, yet we should be ungodly brought up in thouses of Heathen and
unchristened parents, and should be taught even from our tender age, to hate
and despise the true faith of Christ as we may see an example by Turks and
Jews children, which vehemently hate the faith of Christ, and among ten
thousand of them, scase one desires to be baptized. And this is ye third great
benefit, ye God by our pare^tes does bring us to baptism, and to Christ his
church, and does plant in our hertes an ernest love toward Christ's religion,
that wyllynglye and gladly we become Christians.

Besides this when we be growe^ to such age, yt it is time for us to go to
schole, then god teaches us by our parents his most excellent doctrine that
is to say, tharticles of our faith, the ten commandments, and the Lords
prayer. Furthermore our parents do teach us the nourture and civility of
good manners, that we may prove gentle, quiet and fair co^ditioned, and such
with whom, honest men will be glad to keep company. From our parents we
have our country, (then which nothing is more pleasant unto us) and the
fredome fraunchesies and lyberties of ye city in the which we were borne. Our
parents also leave unto us oftentimes great plenty of riches and lands for
our inheryta^ce. They also teach us diverse ways of marchaundise, mani
handycraftes and all kinds of sciences, by the which we may honestly and in
the way of treuth get our living here in this world. And although they be
compelled of necessity, oftentimes to use the aid and help of scholemasters,
and other connyng men in diverse kinds of faculties, yet because all these
things be done at the commandment, costs and charges of our pare^tes,
therefore we ought chiefly to thank them for all these benefits. And this is
the fourth benefit, that God by our parents does teach us the true
knowledge of him and his word.

Now these be the chiefest causes good children, why God has commanded us to
honor our parents. And suerly they be cruel children, yt do not this,
seeing that they have received of their pare^tes so great an heap of
benefits. And trewly they were wourthye to be stoned to death as stubburne
children were wont to be in the old testamente. Wherefore good children, observe
diligently this commandment that you be not disobedyent nor unkind, but
honor your fathers and mothers. And here you must not think that you owe this
subjection only to your fathers and mothers, but the same obedience and honor
is dew also to all the^ whose help and labor your parents does oftentimes
use in gouernyng and teaching you. Of the which sort be your tutors,
scholemasters, preachers, pastors, and curates, your masters that teach you
your crafts, and also the magestrates, and common officers. For ye holy
scripture does call all these fathers. And therefore when God says: honor thy
father and mother, he comprehends within the bounds of this commandment,
all those parsons before rehearsed. And this is done for these consideracions,
For when the parents do ley on their death bed then in their last will or
testament they assign and appoint to their children yt be of nonage tutors,
gardians, or governors to who^ they resign all their jurisdiction, which they
had of God given unto them over their children. To such tutors or governors
children ought to be obedient and honor them. For such be left unto them in
the stead of their parents and they nouryshed their pupylles or wards and
make much of them, and se that they be honestly brought up in virtue and
learning, and shall make a rekenyng for ye same both before God and the world.
Furthermore when that our parents either be not able sufficientlye to teach
us in their own parsons, or have not convenient leisure to do the same, then
they commit us to scholemaisters, preachers, pastors and curates, and make
them their deputies. Therefore it is the deutie of children, reverently to obey
their teachers and curates. For saint Paul says. The elders that rule well,
are worthy of double honor, specialli they that labor in the word and
teaching. i. Tim. v.
And saint Peter says. Obey them that are appointed to govern you, for they
do wake and watch for your souls as men that shall make an account for the
same.

Also it happens oftentimes, that pare^tes do put their children to other,
either because they themselves are not able to find them, or teach them
handye crafts, or the art of marchau^dyse, and when this chaunseth, then it
is the office of children to obey in all things and to honor even as their
parents, those to who^ they be thus committed and with who^ they dwell. For
unto such their fathers and mothers have given their power and authority.
Therefore saint Paul says. Servants be obedient unto your masters as
unto God, and so forth. But when children grow to man's age, Ephe. vi.
and then refuse to be ruled by their pare^tes, masters, teachers and curates,
and begin to wax wyld and wanton and to hurt, other, the^ the co^me^
officers ought to chastise them. And the Magistrates and superior powers ought
to be honored and feared, even as our fathers and mothers. For by them we be
defended from our enemies, of them we receive laws and statutes whereby we may
live in peace and quietness, wherefore we ought to be glad and willing to pay
to the^ tribute, taxes, tollages and subsidies, whereby they may be the better
able to maintain the tranquillitye of ye commen wealth. Learn therefore good
childerne. that they be not only called our parents, of who^ we are begotten
and borne, but they also be called to the honor and title of this name, which
help them to bring us up in virtue and learning. Such be they whom we call our
tutors or gardians, teachers, masters, curates, and officers. Also this word,
honor, does not only contain the outward gesture of making cursey and
puttyng of ye cap, but they do trewly honor their parents, which do fear
and love them, highly esteem them, give place to them, and render unto them
all kind of gentilnes and liberality, and yet do not obbrayd them, or cast
their gifts in their teath, but do confess ye still they be in their parents
debt, and as yet do owe them greater things. And this is a great point of
wisdom, yea in worldly policy, to acknowledge yt of bounden deutie we owe to
these persons above rehearsed honor and reverence, and that God is highly
pleased with this kind of sacryfice. And that he does send unto us by these
me^ innumerable benefits, wherefore if you will be counted good and godly
childerne, and please God, then keep this commandment, obey your parents and
every commen officer, fear them, be obedient to their laws and statutes, be
subject unto the^ in all things. Notwithstanding if the commen officer do bid
you do any thing expressly against god, the^ you may not obey hi^, but say
with ye Apostle Peter, we must obey god rather then men. Acts. v.
And beware good children yt you despise not your parents, or vncurtesely
entreat the^, because perchance they be simple men, rude, unlearned, poor,
weak, feable and impote^t by ye reason of their old age. For of what soever
state condition or quality they be, yet by them God has given us our life, he
has ordained them to be our governors, and (as I have declared heretofore) by
them he has sent us infinite benefits, wherefore we ought to honor them, obey
them, to be willing and ready both to learn and do that which they command
us, and to eschew those things which they forbid us. For this obedience
pleases God and is a most acceptable honoring of him. Take heed also yt you
refuse not nor grudge to do such things as they shall command you, nether
that you play the truantes or run away from your teachers, masters or other
artificers into whose house tuition and custody your fathers and mothers shall
commit you. For this is a great sin before God, the which shall not escape
unpunished. But specially you must eschew this most detestable kind of
disobedience (which now a days is very common) that you entangle not your
selves with marriage without the knowledge and consent of your pare^tes. For this
is a point not only of notable dysobedience, but also of great folyshenes. For
what is more miserable or can trouble a man more in this world, then a marriage
euel matched and vnmetly coupled. This is that grefe and punishment that daily
troubles and scourges us all our life time, from the which there is no
means to escape but by death only. And it is to be feared, when we go about
to marie oureselues, not making our parents privy to such contractes or
bargaynes but contemnyng their authority, that God will not prosper such
marriages, nor give thereto his favor and blessyng. But if you will keep gods
commandments, and honor your parents, then God will love you, and power his
gifts upon you most abou^dantly. Now good children you have herd what you
ought to do, I pray you be willing to perform that thing, which your bounden
dewtie requires of you. For saint Paul says, that this is the first or
chief commau^demente having a promise annexed unto it. Ephesians. v.
For herin god does promise, that he which does honor his father and mother,
shall live a long life, and shall abide in his native country. And he that
does not honor them, shall be driven out of his country, and shall shortly
dye. And surely this we prove to be true by daily experyence. For when
childerne be wanton, wild stiffenecked, stubburne, and refuse to be ruled by
their pare^tes and scholemasters, or do not serve their masters truly, when
they will not have in reverence their preachers and curates, or do not obey the
common rulers, then God scourges them, some with one punishment, some with an
other. Some is maimed, some leaseth an eye, one has such a fall from an
horse yt he lies for stark dead, an other is drowned. And here I will not
speak of those unthrifty young men which be pickers of quarrels and in their
wylfulnes the one slays the other. But if perchance these dysobedyente childerne
escape punyshmente in their yought, yet when they come to man's state, and keep
howses of their own, then commonly such children do not avoid this threat
and indignation of God. For then many times they run into such debt, that
they be compelled to forsake their native country, and to fly into
sanctuary, or else to wandre in strange regions like banyshed men, far
from their kynsfolkes acquaintau^ce and friends, where no man does help the^,
trust them, or has pity of them.

And many of them, whilst they go about to avoid extreme poverty by lying,
stelyng, robbyng, and other ill means are cast in prison and afterward hanged.
These and such like pains men do worthily suffer in their age, which in their
youth dysdayned to follow the counsel of their parents.

Wherefore good children, obey your parents and magistrates, then you shall
prove wise men, able to help both your selves and other. Then God shall bless
you, that you may long continewe in the country wherein you were borne and
bredde, and dwell among your parents, brethren and sisters, friends and
acquayntau^ce many years. Then extreme poverty shall not oppress you,
whereby you should be compelled to leave your country, neither the rages or
partels of war shall drive you out from thense. So many and so great
benefits has God promised to obedyent children. And there is no doubt, but
that he will perform that thing which he has promised. As we feale by
experience, yt as long as we obey our parents, and suffer our selves to be
governed according to Gods will, so long we be brought up in the fear of God,
to our great commodity and profit. And this is the true meaning of the
fourth precept, which I pray you depely to prynt into your memories, that
when you shall be asked how you understand the fourth commandment, you may
answer, we ought to love and dread our Lord God, and for his sake to honor our
pare^tes, teachers masters and governors to obey the^ and in no wise to
despise the^

The fifte sermon.
Thou shall not kill. Gene. iiii.


IN the former sermon it has been declared unto you, how you should
understand the fourth precept, in ye which you have learned, how you must
behave your selves toward your fathers and mothers and all common ministers
in the publyke weal. Now follows the fifth commandment. Thou shalt not
kill. Which teaches us how we ought to order our selves toward each of
our neighbors, that we hurt them not, nether in their goods, nor in their
life. For among al worldly goods, and bodily gifts, there is none more
precious the^ health and life. Therefore God before al other damages and hurtes
does chiefly forbydde this, that we kill not our neighbor. And this
commandment does not only restrain our hands from kyllyng with violence
and force, but it for byddethe also all anger, envy, wrath, hatred and
malice, that we be not manquellers neither in heart, wourde nor dead. Roma,
vii.
For the law is spiritual (as saint Paul says) and requires of us
obedience, not only in outward work but also in thaffection of heart and
inward motions and most secret senses of the same. And it is an hye wisdom,
to look in the botome of this commandment, and ryghtly to understand the
same. Therefore our lord Jesus Christ did expound this commandment, his own
self, lest we should err and falsely understand it, as the Jews did. For
the Jews thought, that as long as they had refrayned their hands from killyng
and slayng, so long they had kept this commandment. And although their heart
had been full of hatred, envy, and malice toward their neighbor, and with
co^tumelious words or deeds had given occasion of manslaughter, yet this
they counted for no syn, and their scribes and pharisees did so teach the^.
Math. v.
Therefore Christ in the fifte of Matthew says. Uerely I say unto you, except
your ryghteousnes excede the righteousness of the scribes and pharisees, ye can
not enter into the kyngedome of heaven. Ye have heard that it was said unto
them of the old time, Thou shall not kill. Whosoever kylleth shall be worthy to
be judged. But I say unto you, yt who soever is angry with his brother, shall be
worthy to be judged. Here you see good children, that Christ does as ernestly
forbydde hathered, anger and envy, as he does bloody ma^slaughter. For he
that is angry with his neighbor, kills his neighbor in heart and will and
breketh this commandment of God, thou shalt not kill. And mark well good
children, that he says not, thy hand shall not kyl, or thy sword, spear, or
gunne shall not slaye. But he says, thou shall not kill, that is to say,
thou which art made of body and soul, shalt neither kill with any of thy
bodily members, neither yet with thy inward mind or will, neither with word
nor deed. But here paraduenture some will say. What think you sir of
traitors, commen thieves, robbers and murderers ought not such to be killed?
I answer that they ought to be killed, but yet God says, thou shall not kill,
thou shall keep peace with all me^. Who then shall kill such malefactors?
Leave punisheme^t to me (says God) and I will revenge. God himself will do
execution upon such open tra^sgressors of his laws. And therefore here in this
world, God has ordained under him kings, princes and other magistrates, and
has given them their swords to this use, that they should be his deputies
in kylling such offenders. And when such commen governors do their office in
punishyng open malefactors, the^ they do a true honor and service to god, and
ar his ministers, as saint Paul says to ye Romans. Romans xiii.
The magistrate is Gods officer. And when the public minister doethe kill an
open transgressor, we ought to think yt God kylleth him, for as much as the
officer doethe the same by the commandment and ordynance of God. Wherefore
good children, although men do never so great wrong unto you, and hurt
you either in your bodies or goods, yet take it patiently, refrain your hands
from bloudshedyng, strike no man violently, but commit the matier to God. For
he has said, leave vengeance to me and I will revenge. But ye in no wise shall
kill, nether in will, word, nor deed. For there be diverse ways to commit
murder. The first is when with any kind of weapon, or violence we slay our
neighbor, as thieves do be the high ways. Also if we give any commandment
or counsel, that our neighbor should be slain by other, or if we spread
abroad any euel brute or slander of any man, by occasyon of ye which he is put
to death. Furthermore we kill, when either with word or deed, we may, and do
not, deliver him whom other men entende to kill. And when we see our neighbor
in perryll of life, and do not help him, but suffer him to dye for hunger, to
be drowned, or burned. Besides this we be manquellers when we bear anger,
hatred and malice, against our neighbors, and when with great anger and
furye we do rail on him, curse him, and wish vengeance to light upon him.
For whersoeuer anger, hatred, envy, and malycyousnes reygneth, there is
manslaughter, which although it be not performed in deed with the hand and
sword, yet it is done in heart, mind and will. For as fire kyndled with a little
spark, does oftentimes great hurt and damage, and can not easily be
quenched, so wha^ the sparks of anger, hatred and envy do set on fire man's
heart they do oftentimes provoke more hurt than ever a man thought, and some
time they stir to commit such offenses, as in all his life he never
thought upon, and for the which afterward he soroweth all the days of his
life. So that the well and spring of manslaughter, is malice and envy. And
therefore sayncte John in his Epistle says. He that hates his brother is a
manqueller. And Christ says. He that is angrye with his brother is worthy to
be judged. For to be angrye is with the heart to kill. Wherefore that
commandment that says, thou shall not kill, does also forbid to be angry.
Furthermore Christ says, he that says to his brother Racha, that is to
say, he that with voice or gesture shows any token of an angry heart, is
worthy the sessyons, but he that says, thou fool is worthy the fire of hell.
In these sentences our master Christ teaches us, that in words is
manslaughter committed, when we utter the poison of our heart with any such
words whereby the venom of our heart is perceived. But when we burst out into
such raylynge, slaunderouse and contumelious words against any man, that he
may lose thereby his estimation or good name, then we be more heinous
murderers. And here also Christ teaches us, how greuouslye we shall be
punished both in this life and in the life to come, if we dyspise this
commandment of god. For he does not only say, he that kylleth, but he also
that is angrye with his brother, is worthy judgment, that is to say, is
gyltye before God of so great a crime, that he has deserved to be arrested,
violentlye to be drawn in to the place of judgment, and there openly to be
accused and arrayned of the same. But he yt with voice or gesture does utter
the malice of his heart, is worthy the sessions, that is to say, he has
committed so grievous an offense in the sight of God, yt it is not now
necessary to empanel a quest to inquire whether he has deserved punishment or
no, forasmuch as his offense is manifest, but the greatness of the sin has
only need of a sessio^ or a number of judges, to determine how grievously such
an offe^der ought to be punished. But he which inflamed with anger calls his
neighbor by such approbrius words, that his estimacion and good nameis hurt
and decayed, he is worthy hell fire, that is to say, he has sinned so
heynously, that he has deserved torments both in this world and in an other
world, except he repent in time, and obtain him pardone by the passion of
Chrste. But most of all, kyllyng with the hand and effusion of blood shall be
punished with most grievous pains, both in this life and in the life to come.
As our Lord God declared to Noe saying. Genes. ix
I will require your blood of the hands of all beasts, and of the hands of
man. For who so ever shedeth man's blood, his blood shall be shed again. And
in case the manqueller escape man's hands, and punishment of the commen
offycer, or if they that have Gods sword in their hands, be neglygent in
doing their office, or will be blinded with affections and corrupted with
monye, yet God will not let manslaughter to escape unpunished. For he has
said, that he himself will inquire of bloodshedynge and sit in judgment upon
manquellers. As it is plainly declared unto us by the horrible example of Cain,
who killed his brother Abell.

For not only in this life God did so sore punyshe him, that his conscience
was vexed with such unquietness and horrible fear, that all his body shook
and trembled most pitifully, and he could abid or rest in no place but like
a banyshed man or run agate wandered euerne where, but also now after this
life he is cursed of God, and damned for ever. This fearful pain (good
children) ought to warn us to be diligent in keeping this commandment, that
we kill not, neither in will, word nor deed, but contrarywyse to endeavor our
selfs to practice Christ's lessons, who has taught us gentylnes, mildnes,
long sufferance and patience. For he says. Blessed ar they, that suffer
persecution for rightousnes, for theyrs is ye kingdom of heaven. Wherefore good
children, mark ernestly what God here commands. Ye shall not (says he) be
angrye, but love your enemies, ye shall not slau^dre or backbite other, but
speak well even of those that hate you, according to ye commandment of
Christ. If a man strike yt on the cheke, resist not, but whosoever shall give
the a blow on the right cheke, turn to him the other also. And if any man will
sue yt at ye law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy clooke also. And
whosoever will compel the to go one mile, go with him twain. Do good to them
that hate you, pray for them that hurt and persecute you, that ye may be the
children of your father which is in heaven. All these are the words of
Christ. And if perchance we have done any manne wrong, or provoked our
neighbor to anger, then with great diligence we ought to labor, that in all
have and speed we may be reconciled. For Christ says. If thou offrest thy
gift at the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has any thing
against the, leave there thine offering before the altar, go thy way, and
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Oblations
and sacrifices were in tholde testament a very commendable and an high kind of
worshipping god. (For as much as he himself did appointe and command them).
And yet Christ here teaches, that God is better honored with keeping his
commandments, than with our offeringes. And to be reconsiled to our
neighbor is a sacrifice more acceptable unto him, then to offer oblacions.

Furthermore the keeping of these commandments, helps much to maintain
the tranquillite, peace and quietness of the comme^ wealth. For Christ says.
Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him, yt
is to say, we must refrain our self from discord, variance, hatred and
contencion and as much as lies in us, seek peace, concord and quietness* lest
we be cast into prison, from whence we shall not be delivered except we pay ye
utmost farthynge. And in these civil and worldly courts, although our
cause be good and rightful, yet is it possible that judgment be given
against us. And in case that at the length we have sentence on our side, yet
the suit thereof shall be so chargeable unto us, yt we shall, for the most part,
spend more money in waginge of the law, than we shall gain by the sentence.
Wherefore there is nothing better or more profitable, then to seek for concord
and peace, as much as is possible. And as it is our part to live in peace
with all men, so it is our duty also, to make them at one which be at
variaunce. For Christ says. Blessed be the peace makers, for they shall be
called the children of God. Wherefore good children, printe well in your
remembrance, that God has commanded, Thou shall not kill, and that we can
not offer a more acceptable sacrifice to God, then to keep his commandments.
Make your selfs strong therefore patiently to suffer all things, revenge not
your selves but leave al punyshement to God, and he will revenge your
quarrelles. Be not inflamed with anger, hatred or envy against your neighbor,
do no wrong to him, bear with his weakness and forbear him, hurt him not,
but rather defend him from hurt, sow, and norishe unity, peace and frendshyp
between all men, make agrementes and love days between them that be fallen at
discord, avoid all occasyons of anger or displeasure, as bragging, boastyng,
reuilynge, tawntynge, scornynge, dicynge, bankettyng, riote and such like
offenses. And contrariwise love your neighbor, do good to all men as far as
your ability will serve you, speak well of every body, and labor with all
your power to save the life of your neighbor. For this is the duty of all
godly men, to preserve and defend their neighbor, frendely to admonyshe
him of his faults, to instruct him and to comfort him. For we be bound to
healpe our neighbor in his necessity, to lend him money, to give to him
when he asks, to refreshe his hunger with meat and drink, to clothe his
nakedness, to receive into our house the harbourles, to comfort him when he is
sick. For all these offices and effects of true humanity, love and charity
God commanded, when he said, Thou shall not kill. And this is the true meaning
of the fifth precepte. Wherefore good children mark it well, and when you be
asked, how understand you the fifthe commandment? you shall answer, we
ought to love and dread our Lord God above all things, so that for his
sake we hurt not our neighbor, nether in his name, goods, cattle, life or
body, but that we aid comfort and succoure him in all his necessities
troubles and afflyctions.

The syxte sermon.
An exposition of the syxte commandment
Thou shalt not commit adultery. ii. Reg. xl.


IN ye last sermon ye were taught, how we should behave ourselfes toward our
neighbor that we kill him not, neither in will, word nor deed, neither hurt
him in his goods or body. Now a man (if he be a man in deed and no monster)
next after his own body does most dearly love his wife, wherefore next
follows the syxte commandment. Thou shall not commit adulterye, the which
teaches us, how we should order our selves toward our wyfes, that we
should love them, not forsake them or break the promise of wedlock with
them, but lovingly keep them company. Also that we should not lust after an
other man's wife, neither with fair words or gifts intyse her away from her
husband, but labor with all diligence that women both married and unmarried
may keep their chastity undefiled. For God himself did institute and ordeine
marriage, and did halow it with his own blessyng. Wherefore we may be sure,
that this state of life pleases god, and that it is his will, to have it kept
with out pollucion or dishonestie. For god after that he had made Ada^, he
said thus. It is not good, that Adam should be alone, let us make for him
an help. And when Adam was a sleep, ye lord took one of his ribs, and made
a woman of the Rybbe, which he had taken from Adam. And he brought her to
Adam, and Adam said. This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. For
this cause a man shall leave his father and mother and shall be joined with his
wife, and they shall be twain in one flesh. And the Lord God blessed them
saying. Grow and increace, and replenishe the earth, and till it. By this you
may learn good children, that God himself did institute marriage with his
own word. Wherefore there is no doubt, but that this kind of life is holy,
and does hyghlye please God. As thapostell Paul writes to ye Hebrews.
Wedlock is honorable and the bed therein is unspotted, but adulterers, and
fornicatours god does condemn. Furthermore god says. Grow and increase. Here
he declares, yt the fruit of wedlock, that is to say, children, are ye gift
of God. For if he had not commanded this thing by his word, then married
folks could have had no children Wherefore ye shall by these words chefely
learn, that there is a great difference between wedlock and the unlawful
company betwixt man and woman. For in marriage the act of generatyon between
the husband and ye wife is no sin (for God has ordained it, and it pleases
him) but fornication and adulterye be sin which God has forbid, and they
highly displease him. To married folks he has said: Grow, increase and fill
the earth, but to horemo^gers and harlots he has not said so, but has
condemned the^. Children begotten in marriage please God, but ye generation of
bastardes dyspleaseth him, and lacks his blessyng, wherefore it is much for
the profit of ye commen wealth, that wedlock should be kept purely and
chastely, out of the which springs the fruit of virtuous and honest
children, which may prove honest men, and be mete to bear office in their
cities and countries. But where adulterye reigns, where yought does both hear
and see unchasteness, there the infection of uncleanness spreads abroad, and does
poison the multitude, and God at the length does punyshe such sins with
hunger, famyne, battle, pestylence, and such like, until he has utterly
destroyed ye whole realm or city. Furthermore mark this also diligently, yt
the Lord says. Grow, increace, replenyshe the earth and dig it. Many
absteyne from marriage, because they be to careful how they shall live, if they
were married. Therefore our Lord God does here plainly show, that he will
minister plentyfullye to married folks, all things necessary to the
maintenance of their life, if they put their trust in him, and apply their
labors diligently. For he says, dygge, plowe or till the earth, as who
should say, I have made for your sake all things that grow upon the earth,
I have given to you all kinds of heastes, fishes, fowls, that lives in the
world, only labor you that you may purchase and possess those my riches
truly and honestly. Now good children consider this, that it is not in your
own liberty, whether you will be married or not. And thus I speak for this
purpose, that you should be the more dilygent to learn in time, some craft,
way, or science, whereby you might keep your house and get your living
honestli, both for yourselfes, your wife and your children, for god wylleth all
those to use marriage, that can not live contine^tly. And Christ speaks in the
gospel of saint Mathewe of.iii. sorts of people that live without
marriage. Math. xix.
There are some chaste, which are so borne even from their mothers womb. Some
there be which are made chaste by men. Other there be to whom God by a
syngular gift has given the gift of chastity, which live unmarried for this
purpose and intent, that they might the better know and set forth the kingdom
of God. And they that have this excellent gift, let them thank God for it,
for they may live unmarried. And Christ also does praise this kind of
chastity, saying. All men can not take this, he that can, let him take it.
Gene. i.
To all other God has commanded to use the help of marriage, saying. Grow
and multiplye. i. Cor. vii.
And saint Paul says. He that can not live contine^tly, let him marie, for
it is better to marie then to burn. Now forasmuch as marriage is a kind of
life so holy godly and honest, and yt also it pertains so much to ye profit
of the comme^ wealth, that the promise therein made should be faythfullye
observed, for ye causes above rehearsed, therefore God with this commandment,
as with a strong bulwerke or fortress has defended wedlock, saying. Thou
shalt be no wedlock breaker. And to thente^t we might the better
understand, what our Lord God meante by this commandment, Christ him self
did expound it, saying. Ye have heard how it was said to them of tholde
law. Thou shall commit no adultery. But I say unto you. He that looks upon
a woman to lust after her, has already committed adulterye in his heart. For it
is not enough to absteyne from carnal copulation with an other man's wife, but we
must absteyne also from all wanton communicacion, all unclean affections and
thoughts. Wherefore this commandment. Thou shall commit none adultery, is
as much to say, as thou shall not offend with thy neighbors wife, neither in
act, nor unclean wourdes, nor in lokes, wynkes, beckes, or other dishonest
gestures and signs, neither in affection and privy motion of thy heart. But I
co^mmau^d the (says God) that you be shamefast, chaste, pure and undefiled,
whether thou be a virgin, wydow or married. For these three states of life be
holy and pure. Herein also we be commanded, that we give none aid nor
counsel, cause or occasion to other to commit adultery, nor give houserome
harbor or lodging to such offenders, but as we ought to keep our own souls
clean from all such vices, so it is our deutie also to monyshe and dissuad al
other from such shameful interprises, both with threats, punyshmentes and all
means possible to stop and let them from so great abomination.

And think not good children, that in this commandment, only wedlock
breakyng is forbid, and that other whordome or lechery is not forbid, as some
frantike me^ do think, that single fornication between unmarried parsons is not
forbid, because God in this commandment speaks in express words only of
adulterers or wedlock breakers, But take heed good children, that ye err not
with these ungodly wicked parsons, but know ye for a suertie, that
fornication, whoredom, lechery and all kind of uncleanness, by what so ever
name or title it be called, is sin, and highly displeases god. For Moses
says. There shall be no whore among the daughters of Israel. Deuteronomy. xxiii
Also he says. There shall be no whormonger among the children of Israel. And
saint Paul says in express words. Ephesians. v.
Fornication and al uncleanness let it not be ones named among you, as it
becomes saints. For this know for a suertie, that no whoremonger either
unclean person has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God. Let
no man deceive you with vain words, for such things comes the wrath of
God upon disobedient children.

By these words you may easily perceive good children, how greuouslye God
does punyshe whores and whormongers. Wherefore fly whoredom as the pestilence
and the deuels poison. For God did forbid whoredom and all kind of uncleanness,
when he said. Thou shall not commit adultery. And he that is a whore haunter
he shall hardelye escape wedlock breaking. For he that in his heart excheweth
adultery, shall also exchewe fornication. Wherefore if you will keep this
commandment trewly, you must order yourselues after this manner. First of all
and chefelye you must beware, that you commit not lecheri in act and deed,
but you must live chastely and continently, until such time as by the healpe
of God, consent of your parents, and counsel of your friends, you may be
married lawfully. And then see that you observe truly the faith and promise made
in matrimony. Wowe not other me^nes wyfes, but keep company with your own
with all dew love and favor. For saint Paul says. The woman has not
power or liberty of her own body, but her husband, likewise the husband
has not power or liberty of his own body, but the wife. And let not one
married person be absent from the other, without an vrgente and weyghty cause,
neither let the husband suffer his wife in peril and daungier to sytte alone
without his company or comfort, nor the wife her husband likewise. For this
withdrawynge of the one from the other, although it be but for a time, yet if
it be done against the will of either party, it is syn, although both of the^
keep their bodies undefiled. Secondarely if you will keep this commandment,
you must abstain from all filthy words and unclean co^municatio^, you must
not craftily go about with flatery and loving words to deceive the
simplicity of young women, you must not with fair promyses or gifts entise
them to folly, neither with wanton songs or dishonest dalyance kyndle the fire
of lechery, but asmoche as is possible, you shall avoid all wanton lokes and
unchaste gestures, to much nysenes in trymmynge and deckynge your bodies, and
apparellyng them to gorgiously, and all kinds of craftye entycementes, which
lovers do use to please ye eyes and minds of their peramoures, whereby they
may allure them to love and lechery. Thyrdly you must eschew all unclean
minds and thoughts. For although the world doethe neither see nor punish
the sins of our thoughts, yet God which sercheth men's hertes and raynes,
does both see, and punish them. Therefore Christ says. He yt sees a woman
to lust after her, has alredye committed adultery in his heart. You must also
diligently avoid al occasions, by the which such unlawful lusts are
provoked as surfetyng, dronkenes, idleness, wanton daunsing and such like.

For Christ in this sermon of adultery says. If thy right eye give the an
occasion to sin, pull it out and cast it from the. For it is better, that one
of thy members peryshe, then that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
Much more then, if surfetynge, banketyng or such other like, do give you
occasion of sin, you ought diligently to eschew them, lest you fall into so
perrellous a daungier. Fourthly you ought not only to keep your own bodies
and souls chaste and pure from all uncleanness, but also you must take heed,
that you give no occasyon, aid or counsel to any other, to commit
adulterye, but as much as lies in you, you shall study that honest and chaste
living may be observed of all men. For these things both please God and be
much profitable to every co^menwelthe. You shall therefore vnderhande this
commandment after this sort, that you abstain from all adulterye and
whoredom, both in heart word, and deed, that you avoid all evil occasion,
both by your selves and by other, that we all may lead a godly chaste and
pure life, that the bond or knot of wedlock may not be broken or loosed.
Whereby the commen wealth may have plentye of good and virtuous children,
which may be able in time to come, either to be preachers and ministers of
Gods most holy word, or to bear commen office in thadministration of the
commen wealth, to the glory of God and profit of their neighbor. Wherefore
good children, when ye shall be demanded, how vndrestande you the syxth
commandment, ye shall answer. We ought above all things to love and dread
our Lord God, and for his sake to live chastely in will, word and deed, and
every man is bownde to love and cheryshe his wife.

The seventh sermon
An exposition of the seventh commandment.
Thou shall not steal. Joshua. vii.


YE have heard in the exposition of the syxte commandment how we should
behave our selfs toward our own wifes and our neighbors wifes also, by the
which commau^demente, as God has fortifyed wedlock that no man shall besyge
or assaut it, so by the virtue and strength of this seventh commandment. Thou
shall not steal, he defends our neighbors goods and riches, whereby he
lives himself, his wife, children and family. For this precepte teaches us,
how we should order our selves toward our neighbors goods, and cattle,
that by fraud or stealth we convey nothing from him, that by violence or
extorcion we take nothing from him, but study to defend and increase his
riches, with as good a will, as we would do our own.

And here note good children, that this word, theft, does not only signify
open robberies, extorcions and manifest poollyng but also all manner of crafts,
and subtle ways by the which we convey our neighbors goods from him,
contrary to his knowledge or will although the gyle have never so fair a
color of virtue and honesty. And to thentente you may the better understand
this thing, I shall declare it unto you by certain examples. And first I will
begin with Magistrates or commen officers. God has commanded us to pay to
princes and governors of the commen wealth, rentes, services, tributes,
customs, toll, subsidies, pensions and other yerelye revenues, whereby they
may be the more able to sustain and bear the charges of the commen
admynistration, and also to punyshe them that be ill, and to defend those
that be good. But when the magistrates do ouercharge their subjects, and
exact more of them then is needful to the mayntenaunce of the commen charges,
and so empouerishe and oppress them, whom they ought from all injury and
wrong to save and defend, then this sore exaction is a notable and haynouse
kind of theft, in the sight of God. Likewise it is wha^ they do wring monye
out of their subjects hands unjustly and against their wylles. And tributes
or subsidyes if they take none but such only as of right are due unto them,
yet if they bestow not the same as they ought to do, but wastfullye spend
that monye which was gathered for the maintenance of the comme^ charges, and
consume it in riot and unlawful pleasures than they commit theft before God.
Also God shall judge them thieves, when for couetuousnesse they leave such
things undone, which be necessary to be done for the commen profit. As when
they appoint not good and mete men to be rulers under them, bishops, persons,
curates, and scholemaysters, because they grudge to give them an honest and
sufficient living, but will take out of the commen sort to minister such high
offices, those that will serve for lest money. And rulers of cities be thieves
when they suffer the necessary buildinges of the city, as churches, yield
halles, the town walls, commen brydges, comductes or such like to decay or
fall to ruin. For so through their negligence or covetousness the commen money
is not employed to such uses, for the which it was gathered.

Also Bishops, pastors, preachers and curates be thieves, when for men's
favor and their own lucre they hid the truethe of Gods word, and teach
lies and their own dreams, and sell all things for money. As of late time
here in England, many of them had great gaynes by diriges, services to sing
for sowles, trentals, pylgrimages, pardons and such like deceytes. This kind
of deceyte, in vttryng false ware for good, is theft before God. For men
thereby be deceived, which would give no monye at all for such merchandise,
if they were taught and warned of their abuses.

Likewise Lawers, advocates, sergeants, attorneis and procters are thieves
before God, when they for their own gaynes do counsel a man to wage the law,
making him to believe that his matter is good, when in deed they think it
naught. Or when for monye they will so craftily handle or plead a matter, that
they with their shifts and colors will purposely hyde the truth, and make a
good cause to seem bad, and a bad cause to appear good: wherwyth they shall so
deceive the judge that they will cause him unjustly to give sentence on their
side. And the judge himself is a thief before God, when he for brybes or any
corrupcion does wittingly and wyllingly give wrong judgment.

For he takes from the party that has the good cause, his just title and
interest, and gives it to the other party that has no right to it at all.
And this is also no small theft, when men craftily defraud the true heirs of
their inheritance, or forge false testamentes, and will not bring to light
the true will, but hyd and suppress it.

Furthermore merchant men, brokers, chapmen, merchants factors, are thieves,
when they require unreasonable gaynes, in sellyng of their marchaundyse, or
when they utter corrupt and naughty ware for good, when they deceive their
neighbor with false weight and measure, when with forged letters and feigned
news they persuade other to be hasty to sell that kind of ware good chepe,
which they know will be dear shortly after, or else by such like craft,
entice men to bye of them great plentye of that kind of marchaundyse, of the
which they know that the price will shortly after decay. Or when with their
lies and periuries they cause a man to give more monye for any stuff, then he
would have done if that he had known that they had lied. Also when the rich
marchaunte men and vserers, have the heads of the poor handy crafts men so
bound under their girddels, that the poor men of necessity are compelled to
bring their ware to them, and when ye handy crafts me^ do come to them and
offer their stuff than they feign that they have no need of such wares at
that time, and by such means compel them to sell their wares better chepe
the^ they be able to aforde them, not regardyng what great loss their poor
neyghbore does suffer thereby. Also when by forstallynge, regratyng, agrementes
in haules to raise the price of things, ingrossynge of marchaundise, when one
man or one company gets all in their own hands, that no man may have
gain but they only, when by these or such like deceites they compel the
poor to bye at their own price, such wares as they must needs occupy, the^
they be arrant thieves before God. For by such fraud they begyle their poor
neyghbors, and poolle them of their money against their wylles. The
handycraftes men and daily laborers also are thieves, when they do not apply
their wourke diligently and faithfully, but sell counterfeyted and slyghtly
wrought wares for substantial stuff, or require more for their labor and
pains then they have deserved.

Like wise it is of husband men in the country, to whom Lords and gentle
men let their land to ferme to thentente yt they should plowe and till it, that
thereby the commen welthe may have plentye of corn, and dearth may be
avoided: than if they be negligent or slouthful in plowyng the ground, or sell
their corn, cattal or other vitayle, at unreasonable prices, to enriche
themselves thereby, they be veraye thieves before the face of God. For Kings
lords and gentle me^ do not give to their fermors the propriety or
inheritance of their lands, but only for certain rentes and services do let
their ground out by lease, for this intent and purpose, that the fermors
should till the same. And the fermour or husband man, to whom such lease is
made, is nothing else but a servant appointed by the lord so to occupy his
ground, yt there by the commen people may be fed and nourished. Now therefore
if he do not diligently plowe and sow the ground as he is appointed, or else
if he set so excessive a price upon his corn that the multitude (whom his
deutye is to feade) is not able to bye it, then he his gyltie of theft before
God. For if fermers and husband men were so owners of their fermes and lands,
yt they might chose whether they would plowe them or no, then they should
nether be able to pay their rent due unto their landlordes, and the commen
people should perchance dye for hunger.

Likewise this commandment is to be understand of householde servants,
whether they be men or women prentises, journey men, or hired laborers. For
all these receive wages for this intent, that they should labor and wourke
for their masters profit, and help their masters in true gettyng, and
faithful keeping of their goods, to ye mayntenance of their householde. But
when such servants be untrusty, negligent or slouthful in doing their duty,
when they wastfullye spend or consume their masters goods, when they require
greater wages then they be worthy to have, when they start or run from their
masters, or tarry not so long as they were bound by their covenant, then
they break this commandment. Thou shalt not steal, for as much as they
withdraw from their masters that profyt, which of dewtie they owe unto them,
and do as much as lies in them to empoueryshe and undo their masters. And to
be short, they that pay not to their servants or wourkemen their wages in
dew time, according to their couenante. They which will not at the day appointed
restore that monye which they have borrowed. They which can, and will not pay
their dettes, for their own lucre. They yt do not render things which they
have found, as far as they can come to knowledge of the true owners. They that
do not give again such things as be committed to their custody for a time.
And generally all they that do hawke and ho^te for other men's goods against
the will of the owners, or do hurt them in any part of the same, or else if
they seek not their neighbors profit, as they ought to do. Al these (I say)
are thieves before God, although the world does not so judge them, nor punyshe
them for the same. Hereby you may perceive good children, how great misery
reigns in this wretched world, and that men swim (as it were) in a floode
of sin. For the world is full of privy thieves, and there is almost no
state or kind of life, from the highest to the lowest, of the which there be
not many that have broken this commandment. And yet we count it a
villainy, to be called a thief, and not with out good cause. For thefes be
punyshed with most shameful death, hanging on the galowes or gybbyt. And
although they escape hanging in this world, yet many times God punysheth
them, so that they live wretchedly all their life time. For commenly evil
gotten goods is ill spent, and the third heir does scasely enjoy them.

And when it chau^seth that such untrusty and slothful servants, as I have
heretofore spoken of, shall keep house of their own, then God scourges them
with the same rod, with the which they whipped other. For he sends them
unfaithful and neglygente servants, which runs away from them, and
serves them as they were wont to serve other. Wherefore good children, keep
well this commandment. Abstain from all kinds of theft, steal no thing
from no man, hurt no body, give and render to every man that which is due
unto him, according to his degree, state and calling. And when you be put in
trust with other men's gooddes, handle them faithfully. You ought to be
much better now than when we were under the Bishop of Rome, for as much as
we have now received the gospel and have newely professed the pure truth of
Gods word. Therefore if we be now not better then we were before, surely God
will more grievously punish us than he did before when we were in ignorance.
For the Lord says in the gospel. The servant that knows his masters
will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many strypes.

Now good children ye have heard how this seventh commandment forbyddeth you
to hurt your neighbor, either in act, word or thought, it commands you
neither pryuely nor openly, to steal or take away an other man's goods
against his will, it wills you to commit no theft in words, that is to say,
to beware that neither with lies, swering, forswering nether with flattery,
fair words, craftye communication we defraude circumuent or begyle our
neighbor, neither by threatnyng we cause him to depart from any portion of his
goods, or other ways to noy him. Also it prohibiteth us to commit theft in
heart or thought, which we do, when through the counsel of covetousness, we
study, compass, and in agine how we may deceive our neighbor, and by hoke
or by croke to get that thing which we covet to have. But contrariwise this
commandment charge us to give and render to every man that which is due
unto him, wyllyngly to serve and profyt all men, to defend our neighbor
from al manner of hurt loss, and damage, (as much as it shall lie in us,) so to
order our words and communication that thereby (as much as shall be possible) we
may healpe and comfort our neighbor, hertely to love and favor all men,
and to envy no man. Also this precepte wylleth us to be so far absent from
taking away an other man's good, that it byddeth us to give part of our
own riches to them that lack and desire it, according to the commandment of
Christ, which says. Luce. xi.
Give to every man that does ask the. And again he says. Give alms and
all thing shall be clean unto you.

And in an other place, That which you do to one of the lest of mine (says
Christ) that you do to me. Mat xxv^


Wherefore good children, when you shall be demanded, how understand you the
seventh commandment? you shall answer. We ought to fear and love our Lord
God above al things, and for his sake willingly to abstain from our neyghbors
goods and cattle, to take nothing from him, but to help him in his need,
and to defend and augment his riches and commodities.

The eight sermon.
An exposition of the eyghte commandment.
Thou shall bear no false witness against thy neighbor. Daniel. iii


YE have heard how ye ought to understand the seventh precepte, by the which
ye have learned, yt by no means we should take away our neighbors goods
against his will. And when he commits any thing to our custodye, (either
wyllyngly or constrained by necessity), then it is our duty to keep, and
save the same, as we would do in case it were our own. And forasmuch as our
riches stands not only in possession of lands, tenementes, cattle or
money, but also in our good name, fame and estimation, (which far passes al
gold silver and precious stones,) therefore follows this commandment. Thou
shalt bear no false witness against thy neighbor. For this commandment
teaches us, how we should behave our selves, in defendyng our neighbors
good name, that we dishonest him not with lies, false accusations, or witness
bearyng, that we slander him not, but study to defend, increase and
maintain his good name and fame, even so as we would wyshe other men to do
toward us. And here you shall dylygently mark and bear away, how excellent a
treasure it is to have a good name. Pro. xxvi.
For Solomon says. A good name is better then much riches, and more precious
then balm or other straung oyntementes. And forasmuch as God so ernestlye
forbids other men, to hurt our good report and estymatyon, which men
have conceived of us, it must needs follow, that much more he forbyddeth
our selves, to do that hurt to our selves, which he charge other not once
to offer unto us, but he requires of us, that we with all diligence should
study to get us a good name, and to keep the same unspotted and undefiled.
This we shall do, if we apply our minds to true virtue and unfeigned religion,
that our life may be found fawteles, and men may have no matier against us,
wherewith they may wourthely charge us. For it is not sufficient, only to
abstein from syn, but we must also avoid all occasyon of the same, and as
saint Paul counsels us, we must refrain from all outward apperaunce of
evil. These. v.
Wherefore good children live virtuously, keep Gods commandments, obey your
parents and elders, that you may be well spoken of, and be taken for honest
persons: For this does not only please God, but also is very profitable for
you. For this is the high wai that shall bring you to riches, honor and
promotion, to have a good report and credit among your neighbors, and in no
wise follow you not ye example of some light and shameless unthrifts which
care not what men say of them, and pass not if all men speak evil by them.
For they be ashamed of no kind of myschiefe. But such God will punyshe and
commonly they shall have an evil end. But ye good children, shall endeavor
your selfs, to preserve both your own good name and your neghbours also,
and to beware yt ye bear no false witness against other me^, yt is to say, that
ye diffame not the^ or impair their good name by your lies and slanders.

For this word, wytnes, in this place betokens all that thing which is
spoken of our neighbors, when they go to law, or contend about any matier.
As when one does arrest an other, and says. I lent this fellow so much
money, and now he denies the same. Then if any third parson come in, and say
I was present, and did see when this man lent him this sum of monye, (whereas
he saw no such thing in dead) then this false witness does to his
neighbor double iniurye. For first he causes that his neighbor is
compelled to pay that monye, which he never borrowed. Seco^darily he causes
him to lose his good name and credit, and to be called a shameless liar,
insomuche yt every man will point at him when he goes in the streates, and
say. Lo yonder goes that unfaithful person, which boroweth monye of his
neighbor, and denied the same. The which thing when it chances, the party
of whom this euel brute is sprede, is undone in this world, and suffers
greater damage by the loss of his name, then if he should lose al his riches.
Wherefore it is not without a cause, that God so ernestlye forbyddeth us to
bear false witness. For as by true witness bearyng, discord, strife and
contention is ended, both in the law and out of the law, so by false
testimonies, strife, discord and variaunce is sown and scatered, and wrong
thereby greatly maintained. Wherefore God in this commandment forbyddeth us,
that with lies we slaundre not our neighbor, that we give no occasion to
hatred, dyscorde or debate, but yt we study to speak ye truth, and (as much
as it shall lie in us) to reconcyle men together. For this is an excellent
virtue, which highly pleases God. For Christ says in the gospel. Blessed are
they that make peace, for they shall be called the childerne of God. Wherefore
good children, beware chiefly, that you be no liers, nor false witness berers,
but for any occasion you spare not to speak the truth at all times and
places, and specially when you be brought for witnesses into commen courts or
open judgments. For God himself has ordained laws, courts and officers,
to defend the good, and to punyshe ye euel, without the which, there can be
no peace or quietness in this world. They be the succor and sanctuary of
fatherles and motherles children, of widows and of all oppressed persons. And
he that should go about to ouerturne this commen refuge of all persons that
suffer wrong, it can not otherwise be, but he must needs sin against ye
ordinance of God, and grievously hurt his neighbor. But no man does peruerte
and ouerturne justice, courts, and judgments, more, the^ a false wytnes,
wherefore this is a very heinous sin before God. For a false wytnes does
forswear himself against the second commandment, he does as much as lies
in him to ouerturne and destroy courts and judgments, founded and
establyshed by God, he despises and deceueth ye judge, he hurts his neyghbor
both in his name and goods, he stops ye peace, fre^dshyp and agremente, the
which should have been made between the parties by the judges true judgment,
he mainteineth wrong, and continues hathred, debate and contention, of the
which follows brawlyng, fyghtyng and oftentimes manslaughter. The which
heinous sins God will not suffer to escape vnscourged, but horribly will
punish them. Wherefore let every man avoid false witness bearyng, as they
would fly the plage or poison. By this commandment also God wythdraweth us,
from all euel suspicions, that we think not euel of our neyghbor, nether
expound his words or deades to the wourst, yt we suspecte him not without a
cause nor utter to other our suspicions conceived against any man, as long as
we know not certainly the truth. For they which groundyng themselves upon
suspicions, do raise euel tales or untrue brutes against their neighbor, they
do bear false witness against him, and do more hurt then open liars. For they
that lie openly, or that in the face of ye court bear false witness against a
man, may be accused and punyshed for their offense. But me^ can not so easily
avoid ye venomie of such persons, which secretly by poysened words, or
other means, causes his neighbor to be suspected.

For they so secretly handle the matier, yt they bring their neighbor in
slander, and yet they will not be known that it comes by them. And this is
no small offense, contrary to this eight commandment. Wherefore utterly
exchewe this vice, and be not suspicious of your neighbors, taking all
things that you hear or see in them to the worste, but rather to the best.
For this is the nature and property of Christen charity as sayncte Paul
says. Charity thinks none euel. 1. Cor xiii,
And for the better understanding of this commandment good children, mark
well this, that by this commandment are forbidden al speakynges and
communication, which be against charity to the hinderance of our neighbor.
For what so ever we talk against charity, is sin, although we speak
nothing but the truth. Therefore our lord Jesus Christ says, men shall make
an account of every idle word. Now if we must make a rekeni^g of idle words,
much more the^ we shall reke^ for our slanderous wourdes against our
neighours. Which sin although it reign in the world to commonly, yet it is
an horrible and heinous offense. Whereof many evils and harms, but no good
thing does arise. For when men's sins be publyshed and spread abroad, many
thereby take occasion of sin, and think on this fashion. If this and that man
have done this thing, why may not I do it also, seeing it is a fault
commenlye practiced in the world. Therefore saint Paul says. Whoredom and
covetousness let it be not ones named among you. Ephesians. v.
And Christ says of him that gives occasion of sin. It were better for
him, that a mylstone were hanged about his neck and he to be cast into the
botome of the sea. Moreover, when we use thus rashely to slander men, it
chances oftentimes, that the parties which be slaundered, be made thereby
paste shame, vnrepentaunte and more obstinate to continue in their wicked life.
For by malicious slander many offenders be provoked to rage, and often times
brust out into these words. I will do it again, because men talk of it.
What have they to do with my deeds? and such like words. And some of the^ be
the worser in deed, continuynge in their sins all the days of their life.
Where as if they were gentely, secretlye and friendly admonyshed, they might be
won and brought to the right way again. Wherefore make not the wourste of
men's faults, neither be desyrouse to tell them abroad, although you know
the things to be true. Mat. xviii
But keep the rule of Christ which says. If thy brother trespace against the,
go, and tell him his fault between him and the alone, if he hear yt, thou
haste won thy brother. But if he hear the not, then take with the one or
two, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every matter may stand, if
he hear not them, tell it unto the congregation. If he hear not the
congregation, let him be unto the as an hethen, and a Publycane. This is the
best and most honest way to entreat sinners, and to handle other men's
faults. And he that will not use this way, let him hold his tongue. For
bacbytynge and ill reportyng does more hurt then good. And it is not enough for
us to refrain our own tongue from evil reports, but we must also take
heed, that we give no occasion to other so to do, that is to say, we must
nether mainteyne, rejoice nor comfort them, that speak evil of their
neighbors, but both with our countenance words and deeds, we must show unto
them, that we do not like such communicacion, and so to stop the mouths of
such bacby^ers.

Now to make a brief rehearsal of such things as have been spoken heretofore,
you shall understand (good children,) that by this eight commandment are
forbid all lies, frauds, and all communication, whereby our neighbors name
may be hurted, or by the which strife and contention may be provoked or
continued, whether it be in courts of law or out of courts. Hereby also we be
commanded not to be suspicious nor to expound our neighbors words or deeds
to the wourst, nor maliciousely to blow abroad their fautes, or in tellyng of
them to make them wourse the^ they be in deed, but we ought always to set our
minds of such things as pertayne to the glory of God and profit of our
neighbor, and in all places to speak well and charitably of every man. We
must also maynteyne unity, peace and concord, take all thing to the best,
bear with our neighbors frailty, and hyde his fautes, when we can not
amend the^. This is the true meaning of this precept. Wherefore good children
when you shall be demanded, how understand you the eyghte commandment, you
shall answer. We ought to fear and love our Lord God above all thing, and
for his sake to absteyne from all liynge, backebytyng, slaunderyng and ill
reportynge, by the which our neighbors good name fame and credit may be
impeched or decayed, and rather to excuse hid or gentely to enterprete
another man's fault, then malycyously to make the wourste of the same, and
with the loud trumpe of our tongue to blast it abroad, to the knowledge of all
the town or place wherein we dwell.

The nynth sermon.
And exposition of the nynthe and tenth commandment.
Thou shalt not desire thy neighbors house / wife / man servant / woman
servant / ox / ass / nor any thing that is his. Gene. xxx. and.xxxi.


THe nynthe and tenth commandments good children, be as it were brief
commentaries and expositions of the other commandments, that were spoken of
before. For they declare unto us, that it is not enough to keep the former
commandments in outward works, and not to hurt our neighbor neither in
his body, wife, goods, fame, name or estimation, but they declare also that
we ought not to covet or desire any thing that is our neighbors. And they
teach us also ye evil lusts and carnal desiers (which lurk in the secret
corners of our hertes) are sins, for ye which we should be for ever damned,
if God should render unto us after justice, and not after his mercy. Wherefore
good children, you shall here learn that evil lusts and appetites, which
come unto us even from our first father Adam be sins, and that no man or
woman, no not infauntes in their mothers womb, do live without such lusts
and appetites. For the which cause all men are sinners, and there is not one
man innocent before God, according to ye saying of S. Paul. All men have
sinned, and have need of the glory of god. Roma. ^
To the which agrees the Prophet David, saying. Al men and women have erred
out of the right way, Psalm. xiii.
there is none that does good no not one. For this we feale in our selves and
prove by experience, that naturally we be full of ill desiers and lusts. For
we delight in things that be pleasant to the flesh, and abhor all things
that be displeasant to ye same. And these appetites and desires we may
perceive to be even in infantes which lie in their cradel. For when such young
babes do not lie softly or be grieved with thirst, hunger or cold, they cry
vnpatientlye. Likewise when we show the^ any pleasant thing to their eyes, and
suddenly again take it from them we see them weep. And these be plain and
evident tokens, that infantes newly borne, be given to their own wills and
appetites, and are sinners, for as much as they transgress this commandment.
Thou shall not desire. And it is much necessary for you good children, to mark
dilygently and to bear away this lesson, to thentent you may thereby
acknowledge your own sin. And let not the sayings of certain unlearned persons
move you, which affirm that infantes and such as be under ye years of
discretion, are pure, innocent and clean without sin. For this opinion is
not true, nor agreeable to holy scripture. And they that say so, deceive both
themselves and other. For infantes are baptized for this purpose, yt they by
the same may enjoy remission of their sins. And in case they neded not
forgyuenes of their offenses, the^ they had no need to be Christened. But there
be few that understands this doctrine. For man's reason can not attain to
it, neither can it comprehe^de, how infantes should be sinners by the reason of
lusts and desiers, called concupiscence in the which they be conceived and
borne, but they that lean to their natural wit judges young babes to be
innocent and void of sin, because they commit no outward offense or
actual sin. But we in this case must not judge after our reason, but
according to ye word of God, which evidently declares unto us, that
concupiscence is sin. For if we were in deed clean, fawtles and innocente,
then our nature would not so vehemently seek for those things which are
pleasant to our appetites, but would be content with yt which God should
send unto us, and whatsoever thing did please God, that also should please us.
Moreover we should not so much desire to avoid such things as be displeasant
to the flesh, as we should desire to avoid those things that be forbydde by
gods law. Also we should be more willing to suffer all kind of afflyctions,
pains and miseries (if it were gods will that we should so do) then contrary
to his will, to hawk and hunte for pleasures, to seek to live idely, to hurde
up riches, purchase lands or other commodities. But now we feale in our
selves, that even from our tender age and in our cradels also, we be clean
contrary minded. For we begin to covet and lust for pleasant things, long
before we know whether God will give them unto us, or no. Also we abhor and
be werye of displeasant things, long before we know whether it be gods will
that we should be relyued of the same or no. Yea although we know gods will
never so well, yet we long and lust for the contrary. And this is surely a
great offense. For gods will ought to be fulfilled and not ours, as we desire
in the Lords prayer. And to know this thing, good children, is a point of
high wisdom, to the which every man does not attain For thapostle Paul does
confess, that he had not known this sin, if the law had not given him
warnyng of it. For he says, I had not known concupiscence, if the law had
not said: Thou shall not desire or lust. Wherefore good children, lock up this
lesson in the cofer of your memories, by the which you shall learn truly to
fear God. For we ought not then only to dread God, when by outward act or
work we break his laws, but also as often as we feale in us these ill lusts
and carnal desiers. And although these lusts do for a time, as it were sleep
in us, and do not stir or move us, yet not withstanding their quiet rest, we
ought to know that they lie hyde in the priuye corners of our hearts, and that
for all their slomberyng they be sins before God. For if God had not taken
them for sins, then he would not have forbide them by this commandment.
Thou shall not long or lust. For as saint Paul says. The law was not given
to the just man, i. Timo. i.
nor does forbid any thing but sin only. Wherefore (good children) forasmuch
as we know, that concupiscence lust or longyng is sin, we ought to eschew
and bridle it (as much as we may) by gods grace. And it is our part chiefly
to take heed, that we consent not to the request of our ill lusts, nor fulfill
in outward act the desiers of the flesh. And that you may the better
attain to the understanding of this commandment, I will declare unto you the
other words of this commandment, thou shall not desire thy neighbors house.
Where you shall note, that this word, house, does not only signifye the house
wherein men do dwell, but it betokens all the hole householde, and the whole
state of ye householder, and all things that belong unto him. Some time it is
taken for a stock or kynrede. As when we say, he and I come out of one house,
meaning thereby that we be both of one stock or kyndrede. Wherefore this is the
perfect sense of this commandment. When thy neighbor is a noble man borne,
and has goodly manors, great cupbordes of plate, costlye hanginges of cloth
of arris, great plenty of riches and abundance of all things as apperteyne to
such a household, then thou shall not desire his house, that is to say, thou
shalt in no wise wyshe yt he might lose any of these things, to the^tent yt
thou myghtes have the^. Nor covetousness or worldly desire ought not so to
rauyshe thy mind, yt thou would be in ye state of life that he is in, but
let that kind of living please the, whereunto it has pleased God to call the.
Wherefore good children learn without book (I pray you) this short lesson, and
put it daily in execution. Covet not, nor long not for a more noble or welthy
state, then God has already given unto you. But let every man be content with
his proginie, office, calling, state and degree, for so ye shall please God,
and obey his will.

Furthermore they break this commandment, that be desirous to put their
neighbor out of his house or land, to thentente that they may have the same.
Also thou offendest herein, when thou art glad to see thy neighbor fall in
decay, and in his need do offer to lend him monye, to the intent he may
run so far in thy delte, that at length he shall be compelled to offer to
yt his inheritance to be sold, now in this case if thou bie the same, thou
do sin, yea although thou pay as much money as the land is worth. For
thou ought to love thy neighbor as thine own self, and to wyshe unto him
as good chance and great prosperity, as thou would to thy self. Now thou
would not gladlye be put from thyn own patrimony, thou would not be
oppressed with debt or poverty. Therefore thou may not wyshe or do to thy
neighbor, that thou would not other men should do to the. Therefore thou
may not hawk or hunte for his patrymonie, thou may make no traynes to
bring him in to thy snare, and to cause him to sell the same, but thou
ought rather to help thy neighbor both with thy counsel and with thy
money, to keep still his inherytaunce and not to defraude his heirs or
posterity of those lands, which his auncesters by long succession have left
to him and his heirs. Now good children you have heard the true meaning of
the nynth precepte, and because it teaches you, how to order your heart, I
pray you learn it by heart, that when you be demanded, how understand you
the nynth commandment, you may answer we ought to fear and love our
Lord God above all things, and for his sake so to chastise our eyes and
lusts, that we desyer not our neighbors house, nor other thing belonging
unto him, that we put him not from his possessions or goods but help him
(as much as shall lie in us) to retain* and keep his lands, goods and all
that is his.

The tenth sermon.
An exposition of the tenth commandment.
Thou shalt not desire thy neighbors wife / nor his man servant / nor
woman servant / nor his Ox / nor his Ass / nor any thing that is his. Genesis
xxxix


I Will not be long good children in declarynge unto you the tenth
commandment, part lie because the words and sense of the same be so plain
that they need no long declaration, partly because I have all ready expounded
the same in the former sermon. For these two last commandments be so coupled
together, that he which understands the one perfitely, shall easily perteyue
the other, for they both have one purpose and intent, to cleanse the inward
manne, and to purge the heart from all ill affections and lusts. But whereas
the former commandment did forbydde us, that we or should not wish to
succeed our neighbor in his lands, honors dignities, a carnal man would
peradventure reason on this fashion. I grant in deed, that I am forbid, to
covet al my neighbors lands or goods, but yet I may desire and entice from
him one servant, I may convey from him an Ox, Ass or an Horse. For he has
great plentye of all these things, and may spare one or two of them without
any hinderaunce or great loss. And that which does him but small service, by
reason of his great abundance, would do me much pleasure, and greatly
releaue my necessity. To this objection God himself does answer in this last
commandment, saying. Thou shalt not desire thy neighbors wife, servant,
maid, Ox or Ass, no thou shall desire no thing that is thy neighbors. For
god is the maker of all things, and Lord of all creatures and he gives them
to who^ it pleases him. Wherefore if he have given any thing to thy
neighbor, which he has not sent to thee, envy not thy neighbor
therefore, nor go about to convey it from him, but think this. If it were
Gods pleasure, that I should possess such a thing, or if he knew that it
were for my welthe, to have it, he would have sent it to me, as well as to my
neighbor. For surely good children, these rauenynge woulfes, that be ever
thryftynge after other men's goods, lack the benediction of God and
therefore they can not long prosper, no not in this world For other they bring
nothing to pass with all their gapyng glenyng and carfulness, or if they
obtain their purpose, yet verily (all things account) their loss is greater
then their gaynes. For in this world they lose ye favor both of God and man,
they lose their good name and fame, and ar called of every man extorcioners,
brybers pollers and piellers, deuourers of widows houses, and oppressers of
fatherles and motherles children. And what a gaynyng is it I pray you, by
purchasing of a little land herein this life to purchase therwithal
everlasting damnacion in hell? What profyteth it a man (says Christ) if he
win all the world and lose his own soulle? what did David win, when he
lusted after the wife of Urie, and had his pleasure of her? did not God
therefore so punyshe him, that he himself lost all his own wifes? For his
son Absolon in the sight of all the people entered unto his fathers wife, and
defloured them all in his fathers own house, and after did purswe his father
David eue^ unto death. What did it profit Achab, that he slew Naboth and took
possession of his vyneyarde? Ueryly God did punyshe him therefore in such sort,
that he caused him to be slain in the next battle that he went unto and took
the kingdom from al his succession, and destroyed all his lynage, and left not
one man alive, and beside all this, the dogs licked Achabes blood in the
same place where he caused Naboth to be slain. What gained Judas, when he sold
our Lord Jesus Christ for thirty peaces of silver? verilye he was punyshed
of God therefore, and was so tormented with the horrible fear of conscience,
that he ran to the halter for succor, and hanged himself. Wherewith as he
ended ye miseries of this life, so he began, the pains of the other life.
Likewise God, even now a days does punyshe these glyerynge keytes, that seek
their pray in every place, for commonly either they be deceived of their
expectacion for all their gapyng and pryenge, or if they obtain their pray,
they purchase to themselfes therewith great mysfortune and euel ends. Wherefore
good children let this commandment deapely synke into your hearts, and
considre well, that it is no man, nor creature, but God himself, yt says unto
you, Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife, his man servant, woman servant,
ox, ass, or any other thing that is his. For to desire these things, is a
very heinous sin, and God will not suffer it to escape unpunished. And
although men now a days take it but for a trifle when a man has a true and
diligent servant, to entice him away by all crafts and means, yet surely God
will punish the same sharply. For as they entice their neighbors seruau^ts
from them, so god suffers other men to alure their servants away likewise.
And moreover this inconvenience comes herby, that when servants perceive men
to sue for the^, they wax so hawte and stubburne, that they will be content
with no mean wages, and be so proud, that they regard not their masters,
nor stand in awe of them, but when so ever their old masters, do displease
them, by and by they will seek for a new. And when they be not content with
their old wages, they desiermore. And this complaint of servants is now a
days al most in every ma^s mouth, and yet it is not redressed, because it is
the just punishment of God, wherewith he scourges them, that allure their
neyghbors servants from the^. And God does not punyshe only such as entice
other men's servants from them but also all those that go about to get any
other part of their neighbors goods or cattle. For if thou take thy
neyghbors house over his head, or put him out of his house by any crafty
conueyance, then many times God takes vengeance with syckenes or loss of thy
goods. If thou convey away his cattle, commonly they prosper not, but dye of
some kind of moirrein. And whatsoever thing we thus purchase and possess,
contrary to godds commandment, it lacks the blessing of God, wherefore it
can not long endure or prosper. Therefore I pray you good childe^, frame your
affections and lives according to this rule. Be content that every man may
enjoy and keep to himself, that thing which God has given him. When gods
pleasure shall so be, he will also send to you, that which you desire. And he
is able so to give it you, that your neighbor thereby shall suffer no loss or
damage. Covet not your neighbors wife, house, servant or any thing that is
his, except it be by his will and consent. And if it shall chance any of you, to
be covenant servant with any man, then let no craftye or malicious fellows
persuade you, to forsake your masters, but do them faithful service (as
your duty is.) And trust not such flateryng or slanderous tongues, as go
about to entice you from your masters. For such men are the dyuels
messengers, which entende nothing else but to allure you to sin, and to
bring you into misery. And believe this good children, as a most sure article
of your faith, that our God is the true lord of all thing, he is the gouerner
and master of all the world, and all is but his own householde. He first
made us, and from time to time does daily nouryshe us. He does set all things
in order in his family, he it is, that does call every man to that office,
state, order, degree and kind of living, in the which it pleases him to set
them. He will give to every man, ye thing which he has need of, so that we
with all our hearts obey him. Wherefore there is no cause whythou should covet
thy neighbors goods, or by any subtyl conueyance get them into thy hands. For
this thing wants the blessyng of God, yea it deserves his curse and
maledyccio^. For scripture says. Cursed is he, that does not abide in all
things, that be written in the law.

And now ye have heard good chylderne a plain brief and true exposition of
the tenth commandment, the which although it be last in number, yet I pray
you let it not have the last place in your memory, but one of the first and
chefest seats of the same. That as soon as you be demanded this question, how
understand you the tenth commandment? you may be prompte and ready to
answer, we ought to fear and love our Lord God above al things, and for his
sake willyngly to absteyne from our neighbors wife, family, goods and
cattle, and to help him as much as lies in us, that he may keep and possess
the same.

The end of the ten commandments.
A general preface / to be rehearsed in the beginning of every sermon made upon
the articles of our Faith, commonly called the Creed.
YHe holy apostle saynct Paul (good childern) writteth expressly, Hebr. xii.
that without faith it is impossible to please God. Also Christ, himself
says. He that beleuethe and is baptized, shall be saved. Mat. xvi.
Now I trust there is none among you, but he is desirous to please God, and
enjoy everlasting life. Then if you will attain thereto, you must chiefly
and most diligently, apply your minds to learn the christian faith and the
articles of the same. For you have heard that without it there is nothing able
to reconcile us to God ye father, to pacify his wrath and to bring us to the
life everlasting. For although the ten commandments are an excellent
godly and heavenly doctrine, yet we can not be saved or justified by them. For
we be not able of our own strength and power to fulfill the law and gods
holy commandments. But by them, we only do learn what God requires of
us, and so be brought to the knowledge of our sin. Roma. iii.
For this is the office of the law (as saint Paul says) to teach us our
offenses and to set before our eyes the great fear of God and the indignation
which we have deserved by breaking his commandments, to the intent, that
we acknowledgyng our own weakness, should fly to Gods grace and mercy.

This fear of God is learned in the ten commandments, and it is the
beginning of wisdom But the holy christian faith is a much more high and
excellent knowledge and wisdom, as sayncte Paul witnesses saying. i. Cori.
ii
We speak wisdom among them that are perfect, such wisdom as is not of
this world, nor of the rulers of this world, which be mortal, but we teach
the wisdom of God, which is secret and hyd, which God ordained before the
world unto our glory, which wisdom none of the rulers of this world did
know. These be the words of sayncte Paul, whereby he declares that the
science of faith passes al other sciences, and teaches heavenly and eternal
wisdom that excedeth all men's philosophye. For by faith we learn to know
God, what he is, and what love he bears toward us, and how great benefits
he has heaped upon us. For by faith we be made ye children of God, and he
gives unto us the holy ghost, which does lyghten and kyndle our hearts, that
we may begin to keep his law, which else of our own strength we were not
able to keep and fulfill. Wherefore good children it is necessary for you to
learn ye doctrine of faith, for without it we can not be justified, or
brought again into gods favor. For no man is just or rightuous before God,
that has not the holy ghost, and he that will receive the holy gooste, must
believe in Christ (for by faith we receive the holy ghost) therefore by faith
we be justified. Again if we will be saved, we must know God and our Lord
Jesus Christ, Ioh. xv
as it is written John the.xvii. But we can not know God and his son Jesus
Christ but by faith, therefore faith justifies us and brings life
everlasting. Wherefore good children apply your selfs dylygently to learn*
the Christian faith the which now I will shortly rehearse unto you.

The Apostles Creed.
I Believe in God the father almighty / maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
christ his only son our Lord which was conceived by the holy ghost / borne
of the virgin Marye. Suffered under Ponce Pylat / was crucified dead and buried
/ he descended into hell. And the third dai / he rose again from death. He
ascended into heaven. and sits on the right hand of God the father
almightye. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I Believe in the holy ghost. The holy Catholyke church / The communion of
saints the forgiveness of sins. The resurrection of the body. And life
everlasting. Amen.

This is the sum of our christian faith wherein God has showed unto us what
he is, and how great benefits he has given and daily does give unto us, to
thentent that we should cast ye anchore of our faith upon him, and take sure
hold of his mercy and goodness, and comfort our selves with the same both
in our life time and also at our death. Wherefore good children be dilygent,
not only to say by rote the wourdes of your Creed, but also to understand
what is meant by the same, so yt when you be asked any question thereof, you may
be able to make a direct answer, and also in time to come to teach ye same to
your children. For what thing can be more shame to a Christen man, then to
profess the relygion of Christ, and yet to be ignorant in the chief points of
Christ's faith, and his doctrine? Considering that every Christen man is bound
openly to declare his faith, when need shall so require and to instruct his
children in the same, yt they may come to the true knowledge of Christ.

This general beginning must go before every sermon of the Creed.



The first sermon of the Creation.
TO thentent good children that you may the better understand the true
Christian faith and doctrine, you must first of all learn and know that
God is a spiritual or gostly substance, (...). iiii.
as Christ says John the.iiii. God is not a bodily thing which may be seen
and felt. He is present in every place, he sees and beholds all things,
which we do, speak, or think, and yet he is not measured with any end, time
or place. And forasmuch as man's wit could not search or find out the
knowledge of this high mystery of the substance of God, Christ himself the
son of God did open to us that believe in him what God is. That is to say,
that there is God the father, God the son, and God the holy ghost, three
persons, and yet one true and everlasting God. And it is your bou^de^ duty
(good children) diligently to learn this lesson. And although these things
pass all men's capacities, and is a doctrine hard for you to learn, yet in
time to come you shall hear more of this matier. In the mean season bear
away (I pray you) this one lesson, that there is one true and everlasting
God, and yet three persons, the father, the son and the holy ghost And this
we call the Trinity, because these three, the father, the son and the holy
ghost are one godly substance. And it is a great shame for you that be
christian children, not to learn this lesson. For all you were baptized in the
name of the father, and of the son and of the holy ghost, and thereby you
were made christen and the children of God, and obtained remission of your
sins. Wherefore it is your duty to learn and know, in whose name you ar
baptized, that so you may truly know God and your father which you have in
heaven. And this does plainly and shortly teach unto you the Creed. For in the
Creed wherein we say thus: I believe in God ye father almightye. And I believe in
Jesus Christ his only son, and last of all we say. I believe in ye holy
ghost, these three sentences be as much to say, as I believe in God, which is
the father, the son, and ye holy ghost. Infidels and ungodly people do not
know this, nor can understand the same. But Christian men have this mysterye
so openly declared unto them, in the word of God, that babes and young
children may hear and learn this lesson, almost as soon as they be able to
crepe out of their cradell. Wherefore we are bound heartily to thank God,
which has opened unto us so great wisdom and mysteries. Hereby you perceive
(good childerne) that in this short treatice called the Creed (as I said
before) we be taught what God is, that is to say, God the father, God the
son and God the holy ghost. Also herby we learn what great benefytes God has
given unto us, and how tenderly he loves and favors us like a most gentle
and merciful father. In ye which knowledge, consists our felicity, and
blessedness. For if we did only know, what God were, and did know nothing of
his will toward us, whether he were our friend or foo, favorable or angry,
pleased or displeased with us, then our conscience being waueryng and
doutful, should be destitute and void of comfort. Wherefore lysten to me
dilygently good childerne, that you may know what benefits those be which
god has given among you, what love he bears toward you, and what is the
hope of everlasting life to the which we be called. The benefits of God
toward us be infynite and innumerable, yet nevertheless as God himself is three
persons, the father, the son and the holy ghost, so there be three special
works whereby he has declared his singular love toward us. The first is,
that God the father has creat and made us of nothing, and given to us body
and soul, and all things necessary to the maintenance of our lives, and
has made us lords over al erthly creatures. The second is, that when we were
all borne in sin, God ye son did redeem us from our sins and wicked life.
The third is that the holy gooste does renew our hearts, sanctifye us, and
make us the temples of God. And in these three benefytes, given unto us by ye
three parsons of the most blessed Trinity, consists the matier and effect of
the hole Creed. For this is the brief sum of the Creed, to say. I believe in
God the father, which did creat and make me. I believe in God the son, which
did redeem me. And I believe in the holy ghost, which has sanctified and
hallowed me. For the which consyderations we entende to deuyde this our
exposition made upon the Creed, into three parts, of ye which the first shall be
of ye Creation, the second of the Redemption, and the third of Sanctification.
And first we will entreat of the Creation, which is expressed in these words I
believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. Where note good
children, that this word (I believe) signifies as much in this place, as I
trust. So that this sentence I believe in God the father, is as much to say, as
I trust in God the father, and look assuredly to receive all good things at
his hand. Wherefore this is the meaning of the forsaid article that we ought
to put our trust in no creature, but in the true and living god only. For no
creature ca^ do us any good or harm without the will of him. We our selves
made not our selves (as it is written in the psalm) nor we can nether save
ourselfes, nether deliver us from any perrel. Therefore we ought to put our
trust in God only, stick fast to him, hang upon him, and to look for all good
things at his hand. They therefore that trust in men, in their favor or
friendship, they that trust in their own learning, wisdom, riches, power,
friends, or any such thing, they do not truly believe in God, truly and holly
trust in him, nor look for all good things from him, but rather despise him,
and worship for their God and make an ydole of that thing, wherein they put
their trust, and so grievously offend god. Wherefore it must needs be, that at
the length they must be brought to confusion and ruin that they may learn by
their own fall and decay, that those were but vain things, wherein they put
their trust and confidence, and that only God is the sure rock and stay,
upon whom who so ever leans, shall not be deceived nor confounded. For it is
the Lord god, which daily pourethe upon us infinite benefits which gives us
al things yt we have need of, and defends us from all things yt may hurt us
either in body or in soul. And this is ye fatherly love which he bears toward
us, to do al goodness toward us, without our merits or deservings. Wherefore
we ought to trust in him, yield our selfs holly into his protection to look
for all good things at his hand, and with a merry heart and constant faith to
cleave to his goodness in all things. And this is the highest and chiefest
sacrifice where with God is pleased and worshipped. And whosoever believes in
him after this sort, those he takes for his welbelouyd children and in all
things he declares to the^, that he is their loving father. Wherefore (good
children) let us not put our trust in any creature, or in any worldly thing,
but at all times let us faste^ our sure trust in our Lord God. So we shall be
made his children, and enjoy life everlasting.

Now considre good children what a God he is, in whom we believe, and in whom
we put our trust. He is God the father, the almyghtye maker of heaven and
earth. And these words good children ought not slyghtly to be passed over,
for they be of great weight and importance. Wherefore I pray you as it were in
balance to wey them dyligently and learn to understand them. For these
words contain not in them worldly phylosophye or man's sapience, but
heavenly and Godly wisdom. Wherefore I pray you give good ear whiles I do
declare them to you.

First this article teaches us that God is almyghtye, that is to say, that he
has power to work and do all things whatsoever pleases him, and no creature
in heaven or earth is able to let or withstand him, and that no thing is
impossible unto him. And this is the foundation and beginning of christian
knowledge and faith, to believe that God is almyghtye. The which many men do
not believe, and yet nevertheless they will be counted christen men, or rather
great clerks. In this number be they, that do not believe the body of Christ
truly to be given in the Lords supper, to them that receive the sacrament,
although Christ himself says plainly. Take eat this is my body. And why
do they not believe this? verily because they did never truly believe this
article, that God is almyghtye, but they think that God is not able to work or
do that thing, which they can not compass with their own wit, and reason.

But you good children follow not such, but believe you, with all your heart,
that God is almyghtye, that he is able to work and do all thing that he
wylleth and perform all thing that he speaks or promises. And in so doing
you shall find great peace and quietness in your consciences. For this is an
excedyng comfort for us, steadfastly to believe this article, that God is
almighty. For hereby we be persuaded, in all perels and adversities to put our
trust in him, forasmoche as he is able to deliver us out of al troubles and
affections, although they seem to man's reason remediles. Hereby also we be
taught, to humble our selves before God, and not to be proud, neither to
despise or forget him when all things goes after our own will, but to
consider that God is almighty, and able with a beck to ouerturne kingdoms,
to cast down the rich, to exalte the poor, to punyshe the wicked, and to
destroy us if we provoke him to anger. Wherefore good children mark well this
word. Almighty, which is as much to say as this. No man is so sore sick,
but God is able to heal him. No man is so poor but God can make him rich. No
man is so simple or dull wytted, whom he is not able to make wise. No man is so
vile or little regarded, but he is able to promote him to high honors. No man
is so great a sinner but he is able to iustifye him. Wherefore in all chances
we must put our trust in God only. For he is able to do what soever he
wills, and all thing is subject under his dominion.

Furthermore in this article God is called maker of heaven and earth, that is
to say, God made heaven and earth and all thing contained therein of no
thing. For God made not these things as a carpenter makes an house, (which
can not work if he lack his toils and stuff.) But he only said, let
it be done, and by and by all things were done. And therefore he has a new
title which was never herd among all the Philosophers, being called the
creator of the world, that is to say, that by his word he wonderfullye
made all things of nothing. And as soon as he did speak, by and by all the
world stood up and was made.

Thus he made manne, and gave him body and soul, reason and wisdom, and did
set under his governance the yerth and all thing that grows thereon, as all
kind of trees with their fruytes, all kinds of herbs and flowers, all fyshes
of the sea, fowls of the air and al manner of beasts tame or wild, and he
made man Lord over all these creatures, that he might use them partly to
his norishement and food, and partly to his apparel and ornament of his
body, in so much that he made the Sun Moon and all ye sterres for this
end, that they should serve man. And (that is most comfort to us of all) he
made al these creatures before he did creat man, declaryng thereby, that he is
careful for us and prouydeth such things as we have need of, yea before we
be borne.

Wherefore good children let us be of good chere, and putting our trust in God
let us reason on this fashion. For as much as God made heaven and earth, it is
evident thereby, that he is Lord and master of the same, and that all things
as well in heaven as in earth are done according to his will. And forasmuch as
he made all thing for us, it is also manifest thereby, yt he wills all
creatures to do us service, let us therefore follow ye counsel of Christ who
says. Mat. vi.
Be not careful for your life what ye shall eat or drink, nor yet for your
body what raiment ye shall put on. Is not ye life more worth then meat? and the
body, more of value then raiment? Behold the fowls of the air, the which
do neither sow nor reap nor carye into the barnes, and yet your heavenly
father does feade them. Are not you much better the^ they? Consider the lilies
of the feld, how they grow. They labor not, they spynne not. And yet I say
unto you, that Salomo^ himself (when he was in his most gorgious roialtie and
glory) was not apparelled like one of these. Now if God does so apparel a
flower (which although it florysheth to day, yet to morrow it wythereth away
and is cast into a fournas) shall he not much more do ye same for you, o ye men
of little faith? These be the words of Christ good children by the which he
exhorts us to put our trust and confidence in God our father, and stedfastlye
to believe, that he which has given to us our life, is both able and willing
also to give us all things necessary to the maintenance of our life. For he
is the maker of al things, and all creatures obey his will and commandment,
and if there lacked any things yt should help us, he is able every day to
make all new again, as every year he makes all things to renew and spryng
again. Thus by these words we learn yt God has made heaven and earth and all
things contained therein for us, and for our commodity, and that he is, both
can and will give us our daily food and living. Wherefore let no man trust to
his own wit reason or co^passinge, thinking ye he is able to get his living or
riches by his own carefulnes or to maynteyne his life, but let us put our
trust in God our father almighty, he will feade nouryshe and mainteyne us, as
long as it shall please him. Nevertheless it is our part to labor
diligently, and every man is bound to do his duty in his vocation and
calling. For God wills not, that we should be idle, and lie all the day on
the one side, lokyng that he should put meat in our moughtes, as the nourse
does feade young children, but he commands us to plye our labors and
occupations and then to cast all carefulnes, and put it unto him, Thus good
children I have expounded unto you ye first article of our belyfe, conteinyng
the doctrine of the creation and making of the world, the which heavenly
philosophy (to the intent you may the more easily bear it in your memories)
I will knit it up in few words, that when you be demanded, how understand
you the first article of your belyfe? you may thus shortly answer. I believe
that God ye father has made me, and al creatures in heaven and earth, that he
has given to me and conserueth my body and soul, reason, senses, eyes,
ears, and all my other members. Also I believe that the same almyghtye Lord
and God does daily give to me and to us al, meat, drink, cloth, wife,
children, house, land, riches, cattle, and all things necessary to the
mayntenaunce of our lives and yt he does daily defend keep and preserve us
from al peril, and deliver us from all evil. And all this he doethe of his
own mere mercy and goodness, without our worthynes or deservings. For the
which benefits it is our duty to render to him continualll and everlasting
thanks to obey him in all things, and to take heed that we be not unkind to
him, yt has showed so great kyndnesse toward us.

A general conclusion to be rehearsed at the end of every sermon made upon the
Creed.
Thus you have heard good children, the true and plain meaning of this part
of the Creed. Now it is your part deapely to prynte the same in your
hearts, that you may put your hole trust and confidence in the true and
living God our heavenly father.

And forasmuch as faith is the work of god, and the light of our hearts,
which God puts in us by his word and holy spirit, (so that we can not
atteyne faith and the knowledge of Christ without gods word and true
preachers) therefore accustom your selfs eue^ from your tender age to hear
the word of God, that he by his holy spirit may move and stir up your
hertes to true faith and knowledge of him. And beside that you shall desire God
with most hearty prayers, that as he has given you the gift of faith, so he
will contynew and increase the same in you, that as you grow in age, so also
you may grow in the knowledge of Christ. For he that believes in Christ, is
made thereby the son of god, and heir of life everlasting. And then he
gives us his holy spirit to kyndle charity in our hearts, whereby we love
God and keep all his commandments. All these benefytes we receive by faith
in the which who so ever contynueth unto the end of his life, shall be saved,
the which God grant to us all. Amen.

The second sermon of our Redemption.
mat xxvii. Mark. xv Luke xxiii. John. xix.


I Declared unto you heretofore good children, that the Creed entreats
chiefly of three things, that is to say, of God the father that made the
world, of God the son that redeemed the world, and of God the holy ghost that
sanctifies the world. And in the former sermon I taught you the high and
heavenly philosophy, of the creation. Wherefore now I will vttre unto you the
great mystery of our redemption, which is contained in these words of the
Creed. I believe in Jesus Christ his only begotten son / our Lord / which
was conceived by the holy ghost / borne of the virgin Marie / suffered under
Ponce Pilate / was crucified / dead and buried. He descended into hell. The
third day he rose from death. He ascended to heaven. He sytteth on the right
hand of God the father almyghtie. From thense he shall come to judge the
quick and the dead. In this second part of the Creed we may learn to know
the second person in trinity, the son of god, Jesus christ our lord. And as
in ye first article ye have learned what benefytes we receive of God the father
to the sustentation and maintenau^ce of this temporal and transitory life, so
in this second part we shall learn to know, how great treasures and rich
gifts we have received by ye son of God Jesus Christ, to the atteinyng of ye
perfect and everlasting life. And here you may consider good children how great
was the misery, and how horrible was the indignation of God which we were
brought unto by Adam. So great it was, that neither gold nor silver nor any
other thing was able to bye us out of the same, but only Jesus Christ ye
son of God and yt by his death and effusion of his most precious blod. And
of this great misery and indignation of God toward us this was the cause. At
what time God had made Adam and Eve, and set the^ in paradyse, he entreated
them like a most loving and gentle father. For he made them lords over al
lively creatures, both beasts fyshe and foul, and did give unto them al trees
yt bare fruit, that they might feade thereon. Only he forbad them that they
should not eat of the tree of knowledge of good and ylle. And yet he gave
them warning of ye great loss and damage that they should suffer if they eat
of that tree saying. When soever you shall taste of the fruit of that tree, you
shall be made mortal and shall dye. Their duty had been unto so gentle a God and
so merciful a father, in their hearts to have believed him, trusted him, and
loved him, to have obeyed him, and to keep all his commandments gladly. But
our most craftye enemy Satan, envying man's felicity, spoke to Eve by the
serpent and said. No, you shall not dye, but you shall be like Gods, knowing
both good and evil. And with these most poysened words persuaded Eve, to eat
of the fruit which was forbydde. And Eve gave of the same to Adam, who also
did eat thereof and so did break gods commandment. Now I pray you mark
good children, what they lost by this their disobedience. First when Adam and
Eve were thus deceived by ye serpent, and persuaded that God did not favor
them but had envy at them, that they should have knowledge of good and ill,
(and that for envy he forbad the^ to eat of that fruit, that should give to
them so great knowledge) they did no more trust God, but began to trust
themselves, and did study to care and provide for the^ selves. Secondarily when
they no more trusted God they could no more find in their hearts to love him,
but began to dote upon them selves, and to think yt they had no better friend
neither in heaven nor earth the^ their awn selfs. And after yt they had thus
put their trust and confidence in themselves, and dotyngly loved all that was
their own, by and by followed fear and concupiscence. For by an by they
began to hate and eschew all things, that were paynful or unpleasant to the
flesh and dotynglye to lust and long for such things as were delectable and
pleasant to the flesh. Hereby you perceive good children, how our first
pare^tes Adam and Eve, poisened with the venom of the serpente, were cast
into.iiii. horrible vices or diseases. The first is, that they did not trust
in God. The second, that they did not love God. The third that they did not
fear him, but as a cruel tyranne. The fourth, that they were replenished with
concupiscence and evil desiers lusts and appetites. And these be the rotes of
original sin, out of the which all other sins do spryng and grow. So
Adam and Eve had a very great fall, that fell from gods benediction favor and
love, in to gods curse anger and dyspleasure, that fell from original justice
into original syn, by the which fall all the strength and powers both of their
bodies and souls were sore decayed and corrupted. And as our first parents
Adam and Eve were infected and corrupted even so be we that be their children.
For as we see by daily experience, yt commenly gowtie parents begets gowtie
children. And if the father and the mother be infected with the leprie, we se
commenly that the children borne between them have the same disease: So
likewise as our first pare^tes Adam and Eve, did not put their trust in God, no
more do they yt be carnally borne of them. And as they loved not God, so their
children love him not. And as they followed their own concupiscence lusts and
appetytes and not the will of God, even so do all their issue. So that all their
posterity upon earth be sinners even in their mothers wombes. For they have
not their trust in God, they love not God, they have not a fatherly fear unto
him, they be full of ill lusts appetites and desiers as you have herd good
children in the.ix. and tenth commandments. And for this cause the scripture
does say, Psalm. li.
that all we are conceived and borne in sin. And saint Paul says, that by
nature we be the children of Gods wrath. Ephesians. ii.
So that we all should everlastingly be damned, if Christ by his death had not
redeemed us.

Wherefore good children mark well this part of your Creed, that teaches you
both to know Christ, and by what means he did redeem you. For first in the
Creed he is called, the only son, or only begotten son of God. Whereof it
must needs follow, yt he is very God by nature, borne of God the father,
before the fou^dacion of the world was laid. He is the everlasting wisdom,
and word of God, by the which God the father made all things. That he is
also very man, it is evidently expressed in these words. I believe in Jesus
Christ, which was conceived by the holy gooste, borne of the virgyne Marye,
suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified dead and buried. And these.ii.
forsaide things I can not comprehend more shortly nor aptely, than by these
words. Christ our Lord is very God and very man. Secondly learn this also,
by what means Christ did redeem us. For what soever God has commanded in the
ten commandments which we have not fulfilled because we be all sinners, yt
Christ himself has fulfilled for us. And what soever punishment we have
deserved to suffer of God for our sins and offenses, that Christ has taken
upon himself and suffered for us. By this you may perceive how requisite it
was, that Christ God and man, should be conceived by the holy gooste, and borne
of a pure virgyn. For if Christ should redeem us, and satisfye for our sins,
than must he needs be holy and without sin. For if he had been gyltye and a
sinner, then could not he have helped his own self, but he must needs have
had an other Sauyor and Redemer for him, as well as we have for us. For what
soever he had done or suffered, should have been worthily for his own offenses,
and yet could he not have satisfied for him self, much less then he could
have satysfyed for other. Wherefore it was necessary (if he should satisfye for
us) that he should be conceived of the holy gooste, and borne of a virgyn, that
his natyuitie might be pure without sin and not corrupt, as ours is. That
our corrupt and damnable nativity, might be purified and made holy by the
holy and pure nativity of Christ. Therefore we say in the Creed. He was
conceived of the holy ghost, borne of the virgyn Marye, that Christ being
pure and clean from all sin, might redeem sinners and satisfye for them.
Now for as much as the justice of God did require that Christ should suffer
and make satisfaction for us, and do all things that we were bound to do, it
was necessary that he should be made man. For if he had not been a very
natural man, he could not have done for us, all those things, which we were
bound to do.

And again, if he had not been veraye God, he could not have been pure and
clean from al syn, and so have made a true and perfect satisfaction for our
sins. For no man can perfectly fulfill the will of God, but God himself alone.
Wherefore in that he suffered for our sins, thereby he declared, that he was a
very pure and natural manne. Again he gave most certain and euydente tokens
of his Godhed, in that he ouercomed and vanquyshed the deuell sin and death.
For if he had not been veraye God, he could not have losed the bands of
death, nether have raised himself from death to life. So you hear good
children, yt our lord Jesus Christ was very God and very man, not conceived in
syn (as we be) but conceived by the holy ghost, and borne of the most pure
virgyn Marie. And as man he suffered death for us, and descended into hell. But
as naturally God he losed the bands and pains of hell, he destroyed the
kingdom of death, he rose from death to life, and so paid the rau^some for
our sins, and took away all the gylthynes of the same. Therefore when we
believe in Christ and steadfastly cleuyng to the word of God, suerly persuade
our selves in our hearts, that we be thus redeemed by Christ, then God is no
more angry or displeased with us for our sins, but freely and mercyfullye he
forgyueth us all our offenses, for the death and passion of his son Jesus
Christ, and he gives us also the holy gooste, by whose healpe we may
wythstande sin, and be delivered from the same. The which matiers sayncte
Paul does knyt up in one bryef sentence, not so short as notable and
weyghtye, saying. Christ was delivered to death for our sins, and did
rise again for our justification. In the which sentence saynct Paul does
not only declare what Christ did, but also for what end, and for whom he
suffered death, and rose again. For seeing that Christ was that most
innocent lamb, that never was blotted with any spot of syn, and yet he
suffered for us as a sinner, it is evident hereby, that he dyed not for
himself, but took upon him our sins, and bore for us the burden which we
should have borne. Moreover seeing that Christ was not overcome by death but by
his mighty power he did vanquyshe death, and rose from death to life, and
sytteth at the right hand of the father, hereby we may evidently perceive,
that the great wrath and indignation of God to us, has an end, and that by
our lively faith in hi^ our sins be forgyuen us, and that we be reconsiled
into the favor of God, made holy and ryghtuous. For than God does no more
impute unto us our former sins, but he does impute and give unto us the
justice and ryghtuousnes of his son Jesus Christ which suffered for us.
These are but few words, but surely they be of great importance. For in
this sentence saynct Paul includes the sum and effect of the holy
gospel, when he says. Christ was delivered to death for our sins, and
rose again for our ryghtuousnes. For likewise as when an other man does pay
my ransom and satisfye or suffer for me, I my self am judged to pay the
same, and no man after can accuse me thereof. And when an other is bound for
me, if he be by any lawful means discharged, I my self am counted to be
dyscharged also, even so forasmuch as Christ himself, took upon him the
band of death for us, and to satisfye for us, and so did in deed by his
death, we our selves for who^ he was thus bound justly be delivered and
dyscharged from death and damnation. And so we be counted righteous for as much
as no man dare accuse us for that syn, for the which satisfaction is made by
our Savior Christ. And when our savior Jesus Christ had thus satisfied for
our sin, and so overcame death and hell, than like a most valiant conqueror
he ascended into heaven, where God his father received him with a most
gloriouse triumph, and placed, him on his right hand, and made him Lord
over all creatures, and therefore he is called in ye creed also our Lord. For
if he had not raunsomed and redeemed us, we had been cast down to hell for ever.
But seeing yt he redeemed and bought us, therefore bewe his and he is our Lord
and master, and him we must love, obey and serve.

And this is our most hye and everlasting comfort, that Jesus Christ is our
Lord and we his servants. For because he is our Lord, therefore he will
defend us, and deliver us from all dangers. And although we be sinners, yet
he will forgive us our sins, because he has paid ye rau^some and det due
for the same. And although we dye, yet he will raise us up again, because he
has overcome and conquered death. And although we be never so much afraid
of the sorrows and pains of hell, yet they shall not be able to hold us,
because that to them that be his servants, he has broken hell, and set
open the gates thereof. Wherefore seeing that we have so mighty a Lord and
master we be out of all peril and danger.

But we again above all things, we must study to obey our lord and
master, and do those things which he commands. For he has redeemed and
bought us for this entente and purpose, that we should be just and holy, as he
himself is holy. And he that is not obedient unto Christ's commandments
shall be sore punyshed, for our Lord Jesus Christ shall come again to judge
both the quick and the dead.

Wherefore good children, labor with all diligence and study, that when
Christ shall come again to judge the world, he may find you holy and
obedient. For then he will reward you with everlasting life. After this manner
Christ redeemed us from sin, and from the horrible offense of Adam, by whom
we were al condemned. For by Christ's passion and death, and by his gospel we
have obtained thus much, that we may believe and trust in god. And trustyng in
God, we have his holy spirit, whereby we may also love God. And this holy
gooste renueth us and clemeth us from all evil lusts and desires, that we
being thus made holy and rightuouse, may keep Gods commandments, and
serve our Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherefore good children believe ye with all your heart in this Jesus Christ the
only son of God our Lord, and doubt not but that he has suffered for our
sins and contented the justice of his father for ye same, and has brought us
again unto his favor, and made us his well beloved children and heirs of his
kingdom. And when you be asked, how understand you the second part of the
Creed, you shall answer. I believe that Jesus Christ, very God, begotten of God
the father, and very manne, borne of the virgin Marie, is my Lord, which by
his precyouse blood and holy passion, has redeemed me, a miserable and damned
wretch from all my sins, from death eternal, and from the tyranny of the
Deuell, that I should be his own true subject, and live within his kingdom,
and serve him, in a new and everlasting life and justice, even as our Lord
Christ, after he rose from death to life, lives and raygneth euerlastyngly.
Or else if you will answer more shortly, you may say, thus. I believe that
Christ was delivered to death for our sins, and rose again for our
justification.

Actu^. i.ii.


The third sermon of our Sanctification.
Now remains the third part of the Creed to be declared, which entreats
of our sanctification, how we be made holy. And it is spoken in these words.

I believe in the holy ghost / the holy catholic church / the communion of
saynctes / the forgyuenes of sins / the risyng again of the body and life
everlasting. Amen. IN the second part of the Creed (which treats of our
Redemption and price given for us) you have been taught (good children) to
know the second person in Trinity, Jesus Christ what he is, and what he
has done for us, that he was made man for our sakes, that he took upon him our
sins, and suffered for us ye fear and panges of death and hell, and had
victory over them by his passion and death. And after by his godly and
victorious power he arose again from death to life. And after this most
glorious conquest, he ascended into heaven, where he sits at the right
hand of his father, and is our Lord, and we his servants derely boughte.

All this you have learned in the last sermon, but now good children, in this
third part of the Creed, you shall learn to know the third person in
trinity, ye holy ghost, and also his benefits and gifts that we may know,
what we have received of God after our redemption, whereby we may be made mete
to come to everlasting life thorough the merits of Christ. For although our
Lord Jesus Christ, has redeemed us from ye captivity of sin death and hell,
and has set us again in the favor of God, yet we should have no knowledge of
these great benefits, we should feale in our consciences no comfort joy or
peace, by the same, if they were not declared unto us by the preachi^g of gods
most holy word.

And our consciences should still remain troubled, and the fear of eternal
death, and all noughty desiers and concupiscences of the frail flesh, should
ever remain in us (eue^ as from Adams time they be in us as soon as we be
borne) and so we should be utterly unapt to the kingdom of God and life
everlasting, if we should still remain, as we be borne. For if we will be the
heirs of god and everlasting life, we must be borne again, and sanctified or
made holy, as apperteyneth to ye children of ye most holy God. Now this new
birthe and sanctification, the holy ghost works in us. And therefore he is
called the holy ghost, because al thing that is sanctified or hallowed, is
sanctified or made holy by him. Wherefore when the holy ghost is not in man,
then it is not possible that he should be holy, although he did all the good
works under ye sun. And for this cause saint Paul, writing to the
Romans, Roma. i.
does call the holy ghost, the spirit of sanctification, that is to say, the
spirit that makes holiness. Learn therefore good children, that al we must be
made holy and new men, by the virtue of the holy ghost, and that we can not
atteyne this holiness by our awn strength or works, and therefore we must believe
in the holy ghost that he will sanctyfye us at such time and place, and after
that sort and manner, as it shall please him. And it is our part to give place
to his workynge and not to wtstande the same. And therefore we say in this
Creed, I believe in the holy ghost. But it is necessary some things here to
speak of the manner of sanctification, how and after what manner ye holy ghost
does hallowe us, yt we may so prepare our selfs, or rather give place to the
holy ghost which preuenteth us, that he with his light and almighty strenght
and power may work his will in us.

Now I desire you to mark dyligently, by what means and fashion the holy ghost
does work this sanctification or halowyng in us. After yt our Lord Jesus
Christ by his death passion and resurrection had redeemed us, and obtained for
us, that our sins should be forgyuen, and we be made the children of God,
shortly after in the feast of Pe^tecoste, he sent down up on his Apostles the
holy ghost in the lykenes of fyery tongues. The which holy ghost gave them
wisdom conning audacitie and consta^cie, to teach boldly this holy gospel of
Christ, that is to say, this christen faith whereof we do speak. And where
they could not be present themself, or long abide and continue in their own
persons, thither they sent their disciples and other godly and learned me^, and
to the^ they gave the holy ghost, by layng their hands upon their heads. And
this rite or ceremony, to orde^ preachers and mynisters of gods word, has
continued in the church even from the Apostles time unto this day, and shall
endure unto the worlds end. For saint Paul says. How shall men believe
without a preacher? And how shall men preach, except they be sent? And here
you may learn, that this holy gospel which we preach, and the doctrine of ye
grace of Christ, taught in the hole church, comes not of the will of man,
but by the commandment of God, and by ye motion of the holy ghost which does
stir up men's minds, to publishe gods most holy word, and does work by his
secret inspiration in the prechers and ministers of the same. For they were not
able so much as to open their moughtes, to teach so high mysteries and
heavenly wisdom, if the holy ghost did not move them thereto, and work in
them. Neither would the hearers so greatly esteem the preachers word, and
give so good ear unto it, except the holy ghost did parsuade them, that ye
doctrine of the gospel, were of God and came from heaven. Now the holy ghost
works by this word on this fashion. First he that believes ye gospel, and
receaueth the doctrine of Christ, is made the son of God, as sayncte John
witnesses in his gospel, John. ii
saying. As many as receive him, he has given them power to be made the
children of God. For when we believe in Christ, and are baptized, then we be
borne again, and are made the children of God. And when we be his children,
then he gives the holy ghost into our hearts, as saint Paul testifies
writing thus. Galat. iiii
Forasmuch as you be now the children of God, therefore God has sent the
spirit of his son into your hearts, which cries, Abba, father. And when we
have received ye holy ghost, he does kyndle in our hearts true love toward God,
as saint Paull writes in the pistle to the Romans in the fifthe chapter.
The love of God (says he) is poured abroad in our hearts, by the holy ghost
which is given to us. And where as the true love of God raygneth, there are
gods commandments kept, and there begins a certain obedience to his will and
pleasure. Forthermore the holy ghost does stay the flesh and ye lusts of
the same, and helps us to overcome them, that we be not carried away by them,
but may continue in clennes and holiness of life. These be the benefits and
works of ye holy ghost in us. And to thentent you may the more easily bear
them away, I will (as briefly as I can) repete them again unto you. First of
all ye holy ghost provoke and stirs up men, to preach gods word. Than he
moves men's hearts to faith, and calls them to baptism, and than by faith
and baptism he works so, yt he makes us new men again. And when we be
thus newely borne and made again, and be bicome the children of God, then the
holy ghost does dwell in us and make us holy and godly, that we may be ye temples
of God, in whom God may dwell and inhabit. Also this holy ghost does
daily more and more increase and establyshe our faith, that we like most
loving children may colle and embrace our heavenly father, and hang fast about
his neck. The same holy ghost does also assure and warrant us, that our
sins be forgyuen, and that our pardon is signed with Gods seal. He does also
kyndle in us a fervent love toward God, and makes us wylling to keep gods
law and commandments, and helps us also to fight against sin, and to
wythstande our ill appetites and desyers. Furthermore with the cross of
syckenes and diverse other kinds of afflictions and adversities, the holy
gooste does as it were, crucify and mortify us to the world, that we may live
to Christ. And this work he woorketh continually in us, and cesseth not until
he has wrought in our hearts a perfect faith and a perfect charity, and
until sin and all evil desires be clean at length purged out of us, by
the death of our bodies. And then we shall be perfect in all holiness, and clean
delivered from all sin and adversity, and be heirs of our fathers
kingdom, and his true and most derely beloved children,

Wherefore good children, as heretofore you have been taught, that we ought to
believe in God the father that made us, and in God the son that redeemed or
boughte us, so you must now learn to believe in the holy ghost that has
hallowed us, and does continually more and more renew and make holy, all those
that believe the gospel. For he that believes in Jesus Christ, that he is our
Lord and our redemer, to him God gives the holy ghost, to make him holy and
ryghtuouse. As sayncte Paul witnesses, saying. No man can call Jesus, lord,
but by the holy ghost. And for as much, as now it has been plainly declared
unto you, after what sort and manner the holy gooste does sanctify us, it is
your part, not only to emprynt this lesson diligently in your minds, but
also to desire God, with continual and earnest prayers, that he will
vouchesafe more and more to sanctify you.

And as much as lies in you, apply your selfs to hear godly sermons and
give your hearts to God like wax, apt and mete to receive what thing so ever
it shall please him to prynt in you.

For he that is willing and glad to lysten to godly sermons, he that is
studyous to learn the word of god, wherein christ is preached, and with a
steadfast faith cleueth to ye promise of ye gospel* he is made partaker of this
Sa^ctificatio^ and holiness, and of this so great comfort, and everlasting
salvation. For God says by his prophet Esaye. My word shall not return to
me in vain. And saynct Paul says, that the gospel is the power of God,
where with he wourketh the salvation of all them that believe.

Now the rest that folowethe in the Creed, is a short declaration of these
things before rehearsed. For it follows in the Creed.

I believe the holy catholycke church, that is to say, all godly and Christian
men must believe, that the gospel or doctrine of gods grace through the
merits of our savior Jesus Christ, is never in vain published in the
world, or sowed abroad without fruit, but ever there is found some company
of men, or some congregation of good people which believe the gospel and be
saved. And this company of men which believes the gospel, although here upon
earth they be severed in so^dry places, yet are they called one holy catholic
or universal church of Christ, that is to say, a multitude congregation or
company of Christen people. For this word, church, does not here betoken a
temple or church builded of timber and stone, but it signifies a company of
men lyghtened with the spirit of Christ, which do receive the gospel, and
come together to hear gods wourde, and to pray. And this Christian church is
a co^munyon of saints, that is to say, all that be of this communion or
company, be holy, and be one holy body under Christ their heed, they be one
holy congregation or assemble. And this congregation receaueth of their hedde
and Lord Jesus Christ, all spiritual riches and gifts that perteyneth to
the sanctification and making holy of the same body. And these gostly
treasuers, be commen to ye hole body, and to every membre of the same. For he
that is unfeignedly a faithful and Godly man, is made partaker of these
benefits. And these are the said gifts, which be comme^ to ye hole church of
Christ and to every membre of the same.

The first is that God the father (that everlasting and endless majesty) is our
most gentle and mercyful father. That God ye son, is our redemer and
mediator between the father and us. And that God the holy ghost, is ye commen
sanctifier or halower, of all them yt have a true faith in God. The second,
is the preaching of ye gospel, thadministration of baptism, and the sacrament
of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the which we are made
partakers of all the inheritance of heaven, and of all the benefits of
Christ. The third, is prayer. The fourth, is the cross of affliction and
adversity, which God sends to all godly men, to make them to know him, to
prove thereby and try their faith, to mortifye their flesh and to make clean
the corruption of the same. And here I speak only of the cross, which good
men suffer. For thafflictions of the unfaithful and ungodly, do rather hurt
them, then make them holy. For inasmuch as their vnpatientnes, is encreaced by
such adversity, they be brought to more disperatio^ and damnation. Now it is
very good for you to know these things, that you may also know, that there
is nothing in heaven or earth better for us, tha^ is the true knowledge of God,
and that these excellent gifts and benefits, cannot be had, but only in the
foresaid church or congregation, and no where else. But when the true church
(which is ruled by the holy ghost, and the word of God) does promise us these
so great riches and benefits, we ought not to doubt, but that we have alredye
received them. And when ye church does happoint and ordeine us, to be
preachers and ministers of these most pretiouse treasures, we must steadfastly
believe, that God effectuously works with us that he is present with us, and
that he at all times does strengthen us against the world and the devil, and
that he does help us to do all things according to our calling prosperously
and with good success. Secondly we must believe the remission of sins.
Therefore next unto this article, I believe the holy catholic church, the
communion of saints is added, ye forgeuenes of sins. For where so ever the
church of Christ is, there is freely offered that eternal comfort above all
measure, that is to say, the fauore of God, and remission of sins. And
without that church is no remission of sin. Wherefore we must seek remission
of sins in the church of Christ, and desire absolution. That when ye true
church, by their ministers does promise us remissyon of our sins, and here
in earth does absolve us, we may surely trust, that in heaven also before God
we be absolved and pardoned. Thirdly, We must believe the resurrection of the
flesh, wherefore after tharticle of the remission of sin, follows next this
article. I believe the rising again of ye flesh, for among other ponyshmentes
for original syn, laid upon Adam, and his posterity, we daily see this
horrible pain, that the goodly beawtiful body of man, created to
immortality, must needs ones be dissolved by death, and brought to a filthye
and stinckyng corse and grave, that the tyranny of sin (which so long as we
live rages in our flesh) by our death may cease, and have an end, as saint
Paul says unto the Romans. Romans vi.
For by death of the body cease all the desires, concupiscences and rages of
ye mind which be against the will and commandments of God. There ceassith
also all sins against our neighbors, as Ire, envy, lechery, couetuousnes,
pride and all ill affectyons, and at the last day god shall raise us again
from death, so that such infirmities and sins, shall no more be found in us,
but we shall be pure, spiritual, and immortal, and like to the bright and clear
body of Christ. And that we may ye more assuredly believe this, both Christ
himself rose from death, and many saints also with him. Fourthely we must believe
everlasting life. Wherefore it follows in the Creed, I believe everlasting
life, that is to say. I believe, that wha^ we shall rise from death, then we
shall live ever with Christ in parfite holiness and justice, and in such a
gloriouse joy as no tongue can tell, nor heart think. And this treatise of the
Creed, we must end with this wourde. Amen. which is as much to say, as I
believe that all the articles of our belief before rehearsed, be very true, and
thereof I have a sure faith trust and confidence. Therefore good children,
from the bottom of your hearts, you must believe in the holy ghost, which does
promise unto us remission of our sins, by all ye true preachers and ministers
of gods word. And he does also give light to our hearts and minds, and
moves us to believe gods word, and to put our faith and trust in him. And
the same holy ghost does daily purifye and sanctifye us, purge and cleanse us
from sin and after this bodily death, shall raise us again to everlasting
life. And take this for a sure conclusion, and doubt nothing thereof, that the
holy ghost, as he has begone these things in us, so he will fynyshe the same
in us, if we obey him, and continue in faith, unto the^de of our lives. For he
yt continues unto ye end, shall be saved. And this is the sum, and also the
most plain understanding of this third part of the Creed entreatyng of our
sanctification or halowing. Wherefore good children, mark well this lesson,
that when ye be demanded how understand you the third part of the Creed,
ye may answer thus I believe, yt neither by ma^s strength power or wisdom,
neither by mine own endeavor, nor compass of mine own reason, I am able to
believe in Jesus Christ, or to come unto him. But the holy ghost did call me by
the word of ye gospel, and with ye gifts of his grace, he has hitherto
endowed me, and hallowed me, and in the true faith, he has hitherto preserved
and confirmed me, and this he has not done only to me, but also he calls and
gathers together in the unity of one faith and one baptism, all the
universal church, that is here in earth, and he halloweth, keeps and
preserves the same, in the true knowledge of Christ, and faith in his promyses.
And in this church he gives free and general pardon, to me and to all that
believe in him, of al our sins, offenses, and trespasses, and at the last day
he shall raise me, and all other yt be dead, and all that dyed in the true
faith of Jesus Christ, he shall glorifye, in the life everlasting. Therefore
to the said holy ghost that sanctefyeth us, with ye father that made and
created us, and the son that redeemed us, be given all honor and glory world
without end. Amen.

A general preface / to be rehearsed in the beginning of every sermon, made
upon the Lords prayer.
YE have learned heretofore good children in ye Creed, what we ought to believe,
and in the ten commandments what we ought to do, but we can neither believe
nor do as we ought to do, except the holy ghost work with in us, both a true
faith and also a dew obedyence toward God and his law. For faith is the
gift of God, and all good things comes from the father of lights. Jacob. i*
Therefore we must needs ask and crave these benefits at his hand which
only is the gyuer of them. For so Christ says, that God the father will give
to us his children all things, so that we sue to him for them. Psalm. i.
And the prophet Dauyd says. Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I
shall deliver the, and thou shall glorifye me. Also our Savior Christ
commands us to do ye same, sayng. Mat. vii. Iere. xxix. Mar. vii. Luke. xi.
Ioh. xvi.
Ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find, knock and the door shall be
opened unto you. Now therefore, seeing that we have learned what we should
believe and do, it is most necessary for us, to call for gods grace with most
fervent and ernest prayers, that we may be able to perform ye thing which we
are bound to do. For our savior Christ has promised us, that what soever we
ask the father in his name, he will give it us. Also he says, Ioh. xiii*
that what soever we ask, if we believe, we shall receive ye same. Where is to be
noted, that if we will obtain our requests, we must ask in ye name of
Christ, and also trust assuredly, that for Christ's sake our prayers shall be
heard. To ask in Christ's name is to ask according to his will, that is to
say, to ask yt which he has commanded.

Therefore when we pray we may say thus. O God our father and the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which art in heaven, I durst not of mine awn head be so
bold, to come unto thy most high and excellent majesty to desyer any thing of
the, but thy well-beloved son our Lord Jesus Christ has commanded me so to
do, and only in his name and at his commau^demente am so bold. Therefore if
thou hear me, you hear thy dearly beloved son our Lord Jesus Christ. And
if thou hear me not, the^ thou hear not Jesus Christ him self, who has
sent me to the, and has commanded me to ask in his name. Of this prayer made
in faith, speaks saint John in his epistle saying. This trust we have in
God, yt when we ask any thing according to his will, he does hear us.

Therefore we should steadfastly believe that God does hear our prayer. For he
that believes not, he shall obtain nothing. And therefore Christ says. If
you believe, you shall obtain. And to thentent, Mark. xi.
that we should believe and surely think, that we be herd, he has promised to
grant what soever we ask in his name. And again to thentent that we should
know and be suer, that we pray according to his will, he himself has taught
us, how and what we should pray and ask. Therefore it is not in our lybertye,
whether we will pray or not, but by gods commandment, we be bound to
pray, as you have heard in the second commandment. Now therefore with all
dilygence learn good children, ye holy prayer of ye Lord, which ye great
doctor and our Lord Jesus Christ taught us himself, saying to his disciples.
Ye shall pray after this manner.

Math. vi. Luke* xi.


Our father which art in heaven / hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be don in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespaces as we forgive them that trespace against us. And
suffer us not to be led into temptacion. But deliver us from evil. Amen. This
good children is the prayer of the Lord, which although it be short, yet it
conteyneth most great and weyghty matters, such as neither angel nor man,
nor other creature, was able so pitheli to co^prise in so few words. For in
this prayer Christ our Lord teaches us to ask all things, yt either be
commanded us in the ten commandments, or promised us in ye article of our
Creed. Wherefore good children you ought to endeavor your selfs, not only to
learn without ye book this most holy prayer, taught us by Christ's own mouth,
our great master and teacher, but also you ought to give dilygence to
understand and iustlye to weye every word of so great a master, that when you
be apposed herein, you may be able to make a direct answer, and also in time
to come to teach your children the true understanding of this prayer, as you
your selfs be now instructed. For what greater shame can there be before God
and man, tha^ wha^ in our mouths we profess our selves to be christian men,
and to know what we ought to believe, and how to live, and yet to be ignorant
what thing we ought to ask of God, and after what manner we ought to ask
those things, which he of his goodness has promised most largely to give us.

Or else if we know how and what to ask, yet of negligence, sloth or
contempt of God, not to ask the same in deed in such wise as we ought to do.
Specially seeing yt the propre office of a Christen man is, to call upon God in
all his busynes and necessities, to give thanks, and evermore to honor his
most blessed name with most hye lauds and praises. Wherefore good children
for as much as God has commanded us to resort to him boldelye, and to move
our selves to him in all our troubles and adversities, and has promised that
he will hear our prayers, deliver us, and grant us al things necessary for
our salvation, let us not refuse this honor that we be called unto, let us
not refuse this remedy, help, aid and succoure that is freelye offered of
our most merciful father, to all his children that will call upon his name.
For this is a sacrifice most acceptable to God, wherewith he is most higly
honored and pleased.

Wherefore good children both daily and hourly accustom your selfs, even
from your tender age, to pray to your heavenly father, for all things
necessary. Offer up unto him at your vprisinge and down leyinge, before
your meals and after your meat, this sacrifice of your lyppes, the oblatio^
of praise and thanks gyuing, wourshippe him at al times with the frankyncense
of this prayer taught unto you by your savior Christ. The perfume whereof, if
it be cast into the burning coals of faith and charity, it perceth the
clouds, and is so sweet and pleasant unto God, that it vanishethe not away,
until it have obtained that thing, that it was sent for. For it is written,
that the prayer of a just man can do much with god, and the eyes of the Lord do
look upon the rightuous, and his ears be opened to hear their prayers.

Wherefore study you, to be the children of God, and there is no doubt, but
your heavenly father will give all good things, which you shall desire of him,
in the name of his son and your brother Jesus Christ, to whom be all glory
now and ever. Amen.

This preface must be rehearsed before every sermon of the Lords prayer.

The first sermon.
A declaration of the first peticion.
Luke. xviii


NOw good children, to the intent you may the better understand this prayer,
you shall first learn this lesson, that we wretched sinners do not first
preuente God, and go before him, in the work of our justification, but it is
God that lays the first foundation of our salvation, he begins with us,
and first calls us, by the gospel. First he sends unto us godly and
faithful ministers by whom we be baptized and before we do any good work, he
offers unto us his grace, he se^deth unto us preachers and messengers of
peace, which declare unto us the glad tidinges of the gospel, and the
promises of the favor of God, toward all them that truly repent them of
their evil living, and do move them to put their trust in Gods mercy for
pardon of the same. God also opens our hertes, that we may lysten and give
credit to his holy preachers, as Christ him self says. Ye have not first
chosen me, but I have chosen you. Now forasmuch as God has thus called us
to the faith, and by faith has given us light in our hearts, that we may
forsake all strange Gods, and believe only in him, now it is our part, to
lead our life in godlynes, to desire god with hertye and feruente prayers, that
it may please him to make perfect, that thing which he has begone in us, to
healpe and strengthen us, that by his grace we may be able to do those things,
which he has commanded us, and that he will augment and increase our faith
in us. For the prayer of the unfaithful, is nothing worth before God, and
without faith it is impossible to please God. Therefore God must begin, and
call us by his word, and put faith in our hearts, or else we should never
ask nothing of him. And for this cause we be not taught in the lords prayer
to say to God. Father grant me to believe, that thou art my father, but we be
taught to say thus. Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.
That is to say, o Lord God our heavenly father, before I began to pray,
and before I knew thy name, thou through thin exceeding great mercy did
send unto me thy preachers, by whom thou did declare unto me, that thou art
my father for Jesus Christ's sake, and thou did open my heart that I might
believe that thou art my father. Therefore grant I beseech the my heavenly
father, that thy name may be hallowed. And he yt takes not God to be his
father, yet he may learn that it is so by this prayer. For Christ our Lord
knew most certainly the will of his heavenly father, that is to say, that he
would be our most sweet and loving father (for else he would not have taught
us this title, our father) and therefore must we again upon our parties have
such a love and obedience to him, as becomes the children unto their father,
and conceive a most assured trust in God (who is all our fathers) that we shall
lack nothing necessary for us, and that nothing shall be able to hurt, as long
as we have so mighty and so loving a father. We see by daily experience, how
intierlye the fathers loves their children, what care they take to bring them
up in virtue and lernyng and to get them good masters and governors, how
they labor to provide for their living, and al things necessary for them.
And if perchance their children commits any fault, for the which they
deserve correction yet we se how the fathers love remains, what pity and
compassion he has of them, how loathe he is to beat them, and would rather
forgive them, if it were not for their benefit and amendment. And when the
child falls on his knees, and asks forgyuenes, promising amendment, we
see how ready and willing the father is to forgive. Now seeing our earthly
fathers, be so loving to their children, much more God our heavenly father
will be our most kind and loving father, will nourysh keep and defend us,
teach and instruct us, the way to everlasting salvation. And if we fall into
any errore or sin, yet for Christ's sake he is willing to forgive us, and
although he punysheth us here for a time, yet he doethe it of fatherlye love
that he bears toward us not to punyshe us for ever, but to amend us and to
make us to know our faults, and to bring us again into the right way. And
like a most loving father he corrects us for a small time in this world, lest
he should punyshe us for ever in ye world to come. Of this therefore so
loving and so mighty a father we may well rejoice, and have an exceeding great
comfort, far passing any heart to think, or tongue to tell. And him again we
ought most entierlye to love and obey, seeing that he is our father, and has
laden us with so many gifts and benefits. With glad hearts therefore you ought
to say this prayer, which wha^ you say, you speak with God the father in
heaven, and he hears you, and like a most kind father, does grant all that
you ask.

Often times also, and ernestly you must pray, when you rise in the morning,
when you go to the church, when you eat and drink, when you go to bed, when
you awake out of your sleep, that from your youth you may accustom your
selfs, both gladly and often to pray. For by prayer we shall obtain all
things, that either Christ has purchased for us, or our heavenly father has
promised to us.

Now this also you must dilygently considre, that we say, O father which art
in heaven, to dyscerne him from our fathers which be here upon earth. For we
have fathers here in earth, which be but men, and be not able to save us. But
in heaven we have an other manner of father, of far more might, a spiritual and
an everlasting father: which in all our needs is able to help us, and
finallye to give us health and life everlasting. And as children take of their
carnal fathers flesh and blood, and many times be very like them in their
face and countenance, so take we of our heavenly father our soul and spirit,
and therein we ought to resemble our heavenly father, that is to say, we ought
to believe his word, obey his commandments, forbere those things that he
forbyddeth, and in all things be conformable to his holy will and word. And
than is he assuredlye our gentle father, and we his dear children.

And than as he dwells in heaven, in a light passing all measure, even so
shall we dwell with him in heaven for ever. These great things (which far
excede the capacity of man's understanding) our savior Christ does teach in
these few words, when he teaches us to say. O our father, which art in
heaven.

Now follow in this holy prayer certain petitions, wherein be comprehended all
things, that be either contained in ye ten Commandments, or else promised
in the Creed. These petitions good children, you shall learn with all diligence,
that you may know what you should ask. The three first petitions entreat of
the matters perteynynge to ye first table. The other.iiii. speak of things
promised in the Creed, and belonging to the second table, as herafter you
shall hear.

The first petition conteyneth matters of the first and second commandment.
I am thy God. Thou shall not take the name of thy Lord God in vain. And these
be the words of that petition.

Thy name be hallowed. Nume. xv.


BEfore I told you good children, yt we go not before god, we pray not first,
that God will be our God and our father, but god of his inestimable mercy does
prevent us, does call us by his word, does call us unto faith, does give us
his spirit, to know him for our father and Lord, before we could think
thereof, and seek for God. But now seeing that by his word and faith he has
called us, and by Baptism has grafted us in Christ, and made us members of
his church, we ought not to be slouthful nor idle, but study to go forward
and increace in godlynes, and to pray thus. Our father, which art in heaven,
for as much as thou have given unto us, being unworthy, thy holy gospel, and
have chosen us, and not we the, and seeing that thou haste sent unto us
preachers, which teach unto us thy word, whereby we be sanctified, and
instructed in the faith, (so that now we may know the for God, and partelye
fulfill the first commandment) now fulfill O father yt thou haste begone,
proceed to help us, that we may fulfill the second commau^deme^t, that is, yt
thy name may be hallowed, that is to say, may be honored as holy. This prayer
pleases God, and he hears it, and God gives us grace and strength, that we
may halowe his name.

To halowe the name of God, is not to make it holy (which in it self is ever
most holy) but to halowe his name is to take it for holy, and reuerentlye to
use it, as a most holy thing, of great fear and love to God, to beware that we
speak not of his name vaynely, nor with out great reverence to confess his
name, to laud him, extolle him, and in all necessities to call upon him. And on
the other side, we do violate the holy name of God, when we abuse the same to
evil and naughty things, when we speak evil of God or godly things, when
we teach any false doctrine of God and his religion, or abuse the name of God
to ydoltarie and errors, or when by the name of God we be forsworn.

Also when by the name of God we curse me^ or other creatures, or when we
speak of God and godly things and make thereof but scoffing and gestyng. And
when we live not according to the word of God, and regard not God, but give
evil example to other, both to think and speak of God and godly things
lightly and contemptuously, as they passed not of them.

But now it is an horrible hearing good children, that we be called the
church of Christ and christen men, we be taught that God is our Lord and
father, and yet we be so faynte, so evil, naughtye and unkind people, that we
do not halow nor reuere^tli use his name. Therefore it is more than need to
pray, and instantlye to pray for Gods help, that we mysuse not his name
irreverently, but that we may halowe it, and most hyghly honor it our
selfs, and provoke other to do the like which we shall do, if we preach and
teach the word of God purelye, and agree unto the same in pure innocent
living, so that no man can reprehende us, if we believe Gods word* and profess
the same, in all necessities call upon his name, and give him thanks for all
his benefits,

But when false doctrine is taught, than the name of God is defiled, and false
doctrine is honored, and taken for the holy word of God, which in deed is not
holy, but wicked and the false invention of the devil, the inuentour of all
lies and falsehode. And how can the holy name of god be more horribly abused?
tha^ when the deuyls lies and false inventions, be set out and honored under
the pretense and color of Gods holy name, that by that means the people
may the sonner be deceived.

Moreover the name of God is not hallowed, but blasphemed and despised, when the
true word of god is cruelly persecuted, as Cain persecuted his brother Abell.
For when the ungodly hypocrites, do call the gospel and true doctrine of
Christ, heresy and errore, than is God as it were accused of heresy, which
gave the said doctrine, which is an horrible blasphemy of Gods name.

Also when we believe not the word of God, than we violate and do injury to ye
name of God, not taking him to be true.

The name of God is hallowed also, but little regarded and contemned, when the
gospel and word of God, is not boldly professed before the world. For he
that denies ye gospel, and does not constantly stand unto it, but for fear
of men does shrynke from it, and reuoketh those things, which before he has
truly and godly taught he counts not Jesus Christ the son of the living
God, nor his holy word and gospel, to be of that value and estimation, that
he will for their sakes, speak boldly, or suffer any thing, before the kings
and powers of the world.

Also we do not halowe ye name of God, when we call God our father, and bost our
selfs to be his children, and yet that thing which we profess, we do not
parforme by holy and godly living. For an vnthristy and wicked child, is a
dishonor to his father. Hereof complayneth God by the Prophet Ezechiel
the.xxvi. Chapter, saying. By you my name is blasphemed among people and
nations.

And he also regards not the holy name of God, that does not call upon God,
and give thanks to god, as though he were not the very true God, which has
helped him, and both can and will help him in all his needs. For he that
knowlegeth himself, that he is helped of God, he of dewty must needs give him
thanks therefore, and he yt trusts to be helped, must likewise call upon him
for the same.

Therefore briefly to conclude, he yt teaches any other tha^ gods true
doctrine, that believes not in the name of Christ, that does not boldly
confess ye word of God, that does not lead his life according to the gospel,
that does not call upon God in all necessity, that does not willyngly and gladly
give thanks to God for all his benefits, he dispiseth God, and his holy name,
and gives occasion to other, to do ye like, which of al other, is the greatest
offense to God. Therefore we ought to pray, that God keep and defend us from
this sin.

This is the meaning and plain understanding of this petition. The name of
God is of it self holy, but in this petition we desire, that we may also halow
it, which we do, when the word of God is purely and si^cerely taught, wha^ we
walk and live according to the gospel. This grant us O heavenly father. For
he that teaches other doctrine, than the pure word of God, he dyshonoreth and
defyleth the word of God. Wherefore from this sin good Lord defend us.

Learn these things dilygentlye good children, and when you be asked, how
understand you this first petition? you shall answer. The name of God of it
self is holy, but here we do ask, that it may be hallowed of us. And wha^ you
be asked, how is it hallowed of us? Answer, when the word of God is puerly and
syncerelye taught, when we lead our life in this world holyly and godly, as
it becomes the very true children of God. Here in this point succor us good
Lord, help us O heavenly father. For he that either teaches or lives,
otherwise than the word of God requires, he dyshonoreth and polluteth the
word of God.

The general conclusion in all sermons of the Lords prayer.

Thus you have herd good children, the sum and mind of this first, second,
third etc. peticion, keep this in your memory, and cease not to make your
prayers unto the Lord, nothing dowting but he will hear you, and make you holy
and very godly as the true children of God without fault, which have their
father in heaven. For he has promised to grant us, what soever we ask in his
name. And in his name we ask, when so ever we say his prayer, and use the same
form of prayer which he prescribed unto us, and commanded us so to pray.
Therefore we ought to believe in our hearts, that God does hear, for so much
as he is our father. For when we give faith unto his promyses, than surely
he hearethe us, and by our prayer we trust to obtain that thing which we ask
and to obey and parforme such things as he has commanded, which thing God
grant us all. Amen.

Thy kingdom come. Romans vii* Philip. i^. 2. Cor. v.^.


BEfore you herd in the first petytion, how we pray in it, that God will
grant us, that we may fulfill the second commandment, that is to say,
that we take not the name of God in vain, but that it may be sanctified and
honored by us.

Now follows the second petition, wherein we pray, yt God will grant us
strength to fulfill the third commandment which is, reverently, to use and
to halow y^ sabbath day, which is not done, by easynge only from all outward
bodily labors, but it is chieflye done, when we mortifye the desyers of the
flesh, dilygentlye hear the word of God, and obey the same in our hearts
which we can not do, without a special and synguler grace and favor of God.
Therefore we have need, fervently to pray, even as Christ has caught us in
this second petition.

Thy kingdom come.

That you may understand these words rightly and justly, take good dilygent
head, that you may learn, what yt kingdom is which you do ask. The kyngedome
of God (as saint Paul says Romans xiiii.) is justice, peace and joy, in the
holy ghost. And although these words paraduenture seem unto you hard and
dark, yet you shall understand them, if you take good head. You know that
Emperors and kings in this world, have their realms and kingdoms, and
those people that be within their lands and dominions, and dewly obey their
laws and commandments, those be their true and faithful subjects of their
realms. And every king gives commandments unto his subjects, and
governs them in such wise, that they do not, every man what he list him
self, but what it pleases his prince to command him.

Even so almighty God has here in earth in his church an heavenly kingdom. And
this kingdom (which Christ in his gospel so often calls the kingdom of
heaven) begins among his faithful peoble, in this world. And all that truly
believe, and keep his commandments, parteyne unto this kingdom. And when God
by his gospel, begins to call us unto this kingdom, than the kingdom of God
comes unto us, and begins in us. For God begins, and in deed is the
king and Lord of them that be godly, he governs and rules them, so that
they work not after ye lusts and desiers of their own flesh, but as the
Lord God (who is their king) teaches and commands them by his word.

And kings and great men in this world, rule and govern by forse, by soore
threatenynges and grievous pains, and comstrayne their subjects to obedyence
(and so they ought to do, for it is the ordinance of God) but God does not
order his affairs so, i^ this forsaid kingdom of heaven, but rules his
subjects like a gentle father, by the word of his gospel, and by the holy
ghost, and that after this sort.

God causes his ghospel to be preached unto us, how Christ for our sakes
suffered death, was buried and rose again, as before you herd in ye Creed.
Moreover he opens our hertes, and gives us faith, to believe his gospel. And
to them yt believe his gospel he gives the holy ghost, which does govern us,
and lead us unto all truth.

For first by faith we be justified before God (for faith makes us partakers
of ye justice of christ, and planteth us in Christ) and he that by true faith,
do receive the promise of grace, to him God gyuethe the holy ghost, by whom
charity is spread abroad in our hertes, which perfourmethe all the
commandments. Therefore he that believes in Christ, and truly believes ye
gospel, he is just and holy before God, by ye justice of Christ, which is
imputed and given unto hi^ as Paul says. To. iii. we think yt man is
justified by faith without works. Roma. iii.
He is also just before ye world, because of ye love and charity, which the
holy ghost works in his heart.

Secondly, faith works peace and quietness in our hearts and consciences.
For by faith we be certified that our sins be forgiven. Therefore says
sayncte Paul to the Romans. Romans iiii.
Being justified, we have peace and quietness with God, by our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Thirdely, this peace brings unto us a great and synguler joy in our hertes
and consciences, and makes us, for this excedyng benefit of gods mercy and
grace toward us, feruentely to love him, gladly to laud and praise him, to
honor his name and to profess the same before all the world, evermore to
give unto him most harti thanks, and to be swift and redye to do all things
that may please God, and to eschew those things that may dysplease him.

This good children is the said kingdom of God, when by the gospel and the
holy ghost, God raygneth in our hearts, when he works in us our
Justification, that we having peace of conscience may have joy and comfort
in the holy ghost, of the abundance and plentifulnes of grace and the benefytes
of Christ. And this is that thing, which sayncte Paul speaks of to ye
Romans. Romans xiiii.
The kingdom of God is justice, peace and joy, in the holy ghost.

Now as an earthly king does govern his subjects by his laws and
commandments, and by his might and power, so does God rule and govern his
church and true faithful people (which although they be here in earth, yet
they be of his heavenly kingdom) such I say he governs by the holy word of
his gospel, and the power of the holy ghost (whom he powers plentifully upon
al them that believe the gospel) and by that comfortable word of the gospel
he gentilly entiseth and drawethe us unto him, that we should gladly of our
own free will obey him. For God loves not service constrained by forse, such
as slaves and bond men do, more for the fear then love, but he would have
his people to serve him willyngly of heart and love, Psalm. cx.
as David said in the.cx. Psalm.

And this is the forsayde kingdom of God, when he does in such wise reign
in us and govern us, that we do not wourke after our own wylles, but in body
and mind do cease and rest from our own evil works, and shrewed wylles, and
follow the workyng of God and the holy ghost in us. And this is to sanctifye
the sabbot day (that is to say, to keep an holy rest) when we honor God with
true honor, when we hear dilygently the word of God, when we yield our
selfs clerly to God, that his holy spirit may work in us, holy, godly and
heavenly works, yt is to say, justice, peace, comfort and other works of ye
holy ghost.

Therefore he that prays thus. Thy kingdom come, he prays, nothing else,
but that God will give us grace, that we may rest from our own propre wills,
that we do not those things that delight the body, and please our appetites,
but that we may suffer God, by his holy word and spirit, to work in us holy
works, that so the third commandment may be fulfilled. Remember that thou
sanctifye the sabbath day. For so does Esaye declare this commandment, Esa.
lviii.
saying. If thou work not after thine own will, in my holy day, than thou shall
be called a pleasant rest, to sanctifye and honor the Lord, if thou honor
him so, that thou work not after thine own ways, nor find the means to
follow thine own will, nor speak thine own pleasure, than shall thou have
pleasure in the Lord. For all these things therefore good children, ought you
to pray to God, that his kingdom may come, that he will here in earth begin
his kingdom in us, that we may obey him in such wise as you have herd.

Now the kingdom of God comes unto us two manner of ways, first by his
word and faith, when the gospel is preached unto us, that our Lord Jesus
Christ, delivered us from sin, death and hell, by cross, death and
resurrection. For by the preaching of his word we do learn to put our trust
in God and to love God. And this knowledge and faith in Christ, increases from
time to time, not only in them that have but newlye begone to believe, but
they also which many years have professed Christ, do profyt in the same
faith more and more. For their faith and love toward God, by the daily
preaching of the gospel is confirmed and made more strong. Secondly, the
kingdom of God shall come to us at the last day when the everlasting glory
and kingdom of God shall be reveled, when at the last day we shall be raised
from death to life, and be received into the kingdom of heaven, where we
shall be made perfytely just, holy and safe for ever, which thing so long as
we be here in this world, is hyde from us, and appears not clerlye unto us,
but at that last day shall appear to all men, that exceeding joy, which no
tongue is able to express. As says saint John in his Canonical epistle. i.
John. iii
Yet it appears not, what we shall be, but we know that when it shall appear, we
shall be like unto him, and we shall see him, even as he is.

All these things our Lord God causes to be preached in the hole world, of
his mere goodness and most abunda^t mercy, not for our works or merits, but
before we desiered him. But although it be preached through ye world, yet it
should not avail us, if we believed not, that is to say, if he came not into
our hearts, if the kingdom of God were not within us. Therefore must we with
all dilygence pray, that God not only may make this to be preched, but also
yt he will give faith, not only to other, but also to our selfs.

And shortly, this is the sum of this petition, that God by his sincere
preachers, will send his word and gospel of Christ, and by his holy spirit
bring us to the faith, and obedience to God, and daily to encreace the same.
And than utterly to abolyshe and take away from us, the rest of the world,
which is wicked and disobedient, withal their sin and wickedness, and to
receive us in to his eternal kingdom and glory.

This is the meaning and plain understanding of this second petition. The
kingdom of god comes of it self, without our prayer, but here we pray, that
it may com to us. Which comes to pass, when the heavenly father gives us
his spirit, to believe his holy word, to live well and godly, here in his
church for a time and after in heaven for ever.

The third petition.
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Mat. xxvi. Mar. xiiii. Luke.
xxii. John. vi. and.xviii


YE have herd how in the former petycions, we require of our Lord God, to give
us al things that perteyne to his glory, and to the kingdom of heaven,
whereof he has given us commandment in the three precepts, written in the
first table Now follows the third peticyon, wherein we pray God to grant
us, that we may fulfill the other seven commandments also, the which
entreat of matiers concerning this worldly kingdom and transitorye life, that
is to say, to honor our parents and governors, to kyl no man, to commit
none adulterye, to absteyne from theft and lyinge, and to behave our selfs in
all things obedyentlye, honestlye, peaceably and godly. And these be the
words of this petition. Thy will be don in earth, as it is in heaven. And to the
intent, that you may the better understand this petition, you shall know,
that there be two manner of kingdoms. The first is the kingdom of God or of
heaven, whereof we spoke in the second petition. The other is an earthly or
worldly kingdom, of the which you shall now hear. Now our Lord God, is the
chief ruler and gouernoure, in both these kingdoms. In the kingdom of
heaven he does so raygne, that he begins in us here in this world, the
kingdom of everlasting life and salvation. And the worldly kingedomes he
does so govern, that here he gives us peace and quietness that we may hear
and learn the kingdom of God, and so atteyne the kingdom of heaven. And God
has ordained in this erthlye kingdom, commen officers and rulers under him,
which he has appointed for this purpose, that they should in his name
govern the commen people, and labor with all dyligence that peace and
quietness may be maynteyned in the same. And he has given them the authority
of the sword, that they should not only therewyth defend the godly, but
also punish malefactors, and breakers of the commen peace and quietness, as
traitors, rebellions, ma^quellers, adulterers, thieves, and false witness
bearers, and all wrong doers to other men, according to the saying of
sayncte Paul in the.xiii. chapter to the Romans. Let every soul (says he)
submit himself unto the higher powers. For there is no power, but that comes
of God. And the powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the superior powers, resists the ordinance of God. And they that
resist, do purchase to themselves damnation. For the rulers are not fearful
to them that do good, but to them that do evil. will thou be without fear
of the powers? do well then, and so shalt thou be praised of the same. For he
is the minister of God for thy wealth. But if thou do evil, then fear, for he
bears not the sword in vain. For he is ye mynister of God, to punish him
that does evil. Wherefore you must needs obey, not only for fear of
punyshement, but also for veraye conscience. By these words you may well
perceive good children, that it is Gods will and pleasure, that we should
lead here in this world an honest and quiet life, and that they which be
sedytyous and full of trouble and unquietness in the commen wealth, should be
punyshed. And upon these considerations he has given us these commandments.
Honor thy father and mother. Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not commytte
adulterye. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt bear no false witness against
thy neighbor. Thou shall not desire any thing that is thy neighbors. And
God has commanded the gouerners of commen welthes, to punyshe such as do not
obey these commandments, and he himself will punyshe them also, wherefore
let such as be disobedient, look for punishment, not only of the gouerners
here in the sight of the world, but also of God himself. And the governors,
which according to gods commandment, do correct and punyshe offenders, they
do wourshyppe God highly, and do to him a pleasant and acceptable sacryfice.
And God has ordained the higher powers, and quietness to be in commen welthes,
that thereby we might hear and learn the gospel more easily and quietly. For
where as war and sedycion is, there is not the place to preach the word of
god with fruit and profit. For the which cause saint Paul, writing to
Tymothye, says on this wise: I charge you, that prayers and supplications be
made for all men, for kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may
live a quiet and a peaseable life, with all godliness and honestye. For this
is good and accepted in the sight of God our savior, which wylleth all men to
be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. Now therefore forasmuch
as we know, by Gods holy commandments, what his will is, it is our part to
confirm our wills to his will, and to desire him, to give us his grace and
aid, to accomplish his most holy will, saying as Christ has taught us. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. And because the will of God,
(whereby he requires here in earth obedience to laws and governors) is
expressed very plainly in the seven latter commandments before rehearsed,
therefore whenever you will make this prayer to God, and say. Thy will good
Lord be done in earth, as it is in heaven, you must before, call to your
remembrance, these seven commandments, with their exposition unto you
hertofore declared. For in this short request, you comprise as much, as if you
should pray on this fashion.

O God our most merciful father in heaven, give us thy grace and healpe,
that we may obey our parents and commen officers, and honor them with all
our hertes, keape us from manslaughter, from envy, hatred, malice, anger,
desire of reuengynge, and all evil minds toward our neighbors.

Grant that we may heartily love our neighbors, and do them good, both in
words and deades Grant us to live purelye and chastely, to avoid all
occations of offense, to provoke no body to unclean living, but yt we may
study to save every man's and woman's chastity and honestye. Grant, that
neither by theft, gyle or any craftye means we take brybe or keape away
any man's goods from him, but rather that we may help them to save and keep
their riches, and if any of the^ be in poverty that we may be wyllyng to
releaue them with our alms and charity. Grant that we hurt no man with
false witness bearing or lying, but that we may both judge and speak all
goodness of our neighbor. Keep us from all evil lusts and desires, that we
covet not our neyghbors goods, nor hawk or hunt after any thing that is
his. For all these be the commandments of thy holy and godly will, whereto
thou have commanded us to be obedyente.

And mark well these words I pray you (good children) that we do not only
pray God, that his will may be done, but also we desyer, yt it may be
fulfilled here of men in earth, even as it is of the angels in heaven. Now the
angels in heaven fulfill Gods will most perfectlye, both with most fervent
love and most perfyte obedience. And there is not in any of the heavenly
spirits any evil desire, to do any thing contrary to gods will, but they be
whollye inflamed with most perfect love toward God. Even so ought we also
to be that dwell here in earth. But the wekenes and euylnes of man's heart is so
great that we be not able to perform the same.

For oftentimes we obey Gods will nothing at all, but give our selves wholly to
the lusts of our flesh, oftentimes we do that God requirethe of us
grudgynglye, coldly and as it were half against our wills. This is a great
feebleness, or rather an horrible sykenes, lepry, corruption and pestylente
contagion of original sin, by means whereof they that be most holy here in
earth, be not perfecttely just and rightuous, but ever they want many things,
that belong to their perfection. We must therefore continually pray God, to
give us his grace and help, that we may fulfill his holy will, and be made as
just and obediente, as the angels which be in heaven. Forthermore (good
children) you shall note that when we say, thy will be done, we do not only
pray for our selves, but for other also, that both we and they may do the
holy will of God. And when any man goes about to do any ungodly thing, which
is against gods will, then we pray in this petition that God will let his
naughty purpose, that gods will only may be done. This prayer also is against
the devil and this most corrupt world, that neither the deuels will, neither
the will of the wicked world may be done. For when we hear the gospel
preached unto us, and give credyte to it, and frame our lyfes and conversation
after the same, then Satan rages and is sore grieved and vexed, than he calls
all his wits unto him, and sets all his study and craftye, to stir up
false and braynesyke doctors, to sow the cockell of heresye and erroneous
opinions, where the good sede of gods word was first sowe^. The^ he is busye to
raise up persecutions, seditio^s, insurrections, co^motyons, war and
blasphemies, whereby ye may let the word of God to have his course, and
trouble the kingdom of Christ. And Satan is not alone, when he fyghteth
against Christ and his kingdom, but he has on his side this false and
deceyuable world, and also our own flesh, which do not cease to intyce and
move us against gods most holy will. But when we say in the lords prayer, thy
will be done, then we do not only pray, that both we and other may keep gods
commandments, but we pray also, that the most naughty will of the Deuel
and the corrupt world may be broken, and only the will of God may be
fulfilled, that in commen welthes may be peace and quietness, the gospel freely
and fruitefully preached, and that we may led in this world holy and godly
lives. And forasmuch as Christ our Lord, has cammaunded us thus to pray,
and has promised, that whatsoever we ask the father in his name, he will give
it unto us, we ought steadfastly to believe, and nothing doubt, but that he will
stay all the craftye imaginations and compassynges, of the world and the
deuel, and defend us against all persecutions, that we may keep and learn his
word in peace and quietness.

Wherefore our dewtie is, steadfastly to cleue to the gospel, dylygently to
study and learn the word of God, and constantly without fear to confess and
abide by the same. For Christ himself says. Math. x. Luke. xii.
He that confesses me before men, I will also confess and acknowledge him
before my father in heaven. But he that denies me before men, I will deny him
before my father in heaven. Also good children you shall dilygently learn this
lesson (which I pray you to prynt well in your memories) that in this peticion
we yield our selves wholly to God, to be ordered after his will and pleasure,
and willynglye to bear, what soever cross or trouble, he shall lay upon our
sholders. For we pray yt his will may be done, than we forsake our own will,
and make a whole resignation thereof into Gods hands, that it may not take
effect, which of it self desire nothing but health of body, riches, honors,
rest, and quietness, where as gods will is contrary that oftentimes we should
be tried in our faith by aduersyties, and bear our cross, as our Lord and
master Christ was crowned with thorns and nailed on the cross for our
sakes. Romans viii.
This saint Paul witnesses, writing these words, whom God has chose^
before the beginning of the world, them also has he ordained, to be like the
image of his son. And our savior Christ himself says. He that takes
not his cross, and follows me is not worthy to be my dysciple. Luke. ii*


And this is not a token of gods anger, when he sends us afflyetion or
adversity, but rather a sign of his love toward us. For he chasteseth every
child whom he loves, as the wise man Solomon witnesses. Prou. lii^*
And they that feel not his rod, be not his true children, but rather
bastardes as saint Paul writes in thepistle to the Hebrews. Wherefore good
children larne patience, Hebr, xii,
that you may gladly suffer adversity (For correction is a teaching) and when
God shall try your faith with sycknes, poverty persecution, or any other
kind of adversity, rejoice and be glad. For these be evident tokens, of gods
fatherly love toward you, and that he will keep you clean from sin and
corruption of this world, and bridle your will, that you may, learn to know
gods holy will, which is a wonderful wisdom.

And therefore sayncte Paul so many times repeteth in his epystles, these
words, that is to say, that you may know the will of God. For this knowledge
is a most high and heavenly wisdom and obedyence, most like to the obedience
and holiness of thangels in heaven. And you be bound to obey God, in sufferyng
his rod and cross. For God in our baptysme has made this covenant with us,
that we must dye and be buried with Christ, and be grafted in his passion and
death, if we will rise again and be glorified with him in the kingdom of
heaven, whereunto he is risen and assended. Wherefore good children, mark well
these lessons, that you may learn patience in all afflictions and
adversities, whether you suffer sycknes, poverty, reproaches or persecution for
the gospel. And what soever kind of adversity troubles you, persuade your
selves, for a suertye, that it is Gods will, that you should suffer and be
tried. And therefore Christ says. One hear shall not fall from your headde,
Luke. xxi.
without the will of your father which is in heaven.

Therefore if perchance at any time you shall be moved to impacience, in your
trouble and adversity, then with all your hertes call upon God for his aid
and succor, desire him to send you the gift of patience, and say. Thy will
good Lord be done, and not ours: For so our savior Christ has not only
taught us to pray, but he himself also did use the like prayer, not long
before he suffered his passion. And this is the plain meaning of this third
petition, concerning ye fulfyllyng of Gods will. Now I pray you good children,
apply your wills and minds to learn ye same, that when you be demanded,
how understand you ye third petition? you may answer after this manner.
Although Gods holy will be done without our prayer, yet we pray that it may be
done in us, and fulfilled among us here in earth. Which is done, when God does
overthrow and destroy the wicked counsels of the deuell, of worldly people,
and of our own flesh (which do all that lies in them, to let and hinder
the kingdom of God, and the halowynge of his name) and does keep us in the
true knowledge of his word, in the lively faith of Christ, in his love and
obedyence of his commandments. For this is the holy and perfect will of
God, which God grant us to keape now and ever. Amen.

John. vi. a Mat. iiii. b and.xv d. Mar. vi. d viii. a. b. c. Luke. ix, b


Give us this day our daily bread. YE have herd, how in the former petitions
we desyer of God, to give us al things that belong to the fulfyllynge of his
holy commandments, that we may lead a godly life, as well toward God, as
also toward our neighbors. Whereby we be evidently taught, that we be not
able to fulfill the law and commandments of God, without the grace of
Christ and Gods healpe. Now follows the other four peticions, in the
which we pray God, that he will vouche safe to give us all those things,
which be promised unto us in the gospel, and which our Creed teaches us to
look for. And first in this fourth petition, we sue to God, to grant us all
those things, which we be taught to believe in the first part of our Creed
concerning our creation. For when we say. Give us this day our daily
bread, we pray to God, that as through his great mercy and goodness, he
did create us, so he will likewise nouryshe and feade us. Wherefore good
children, if you will understand this peticion, you must call to your
remembrance, those lessons which were taught you in the first article of our
belefe, intreatyng of the creation. For seeing that God has made heaven and
earth, he is lord and master of al creatures in heaven or earth, and all be
under his will and pleasure. And forasmuch as he made them all for us he has
appointed them all to serve us, and to healpe and releue our necessities.
Wherefore let us not be careful for meat or drink or other things
necessary for our living. But let us put our confidence in God our
father, which has made us, and given us our life's, and we may be sure, that
he will also send us all things necessary for the preservation and
maintenau^ce of the same. For seeing that he made al creatures of nothing, it
must needs be, that all creatures must obey his will and commandment. And
in case there were not in the world, creatures sufficient to nourish us, yet we
should not mistrust him, for he is able to make new creatures, to give us all
things necessary. And to the intent, that no man should trust in himself,
thinking that by his own wisdom or labor he is able to get all things
necessary to the maintenance of his life, Christ has taught us, to ask
these things of our heavenly father, which only is able to preserve and
feade us. Of him therefore ought we hertely to ask the same, saying. Give us
this day our daily bread. For this thing tends to the glory of god, and
syngulerly pleasethe him, when we ask of him al things necessary for us. And
for this cause God has commanded us to pray contynually without ceasynge.

And our savior Christ has promised us, that he will give us all things, Lu.
xviii. John. xiii.
which we shall ask in his name. And it is evident by the words of this
petition, that we ought oftentimes to pray. For Christ has not taught us to
ask our sustinaunce for fyfthy or three score year, nor yet for one year, no
nor for one month or weak, but he has wylled us to ask our daily bread.
And he says. Be not careful for to morrow, for to morrow brings care enough
of it self.

Now if we shall not be careful for to morrow, but only require of God
sustinance necessary for the present day, it is manifest hereby, that it is
gods will, that we should ask again of him to morrow. For we shall have as much
need of meat and drink to morrow, as we have this present day, and yet we
pray not for to mrowes fode but for this days sustinance only. Wherefore good
children accustom your selfs from your tender age, to pray gladly and
often, for that pleases God, and he is very ready, to give you al things that
you need, so that we give him his due honor, and ask of him as our duty is.
But specially they that be godly, must use to pray, when they go to bed,
when they rise, when they go to the church, or sit down at the table. For
these times are chiefly appointed to prayer, as scripture does witness in many
places. And forasmuch as we be not able to get our daily bread, by our own
wit, labor and dylygence, except God give it us, let us therefore before all
things seek his kingdom and study to please him, that he may give us al
things necessary for us.

And although many men in this world, get their living and riches by craft
and deceipte, yet let us absteyne from such unlawful means. For they do rather
bring pouertye to a man, then riches. And although brybers, extorcyoners,
usurers, and craftye deceauers of their neighbors, do prosper for a while in
this world, yet they seldom establyshe their things. For it is written, that
scasely the third heir shall enjoy goods ill gotten. And God does only wynke
at them, suffryng the^ to floryshe for a time, that afterward he may ye more
greuouslye punyshe, and suddenly destroy the^. And when we desyer God to give us
our daily bread, think not (Good children) that our heavenly father will give
us only a morsel of bread, and nothing beside, but under the name of bread be
all things contained, which be necessary to the maintenance of our life, as
meat, drink, apparel, house, lands, cattle, and monye, according to the
saying of saint Paul. God gives all thing to our use richely and
abundantly. But Christ teaches us in this petition, to ask only for our
daily bread, for this intent, that we should be content with such a mean,
as our daily use and necessity does require, and that we should not by
ouermuche eating and drinking, wastfully spend those things, where with poor
people might be relyued. For sayncte Paul does command us to labor and
work, that we may eat our own bread, and also give to the^ that have need.
The which commandment we shall easily keep, if we will be content with a
mean diet, and keep a measure in our apparel. But they that delyght in
superfluity of gorgyous apparel and deynty fare, and make pleasure the end of
their eating and drynkyng* and not necessity, they be not wont to give much
to the poor, but commenly such do deceive the nedye, brybe and pyle from
the^, and oftentynes by plain robberies and force do steal other men's goods,
that they may have wherewith to mainteyne their charges and sumptuous expe^ses.
As we see by daily experience, that covetous persons and the rich men of this
world, that be given to riot and superfluitye, use to give little or nothing at
all to ye poor. Furthermore in this petition we do not only desire our bodily
fode and sustinance, but also all thing necessary to the same, whereby we may
use and enjoy such as God has sent us, that is to say, we pray for
seasonable wether and holsomenes of the air, for health of body, for peace
and quyetnes of the commen welthe, for trustye and faithful servants, and
such like. For except God send a fair and seasenable wether all the fruits
and corn growyng upon the earth are like to peryshe, and so all our labor in
plowyng, sowyng and plantyng shall be bestowed in vain. Also he yt has not
his health, he can have no pleasure in his riches, or greatly joy in his meat or
drink, be it never so deinty. Furthermore in war time, all though God send
us great ple^tye of corn and wine, yet all is destroyed of our enemies,
somuche that we may scante trust our friends from spoilyng of us. For than
all is full of robbynge, burning, beatyng, killing and wasting with fire and
sword. And if we have any thing left us in the time of war, yet we can not
quyetly have ye use of it, for fear, care and trouble of the wars.

And if it be a time of peace, yet if thou have an enemy within the walls of
thine own house, that is to say, if thou have an unkind or unfaithful wife,
vnthryftye children, vntrustye and neglygente servants, then by them, thy
living is wasted and consumed. For all these do defraude the of thy daily
bread, and by ye occasion of thy great loss and hynderance. The principal
cause of all these adversities is the deuel. For he is so mortal an enemy to
mankind, that he is desirous not only to destroy our souls with false doctrine
and erroneous opinions, but also through tempests, infection of the air,
diverse kinds of sykenesses by famyne, batteyl, by the malice and falsehed of
our own householde and of our neighbors, he would feign consume our life,
health, house and goods, and clearly destroy them

And this wicked spirit would overthrow, in a momente of an hour whole
realms and commen welthes, if God did not let him. Wherefore we must ernestly
pray to God that he will stay this wicked spirit, and give us our daily bread,
that he will preserve us from all sycknes, that having health of our bodies, we
may use and enjoy our substance. And that also he will send us godly and
dilygente rulers, to defend us from our enemies, and to provide, that nether
our goods be stolen from us by thefes or robbers, neither lost or conuayed
from us, through the vntrustynes or falsenes of our householde servants.
Furthermore you shall note good children, that our Lord Jesus Christ has not
taught us to say, father give me my daily bread, but give us our dailye
bread, and likewise in all the petitions that follow, no man prays in the
synguler noumber for himself alone, but in the plurel noumber as well for other
as for himself. By ye which lesson we be admonyshed of the brotherly
charity, which one of us should bear toward an other. For we be all
offenders, and from our birth the children of ire. Nevertheless God so loved us,
that he gave his only son Jesus Christ to suffer death for us, to obtain
for us remyssion of our sins, to reconcile us to him, and to make us his
children. Therefore now is God our father, and Christ our brother, and we be
gods children and heirs, and coinheriters with Christ, and among our
selves we be brethren, and all brethren to Christ. And therefore we ought to
join altogyther in one prayer, and to be glad one to healpe another, both in
word and deed, to the uttermost of our power. Furthermore this is a great
comfort for us, to know that all the church and congregation of Christ, does
pray for us, and that all the treasurs of Gods riches, that is to say Christ
himself, the kingdom of heaven, the holy gospel, the sacraments, and the
prayers of al godly men, be common to us all. For when soever any Godly man,
requires any good thing of God, he also requires the same for us alone, for
no man ought to pray for him self. And this is a great consolation for all
Christian people. For the scripture says, that the prayer of one just man may
do much with God. And therefore when many just and godly men do make their
supplications unto God, with one accord, we may be sure that their prayers are
herd.

And this is the plain sense and exposition of this fourth petition. Now (good
children) I pray you diligently to remember these things, that when you be
asked this question, how understand you the fourth petition? you may answer,
God does sufficientlye provide for us meat and living with out our desire,
nevertheless we desire him, to grant us, that we may know that we have all
things at his hands, and that we may give to him due thanks for the same.
And if further any man will ask you, what is mente by this word, our daily
bread? answer, that by daily bread is understand all things necessary
for our living, as meat, drink, clothe, house, land, cattle, monye,
household stuff, a good wife, obedyente children, trustye servants, good
gouerners, a well ordered commen wealth, commen peace and tranquillity,
seasenable wether, wholesome aier, health of body, constant friends, honest
neighbors, and such like things, whereby we may lead in this world a
Godly and quiet life.

And forgive us our trespaces / as we forgive them / that trespace against us.
mat. xviiii d c and vi.v. Mar. xi. c Act. xvii. a


YOu have heard how we desyer of God our father, that for as much as he is
the only and true maker of heaven and earth, he will vouchsafe to preserve
and nouryshe us his children, and that we ought to trust for this thing, of no
creature but of God only, as you have learned in the first article of our
Creed, which entreats of the creation. Now follows the fifth petition, in yt
which we desyer God, to give us al those things, yt we have learned in the
second part of our Creed, which speaks of our redemption, and teaches
us, how by the passion, death and resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, we
be delivered from sin, death and hell, that with joy and myrthe we may look
for that day, in the which he shall judge both ye quick and the dead. The
words of this peticion be these. Forgive us our trespaces as we forgive them
that trespace against us.

To the intent good children that you may the better understand this
petition, you shall call to your remembrance that lesson, which you learned a
little before, that is to say, that Christ has promised, that he will give us
all things, which we ask in faith and true belefe. Now true faith is
grounded upon the promise of god, and it is not builded, but upon the
fou^dacion of his word. Wherefore if we will ask any thing in true belefe, we
must ask as the word of God teaches us, and we must take suer hold of Gods
promise, declared in the scripture. For it is not faith, to believe our own
fantasies or dreams, of the which God has nothing spoken or taught. As if
a man would believe that by Gods healpe he should not be drouned, although he
leapte into the sea, this were no faith, but a te^ptacio^ of god, a very
heinous sin, coming dowtles of the deuel, who on this wise tempted our
master Christ, when he set him upon the pinnacle of the temple in the holy
city, Mat, iiii,
and said unto him. If thou be the son of God, cast thy self down. But
Christ refused so to do, and answered thus. Yt is written. Deuteronomy. vi.
Thou shalt not tempte thy Lord God. Now there is not in the whole scripture
any one promise, that God will help me, if I do any such act, but if we do
such things as God has commanded us, he has made us many promyses, that
he will aid and succor us, in all our necessities and troubles. By the which
promyses, he has declared his fatherly love toward us, intendyng thereby to
stir and provoke us, to run unto him in all our cares and needs. Wherefore
it is our bounden duty, to call upon his name in all our necessities, to trust
upon his promyses, to put him as it were in remembrance of them, and ernestly
to desire him to perform ye same. But among al other promyses, this promise
is specially to be remembered where Christ promyseth thus. If ye will forgive
men their trespaces, my heavenly father also will forgive you, your trespaces.
But if you will not forgive men their trespaces, the^ will not my heavenly father
forgive you. In the which promise, Christ does not only offer unto us
remission of our sins, and such things as apperteyne to everlasting life,
but also he promises us hereby peace and quietness in this transitorye life,
with concord and a loving heart toward our neighbor. And according to this
promise, Christ our master has taught us to pray after this sort. Forgive us
our trespaces, as we forgive them, that trespace against us. For it were not
reasonable nor agreyng to justice, that we should require God to forgive us our
trespaces against him, when we are not minded to forgive our neighbors, their
offenses against us. Nor God would never hear us, if we should so pray. For
if we have causes, why we will not forgive our neighbors, the^ suerly God has
both mo and more weighty causes, wherefore he will not forgive us. So that if
God were minded to forgive us our sins, yet if we be not minded to forgive
our neyghbors, he would stay, and (as it were) call again this his purpose, by
the reason of our uncharitableness and dissobedie^ce, as Christ himself does
plainly teach us, mat. xviii.
by the example of the servant, which after he had his debt forgyuen him,
was compelled to pay all the monye whereof before he was dyscharged, by his
masters pardon, because he would not forgive his fellow. Wherefore good
children, accustom your selfs eue^ from your tender age, gladly to forgive
them, that have offended you. Be not desirous to revenge your awn quarrels, and
the^ your heavenly father, will also forgive you. If you be angry, sin not,
(...) iiii*
nor let not the sun set upon your anger. For it is not possible, that any
man can trewlye believe that God has forgyuen him his sins, when he himself
is not willing to forgive his neighbore. Wherefore God our heavenly father did
not entende to hurt or hindre us, when he said, that he would not forgive
us, except we did forgive other, and if we forgive our neyghbors their
offenses, that then he will also forgive us. But God did knyt this condytion to
this promise, for our great wealth and benefyte. For under these wourdes, there
lies hyde great comfort, for troubled conscyences, where unto if you will
lysten dilygently, ye shall know the synguler goodness of God and his fatherly
love toward you. It is not unknown to God, how hard a thing it is for us
to believe, that God frelye and for his mere mercy will pardon us when we have
offended him.

Wherefore he has added to his promise this token, whereby we might be assured
that he has forgyuen us, that is to say, when we forgive our neighbors. For
although it be hard to forgive our neighbors, their offenses against us, yet
more hard it is, to believe that God has forgyuen us. Let us therefore lay
aside al anger and dyspleasure, and accustom our selves gladly to forgive our
neighbors, that thereby we may the sooner believe, that our Lord God has
forgyuen us. For God is much more inclyned and redye to mercy, then we mortal
men be. Moreover the forgyuyng of our neighbor, Christ here in does not
only stablyshe our faith, yt our sins be forgiven of God but also it does
nouryshe peace, concord and brotherly charity. For if we should not much
forbear and forgive one another, but every man should study how he might be
revenged of his neighbor, for every matter, either by force or else by
subtlety, then, we should never have measure nor end of chiding, scolding,
layinge in watch one of an other, deceauynge, lawyng, fightyng and such like.
Then fare well all quietness, peace, concord and good order.

And this reuengynge of our selfs should greatly hurt us, both in our body,
soul, good name, honor and riches, as experience daily teaches us. For
oftentimes we see, that while a man goes to law for two or three crowns, he
spends twentye or thirthye. And many men be killed themselves while they go
about to stryke or wou^d other. Wherefore it is much better, one of us to
forgive an other, then to provoke and increace the anger and malice one of
another.

And although we lose part of our goods thereby, yet we shall have this great
winning thereby, that God will forgive us, even as we forgive them that
trespass against us. And note well (good children) that Christ does not teach
us to say, forgive us our gross sins, but forgive us our dettes or
trespaces. For it is a greater benefyte, to have our dettes and all offenses
forgyuen, then to have our gross sins forgyuen us.

For that we proprely call sin, which we do directly against gods
commandment. But that is called debt, or offense when we ought to do good
and do it not, or do good vnperfitely, although dyrectly we do no hurt to no
man. And we Christen men although by baptism we be made the children of God,
and receive ye holy ghost, (which does healpe us to withstand all evil, and to
do yt is good) and although we commit no gross sin, nor break the law by any
outward act, yet we do not perfectely fulfill gods commandments, nor do al
things which we ought to do. And when we do not all things which we ought
to do, then ever we be detters and sinners in some thing.

But God forgyueth us these dettes for Christ's sake, when we pray to him
therefore, and forgive our neighbors for his sake. And this is the cause, why
we can not be justified, or delivered from syn, death, and hell, by our own
works. For in as much as our good works be ever imperfect, and have need of
pardon, therefore we must needs be redeemed by the passion, death, and
resurrection of Christ, as it has been taught you in that part of ye Creed,
which entreats of our redemption, wherefore in as much as, according to our
Creed, we believe that God for Christ's sake has forgyuen us all our sins
and dettes, we ought also earnestly to pray, yt he will deal with us
according to our faith, and forgive us our trespaces, as we forgive them,
that trespace against us. And this is the plain understanding of this fifth
petition, which we daily and hourly ought to make to God. And now I pray you
(good children) that you will dilygentlye record the true meaning of this
petition. And when you be asked this question, how understand you the fifthe
petition? Answer, and say. Herein we desyere, that our heavenly father will
not look upon our sins, and for them, cast us away. For we have not
deserved those great gifts and, grace which we desire at gods hands, nor we
be not worthy to have the same, but we desyer God, that although we daily
offend him, and deserve grievous punyshmentes for our sins, yet he of his
mere grace and mercy will hear our prayers, and freely forgive us our
offenses. And we offer our selves for his sake from the botome of our hearts
to forgive them that have offended us.

The syxte petition.
And suffer us not to be led into temptacion. mat. iiii. a Mark. i. b Luk*
iiii. a


Now you have heard, how in the fyfte petition, we desire God to give us all
those things, which our Lord Jesus Christ has deserved for us, by his
passion, death and glorious resurrection, that is to say forgiveness of our
sins, and all thereto belonging, even as we forgive them that have offended
us, as you have learned in the second part of the Creed, which entreats of
our Redemption. Now therefore follows the syxt petition, in the which we
pray, that God will give us all those things, which we have learned in
the.iii. part of the Creed, which entreats of our Sanctification, that is
to say, we desire, that God will vouchesafe, to send us the holy ghost,
which may assist us in our continual batell against sin, the flesh, the
world and the deuel, that in all temptations and skyrmishes with the same, we
may ma^fully withstand them, and overcome them. For this we desire, when we
say. And suffer us not to be led into temptation. And to the intent, that ye
may the better understand this petition, ye shall first dilygentlye learn
this lesson, that although sin is forgyuen us by Christ, yet it is not
whollye purged or driven out of us, but sin yet sticks fast in our flesh,
which does tempte and provoke us to do against Gods commandments. For ye
have all redye learned by the ten commandments, what sin is, and what is
very ungodliness, to ye intent ye may eschew it. Also you have herd in your
Creed, that God does forgive us our sins, and does no more condemn us for
the same, when we believe in the son of God our savior Jesus Christ. But yet
nevertheless, we feale the temptations of sin, which cleueth to us like glewe.
And that this is true every one of you does feale in your selves by daily
experience. For when you grudge to do that thing, which your parents
commands you to do, then sin tempts you, and provoke you to
stoubbernes and disobedience toward your father and mother. But yield not you
to this temptacion, but obey your father and mother, as God has commanded
you. Likewise when you see other children have any gay thing, which pleases
you so well, that you would feign have the same, then sin tempts and
moves you either by force, or by stelthe, or else by some crafty means to
pick it from them, and so to deceive your neighbor. But it is your part, to
withstand this temptation, and to keep Gods commandment, which says. Thou
shalt not steal. And after this sort we be tempted in the other
commandments of God also, and tried whether we will be obedyent unto them or
no. But we must strive against temptation, and manfully withstand the same,
yt we do nothing against gods commandment. Now when we will resyst
temptation, and not obey the same, but keep the commandments of God, then we
must have the help and assistance of the holy Ghost. For without the holy Ghost
no man can be rightuouse and good. And for this cause also he is called the
holy ghost, because he makes men rightuous, pure and holy. And god does give
the holy ghost, to al them, which do believe with all their heart in Jesus
Christ our Lord. For by this toke^ saint Paul teaches us to know that we
have the holy ghost. No man (says saint Paul) can call Jesus Lord, i. Cor.
xii.
but by the holy ghost. And saint John in his epistel canonical writes thus.
When we do truly confess Jesus Christ to be our Lord than we be borne of
God, and have his holy spirit.

Wherefore good children, believe with all your hearts, that Jesus Christ the
true son of God, dyed and rose again for you, that he has purchased
forgyuenes of sins and everlasting life for you, and that he is so your
Lord, that you shall be sure to dwell with him in everlasting life. Forthermore
ye shall believe, that Christ does give you the holy ghost, who does sanctifye
you, help and assiste you, that ye be not led into temptation, but that ye may
obey God, as you have heard in the ten commandments. And as long as we live
here upon earth, we must not look to be void of temptations.

For all our life in this world, is subject to diverse temptations. Some time
the flesh tempts us, some time the false and deceiptful world, some time
the deuel tempts us, who has ever had a most fervent desire to do us hurt.
And all the temptations of these our enemies, do level at this prycke, to
bring us, to do against gods cammaundementes. But it is our parts, manfully
to withstand such temptations, that we assent not to any euel. And yet we are
not able to withstand these our enemies, onles God help us by the holy ghost.
Wherefore, when soever we be tempted, to do any thing against gods
commandments, there is no better remedy, then to call for gods help, and to
say as Christ taught us. Good Lord suffer us not to be lead into temptation.
For when we do so, God hears our prayers, he sends the holy ghost, and
helps us, that we be not led into temptacion.

And now good children, yt you may the better withstand such temptations,
you shall here learn, that there be three kinds of temptacio^s. The first is
the temptation of ye flesh, as when we are tempted to do any thing, which is
plea^a^t to the flesh, and yet it is sinful. As when the flesh does provoke
us to lecherye, adulterye, dronkenes and such like. Or when we be tempted to
leave any thing undone, which is painful and grievous to the flesh, and yet of
it self it is holy and rightuous, as when we suffer afflictions against our
will, when we do not gladly fast, when we do not gladly give alms, fraryng lest
we shall lack our own selves, and not have enough to maintain our pride and
pleasures. The second temptation is of the world, as when through euel
company, we be corrupted in our own living, and provoked to follow noughty
examples. Also when we swerve from that which is right and honest, for fear of
persecution, dyspleasure, indignation or threatnynge of men. Or when men
through their falsehede, malice or craft do move us to anger, envy or hatred.
The third temptation is of the deuel, as when we feale in our hearts, sodein
and vehement motions to do euel, and yet neither the flesh nor the world does
provoke us to the same. But euel thoughts do so suddenly come into our minds,
that we our selves do not well know from whence they came. Such evil thoughts,
no doubt of it, come from the deuel, For the deuel is a spirit, whom we can
neither feal nor see, Wherefore he can set our hearts afyer so suddenly, that we
shall not know from whence such soden fire and sparks do come. Also when the
flesh and the world do tempte us, then Satan also takes occasion thereby to
enter in at ye gate, which they have set open for him, and makes their
temptation so strong, that it is hard for us to withstand and overcome the
same. And all these temptations good children be against gods commundementes.
Wherefore hereby you shall learn to know what is temptation. For when any
thing comes in to your mind, by the whithe you are provoked to do against
gods commandment, yt is temptation. Wherefore beware you do not the same, but
desyer of God help and assistence against temptation. For in this stands a
Christian, and holy life, that as our sins be forgyuen us by Christ, so we
ought ever to withstand sin, that we suffer it not to enter in to us, or to
reign over us. For what a monstrous thing should Christen relygion be? if we
that be Christen men, (which confess sin to be naught and against God,
and desire God to forgive us our sin) should contynewe still and walk in
sin, after that God most mercyefully has forgyuen us the same.

Also we may easily withstand temptation and sin, if we believe truly, and
pray ernestly. For we have learned in ye doctrine of faith, that we ca^ not be
rightuous pure and holy of our selves, but ye holy ghost does purify cleanse and
halow us. And if we beleaue this steadfastly, then we ought to pray with a
fervent spirit, and say thus. Lord our heavenly father, we be seche the
suffer us not to be led into temptation. And if we thus pray, then God will
hear us, and will give us strength against him that tempts us, and against
his temptacion. For a Christen man's life, is a continual war upon earth, and
so long as we live in this world, we may not look to have peace or quietness,
but as in ye sea one wawe comes after an other, so in this world one
temptation follows an other. So that, when we have overcome one temptation, by
and by, an other is at hand, paradue^ture greater then the first. Wherefore in
this sixth petition, we do not pray thus. O heavenly father, grant that we may
have no temptations, but we say thus. O heavenly father suffer us not to be led
into temptation. To be led into temptation, is when God suffers, the greatness
of temptation so to grow, that we be not able to overcome ye same, but be so
deceived and blinded by ye deuel, that sin is pleasant unto us, and we see
nothing in the same but pleasure and profit, and consider not the anger of God
due for sin, nor the poysen that lies hyd in the same, nor the pain that
shall follow thereof, and so we persuade our selves, yt we have no more need to
watch or fight against sin, but do consent to temptation, and yield our
selves into the hands of our enemies. This Christ calls to be led into
temptation, as in our comen speech we are wont to say. This leadde me, or
this brou^ght me, in to this myschiefe. And that we be not led into temptation,
it is our part, ernestly to pray to God, as Christ has taught and commanded
us.

So ye perceive good children, the myserye of this transitorye and mortal life,
that it is full of temptations and snares. But we must not give place to them,
but withstand them, and live godly. But this we be not able to do, except ye
holy ghost do sanctifye us, and make us pure and holy. Wherefore we ought to
pray to God, that he will give us the holy ghost, and that he will vouchesaue,
to assiste and strengthen us, that we may withstand all temptations, and keape
his holy commandments.

And this is the meaning and plain understanding of this sixth petition.
Wherefore good children I pray you diligently learn the same, that when you
be asked. How understand you the sixth petition? you may answer, God tempts
no man. But here we pray, that God will keep and defend us, that the deuel,
the world and the flesh deceive us not, and leadde us not into ungodliness,
ydolatrie, blasphemy, desperation, or other horrible sins. And although we
be tempted with these sins, yet we desire God, that at length we may overcome
the^, and triumph over them, by the help and assistence of the holy ghost.

The seventh petition.
But deliver us from evil. Amen. Mat. ix.^. and.xii. c. Mark, iii. Luke. xi.^.


YE have heard in the syxte petition, how we sue to God, that he will rule,
govern and strengthen us, by his holy ghost, that we may be able to fight
against sin, to wtstande all the perellous tentations of the flesh, the
world and the devil, and to overcome them, so that we may become ryghtuous
and holy. Now follows the seventh last peticion, in the which we desire
God, to deliver us from this perelous and continual battle, and from all other
euelles, that this great dau^gier may not continue for ever, but yt at length
we may have some end thereof. And for this Christ taught us to pray, and to say
Good Lord deliver us from euel.

And now to the intent, that you may the better understand this petition, you
shall know (good children) that this word, euel, does not sygnifie in this
place, only sin, against Gods commandments, and unbelief against Gods
promise, but here it betokens all kind of adversity and affliction, which
we suffer for our sins, either in our bodies, souls, honors or riches, as
ignorance, blyndnes of mind, sadness, sorrow, trouble of conscience, fayntnes of
the heart, sickness of the body, poverty, sclaunders, dispising, reproaches,
persecutions, battle, sedition, hunger, pestilence, and al plages, with the
which Satan does afflict and trouble us, either by himself, or by ye wicked
world, whereof he is prince and gouernoure. The which euyls no man can number
nor rehearse, for they be without number, and increase daily more and more. For
the devil in this lattre time does daily more and more rage against the true
church and people of God, forasmuch as he perceyuethe, Apoca. xii.
that his kingdom draws to an end, and a short time remains until the
day of judgment come, and his everlasting damnation.

Furthermore the world waxes daily worse and worse, and me^ waxes more wild
and unruly, sin, wickedness, malice and craftines increase above all measure,
so much that it is not possible to number the great floodes of euels which
have almost ouerflowed the world. Among the which euels, there is such
blyndnesse and corruption of judgment, that few therebe, which can rightly
deserve what is good and what is evil. As for example. Many men when they be
sick, judge bodily sickness to be a great evil, whereas in deed (if they would
take it as they ought to do) it is to them an occasion of great goodness. Who
perchance (if they should have contynuall health) would forget God, and
run hedlonge into dangerous perels, both of body and soul, from the which
euyls, their bodyly diseases do stay and let them. And so their bodyly
syckenes, wourkethe in them their soul health and salvation.

Also many men set al their mind upon riches, and wealth of this world,
which makes them proud and high minded, full of reuengynge, idle and
slouthful, piteles to ye poor, and stubburne both toward god and their
neighbor, to put their trust in them selves, and to follow bodyly
pleasures, in ryotyng, surfetynge and bancketynge, whereof ensues diverse
diseases and sicknesses, where as if they had been poor men, they would
have labored for their living, and should have lived much more temperatlye,
healthefully, quietly and Godly.

And many there be which veraye vnpacyentelye take adversity, and murmr
against God, when their worldly diuises come not to pass after their minds,
and many times they know not what danger they should have come unto, if God
had not let their purpose, so that we know full little, what is for us, or
against us, what is good or ill, but as we be taught by the word of God. And
therefore we do not desire God, to deliver us from this or that particular or
special evil, but we be taught to pray to God, with these short words,
and syghynges of the spirit, that God will vouchesafe to healpe us, not as we
shall think good, (which do not well know, what is good, nor what is ill for
us) but as it shall please him, and as he shall judge profitable for us, not
prescribyng or appoyntynge unto him either time, place or manner of helping or
delyueryng of us.

For as sayncte Paul says, Romans viii
we know not what to pray for as we ought to do, but the spirit himself
makes intercession for us with syghynges, which can not be declared.
Nevertheless let not this saying of saynct Paul dyscorage us from prayinge.
For God is not so ignorant, that he needs, that we should express our
particular requests unto him. For he knows what we want, before we open our
mouths to pray to him. Wherefore Christ in the gospel teaches us this
lesson, when ye pray (says Christ) babble not much, as the Heythen do. For
they think, that they shall be heard, for their much babbling. But be not
you like unto them.

For your heavenly father, knows what you lack before you ask of him. Now
forasmuch as the euelles of this miserable life, be so many, that we can
neither noumbre them, know them, nor rightly judge of them, (as I have
hertofore declared) therefore our master christ (which forbyddeth us to use many
words in our prayers) has as it were knyt up together in one ferdel al ye
plages and adversities yt ca^ happen unto us in this world, and has taught us
to say this short prayer. Good Lord deliver us from euel. As though he should
say thus. Be not dyscoraged from praying, although you perfectely know not
all the kinds of euels, from the which you desyer to be delivered, but only
say these few words, deliver us from euel, and by and by your heavenly father
knows, from what thing he ought to deliver you, and will gladly do it.

Now (good children) you see how good and merciful is God our heavenly father,
who so much loves us, and has so fatherlye a care for us, that he sees what
we lack, and what evils he should deliver us from, before we begin to ask.
And he requires not, yt we should use many words, but only that from the
depenes of our hearts we should call upon him, and do to him this honor, that
is to say, to ask all things of him, to take him for our only God, and to
trust assuredly, yt he will hear us. Therefore good children, learn perfytely
this lesson, that God wylleth and requires of us, that we in all necessities
and danger, that may chance unto us, should call of him for help, and to
put our trust and confidence in him alone, and in no man or creature besides
him. For ye prophet Hieremye says. Cursed be he, which does put his trust in
man, and makes hi^ his defense. And although me^ do oftentimes help and
succor us yet it is not men, that do it, but it is God that works these
things by men, as by his instruments, whom he has chosen for that purpose.
But when God will not help us, then is there no man, that is able, to deliver
us. If we have any wrong done unto us, then if it please God to succoure us, he
does it by his judges and comen officers, whom he has ordained for that
purpose. But if he be not minded to deliver us, then all the men in ye world can
not help us. Likewise when we be sick if gods pleasure be not to make us
hole, what can all phisicians and medycynes avail us? But if he be willing to
make us hole again he works this thing by phisitia^s and medicines, which he
has or dened for ye same use. Our deuties is therefore, in all our needs to
call upon God, to ask help of him, to confess yt all goodness co^methe from
him, and to make him only the author and chyefe gyuer of all the good things
that we have, and to thank him for the same. Nevertheless we must also give
due honor to gods instruments and means, by whom he works his benefits in
us. Forthermore good children mark dylygentlye this lesson also, that we be
not taught to say in this petition, keep us from euel, but deliver us from
euel. And in desirynge God, to deliver us from euel, we do confess (as the
truth is in deed) that as long as we live in this miserable world, we be
wrapped and subject to all kinds of euels, and that we be not able to deliver
our selves, there from.

And the well and head, out of the which al these evil do spring is original
sin, in the which we were conceived and borne in our mothers wombes,
whereby man's reason is so blinded, that of himself he can not know God, nor
his word. And man's will also by this sin is so poysened, that he does not
obey the will of God, nor keape his commau^dements. Now because man's reason is
blinded, it is easy for the deuel, to led man to all errores, as Idolatry,
heresies, wytchecraftes, inchauntementes, and to all kind of superstitious and
false doctrine. And these offenses God does punish with diverse and grievous
plages, as with pride, envy, contencyon, detraction, slaunderyng, lying,
raylyng, trouble and unquietness of conscience, fear and pensiuenes of the
mind and such like, which vices, so torment and gnaw our hearts, that they
daily wast and consume us. And hereof ensue diverse dyseases sykenesses and
infirmities, and at length death it self. Also when man's will is not ruled by
gods law, but follows his own affections and lusts, then he runs
hedlonge into all kind of gross and horrible sin, as to treason, sedition,
adulteryes, theft, extorcion, brybery, begylyng and deceyuyng his neighbor, to
pride, envy, anger, glotonye, brawlyng, fighting and manslaughter. And
because God of his justice, can not suffer such heinous sins unpunished,
therefore he suffers ye devil, some time to infect ye aier, some time to
stir up great and dangerous tempests and storms, some time he permytteth
him to destroy our houses, catel, and riches, with fire or water. Again, God
suffers him some time to have such power over us, for our sins yt some he
makes to run mad, some he causes to drown theimselfes, some to burn
themselfes, some to cut their own throtes, some hang theymselues. For this is
Satan's chief study, to drive me^ to such fear, trouble and anguishe of
mind, that through pensiuenes and heuines of heart, he may bring them to
desperation. And this is his only intent and study, to bring as many as he
ca^, to everlasting damnation. Now you have heard (good children) into how
great and horrible euelles, we be brought unto by original sin, so that every
moment we be in danger to be drowned with the ragyous floodes thereof.
Wherefore surely we have most need, continually to cry to our heavenly
father, desyryng him to deliver us from so great perels and euels. For we can
not offer unto God a more acceptable sacrifyce then by calling upon his holy
name to acknowledge him for our God, and to give him this praise, that he it
is, which is both able and willing to deliver us from all our myseries.
Furthermore (good children) you shall yet learn here another lesson, worthy to
be noted and remembered, which is this, that in this request we desire not God
utterly to destroy all those euels, that do vex and trouble us, and so to put
them clear away, (which for a time we must suffer for our sins) yt they
may remain no longer in this world, but we desyer God to deliver us from the
said euel, that is to say, that after we have suffered euel by some space of
time in this life, and have been proved and tried by the fire of aduersite, that
then (when it shall seem good to our most merciful father) he will deliver us
from the said euyls, that we peryshe not in them. For seeing that we have
brought our selves into these myseryes, we must patientlye suffer them for a
time, because they by punyshementes due for our sin, which we most worthily,
have deserved. And although our heavenly father, does most mercyefully
forgive us our offenses, yet he does not take sin, clean away, but during
this life, we fight against sin, until we die, and so be tried and proved,
whether we love him and his commandments, better then our own wylles and
pleasures. Also our mercyefull father lays on our backs diverse
afflictions and adversities, to pull down our proud and high stomakes, and to
mortify our flesh, that we may be like our brother Christ, who by the
cross, overcame sin, death, and the devil, and so entered into everlasting
glory.

So that in this petition we must learn both wisdom and patience, wisdom, to
beware of sin, wha^ it provoke us, and in no wise to follow the same.
Patience, to suffer willyngly the cross and such afflictions, as God shall
send unto us, and to pray god, with fervent desire, that he suffer us not, to
perish in the same, but mercifullye to defend us, until such time, as it
shall please him clearly to deliver us, which shall be, when we shall dye, and by
Gods power be raised again from death to life, and be delivered from all
manner of euels. Therefore when we say in the Lords prayer, deliver us from
evil, we chiefly desire God, to send us a good death, that then above all
other times we may be delivered from all euels.

For as much as at that hour we be in the most danger of all euels and
temtations. Wherefore it is most necessary for us, even from our tender age,
to pray to our Lord, that at that last hour chiefly he will be good and
gracious unto us, delyueryng us from all manner of evil. So that death may be
to us none evil, but a clear acquayntau^ce from al euels. And this the lords
prayer, we must ever end with this word. Amen. Wiche is as much to say as
suerly I trust it shall be so. And it is not enough to say Amen with our tongue
only, but also Amen must be in out heart, and continue and tarry there, that
is to say, we ought to believe suerly and constantlye that our prayer is
heard, and that our heavenly father will grant us our petitions. For so
Christ has promised, that what soever we ask the father in his name, it
shall be given to us. And for that intent Christ confirms this his promise with
an oath, saying Amen.

Now you have heard good children, the true and plain exposition of the
seventh and last petition, which I pray you to place in your memories, that
when you be demanded, how understand you the seventh petition? you may
redely answer.

Herein we generally desire our heavenly father, to deliver us from all evil
and perell, both of body, soul, land, catell and riches. And that when we
shall ley on our death bed, he will than grant us a good hour, that we may
depart out of this vale of misery in his favor, and from this transitory
life, enter into life everlasting. The which God grant us all. Amen.

A sermon of Baptism
Mat. iii. b Mark. i.^ Luke. iii. c. John. i. d.


Our Lord Jesus Christ good children* in ye gospel of John says thus Except
a man be borne again of ye water and the spret, John. iii
he can not enter in to the kingdom of God. Now we ought to direct our hole
life to come to the kyngedome of heaven. For the Lord says. First seek the
kingdom of god. Math. ^^
And you have heard heretofore that we daily make this petition to god, thy
kingdom come. Wherefore it is very necessary for us, to know, how we must be
borne again, and what this second birth is without the which we can not enter
into the kingdom of God. But when we speak of a second birth, you shall not
so gross lie understand this saying, as though a man which is once borne,
should enter again into his mothers womb, and so be borne again as he was
before. (For it were great folyshenes so to think) But here we mean of a
second birthe which is spiritual, whereby our inward man and mind is renewed
by the holy ghost, so that our hertes and minds receive new desiers, which
they had not of their first birth or nativity.

And the second birth is by the water of Baptism, which Paul calls the
bathe of regeneration, because our sins be forgyuen us in Baptism, and the
holy ghost is powered into us, as into gods beloved children, so that by the
power and wourkynge of the holy Ghost, we be borne again spiritually, and
made new creatures. And so by baptism we enter into the kingdom of God, and
shall be saved for ever, Titum. iii John. iii. a Romans vi a Collo. ii. b ^. Pet.
iii. ^
if we continewe to our lives end in the faith of Christ.

Wherefore good children, consider diligently ye strength of baptism, and mark
well, how great treasures and how excellent benefits you received in your
baptism, that you may thank God for the same, and comfort your selfs by
them in all your temptations and endeavor youreselfes, faithfully to perform
al things, which you promised in your baptism. And that you may do this ye
better, hear and learn the words of our master Christ, by the which he did
ordeyne and institute baptism.

And oftentimes repete the same, that you may learn them word, for word
without ye book. These be the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, spoken to his
dyscyples.

Go into the whole world / and teach al nations / and baptize the^ / in the
name of the father / and the son / and the holy ghost. mat. xxviii Mar. xvi.
He that will believe / and be baptized / shall be saved. But he that will not
believe / shall be damned. By these words our Lord Jesus Christ did
institute baptism, whereby we be borne again to the kingdom of God. And you
good children shall give diligence not only to rehearse these words, but also
to understand, what christ meant by the same. That when you be demanded any
questyon herein, you may both make a dyrecte answer, and also in time to
come be able to teach your children, as you your selves are now instructed.
For what greater shame can there be, then a man to profess him self to be a
Christen man, because he is baptized, and yet he knows not what baptysme is,
nor what strength the same has, nor what the dyppyng in the water does
betoken? where as all our life time we ought to keep those promises, which
there we solemply made before God and man, and all our profession and life
ought to agree to our baptism. Wherefore good children, to thentent you may
the better know the strength and power of baptism, you shall first
understand, that our lord Jesus Christ has instituted and annexed to the
gospel, three sacraments or holy seals, of his covenant and lege made with us.
And by these three, gods ministers do work with us in the name and place of God
(yea God him self works with us) to confirm us in our faith, and to
asserten us, that we are ye lively members of Gods true church, and ye chosen
people of God, to whom the gospel is sent, and that all those things belong
to us, whereof the promises of the gospel make mention. The first of these
sacraments is baptism, by the which we be borne again to a new and heavenly
life, and be received into gods church and congregation, which is the
foundation and pyller of the truth. The second is absolution or the
authority of ye keys, whereby we be absolved from such sins, as we be
fallen into after our baptism. The third sacrament is the communion or ye
Lords supper, by the which we be fed and nourished, and fortified in ye
faith of the gospel and knowledge of Christ, that by this fode we may grow
more and more in newnes of life, so that we may be no longer children, but
may wax perfect men, and full growe^ in Christ. For I would you should well
know this good children, that a Christen ma^s knowledge and life, is a more
excellent thing, than unlearned people can judge. For a christen man has the
certain word of God, where upon he may ground his conscience, that he is made
a christen man, and is one of Christ's members which he is assured of by
baptism. For he that is baptized, may assuredlye say thus. I am not now in
this wavering opinion, that I only suppose my self to be a christian man, but
I am in a sure belefe, that I am made a Christen man. For I know for a suerty
that I am baptized, and I am sure also, that baptysme was ordained of God, and
that he which baptized me, did it by gods commission and commandment. And
the holy ghost does witness, that he which is baptized, has put upon him
Christ. Wherefore the holy ghost in my baptism assures me, that I am a Christen
man. And this is a true and sincere faith, which is able to stand against
the gates of hell, for as much as it has for it the euydence of gods word,
and leans not to any man's saying or opinion. Furthermore good children, you
shall dylygentlye learn, the cause, wherefore we are baptized. You have already
herd, yt by baptism we be borne again. The cause of this our second birth,
is, the synfulnes and filthynes of our first birth. For by our first nativity
(when we were borne of our fathers and mothers) all we were borne in sin, and
when we issued out of our mothers womb we were laden with sin and Gods
anger, as it was at large declared unto you in the exposition of ye ten
commandments, and specially in the last commandment. For as Adam did
sin, and by sin was so corrupted both in his body and soul, that by his
own power or strength he was not able to do any good thing, even so all the
children and offspring of Adam be borne sinners, so that they can not be
justified by themselves or by their awn strength but are inclined and bent to
sin at all times. And as saint Paul says, Ephesians. ii.
by nature they be the children of Gods wrath. That is to say, God is angrye
with us for those sins, which by nature be, as it were, a kynne to us, and we
be borne with them into this world. But when we be borne again by baptism,
the^ our sins he forgyuen us, and the holy ghost is given us, which does make
us al so holy, and does move us to al goodness. Wherefore good children when a
man is baptized, it is as much to say, as he does there confess, that he is
a sinner, and that he is under the rule and governance of sin, so that of
himself he can not be good or ryghtuous. And therefore he comes to baptism,
and there seeks for help and remedy, and desires God, first to forgive him
his sins, and at length to deliver him clearly from all sin, and perfectely
to heal his soul from the sykenes of sin, as the physician does perfectely
heal his patient from bodily diseases. And for his part he promyseth to God
again, and solemply voweth, that he will fight against sin with all his
strength and power, and that he will gladly bear the cross, and al such
afflictions, as it shall please God to lay upon him, and that also he will be
content to dye, yt he may be perfectly healed and delivered from sin. For God
does forgive us our sins by faith, but by afflyctions and death, he does
take them clean away, as saint Peter witnesses, i. Pet. iiii.
sainge. He yt suffers or is afflycted in ye flesh, does cesse from sin.
And saint Paul says, he that is dead, is justified or delivered from
sin. These be the promyses, which we make, when we are baptized. And of this
mind must all they be, which shall have any fruit by baptism. Wherefore seeing
all you that be here are already baptized, continewe I pray you in this good
mind and purpose, knowledge in your hearts before God, that you be sinners, be
sorry for ye same, and pray to God, to heal and deliver you from your sin.
Beware you fall not to sin again, have no delight in sin, nor sin not
wyllyngly. But be godly and holy, and suffer gladly such afflictions, as God
shall lay upon your backs. And if you do thus, then your baptism shall be
avail able unto you, and God shall work in you by his holy spirit, and shall
fynyshe in you all those things which by baptism he has begone. Hitherto you
have herd, what we promise to God, when we are baptized, now learn also I
pray you, what God works in us by baptism, and what benefits he gives us
in the same. For baptysme is not water alone, and nothing else besides, but it
is the water of god, and has his strength by ye word of God, and is a seal
of gods promise. Wherefore it does work in us, all those things, where unto
God has ordained it. For our Lord Jesus Christ says. Go and teach all
nations, and baptyse them, in the name of ye father, and the son, and the
holy ghost. This god commanded his disciples to do. Wherefore by the virtue of
this commandment, which came from heaven, even from the bosom of god,
baptism does wourke in us, as the wourke of God. For when we be baptized in
the name of God, that is as much to say, as God him self should baptize us.
Wherefore we ought not to have an eye only to the water, but to God rather,
which did ordeine the baptism of water, and commanded it to be done in his
name. For he is almyghtye, and able to work in us by baptism, forgiveness of
our sins, and al those wonderful effects and operatio^s, for the which he
has ordained the same, although man's reason, is not able to conceive the
same. Therefore consider good children, the great treasures and benefytes,
whereof God makes us partakers, when we are baptized, which be these. The
first is, that in baptism our sins be forgyuen us, as saint Peter
witnesses, saiynge. Let every one of you be baptized for the forgiveness of
his sins. The second is, that the holy ghost is given us, the which does
sprede abrod the love of God in our heart, whereby we may keep Gods
commandments according to this saying of saint Peter. Let every one of you
he baptized in the name of christ, Actu^. ii.
and then you shall receive the gift of the holy ghost.

The third is, that by baptism the whole righteousness of Christ is given unto
us, that we may claim the same as our own. For so saint Paul teachethe,
saying. As many of ye as are baptized in Christ, have put upon you Christ.
Fourthly by baptism we die with Christ, and are buried (as it were) in his
blood and death, that we should suffer afflictions and death, as Christ
himself has suffered. And as that man, which is baptized, does promise to
God, that he will dye with Christ, that he may be dead to sin and to the
old Adam, so on the other part God does promise again to him, that he shall be
partaker of christ's death and passion.

And also God makes al afflictions which he sufferethe to be good and
profitable unto him, as was the passion of Christ and not damnable, as it was
to Judas, and diverse other ungodly parsons.

By this which I have hitherto spoken, I trust you understand good children,
wherefore baptism is called the bath of regeneration, and how in baptism we
be borne again and be made new creatures in Christ. The which doctrine you
shall the better understand, if you consider in what condition you were,
before you were baptized, and in what state you stand in, after your baptism.

First before we were baptized it is evident, that we were sinners, and he
that is a sinner, can have no peace nor quietness of conscience before he come
to Christ, so much he fears Gods wroth and everlasting damnation. But
after that our sins, in baptism be forgyuen us, and we believe the promise
of God, and so by our faith be justified, than our conscyences be quieted, and
we be glad and merry, trustyng assuredly, that God is no more angrye with us for
our former offenses, and that we shall not be damned for ye same And this is a
marvelous alteration and renewyng of the inward manne the which could be
wrought by the power of no creature, but by God alone. Also before we were
baptized, we were slaves and boundemen to sin, so that we neither could do
that good, which we would have done, nor could keep us from that evil, which
we would not have done, as saint Paul complaynethe of himself. Romans xvii
But when by baptysme the holy ghost was given us, the which did spread abroad
the love of god in our hearts, and did also deliver us from ye boundage and
tyranny of sin, and gave us new strength and power, to wrestle against
sin, and manfullye to withstand our gostly enemy the deuel, tha^ after a
certain manner we were able to fulfill gods commandments. And this is a great
change, and renewyng of the inward man. And this I would you should know for
a suertye good children, and steadfastly believe ye same that no child of ye
Jews or Turks, which is not baptized, has the holy ghost, neither that
any such can understand the word of God, neither that any such is holy or
righteous before God. Wherefore you shall thank God with all your heart,
which has brought you to baptysme. And when you believe in the name of Christ,
and love the gospel, and are glad and dylige^t to hear ye same, the^ this is
a suer toke^ yt by the gospel you have received ye holy ghost

Furthermore he that is a sinner and not baptized, although he had the holy
ghost to this effect, to help him to fight against sin, yet oftentimes he
is over come, and falls to sin. And although he does oftentimes overcome
sin, yet this is a great vnperfectenes, yt he does it not willingly, but
that this fight against sin is tedious and grievous unto him. Wherefore he is
ever in perrel, lest he be overcome of syn. And in case he does manfully
wtstande sin, yet he sees, that his justice and obedience be to weak and
imperfect, to stand before the judgment of God, (as in deed no man, not the
holiest, is able to stand before ye judgment of God by his own
righteousness). But when in baptism the rightuousenes of Christ is given and
imputed to him, then he is delivered from al those perrels. For he knows for
a suerty, that he has put upon him Christ, and that his weakness and
imperfection, is covered and hid, with the perfect ryghtuousnes and holiness
of Christ. Wherefore after baptism, he does not trust in his own righteousness,
but in Christ only. And he is no more pensive or doubteful, co^syderynge his
own weakness, but he is joyful, because, he co^sidereth, that he is made
partaker of Christ's righteousness. And this again is a great alteration and
renewyng, of the inward man. These new affections and spiritual mocions, are
in the soulles of such as are borne again by baptism, but they be unknown to
worldly men, and such as be not led by the spirit of God. And when they that
believe, and be baptized, do continewe in this their faith to ^he end of their
lives, then God shall raise them up from death to life, that they may be
immortal, and live everlastingly with christ And then, when syn and the
kingdom of death is vtterli abolished and destroyed, we shall be perfectly holy
and rightuous, both in body and soul. And for this cause, our savior Christ
does call in ye gospel the rysyng again from death, a regeneration or a second
begettyng. Al these things does baptism work in us, when we believe in
Christ. And therefore Christ says. He that will believe and be baptized,
shall be saved. But he that will not believe, shall be damned. Wherefore good
children, learn dylygentlye I pray you, the fruit and operation of baptism.
For it works forgyuenes of sin, it delyuereth from death and power of the
deuel, it gives salvation and everlasting life, to all them that believe. As
the words of Christ's promise does euydently witness. But peradventure some
will say. How can water work so great things? To whom I answer, that it
is not the water that does these things, but the almyghtye word of God
(which is knyt and joined to the water) and faith, which receives gods word
and promise. For with out the word of God, water is water, and not baptism.
But when the word of the living God is added and joined to the water, then it
is the bathe of regeneration, and baptism water, and the lively spring of
eternal salvation, and a bathe that wassheth our souls by the holy ghost, as
saynct Paul calls it, saying. Actu^. iii.
God has saved us through his mercy and made us partakers of the rightuosnes
of his well-beloved son Jesus Christ. Now consider depely I pray you, how
great benefytes these be, that you may not be unkind to him, that has done
so much for you, but stedfastlye believe these things, mortifye sin,
patiently suffer al dyseases and adversities, which it shall please god to send
you, and than without dowte you shall be saved. Wherefore good children, learn
these things dilygentlye, and when you be demanded, what is baptism. The^
you shall answer, baptism is not water alone, but it is water enclosed and
joined to the word of God, and to the couenaunte of Gods promise. And these be
the words, whereby our Lord Jesus Christ did ordeine baptism, which be
written in the last chapter of saint Matthew. Go and teach all nations,
baptisynge them in the name of the father, and the son, and the holy ghost.
And when you shall be asked what avails baptism? you shall answer. Baptism
works forgyuenes of sin, it delyuereth from the kingdom of the deuel and
from death, and gives life and everlasting salvation, to all them that believe
these words of Christ, and promise of god, which are written in the last
chapter of saint Mark his gospel. He that will believe, and be baptized, shall be
saved. But he that will not believe shall be damned.

Thirdly, if a man ask you, how can water bring to pass so great things? ye
shall answer. Uerely the water works not these things, but the word of
God, which is joined to the water, and faith which does believe the word of
God. For without the word of God, water is water, and not baptism, but when
the word of the living God, is joined to the water, then it is baptism, and
water of wonderful holsomnes, and the bath of regeneration, through the holy
gohst, as saint Paul writes. Actu^. iii.
God saved us by the bath of regeneration, and renewyng of the holy ghost, whom
he powered upon us plenteously, by Jesus Christ our savior, that we being made
rightuous by his grace, may be heirs of everlasting life. Fourthly. If a man
ask you, what does the baptisynge in the water betoken? answer ye, it
betokens, that old Adam with all sins and euel desyers, ought daily to be
killed in us, by true contritio^ and repentance: that he may rise again from
death, and after he is risen with Christ, may be a new man, a new creature, and
may live euerlastyngly in God, and before God, in righteousness and holiness. As
saint Paul writes, saying. All we yt are baptized, are buried with Christ in
to death, that as Christ rose again, by the glory of his father, so we also
should walk in newnes of life. Thus ye have heard good children, what is meant
by ye words of baptism, by the which we are borne again, and made new to
everlasting life. Learn these things dilygentlye, and thank God, who in
Christ has called you to be partakers of so large and ample benefits. And
express baptism in your life, and baptism shall be the greatest comfort to
you, both in your life time, and also in your death bed. For by baptism we
be grafted into the death of Christ, wherefore sin, death or hell, can not
hurt us, but we shall overcome all these things by faith, as Christ himself
overcame them. And so by this new birth we shall enter into the kingdom of
God, and life everlasting. The which God grant us all Amen.

A sermon of the authority of the Kayes.


THe holy Apostle saint Paul good children, in the tenth chapter of his
epistle to the Romans, writes on this fashion. Who so ever shall call upon the
name of ye lord, shall be saved. But how shall they call on him, on whom they
believe not? How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? How
shall they hear without a preacher? How shall they preach, expcept they be
sent? By the which wourdes saynct Paul does evidently declare unto us, two
lessons.

The first is, that it is necessary to our salvation, to have prechers and
ministers of Gods most holy word, to instruct us in the true faith and
knowledge of God.

The second is that preachers must not run to this high honor, before they
be called thereto, but they must be ordained and appointed to this office, and
sent to us by God. For it is not possible to be saved, or to please God,
without faith, and no man can truly believe in God by his own wit, (for of
our selfs we know not what we should believe) but we must needs hear Gods
word, taught us by other.

Again, the teachers, except they be called and sent, can not frutfully
teach. 1. Cor. iii. ^ John. vi, b Actum. ii. ^
For the seed of Gods wourde, does never bring forth fruit, onles the
Lord of the harvest do give increase, and by his holy spirit do wourke with
the sower. But God does not work with the preacher, whom he has not sent
as saynct Paul says. Roma. x ^


How shall they preach, if they be not sent. Wherefore it is requisite, that
preachers should be called and sent of god, and they must preach according to
the authority and commission of God, granted unto them, whereby they may
strengthen men's belefe, and assure their consciences, that God has
commanded them to preach after this or that fashion. For else every manne
should still be in doubt, and think after this sort. Who knows whether this
be true, which I hear the preacher say? who can tell whether God has
commanded him to preach these things or no? And in case he teaches no thing
but truth, yet I am not sure that God will wourke with me, as the preacher
promyseth? Perchance these promises perteine to other, and not to me? These
doubts, in the time of temptation, might trouble men's minds, if we were not
assured, that our Lord Jesus Christ him self has both ordained and
appointed ministers and preachers to teach us his holy wourde, and to
minister his sacraments, and also has appointed them, what they shall teach
in his name, and what they shall do unto us. Therefore he called them and sent
them, and gave the^ instructions, what they should do, and speak to us, in his
name, to the intent that we should give sure credence unto their words, and
believe that god will work with us according to his words by them spoken. And
he has promised therefore, yt what soever they should bind upon earth, Mat.
xvi.
should be bound in heaven and whatsoever they should lose upon earth should be
losed in heaven also. Wherefore good children, to the intent you may
stedfastlye believe, all things which god by his ministers does teach, and
promise unto you, and so be saved by your faith, learn diligently I prai you,
by what words our lord Jesus Christ, gave this co^missio^ and commandment to
his ministers, and rehearse the^ here, word for word that so you may print the^
in your memories, and recite them the better when you come home.

The words of Christ be these.

Our Lord Jesus brethed on his Apostles / and said. John. xx: ^
Receive the holy ghost / whose sins ye forgive / they are forgyuen unto
them. And whose sins you reserve / they are reserved. Now good children, you
shall employ your selfs, not only to rehearse these words without book, but
also to understand, what our Lord Jesus Christ meant by them, that when you
shall be asked any question herein, you may make a dyrect answer, and that
also in time to come you may be able to instruct your children in the same.
For what greater shame can there be, either in the sight of God or of man, then
to profess thy self to be a Christen man, and yet to be ignorant in what
place of scripture and by what words, Christ commanded faith, and forgyuenes
of sins, to be preached. Seeing yt a Christian man ought to believe nothing, as
an article of his faith, except he be assured, that either it is gods
commandment, or his word. Now good children, that you may the better
understand these words, of our savior Christ you shall know, yt our Lord
Jesus Christ when he began to preach, he ded call and chose his twelve
Apostils and afterward besides those twelve, Mark. iii. Luke. vi. Luke. x.
he sent forth three score and ten dysciples, and gave the^ authority to
preach the gospel. And a little before his death and passion, he made his prayer
to his heavenly father for them, and for all those that should believe through
their preaching. As it is declared in the gospel of saint John. John. xvii
Now it is not to be doubted, but yt Christ's prayer was heard, of his heavenly
father, wherefore it follows, that as mani as believed the preaching of
Christ's discyples, were as surely saved, as if they had heard and believed
Christ himself. And after Christ's assention, the Apostelles gave authority
to other godly and holy men, to minyster gods word, and chiefly in those
places, where there were Christen me^ already, which lacked preachers, and the
Apostles them selves could not longer abide with them For the Apostles did
walk abrod into diverse parts of the world, and did study to plant the
gospel in many places. Wherefore where they found godly men, and mete to
preach gods word, they laid their hands upon them, and gave them the holy
ghost, as they theimselues received of Christ the same holy ghost, to execute
this office. And they that were so ordained, were in deed, and also were
called, the ministers of God as the Apostles theimselues were, as Paul, says
unto Tymothy. And so the ministratio^ of gods word (which our Lord Jesus
Christ himself did first institute) was deryued from the Apostles unto other
after them, by imposition of hands, and gyuynge the holy ghost, from the
Apostles time to our days. And this was the consecration, ordres and unction
of the Apostles, whereby they, at the beginning, made Byshopes and pryestes,
and this shall continewe in ye church, even to the worlds end. And what
soever rite or ceremonye, has been added more than this comes of man's
ordinance and policye, and is not commanded by gods word.

Wherefore good children, you shall give due reverence and honor to the
ministers of ye church, and shall not meanly or lightly esteem them in the
execution of their office, but you shall take them for gods ministers, and the
messengers of our Lord Jesus Christ. For Christ himself says in ye gospel.
He that hears you, hears me. And he yt dyspiseth you, dyspiseth me. Luke. ^.
wherefore good children, you shall steadfastly believe al those things, which
such ministers shall speak unto you, from the mouth, and by the commandment
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And what soever they do to you, as when they baptyse
you, when they give you absolution, and dystribute to you the body and blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ, these you shall so esteem, as if Christ himself in
his own person, did speak, and minister unto you. For Christ has commanded
his ministers to do this unto you, and he himself, (although you see him not
with your bodily eyes) is present with his ministers, and works by the holy
ghost in thadministration of his sacraments. And on the other side, you shall
take good head, and beware of false and priuye preachers, which pryuely crepe
into cities, and preach in corners, having none authority, nor being called
to this office. For Christ is not present with such prechers* and therefore
does not the holy ghost work by their preching, but their word is without
fruit or profyt, and they do great hurt in commen welthes. For such as be
not called of God, they no doubt of it do err, and sow abroad heresye and
naughty doctrine. And yet you shall not think good children, that preachers
which be lawfully called, have authority to do or teach what soever shall
please the^. But our Lord Jesus Christ, has given them plain instructions,
what they ought to teach and do. And if they teach or do any other thing,
then is contained in their commission, then it is of no force, nor we ought not
to regard it. And for this cause our savior Christ did breath into his
discyples, and gave them the holy ghost. For where the holy ghost is, there he so
works, that he causes us to do those things which Christ has commanded.
And wha^ that is not done, than the holy ghost is not there. Wherefore all
things which we shall so speak or do, can take none effect. Now the sum
of the commission which Christ gave to his dysciples, was this, that they
should preach repentance, and forgyuenes of sin, in his name. And he added
thereto, both a promise and a threatnyng, saying. He that will believe, and be
baptized, shall be saved. But he that will not believe, shall be damned. Wherefore
all things which the ministers of ye church do say or do to us, ought to be
directed to this end, yt they may lowse us, and declare unto us, the
forgyuenes of our sins, when we truly repent, and believe in Christ. But when
we do not repent us of our sin, and forsake the same, or do not believe the
gospel, then they ought to bind or reserve sin, and to declare unto us, that
if we still continue in sin, we shall be dampened for ever. And when the
minysters do thus execute their commission, then they obey God, and whose
sins soever they forgive in earth, their sins be forgyuen in heaven also.
And contrary wise, whom soever they bind in earth, their sins be bound
also in heaven. But if the ministers would interprise to do contrary to their
commission, that is to say, to forgive sins to vnrepentaunte sinners and
unbelievers, or to bind their sins and deny them absolution, that be
repentaunte and trust in the mercy of God, then they should not do well, nor
their act should be of any force, but they should deceive themselves, and
other also. And than should that be true, that Christ speaks in the gospel.
When the blind leads the blind, both fall into the diche. But when the
ministers do truly execute their office, you ought good children, to take
great comfort, and to confirm your faith thereby, that you may stedfastlye
believe, and in all temptations answer your aduersarye the deuell after this
manner. God has sent to me one of his ministers, he in the name and place of
God, has declared to me the forgyuenes of my sins, and has baptized me in
the assurance of the same.

Wherefore I doubt not but that my sins be forgyuen, and that I am made the
son and heir of God. Thus good children, you ought generally in all
temptations, to fortify your faith, and to comfort your selfs, with the
authority of Gods word, but specially you shall learn this also, that our
Lord Jesus Christ, did entende, by this authority of the Kayes, to comfort
the troubled consciences of them, that after their baptism, do fall in to
heinous offenses.

For it is not so easy a thing, to rise again from sin, as the mad and
blind world does think, but when the deuel and our faith shall skyrmishe
together, then in those straites, and troubles of conscience, we have need of
the help of some true minister of ye church, which (as it were in our
swonynge) may lift us up with the wourde of God, comfort and refreshe us. As
the wise king Solomon does declare by this sentence. Woe to that man, which is
alone, for when he falls, he has no man to lift him up again. And our Lord
Jesus Christ, does speak so often times in the gospel of the authority of
the kayes, and has added so great promyses to the same, that it may well
appear by the earnestnes of Christ's wourdes, how careful he was for troubled
consciences, and how fatherly an effection he had to comfort the same. Whereof
it undoubtedly follows, yt we have great need of this comfort, and that it is
much to be esteemed and set by. For first of al our savior Christ, before he
gave these kayes i^ deed, he promised to Peter yt he would give them, saying.
Mat. xviii.
I will give to the, the kayes of the kingdom of heaven. What so ever thou
shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven, and what so ever thou shall
louse upon earth, shall be also loused in heaven. Secondarelye, Christ does
teach us, how we shall use these kayes, both in open and in secret sins.
Of the use of the kayes in open sins, Christ speaks these wourdes. If thy
brother trespace against the, (...). xviii.
go and tell him his fault between him and the alone. If he hear the, thou
have won thy brother. But if he hear the not, then take yet with the one or
two, that upon the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may stand. If
he hear not them tell it unto the congregation. If he hear not the
congregation, let him be unto the, as an hethen and publican. Uerely I say
unto you, what so every bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. And what so
ever ye lose on earth, shall be loused in heaven. And of the use of the kayes, in
priuye and secret sins, our savior Christ has taught us by his own deed
and example. For the man, that was sick of the palsy, Christ said thus. Mark.
ii.
Son conceive a steadfast faith, thy sins be forgyuen the. And as touching
byndyng of sins, he said to ye hard herted and stubburne Jews. Luke. v.
John. ix.
If you were blind, you should have no sin. But now because you say, you
see, your sin abides still, that is to say, it is not forgyuen. Thyrdlye,
our Savior Christ after his resurrection, gave the kaies to his apostles
(as before he had promised) breathynge upon them, and saying. Receive the holy
ghost, whose sins ye shall forgive, they are for given. Now forasmuch as our
savior Christ, in gyuynge the keys, did promise us so great comfort, did
so dylygentlye teach the use of them, and did so faithfully, and louyngly
ordeyne and commend them and put them (as it were) into the hands of his
apostles and their successors, we ought in no wise to despise this great
authority, which God has given unto men, but thankefully to use it. For
know this for a suertye good children, that it is a very great offense against
God, little to care for his great gifts and benefits. Therefore when we fall
again to great sins, after that we are ones baptized, we ought not to walk
in a certain rechelesnes, thynkyng that our sins be forgyuen us only because
God is merciful (For this opinion or wavering imagination, is more weak and
feeble, the^ that in the fear and battle of the conscience, it is able to
stand against the violent force and craftye assaults of the deuel) But in
this fight between our conscience and the deuel, our great trust and comfort
is ye sure word and work of God, which may asserteyne us that our sins
are forgyuen, that is to say, when we obtain forgyuenes of our sins and
absolutio^, of the ministers of the church, to whom Christ has delivered the
kaies, and has promised saying. Whose sins ye shall forgive in earth, their
sins be forgyuen in heaven also.

And this also is to be reproved, that some men, which continue in manifest
and open sin, and go not about to amend their lyfes, yet they will be counted
christian me^, and interpryse to receive the same sacraments, that other do, to
come to ye church, to worship God, and to pray with other. Such must be
warned of their fautes, and if they refuse to hear and amend, then they ought
to be excommunicate and put out of the christen congregation, until they
repent and amend their lyfes. Lest by such manifest sin and euel examples,
other men might be provoked to do the like and so at length many might be
infected, and the Christian religyon dispysed and euel spoken of, as though it
were the worst relygyon, forasmuch as Christian men should tha^ lead a
shameful and ungodly life. And so by this means, ye name of God, and God
himself, might be blasphemed among the heathen people. And although those
canons, ordynances and rites, which be agreeable to the gospel, (and were
ordained in time past, to punyshe such open tra^sgressors and malefactors) are
now in our time almost utterly abolyshed and taken away, yet for this cause
we ought not to despise or cast away, the authority and use of the kayes. For
they which presumptuously do cast away all pokes of ecclesiastical discipline
or chasticement, and do let, that such kind of correction, which is agreeable
to the gospel, may not be restored again, shall have without doubt God for
their judge. But let us pray our Lord Jesus Christ, that as it has pleased
him to restore unto us his most blessed word, and the true understanding of
the same, so also he will vouchesaue to render and send again to us, these
and such like good and wholesome ordinances, agreeable to his word.

Now when a man after baptism has grievously sinned, and doubts in his
conscience, whether he be in the favor of God or no (as oftentimes yt
happens) then it is hard for him to trust to his awn bare imaginations,
thinking on this fashion. I know yt I have sinned, but yet I am in this
opinion, that God is not so cruel a revenger. But that he has forgyuen me. For
such an opinion without gods word, is not a true faith, nor is able to
stand in the dangerous skirmyshes of temptation. But true faith must ever be
stayed upon the certain word and wourke of God. Now God does not speak to us,
with a voice soundynge out of heaven. But he has given the kayes of the
kingdom of heaven, and the authority to forgive sin, to the ministers of the
church. Wherefore let him that is a sinner, go to one of them let him
knowledge and confess his sin, and pray him, that according to gods
commandment, he will give him absolution and comfort him with ye word of
grace and forgyuenes of his sins. And when the minister does so, then I
ought steadfastly to believe, that my sins are truly forgyue^ me in heaven. And
such a faith, is able to stand strong, in all skyrmyshes, and assautes of
our mortal enemy ye deuel, forasmuch as it is builded upon a sure rock, that
is to say, upon the certain word and work of God. For he that is absolved,
knows for a suertye, that his sins be forgyuen him by the minister. And he
knows assuredlye also, that the minister has authority from God himself so
to do. And thirdely he knows that God has made this promise to his
ministers, and said to them. To whom ye forgive sins upon earth, to him also
they shall be forgyuen in heaven. Wherefore good children, give good ear to
this doctrine, and when your sins do make you afraid and sad, then seek
and desyer absolution and forgyuenes of your sins of the ministers, which
have received a commission and commandment from Christ himself, to forgive
men their sins, and then your conferences shall have peace, tranquillity and
quietness. But he that does not obey this counsel, but being either blind or
proud, does dispyse the same, he shall not find forgyuenes of his sins,
neither in his own good wourkes, nor yet in paineful chastysementes of his
body, or any other thing, whereto God has not promised remission of sins.
Wherefore dispyse not absolution, for it is the commandment and ordinance of
God, and the holy spirit of God is present, and causes these thinto take
effect in us, and to work our salvation. And this is the meaning and plain
understanding, of these words of Christ, which you heard heretofore
rehearsed, which are written to thente^t yt we should believe, that whatsoever
gods ministers do to us by Gods commandment, are as much available, as if
God himself should do the same. For whether ye minysters do excommunicate
open malefactors and unrepentant persons or do give absolution to those, which
be truly repentant for their sins, and amend their lives, these acts of the
ministers, have as great power and authority, and be confirmed and ratified in
heaven, as though our Lord Jesus Christ himself had done the same Wherefore
good children, learn these things dilygentlye. And when you be asked how
vndresta^de you the words before rehearsed? ye shall answer. I do believe, that
what soever ye ministers of Christ do to us by gods commau^deme^t, either in
excommunicatinge open and vnrepentante sinners, or in absoluyng repentant
persons, all these their acts, be of as great authority, and as suerly
confirmed in heaven, as if Christ should speak the words out of heaven.

So ye have good children, the beginning and foundation, of the ministers of
gods word, and of the authority of the kayes, as our lord Jesus Christ did
first ordeyne and institute the same. The which our savior Christ did
institute and appointe for this purpose, that our consciences might thereby be
comforted, and assured of the forgyuenes of sins, and to have the inestimable
thresures of the gospel, as often as we have need thereof. That we thereby
being made strong in our faith, might so continewe to the end of our life. And
he that continues to the end, shall be saved. The which grant us the most
merciful God Amen.

A sermon of the Communion or the Lords supper.


OUr Lord Jesus Christ good children, in the.xv. chapter of John speaks these
words.

I am the true vine / and my father is the husband man. Every branch that
bears not fruit in me / he will take away. And every branch that bears
fruit / he will prune / that it may bring forth more fruit. Now are ye clean
/ through the wourdes which I have spoken to you. Dwell in me / and I will dwell
in you. As the branch can not bear fruit of it self / except it grow in
the vine / no more can ye / except ye abid in me. I am the vine / ye are the
branches. He that abides in me / and I in him / brings forth much fruit.
For without me ye can do nothing. By these words our Lord Jesus Christ does
teach us veraye plainlye, how we be justified and saved before god. For as ye
branch of a vine, bri^geth forth no fruit, except it abide in the vine, so we
can not be rightuous, except we abyd in Christ. And as ye brau^che of a vine,
does not flouriche, nor keep long his sap, but withers away, and is cast
into the fire, when it is cut from the vine, even so be we damned, and can not
be saved, when we forsake our master Christ

Now ye have heard good children, how by baptism we are so planted in
Christ, yt by him we have forgyuenes of our sins, and are grafted in him, as
the branch is in the vine. And as the branches have sap and life of the
vine, that they may bring forth fruit, so we also (which believe in Christ,
and are baptized) have received of him the holy ghost, that we may be
justified. And if it chance us to fall from Christ, through sin or
unbelief, or to be put out of the Christen congregation, for our open and
manifest sins, yet ye have heard, how we are received again, in to the
bosom of the church, and joined to Christ's body, by the authority of the
Kaies and absolution. But if we will be justified and saved, it is not enough
to be planted in Christ, but we must also abide and continue in him. Wherefore
now follows that doctrine, which teaches us, how we ought to order our
selves, that we may still abide and grow in Christ, after that we are
grafted in him. And this doctrine is contained in the institution and
receauynge of the supper of our Lord Jesus Christ. For as by baptism we are
borne again, and as by the authority of the Kaies and penance, we are lifted
up again, when we are fallen in to sin after baptism, so by the commuinion
of the holy supper of the Lord, we are preserved and strengthened, that we
may be able steadfastly to stand and fight, against the violent inuasio^s of
sin and the power of ye deuel. Wherefore good children, forasmuch as ye be
alredye planted in Christ by baptism, learn also I pray you, how ye may
contynually abide and grow in Christ the which thing is taught you, in the
use of the Lords supper. Ye shall therefore dilygentlye learn the words, by
the which our Lord Jesus Christ did institute and ordeyne his supper, that
ye may repet them word for word, and so prynt the^ in your memoryes, that you
may bear them away with you home to your fathers houses, and there oftentimes
rehearse them. And these be the words of our savior Christ.

Our Lord Jesus Christ the same night that he was betrayed / Mat. 26. c Mar.
14. c Luc. xxii. b John. vi. and xiii, i. Cor. xi. c
took bread / and gyuyng thanks / brake it / and gave it to his disciples /
and said. Take / eat / this is my body / which is given for you. Do this in
remembrance of me. Likewise he took the cup also / after he had supped / and
giuyng thanks / gave it to them / and said. Drink of this al ye. This is my
blood of the new testamente / which is shed for you and for many / for the
forgyuenes of sins. Do this as often as ye drink / in remembrance of me.
Now ye shall dilygentlye labor, not only to say without book these words
of our savior Christ, but also to understand, what our Lord Jesus Christ
mente by the same, that ye may make answer, when ye be asked any question
herein, and that also in time to come, ye may be able to teach your children,
as ye your selfs are now instructed. For what greater dishonestye can there
be, either in the sight of God or man, then to profess your selves to be
Christian people, and to receive the sacraments and yet not to know, what
Christ's sacraments be, and wherefore they were ordained? For saint Paul says,
yt he which eats and drynketh the supper of the Lord unworthily, does eat
and drink his own damnation.

Now therefore good children, that ye may truly understand the words of the
lords holy supper, and that ye receive not this sacrament to your own
damnation, learn here dylygentlye, that the true understanding and use of ye
Lords supper, stands in two things. The first is, to do that which our
lord himself has commanded.

The second is, to believe yt which he has promised. Of these two I will speak
in order, whereto I pray you give good ear.

First our savior Christ takes bread in his hand, he gives thanks, he
breaks it and gives it to his dysciples, and says. Take, eat. Likewise he
takes the cup, and says. Take, drink. Wherefore we ought to obey those
words and to do that, which our Lord commands us. For although Christ
prescribes no certain time, when we ought to come together to his supper,
although also he appoynte no certain noumber of days, how often in the year
we ought to receive this supper, yet this is his holy and godly will, that at
some time we should receive this sacrament. And this to do, is for our great
commodity and profit, for else our Lord would not have commanded us so to
do, who knows better the^ we, what help and comfort we have need of.
Wherefore if we will be christ's true disciples, then we must do as he himself
commands his discyples to do. Let us therefore go to this godly supper, let
us eat and drink thereof, and let us not abstain from the same, without a great
cause. Secondarily Christ says of the bread, this is my body, and of ye
cup he says, this is my blood. Wherefore we ought to believe, yt in the
sacrament we receive trewly the body and blood of Christ. For God is almyghtye
(as ye heard in the Creed). He is able therefore, to do all things what he
will. And as saint Paul writes he calls those things which be not, as if
they were. Wherefore when Christ takes bread, and says. Take, eat, this
is my body we ought not to doubt but we eat his very body. And when he takes
the cup, and says. Take, drink, this is my blod, we ought to think
assuredly, yt we drink his very blood. And this we must believe, if we will be
counted Christian me^. And where as in this perellous time, certain deceitful
persons be found in many places, who of very frowardnes, will not grant, that
there is the body and blood of Christ, but deny the same, for none other
cause, but that they cannot compass by man's blind reason, how this thing
should be brought to pass, ye good children, shall with all dilygence beware
of such persons, that ye suffer not your selves, to be deceived by them. For
such men surely are not true Christyans, nether as yet have they learned the
first article of ye Creed, which teaches, that God is almightye, which ye
good children have already perfectely learned. Wherefore eschew such erroneous
opinions, and believe the words of our lord Jesus, that you eat and drink his
very body and blood although man's reason can not comprehend how and after what
manner ye same is there present. For the wisdom of reason, must be subdued to
the obedience of Christ, as the apostle Paul teaches.

Thirdly he says, that his body was given to death for us, and that his blod
was shed for us. Wherefore we must believe and confess this thing, that all we
are conceived and borne in syn, as we have learned in the ten commandments,
and chiefly in the two last. We are therefore by nature the children of gods
wrath, and should be damned for ever if Christ had not redeemed us by his holy
passion For he was made man for us, and did all things for us, which we were
bound to do, and could not do, that is to say, he fulfilled the law for us,
and took upon him all that cross which we most rightuously had deserved, for
our iniquities and offenses, and he shed his blood for us, that our sins
might be forgyuen us. All these things we ought steadfastly to believe.
Wherefore they be in a great errore, which will make satisfaction for their
sins, with fasting, prayer, alms deeds, and such like good works. For
although we are bound to do these good works, yet they be not a sufficient
price, ransom or satisfaction for our sins, but only the death and blood
of our sauyoure Christ, was a sufficient and worthy sacrifice, to take away our
sins, and to obtain for us forgyuenes of our offenses, as it is written in
the second chapter of saint John his first epistle. Christ is that
sacryfice that pacyfyeth Gods dyspleasure, and obteyneth pardon for our
sins, and not for our sins only, but also for the sins of all the world.

Fourthly Christ says, do this in the remembrance of me. Here also it is
our duty to obey the word of Christ, and to do yt thing, which he has
commanded us to do. Wherefore (good children) doubt not, but there is the body
and blood of our Lord, which we receive in the lords supper. For he has
said so, and by the power of his word has caused it so to be. Wherefore
seeing Christ says, do this as often as ye do it, in remembrance of me, it is
evident herby, that Christ causes, even at this time, his body and blood to
be in the sacrament, after that manner and fashion, as it was at that time, when
he made his maundye with his disciples. For else we could not do that thing,
which his disciples did. But Christ has commanded us, to do the self same
thing that his disciples did, and to do it in the remembrance of him, that is
to say, to receive his body and blood, even so as he himself did give it to
his dysciples. And let not the foulyshe talk of unbelievers move you, who are
wont to ask this question. How can the pryest or minister make the body and
blood of Christ? To the which I answer, that the minister does not this of
himself. But Christ himself does give unto us his flesh and blood, as his
words does euyde^tly declare. Nether let their arguments or reasons persuade
you, which say, yt the sacrament ought not to be received under both kinds,
but under one kind only. For Christ gave to his disciples both kinds and has
bydde us, that we also should do the same. And when he gave the cup to his
dysciples, he added thereto this commandment, in these express and plain
words, saying. Drink ye al of this. Now we ought to obey god, more then men.
We ought therefore to receive the sacrament under both kinds, as Christ
commanded us. And regard not the gageling of them that speak against the
use of the sacraments under both kinds, saying. It makes no great matier,
whether ye receive it under both kinds, or one alone, and yt it pertains not
to salvation, to receive it under both kinds. But what shall I dispute long in
this matier. Take this for a conclusion, that it is only laudable and good, to
do that thing, which Christ has commanded, and not to swerve from the same.

So we ought to receive this blessed sacrament, in the remembrance of Christ,
as saint Paul says, i Cor. xi.i.
that is to say, we ought to preach his death, until he come again. For he
will suerely come again, and judge both the quick and ye dead, as ye have
learned in your Creed. In the mean season, we ought to remember and preach his
death, that he has redeemed us, with his death and sheding of his most precious
blood, and purchased for us forgyuenes of our sins. And this we ought ever
to have in our remembrance, that in no wise we forget this his exceeding great
benefyte, and that we seek not for remyssion of sins, by any other ways or
means, then by faith in Christ.

Now when we preach the death of the Lord, and show that he has redeemed us
thereby, we ought also to call this to our remembrance, that he dyed not for
us only, but for all men that believe in him. And forasmuch as Christ loved
al men so entierely, that he dyed for them, we ought for Christ's sake to love
our neighbors, for whom Christ has dyed. For Christ says. Ioh. xiii. ^


All men shall know by this token, that ye be my disciples, i. Ioh. ii ^
and.iii. b
if one of you love another. And this is it, that saint Paul says. All we
that be pertakers of one bread, i Corin. x.
are one body and one bread.

As often therefore good children, as you shall come to the Lords table (which
ye shall use to do, when ye shall come to further years of discretion) you
shall seek the comfort of your consciences, and do as saint Paul says in
these words. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of the bread and
drink of the cup. For he that eats or drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation, because he makes no dyfference of the Lords
body. And when ye shall have examined your selves, ye shall find that ye are
sinners, and that ye have need, that Christ should give his body for you, and
shede his blood for you. And this to do, is truly to examine and try your
selves. For saint Paul says. If we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged of the Lord. But when we are judged of the Lord, we are chasticed, that
we should not be dampened, with the world. For him that does not acknowledge his
fault, God does judge and chastise with diverse afflictions, that at the
length he may cause him thereby to confess his fautes, and repent him, that
his sins may be forgyuen him. Ye shall also examine yourselues, whether ye be
able to do, yt Christ commands, and to believe, that Christ says.
Furthermore ye shall make an inquiry in your conscyences, whether you be glad
in your heart, to forgive your neighbor his offenses against you and to
love him heartily and unfeignedly for Christ's sake. For when ye do thus, then ye
worthily receive the body and blood of Christ. And he that so receaueth it,
receaueth everlasting life. For he does not only, with his bodyly mouth
receive the body and blood of Christ, but he does also believe the words of
Christ, whereby he is assured, that Christ's body was given to death for us,
and that his blood was shed for us. And he yt this believes, eats and
drynketh the body and blood of Christ spiritually. Of this Christ speaks,
when he says. He that eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, John. vi.
abides in me and I in him. And when we be planted in Christ, then we may
come to this holy supper as often as we will, that by this gostlye fode, we may
daily more and more wax stronger in our faith, that Christ was given to be
the ransom for our sins, and that he dwells in us, and we in him. For
seeing that we are planted in Christ by baptism, and are bound to grow and
increase in him, and to be made like unto him, it is not convenient, that we
should only have a waueryng opinion, that we dwell in Christ, and grow in
faith and charity, but we must have a sure word and work of God, to the
which we may lean in all temptations, and thereby be assured, that we do
spiritually grow and increase in Christ. And this word and work of God, is
set before our eyes in the Lords supper.

For seeing our savior Christ does give us his body to be our meat, and
his blood, to be our drink, and thereby does declare, that he will effectually
dwell in us, strengthen and preserve us to everlasting life, we may steadfastly
believe, that Christ does work in us, and that he will give us gostly strength
and stedfastnes, that we like grene branches may continue in the vine, and so
be full of sap and bring forth good fruit.

And this is the meaning and plain understanding, of the words of the
Lords supper. Wherefore learn them dilygently I pray you, yt when ye be
asked, what is ye Communion or the lords supper? ye may answer. It is the
true body and true blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was ordained by
Christ him self, to be eaten and dronken of us Christen people, under the
form of bread and wine. Furthermore if any man will ask ye, where is this
written? ye shall answer. These be the words which the holy Evangelists
Mathewe, Mark, Luke, and the Apostle Paul do writ. Our Lord Jesus Christ the
same night that he was betrayed, took bread, and gyuyng thanks brake it, and
gave it to his disciples, and said. Take, eat. This is my body, which is
given for you. Do this in remembrance of me. Likewise he took the cup, after
he had supped, and giuynge thanks gave it to them, and said. Drink of this
all ye. This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for you and for
many, for the forgyuenes of sins. Do this as often as ye drink, in
remembrance of me. Furthermore if any man ask ye, what avails it, thus to
eat and drink? ye shall answer. These words do declare what profit we
receive thereby, my body which is given for you, my blood which is shed for
you, for the forgiveness of sins. By the which words Christ declares, that
by this sacrament and words of promise, are given to us, remission of sins,
life and salvation. For where as forgyuenes of sin is there is also life and
salvation. Again if a man will go further with you, and ask you. How can
bodily eating and drinking have so great strength and operation? ye shall
answer. To eat and to drink, does not work so great things, but this word
and promise of God, my body which was given for you, my blood which was
shede for you, for ye remyssion of sins. This word of God is added to the
outward signs, as the chief thing in this sacrament. He that believes these
words, he has that thing, which the words do promise, that is to say,
forgyuenes of his sins.

Beside this, if a man ask of you, who be they, that do worthily receive this
sacrament? ye shall answer. That fasting, abstinence and such other like, do
perteyne and are profitable for an outward discypline or chasticement of ye
body. But he receaueth the sacrament worthily, that has faith to believe these
words. My body which was given for you, my blood which was shed for you,
for the remission of sins. But he that believes not these words, or doubts
of the^, he receaueth the lords supper unworthily. For this word, given for
you, does require a faithful and beleuyng heart.

So good children, ye have the true understanding of ye words of Christ, and
the true use of the holy supper of the Lord. Learn al these lessons
dilygently (I pray you) that ye also in time to come, may worthily receive
this sacrament, and from day to day stick and cleave more stedfastlye to the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so co^tinuyng in Christ, may bring
forth good fruit. And if you do so, then your heavenly father will purge and
prune you (as the husband man does the branches of his vine) that ye may
daily floryshe more and more, and bring forth fruit more plenteouslye, that God
may be glorified by you, and your fruit may abide contynually. And so at the
length, ye shall receive life and everlasting salvation and glory, with our
savior Jesus Christ, the which God grant us all. Amen.

FINIS.
The contents of this book.
The preface.
THe first commandment. fo. ix. The.ii. commandment. fo. xx. The.iii.
commandment. fo. xxxi. The.iiii. commandment. fo. xxxix The.v.
commandment. fo. liiii. The.vi. commandment. fo. lxiiii. The.vii.
commandment. fo. lxxiii. The.viii. commandment. fo. lxxxiii. The.ix.
commandment. fo. xcii. The.x. commandment. fo. xcix.
(...)
