(...)


SEVEN DAYS CONFERENCE, BETWEEN A CATHOLIC CHRISTIAN, AND A CATHOLIC
ROMAN. Concerning some Controversies of RELIGION.

By William Cowper, B. of Galloway.

AVG. DE CIVIT. DEI LIB 20. CAP. 19. Qui non credunt veritati, Iudicati
seducentur, and seducti iudicabuntur.

LONDON Printed by W. S. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
South door of Paul's, and Britains Bursse. 1613.

TO THE MOST SACRED, CHRISTIAN TRVELY CATHOLIC, And mighty Prince JAMES,
King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc.
SIR, Having procreate, not without some pain and labor, this little
Treatise, when I b^gan to view it, I perceived by the sirst face and
countenance thereof, that of it felfe willingly it made retreat to your
Highness for protection, being in effect no other thing in regard of the
matter, but a surcle of that stock, or birth of that Book, whereof your
Highness is the Parent, although the manner of handling it be so base and
unpolished, as that it bewrayes it self altogether unlike any thing proceeding
from your Highness. Yea, also far inferiou^ unto it (to use the words of
Cl^mens, Strom. 5.
Alexandrinus, which he borrowes from Plato, comparing the gifts of Kings with
other men's) as Brass or Iron is inferior to Gold or silver. For there your
Majesty has ^reated the present controversies of Religion, with such
Learning, as in a Prince may be admired, seasoned with such love and mildness
of Spirit, as might move them, who are contrary minded, if they were not
drunken with the Cup of the Whore of B^b^l, and so had lost judgment, and
understanding, to acknowledge that it is no turbulent humor, but the power of
truth, no desire of cont^ntion, but the love of all men's salvation, has
carried your Majesty unto it.

So has it pleased God to be favorable to this I Will, and by your Majesty to
bless us, that there ne^des not now a Iusti^e, nor a Ter^ulli^n to write
Apologies of our Christian faith to any Antoninus or any other such like, Impie
pio Impera^ori; we have a most Christian King, a p^ofessour of the Gospel
with us, a protector of us with it, a Semi-martyr, an Abimelech, A Father
King, an other Solomon, a Coheleth, such a king as is a Preacher of that truth,
whereof his Highness is professor, whose Palaces and Tables are (as was said
of the Courts of Theodosius junior) Schools of Divinity, wherein ignorants
are instructed, Apostates converted, good Christians daily confirmed, and as if
this were yet too little, an open co^fessor before the world, a public
patron of the truth by Apologies learnedly penned, whereby his Highness
reaches to these, to whom by speech he can not attain, and so makes the
light of the Gospel shine to other Princes of the World, who as yet mislike
it, only because they misknow it.

Neither can it be told, whether your Highness endeavor to propagate the truth
of Christian Religion among such as have it not, or to conserve it where it is
already embraced, be greater, the care of all the Reformed Churches in Europe,
after a sort lying upon your Highness. By your Authority they are protected,
by your Learning instructed, by your Pieti^ confirmed, by your Highness wise,
godly and peaceable Council united, where the sire of vnneces^ary contention
is subtly kindled by Satan, for disturbance of the Church, and disgrace of
the Gospel. By your Highness providence, happily, sp^edely and wisely it is
quenched, the benefit whereof, the Churches both of France and and Flanders
lately have found, and thanks God and your Majesty for it.

And if yet any further proof of your Highness most entire affection toward
Christ, and his c^use be required of any man: May he not see your Majesty
willingly bearing Babels indignation for Ierusalems sake? Are not their
raylings, threatenings, contradictions, treasonable imaginations patiently
suffered for Christ's sake? Is their not a sensible loss sustained for the
Gospels sake? Is not alliance with Labans house, for Religions cause preferred
to the friendship of the most puissant Princes of Canaan? But yet what speak I
of loss, since loss for Christ's sake can not be, not indeed, what seems a
loss, shall be found a vantage, for Where the ways of man please the Lord,
Genesis 14.13. Genesis 21.22.
he shall make his enemies his friends, even Mamre, Eschol, and Aner,
Abimelech, and his Captain Phicol (Princes of Canaan) shall sue to Abraham for
friendship, and seek to be in covenant with him, because they see that God is
with him in all that he does. And if yet Jeroboam with his accomplices will be
enemies to David's Kingdom, then has your Majesty in readiness the answer of
Ab^ah unto them, 2. Chron. 13
With you indeed is the multitude, but with it ye have the golden Calves,
which you have made for your gods, and shall be your destruction, but we
belong to the Lord our God, and behold this God is with us as a Captain, and
his servants with sounding Trumpets to cry an Alarm against you. For God from
above has endued your Highness with his heavenly wisdom, which ^ath this
annexed promise, Pr^u. 4.8.
Exalt her, and she shall exalt thee, she shall bring thee to honor if thou
embrace her, The Lord shall be thine assurance, and he shall preserve thy
soote from falling.

And with this great benefit of pure Religion, we enjoy under your Highness
most happy Government, there is conjoined such a peace, as no age heretofore
has affoorded, no care of any Prince could effectuate, for now by your
Highness authority, the most Rebellious people are made peaceable, and the
Scepter of Christ is reverenced there, where all sorts of violence, rapine,
murder, villainy did reign before, so that now to your Majesty most justly
belongs that p^^ise, which of old was given to Constantine, and written in his
triumphall Chariot, Liberator vrbis and sundator quietis. Nazi^n. ad (...)
^pi^^ 8
Or which Nazianzen gave to Olympius. O negotiorum arbiter, and publicarum
rerum corrector and vtrunque ti^i diuinitus concessum qui etiam hoc pietatis
praemium acce^is^i, vtres tibi ex animi sententia fluant, so^usque ea assequi
possis quae omnibus alijs negata sunt. Prudentiae enim and sortitudinis ductu
imperium administras, quarum altera, quae facienda su^t excogitat, altera quod
excogitatum est, facile exequitur, huc quod maximum est accedit manus puritas
and integritas qua omnia reguntur. An arbiter and decider of difficult
controversies, a corrector of the public State, and both of these ^re
committed to your Highness of God, from whom your Majesty has received also
this reward of piety, that matters succeed unto your Highness according to
your hearts desire, and your Highness only has attained to do that which is
denied unto others. And which yet is most of all, hereunto is joined the
purity and integrity of your hands, whereby all things are ruled. Your
Highness has not lived like an Achab^ to spoil any Naboth of his Vineyard,
nor like a Manasseh to defile the streets of your Cities with innocent blood.
Nor like an Herod, to take the Wife of an other. Your Majesty might shake the
lap with Nehemiah against oppressors, in sign and token of innocence. Your
Highness might cast the first stone at adulterers, and in a good conscience
could make purgation with Samuel, if so it were that your Highness came to be
judged of man, Whose Ox or Ass have I taken, or to whom have I done wrong,
If th^re be any fault (for the best want not their own blemishes) it is upon
that extremity, which is nearest to virtue: Namely, in too great mercy and
clemency, which of old was noted for an infirmity in good Theodosius, Quod ex
mansuetudine in nimiam lenitatem declinauerit, yet even of this will I say with
Nazian. Etiam haec est dei humanitas and Clementia. This also is a resemblance
of the clemency of God, whose deputy on earth your Highness are, for he is
gracious, slow to wrath, long suffering and ready to forgive. Many a time he
bends his bow to shoot at the wicked, the arrows of his anger, but is (...),
Pisidae (...)
slow and loath to let them go: Yea, oftimes he shoots and purposely misseth
his mark, sparing yet for a time: (...), his warnings are many, but where they
work not, he strikes at length, and no more but once. (...): Thus eue^ the
Lord whose mercy is marvelous, means him to judgment* where mercy is
abused: It is no piety but superstition to spare, when time is to strike. And
it is a cruel clemency, which is declared upon one with the destruction of
many. The Pillars which uphold a Kingdom, are Mercy and Justice, since by
them Kings are conserved, Your Highness out of your rare wisdom, will have
a care to conserve them both, that neither Mercy make prejudice to Justice,
nor Justice again take away the praise of Mercy.

But to return, as S^desprima and vita ima, are most unseemly; so is the
dignity doubled, where the preferment is beautified with piety: and herein
also has the Lord magnified his mercy toward your Majesty, that as by an high
calling he has exalted your Highness a Head and Ruler over this Mighty
people, so has he made your Highness no less eminent by communication of
his grace, then your Majesty is by the Honor of the place, living in the eyes
of all men a pattern of Virtue, yea an image of the heavenly King, walking so
among the evil that you are not infected with their vice, and so with the good
that the best are made better by your example. God make us wise to know what
we have, for because the Lord has loved his people, therefore has he set
such a King over them, to rule them with equity and righteousness. The Lord
make us thankful for it, and long may your Highness live and reign a happy
king of many blessings to your people, Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, and daily Orator, WILLIAM COVVPER B. of
Galloway.

The Contents of the seven Days Conference.
The I. days Conference.
Concerning Antiquity in Gen^rall.
The II. Day.
Concerning the Antiquity of the Church of Scotland, and how the Church of Rome
in her best estate was but a sister, and not a mother Church unto it.
The III. Day.
Concerning the Apostacy of the Church of Rome, and how sh^e is now become
that mother of W^^redomes, Revel.
The IIII. Day.
Wherein is declared that Rome is the seat of Antichrist.
The V. Day.
Wherein the common quest^on of the Adversaries is answ^red: Where was your
Church before Luther?
The VI. Day.
Wherein an other Question commonly objected by the Aduers^r^es is answered:
Seeing you cannot deny tha^ your fathers were Papists, what think you, are
they all damned or not? And if they be not damned, why may not we be of their
Religion.
The VII. Day.
Wherein the order observed in the Church of Scotland is declared to be conform
to the ancient order prescribed by the Apostles, and and p^^ctised in the
Primitive Church.
SEVEN DAYS CONFERENCE. BETWEEN A Catholic CHRISTIAN, and a Catholic
ROMAN.
C. SIR, you are w^lcome home from Italy.


R. I thank you heartielie good Countriman.


C. Tell me I pray you how it goes with you, are you sound both in body and
in mind?


R. Why, what mean you by that?


C. Because many traveled in these parts where you have been having returned
worse then they went a field.


R. Wherein worse?


C. With the botch of Egypt in their body, the just plague of God for
corporal whoredom; and the leprosy of Babel in their souls, wherewith God
also punishes the^ who love not Sions beauty, and delight not in the light of
the Gospel.


R. But I was neither in Egypt nor in Babel.


C. How so, was you not in Rome, and other parts under the Popes Dominions?


R. Yea that I was.


C. Then was you both in Egypt and Babel.


B. I understand not your mystical Theology.


C. Neither can ye so long as you are in the mist, and have your mind covered
with a veil.


R. You speak your pleasure there, for I see all is well as your self.


C. I would you did, for so you might easily see that Rome is Spiritual
Egypt, wherein the light of God is obscured: and Babel, wherein is a fearful
captivity of Gods people, and such a horrible confusion of languages, that
when the Builder speaks, the people understands not what he says: yea it is
Sodom, which for her vile abominations will shortly be burnt with fire, and
brought to vtte^ desolation never to be repaired again.


R. Let me alone, I see you are still in your old humor, and it maruels me
much, that so many in this Land being converted to the bosom of the mother
Church of Rome, you should still continue in this new Heretical opinion.


C. O now I see the bile of Babel upon you: you will call her a mother Church
whom God calls a mother of Whoredoms, and you charge us with novelty, and
heresy; but we will prove by Gods grace, what you call heresy, and novelty
is verity and antiquity.


R. Antiquity say you, fie, speak never of it: for your eldest Doctors are
Luther, and Calvin.


C. Nay by your leave (Sir) we have neither our faith from Luther, nor from
Calvin: but answer you as the Apostle Saint Paul answered his adversaries,
when they charged him with the like crimes that you charge us with, and I pray
you mark his Apology: Act. 24.14.
I confess that after the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the Lord
God of my Fathers.


R. What ever Saint Paul speaks, I would not have you speaking of Fathers,
seeing you have forsaken the Religion of your Fathers.


C. You deceive your self if you think we will not stand to the Religion of
our Fathers.


R. Ah, but your Fathers were Papists.


C. Nay but our Fathers were Protestants.


R. Now in good faith you move me to laughter.


C. You may laugh as you list, but have no cause.


R. Was not your Father, and Grandfather, and their Fathers before them for
many ages Papists?


C. What of that? they who in regard of time and truth were long before them,
and should be followed as Fathers to us and them both, were Protestants.


R. That is but a shift of your own.


C. It is no shift, it is a truth; and you shall see it your self if you will
consider who were Paul's Fathers, whom he says he followed in the worshipping
of God.


R. What were the names of his Fathers were I cannot tell, but I see they have
been Israelites of the Tribe of Benjamin.


C. We have not that to stand upon, what they were for their persons, or names
either, but what was their Religion: remember you not that he says himself,
he was brought up at the feet of Gamali^l?


R. Yea I do.


C. Tell me now of what Religion was Gamali^l?


R. I see he has been a Pharesie.


C. And think you that Saint Paul when he made his Apology, worshipped God
after the manner of Pharesies?


R. I think it not.


C. How then says he, that he worshipped God after the manner of his Fathers,
seeing his Fathers were Pharesies?


R. I think he means not of these fathers, who lived last before him, but
transcending them he passes up to his elder fathers Abraham, Isaac, Jacob.


C. Was he not then wrongfully accused of novelty, as one who had forsaken
the religion of his fathers, because he forsook the Religion of such Fathers
as lived last before him?


R. I think so indeed: His Apology cleares him sufficiently both of heresy
and novelty, which his adversaries would have imputed to him.


C. Now (Sir) I have you where I would: why should not the like Apology clear
us in the like case: for albeit we have foresaken the heresies of Papistrie
maintained by them, that lived last before us, yet do we worship the Lord our
God, as these fathers did, whom Justin Martyr call^s, Patres Patrum, and whom
with him we will prefer to any posterior fathers whatsoever.


R. That cannot be, seeing it is known, it is not threescore years since your
Religion came into this Country.


C. No (Sir) I will make known to you, that it is 1500 years since this same
Religion preached and professed now, was then preached and professed by our
Ancient fathers. The first Religion that ever we had was gentilisme, our
fathers worshipped Diana, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars.


R. That was a pitiful blindness.


C. So it was indeed: but in the first hundredth year we embraced Christianity,
and eight hundredth year after Christ, we were infected with Papistrie, and now
again has God called us by the light of the gospel to our ancient Religion of
Christianity, whereby we worship the Father in his son according to his
word, and no other way.


R. You speak fair enough to it, be as it will; but if it be true that you
say, then would you be in communion with the Catholic Church.


C. And so thanks to God we are, rejoicing as I said unto you, that the Lord by
his Gospel has called us to be Christian Catholics.


R. That is also^ a new style of your own, that you will be called Christian
Catholics.


C. If you were acquainted with antiquity, you would not call it new, with many
such novelties you charge us, which are indeed ancient truths: it is eleven
hundredth years since in the seventh Council of Carthage, professors of the
Gospel were called Catholic Christians.


R. But to let the style pass, how can you say, you are in communion with the
Catholic Church, seeing you have made separation^ from the Roman Church, and
refuse to be styled Roman Catholics?


C. The Roman Church in her best estate was never more but a member of the
Catholic Church, and there is no more reason to call the Roman church the
Catholic Church, nor to say, that Rome is all Italy, or Pa^^s is all France:
but now seeing the Ro^an Church has played the Whore, made a shameful
Apostasy from her first estate, we have done no wrong in seperating from her:
but for our warrant have Gods own Proclamation commanding us to do so.


R. Where have you that Proclamation?


C. There it is, Come out of Babell my people.


R. But no word is there of Rome


C. I shall prove to you that this Babel is Rome, and your own Doctors cannot
deny it.


R. If you make all good you have said, I will say no more, but there is many
one beguiled.


C. If you will hear me by Gods grace I shall make it good.


R. I will not refuse to hear you, and I trust also to answer you.


C. It is not me you shall hear, but the voice of the Gospel, which if it were
heard at Rome, I am of that mind, the Popes kingdom should not long continue.


R. It will be hard for you to get hearing there.


C. And why? since Sodomits there have their brothels, and Jews have their
Synagogues, wherein they curse Christ, why may not Protestants be tolerated to
have a Church wherein to preach?


R. Good sooth they love you worse then any of them.

I think it true; for on^ Devil can dwell well enough with an other, yea a
legion of them in one man, but none of them will give place to Christ. But tell
me how long, God willing, mind you to stay in this town?


R. I hope to be in it all this week.


C. Then I pray you, let us spare every day one hour or two for conference,
and I will come to you to your own chamber.


R. Agreed am I, and let our conference to morrow continue about antiquity, for
I think it somewhat strange that you should pretend it.


C. Well. let it be so.


THE FIRST DAYS CONFERENCE. Concerning Antiquity in General.
R. WElcome ( Sir) I see you are a true man, and keep promise.

C. What I am not in good feign would I be.


R. Think you not best we begin where we left yesternight?


C. Yea indeed.


R. What say you then of Antiquity? will you not grant that to be the true
Church which has the most ancient Doctrine?


C. That is a thing out of all question; the Doctrine which is most ancient I
embrace, and believe to be most true.


R. You will mire your self incontinent, for these which ye call corruptions
in the Church of Rome, some of them will be found a thousand years old.


C. What is that to the matter? Seeing the truth whereby we condemn these
corruptions will be found elder then they, and we, to speak with Vincentius,
will ever prefer the old Faith to new unfaithfulness: for if you think this
a good Argument: Such a doctrine or ceremony should be received, because it is
one thousand and two hundred years old, then by the same reason the heresies
of Simon Magus must be received for a truth, because they were taught by him
one thousand and six hundred years since.


R. But said you not even now, you would acknowledge that to be most true which
is most ancient?


C. I say that same yet; And that you may conceive it the better, I pray you
consider that truth and error, suppose they came not of the same parents, yet
in regard of time they are like two twins, but the vantage of time that is,
truth has it, suppose very little.


R. I pray you let me hear that at more length, for I see it will greatly
help to clear this point.


C. Will you go up to the Church in Paradise, and you shall see the first
voice that sounded there was Gods voice: For in the first two Chapters of
Genesis, you will hear nothing but Deus dixit, God said: but incontinent in
the third Chapter comes in, Et Serpens dixit, and the Serpent said.


R. I see that clearly.


C. And I am glad you do so: But I pray you consider, will any man be so mad as
to think that Satan's lies shall be received for a truth, because they are
now near six thousand years old?


R. It were no reason indeed, because albeit his lies ^ee old, yet (as you
have said) there is a Truth elder.


C. I pray you remember that, that it may confirm you against the craft of
Satan, when he would cover error with a show of Antiquity.


R. I hope to do so.


C. Now will ye come down again to the days of Christ Jesus; may you not see
that when our Lord sent out his Apostles, Satan also sent out his false
Apostles* and when Simon Peter comes out to Preach the Gospel, Simon Magus is
stirred up to Preach heresies?


R. I see that also.


C. Then let us agree in this, since Truth is to be sought from our fathers
according as we are commanded, Enquire for the good and old way; we will go
seek it from our most ancient fathers.


R. Truly it caries with it I think a reason, that we should not be moved
with the opinion of any father, where they vary from the doctrine of the first
fathers.


C. You* speak now as you should, and as before I showed you was the mind of
that ancient father Iustine Martyr: Quest. 119
when it was objected to him, such a father thought such a thing, he answered,
Sed pater patrum Apostolus aliter sensit: And herein to confirm you, if
controversies of Religion were decided, as our Savior decided the question of
Polygamie, the debate between us and the Romish Church were soon ended.


R. How did Christ resolve that contro^ersie of Polygamie?


C. By this rule, It was not so from the beginning: Leaving this to us as a
maxim in Religion, and a most sure rule whereby to try truth from falsehood,
What has not be^ne from the beginning, let it be rejected as a novelty. And
herein the ancient fathers agree with us. Be ye sollowers of me (says the
Apostle) as I am of Christ: if I, or an Angel, etc. Mihi antiquitas Iesi^
Christus est, cui non obedire manifestus est, and irremissibilis interitus.
Ignat. Epist. ad Philad*

Non attendendum quid quis ante nos faciendum putauerit, sed quid, qui ante
omnes est Christus prior fecerit. Cypri. lib. 2. Epist. 3.

Neque enim hominis consue^udinem, sed Deiveritatem sequi oportet. Ibid.

Non est de consuetudine praescribendum, sed ratione vincendum. Ad Quintinum.

Obstinatio est, and praesumptio humanam traditionem diuinae dispositioni
antepone^e, nec animadvertere ^ndignaeri, and irasci deum; quoties diuina
praecepta soluit, and praeterit humana traditio. Ad Pompeium.

Consuetudo sine veritate vetustas est erroris. Ibid.

Si ad diuinae traditionis caput, and originem reuertamur, cessat error
humanus. Ibid

Frustra quidam, quiratione vincuntur, consuetudinem nobis opponunt, q^asi
con^uetudo sit mator ver^^^^. ^d ^uba^anum.

Nec (...), n^c m^iorum erro^ seq^^^^^, e^^, sed au^horitas Script^r^r^^, and
^^i docem is imper^^^m: (...) ^^^iaei po^^ Baalim abieruns quos ^idicerunt a
patribus. Hie^on. in lerem. cap. 9.

Omnes h^retici aetati Eccle^ie vniuer sa^is comparati, minores, tempore
congrue vocantur: quia ipsi ab ea, non autem ipsa egressa est ^b illis. Greg.
in Job. lib. 10. Sect. 37.

Sicut in omnibus veritas imaginem antecedit, postremo similitudo succedit: ita
prior veritas quam haeresis. Tertul. praescrip. aduersus haeret.


R. But what makes these against the Church of Rome?


C. Yea, very much, for all these novelties which she has invented, and
intruded into the Church, she colors them with the shadow of ancient custom,
and so very craftily under the name of Antiquity, fights against Antiquity.


R. It is not enough to affirm that, unless ye qualify it.


C. I will make it clear to you, if first ye hear a notable testimony o^
Vincentius to this same purpose. Cap. 10.



R. What says he?


C. It is a property of Christian modesty not to deliver their own things to
the after-commers, but to keep things received from their fore-beers.


R. Very well; that place makes against you who will not keep the Religion of
your fore-beers.


C. It makes not against us, but against the Church of Rome, who has departed
from the Religion of them who are theirs and our fore^eer^ also, as the remnant
of his words will declare unto you.


R. Read them out then.


C. He is expounding here he Apostles words: If I, or an Angel from heaven
should bring to you another doctrine, then that which ye have received, let
him be accursed.


R. What says he of it?


C. These are his words: If Peter, if Andrew, if John, yea if the whole
Apostles would Preach to you an other way then is delivered in the Gospel, let
them be accursed: To Preach unto Christian Catholics, besides that which we
have received, was never, is never, shall never be lawful.


R. Let it be so, the Church of Rome has delivered no doctrine but that she
has rec^iued.


C. Yes, but she has; and now once for all, I will give you amongst many, one
clear example of it. In the thirteenth Session of the Council of Constance,
as is Recorded by Carranza one of your own, and Registered in your Canon Law,
there is an Act made of this tenor. Licet in Primitiua Ecclesia huiusmodi
Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub vtraque specie, tamen haec consuetudo
ad euitandum aliqua pericula, and scandala, est rationa^iliter introducta, quod
a conficientibus sub vtraque specie, a laicis tantummodo sub specie panis
suscipiatur. Albeit in the Primitive Church, this Sacrament was received of the
faithful under both the kinds, yet to eschew some perils and offenses, this
custom now with very good reason is brought in, that the Priest should receive
it under both the kinds, but the people should receive the bread only, and not
the cup. What think ye now of this place? Has not the Church of Rome here
delivered a Doctrine which she has not received? Is there not here a
manifest changing of Christ's ordinance, and by their own confession a plain
departing from Antiquity? What think you of this one instance?


R. I will advise upon it.


C. Do so, but I pray you fight not against the clear light; and remember
that all be it the Doctors of your Church pretend always Antiquity,
Antiquity; the ^athers, the fathers; yet this one instance among a hundredth,
proves them to be fathers o^ novelties: what say ye? Tell me, like ye to
hear any more of Vincentius?


R. I am content, but let me know first what writer he is, and whose
Translation is that.


C. He was a Frenchman, he writ this Treatise in the five hundredth year of
Christ, and here it is Translated by Ninian Winzet, a Mass Priest of the
Church of Rome, which ye cannot refuse.


R. Read on, what says he further?


C. There is a command given to Timothy, Depos^um serua, which in all good
reason should bind his successors: Thus he expounds it: Keep that which is
committed to thee, not that which is invented by thee: which thou have
received, not which thou have imagined: wherein thou art no Author, inuenter,
sorger, but a keeper; not a Lawmakers but a Law-keeper; not a guide, but a
follower: save that which is given thee, save the talent of Catholic faith
unbroken, vncorrupt: what thou have received, render it again, if thou have
received Gold, render Gold again; slip not in one thing in stead of an
other, for Gold lay not down lead, nor brass.


R. I hear all that, and I think he writes like a sound Divine.


C. Then take heed^; the Apostle protests he d^liuered that to the Corinthians,
which he had received from the LORD JESUS.


R. I know that.


C. He commanded Timothy, and all others his successors in the work of the
Ministry to do the like.


R. And good reason so they should.


C. Then there is the point; How is it that the Church of Rome takes on her
this liberty to do otherwise?


R. Wherein do they otherwise?


C. Have you forgot so soon? Saint Paul delivered to the people as well the Cup
as the Bread, because he received it from Christ Jesus: how is it then that
the Church of Rome takes away the Cup from the people?


R. Why? May not the Church make Laws?


C. No such Laws as derogate to Christ's Laws, for in that sense you heard
Vincentius deny that they are Lawmakers, but Law-keepers: I pray you give
place to the truth, and consider how little cause they have to brag of
Antiquity, who dare make the like of that; Albeit Christ and his Apostles, and
the Primitive Church did this, yet we for good causes will do oth^rwayes.


R. Always that is but one ^oint,


C. But seeing you cannot deny but they have broken, and corrupted the
ancient Catholic faith in one point, you have the less cause to believe or
defend them in the rest, unless you will incur Gods curse threatened on them
that pares or adds to his word.


R. The Lord save me from his curse.


C. Amen, but pray first that the Lord would save you from the sin that
deserves his curse.


R. God grant it.


C. And so I wish from my heart it may be: But I pray you consider as in one
Sacrament you are guilty of sacrilegious paring, so in both you are guilty of
sacrilegious adding and changing: and so cannot ^schew the curse if you abide
in Communion with the Church of Rome that now is.


R. How So?


C. As ye have taken Wine from the Bread, so ye have added Water to the Wine,
which is a new invention and forgerie, albeit your Doctors to excuse it cast
it on Alexander the first, yet it is certain, it was not in Christ's
institution, and by your own confessions was brought in many years after
Christ, and so should be rejected as a novelty.


R. That is but a small thing, and there may be many reasons to excuse it.


C. No: not one; Let no man be wiser then God. Who dare add to the ordinance
of Christ? But you have done worse in Baptism adding Spittle, Oil, and Salt
to the element of Water: was this done by Christ or his Apostles? You father
the Oil upon Siluester, but confess it was not used in the Church in Baptism
before him, and so it is an other ancient novelty.


R. It may be they have thought good to use these for reasons and respects
which I know not; but this pertaines not to the substance of Baptism, and can
not annull it.


C. I grant they do not annull Baptism, yet are they inexcusable, who in the
smallest thing dare alter the institution of Christ: Are not his Sacraments the
Seals of his covenant?


R. I confess they are.


C. Why then, since it is treason to pare, or add any thing to the form of
the Princes Signet, is it not Sacrilegious boldness^ to pare or add to Christ's
Sacrament? But least you should think the controuersi^ only to be about
these things, you shall know that, except the Article of the Trinity, the
Church of Rome has left no Article of our Faith uncorrupted, so that it is
most certain, This Church of Rome with the doctrine, and jurisdiction now
maintained by her, was not in the Primitive Church.


R. O but I will tell you what I once heard concerning that matter, from one of
their Doctors: That there is a great difference between a Church in her
infancy, and her older and riper age: For as it grows in age, so may it and
should it increase in many things which it had not in the infancy thereof.


C. Now I see you speak from such knowledge, as the great labors of the
Jesuits works in the hearts of their captives, and because it is your last
and greatest defense, I will let you still see out of the words of Vincentius,
which you will like better then mine, that this makes nothing for you.


R. Come on let us see; what says Vincentius?


C. He grants, There should be an encr^ase in Faith, but not a change of Faith.


R. That is a strange distinction, and yet so honest, that in truth I dare not
gainsay it.


C. Hear him then; he expounds the two parts of his distinction: To increase
(says he) is when a thing biding in it self is more amplified: To change, is
when a thing going out of it self is translated and turned into an other. To
make this clear, he illustrates it by a proper similitude: Let (says he)
the Religion of souls follow the nature of bodies, which albe^t in process of
years they grow, yet they remain the same: the same members, the same Joints
are in Children which are in Men, though in the one stronger and greater, in
the other smaller and weaker: but if the shape be turned in any form not of
the own kind, or any thing be eked to the number of the members, or taken
from the same, then either the body perishes, or becomes monstrous, or at the
least becomes weak. So in Religion, if we shall begin to mix novelty with
Antiquity, we shall make the Church a brothell of filthy and abominable
errors, which before was a Temple of chaste and undefiled verity, where as
the Church of Christ should be a diligent keeper of the doctrine delivered to
it, changing nothing, diminishing nothing, adding nothing. Now these are the
words of Vincentius, and I demand of you out of the light of your conscience if
you can gainsay them.


R. In truth it is a pretty discourse, and I embrace all that he has said as a
truth.


C. Advise you th^n yet, what ye will say for the Church of Rome, since it can
not be denied they have changed, diminished, and added to the ancient
Catholic faith: Some ceremonies and opinions they have which Antiquity knew
not, and some the ancient Church had, which they have pared away, and in a word
have so change, that in Rome is nothing anci^nt but the name.


R. That seems very hard: For, though in some ceremonies there be adding,
paring, and changing, yet I can not think it is in substance.


C. You are far deceived, for they have made a change in the substance.


R. Wherein?


C. In the maine point of salvation, as now among many I will show you by this
one. What Divinity is this, to teach people to pray that God would bring them
to Heaven by an other blood then Christ's blood?


R. O that can not be.


C. Nay marvel not, there is the Prayer of their own Mass book. Tu per
Thomae sanguinem, quem ille pro te pendit, fac nos Christ scandere, quo Thomas
ascendit.




R. I have not he^rd of that, for my own part I would be loath to change the
blood of the covenant, or to disgrace it so far as to join any other with it.


C. The more wise are you, for it is by Christ's blood Only, that
reconciliation is made. But what think ye of confidence, should we put
considence in any but in God?


R. No truly.


C. What a Prayer is this the^? Inua ergo omnes gentes
In te Sancte confidentes Confessor Armigile.


And is not Prayer think you and Invocation, a special point of Gods service?


R. So it is.


C. Why then is it given to Saints; and that Psalter which contains Prayers
and praises to God, all turned over to the Virgin Marie? Should men's
traditions, to whom God by his heavenly oracle has not borne testimony, be
received, Pari pietatis affectu and reuerentia, with like devotion and
reverence, as the word of God?


R. Who says that?


C. The Council of Trent. Did. 19. ca. Si Rom^norum and in Canonici^.
Should the four Councels be received as the four Evangelists, or should the
Canon Law and decretall Epistles be received as Canonical Scripture?


R. I know not what that is.


C. Then I will tell you: Twelve hundredth years after Christ, Gratian a
Benedictine Monk, gathered together the sentences of Councels, Fathers, and
Popes, concerning sundry matters of Religion, and set it forth, which is
commonly called Decretum; and after him certain Popes, as Gregory the ninth,
Boniface the eight, Clemens the fifth, John the twenty two, following the
example of Gratian, have gathered the like: These are called Decretals, and
Extrauagants added to Decretum; all of them make up the Canon law, which now
must be equalled with the word, and all to be received, as if Peter his own
mouth had pronounced them. Is not this against the golden rule of Vincentius,
to mix novelty with Antiquity; What say you to it?


R. In truth I can not judge of that which I know not.


C. I will give you but one Decrete of this law, and let you see how it strikes
the Apostle S. Paul in the teeth, that by it you may judge of the rest. Cause.
26. quaest. 2. and Cause. 31. qu^st. 1.
Secundam accipere vxorem secundum Apostoli praeceptum licitum est; secundum
autem veritatis rationem vere fornicatio est. Second marriage according to the
Apostles precept is lawful, but according to the truth of reason is plain
fornication. I am not now to dispute whether Churchmen may Marry or not:
Causa. 26. Quest. 2.
themselves grant it is not forbidden, neither by Legal, nor Apostolical
authority, yet they will forbid it. But what Divinity is this? According to
the Apostles precept, it is lawful to Marry, but according to truth and
reason it is Whoredom, that is as they would say, according to the word of
God in the Bible it is true, but according to the word of God in the Canon Law
written twelve hundredth years after Christ it is false. Did the Apostle give
any precept without reason or truth? How dare they call that unlawful, which
the Apostle calls lawful: W^e be to them who call good evil. You hold silence
at these things and no marvel, for I think no honest man can approve them.
But to return to things of great importance, I assure you the only question
and controversy in Religion this day may be taken up in this question: Is
Jesus the Son of Mary the Christ? Or as the Baptist takes it up, Art thou he
who is come, or shall we look for an other?


R. I think no man will deny that.


C. Yea the Turk, and Pagane say, such Christ as Christians believe is neither
come, nor will come: the Jews say he is not come, but he will come: The
Catholic Roman in word confesses him, but in deed denies him: Quem
praedicant impugnant, both in his Person and Offices.


R. That is a strange assertion, and such as I have not heard.


C. It is strange indeed, and I would we had no cause to charge them with it,
but because it is the most weighty point whereof yet w^ have spoken, we will
refer it to be handled in a meeter time.


R. I am content, providing you forget not to make that good which you have
said.


C. If I forget, I pray remember me: And now this Dispute about Antiquity, I
conclude with IGNATIUS: Mihi antiquitas est Jesus Christus, cui non obedire
manifestus est, and irremissibilis interitus. Epist. ad Philadelphos. My
Antiquity is Jesus Christ; to disobey him is manifest and remediless
destruction: and with that which A^gustine said to the Pelagians: Quia isti
disserunt, De verb. Apos^ ser. 14.
and disputant nescio quas impias nouitates, etiam nos conantur arguere quod
aliquod nouum dicamus. Because these f^llowes maintain certain impious
novelties, they also go about to charge us, as if we did teach any new thing.
But of this if you please you shall hear more.


R. It pleases me very well, and I shall attend your coming if you may at
seven hours.


C. Let it be so.


THE SECOND DAYS CONFERENCE. Concerning the Antiquity of the Church of
SCOTLAND, and how the Church of ROME in her best estate was but a sister, and
not a mother Church unto it.
C. WHat say you to day (Sir) have you considered the points of our last
conference?


R. Yea I have been (as I may) thinking upon them.


C. What? Is not your heart moved to come to us?


R. I find it moved, but not removed from the Church of Rome.


C. Tell me (I pray you) what is that which holds you from us?


R. To be plain with you, since the Church of Rome is your mother Church, you
can with no good conscience forsake her.


C. If that be all your scruple, I hope to resolve you: for this day by Gods
grace I will show that we of this Church of Scotland had never our faith from
the Church of Rome; yea that in her best estate she was no more but a sister
Church unto us. The next day God willing I will show you that the Church of Rome
is Apostatique now, not like that Church of old, which the Apostle commended,
and is not only a Whore her self, but the mother of Whooredomes.


R. You have taken much in hand.


C. No more then by Gods grace I hope to qualify, if you will with patience
hear me, and interrupt me not.


R. Speak as long as you please, I shall hear you.


C. No (Sir) I will be loath to burden you with multitude of words, but shall
be very well content, when you hear any point wherein weight is, that you
warn me to clear it.


R. Well, I shall do so God willing.


C. Then first I will say, Rome has been no mother Church, neither to the
Churches of Asia: these were planted by Apostles and Apostolic men; Nor yet
to the Churches of A^ricke: Christianity was first conveyed to them by Mark
the Evangelist, and the Eunuch of Ethiopia, whom Philip baptized: And I can let
you see (but that I shall disgresse over far) that five hundredth years after
Christ the Churches of Afric would not acknowledge the Bishop of Rome their
superior.


R. Our question is not now concerning them: for I know the Church of Rome
received her faith from the Churches of Asia, and they of Asia received it not
from the Church of Rome. And as to them of Afric, whatsoever is disputable,
there we leave it as not pertaining to our present puropse.


C. Oh good Sir, you will grant then that the Church of Rome is far posterior
to the Churches of A^ia, and, if it be compared with them, is but a daughter
Church.


R. That I can not deny: But the Churches of Europe, and specially these of
the west parts were first converted to Christ by the Church of Rome.


C. No (Sir) ye are deceived in that also, and this is the point wherein I am
to contradict you.


R. I am sure you will not contradict me, without some warrant.


C. That were no reason: I will let you see that the most famous Churches of
Europe (as their Records testify) had not their faith from the Church of Rome,
and then I will come to our own.


R. I think long to hear that.


C. And I will delay you no longer. In the Council of Trent, there was a great
question between the French and Spanish Prelates, about the first place: The
greatest Argument that any of them used, was from the Antiquity of their
Christianity, which none of them alleged, they had from the Church of Rome,
albeit at that time both of them sought the Popes favor.


R. From whence got they it then, if they got it not from Rome?


C. The Spaniards alleged, they were made Christians by Saint James, who
after he had Preached the Gospel in Spain, returned to Palestina, and was
president of that famous Council holden at Jerusalem, Act. 15 then being
Martyred, his bones were brought to Compostella, and there buried. The French
replied that their narration was fabulous, and that it is more likely, if any
Apostle came to Spain, he came rather by land to France, and so taught them
by the way, then otherwise by Sea: And if any credit might be given to such
traditions, they could also with more probability allege that Lazarus, and
Nathaniel taught the Gospel among them* and this at that time they spoke for
themselves. But out of more certain Story this might be said also for them,
that Philip Preached the Gospel in France: CRESCENS also Paul's Disciple, for
there it is said 2. Tim. 4. TITUS is gone to Dalmatia, and Cresc^ns to Galatia:
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. calls it Gallia. Besides him Trophymus, Cent. 2. c. 2.
another of Paul's Disciples taught at Orleance: Photinus again, a very worthy
man, and after him Irenaeus taught the Gospel at Lions. German was first
converted by Lucius of Cyrene, Auentinus in Annal. Boiorum.
Paul's kinsman and companion. Yea the Churches of Italy will not be found to
have the Church of Rome for their Mother Church, for why Barnab^s first
Preached the Gospel at Millan, as testifies Sabellicus, Sabel. Enn^a^. 7. li.
4.
and Apollinaris taught at Rauenna. But to come to the Church of Rome, tell
me, who did first convert the Romans to the Christian faith?


R. Who but Saint Peter!


C. I will not now contend with you about that matter though it be very
dispu^able, Whether Peter was at Rome or not; and your own man Clemens, Clem.
lib. 1. Recognitionum
and Dorotheus also affirm, that Barnabas first taught the Gospel at Rome:
But if Peter came to Rome, what time came he to it?


R. I cannot well remember.


C. I will help you: Lib. 3. Cap. 1. and 3.
Irenaeus says, S. Peter came to Rome when Saint Matthew wrote his Euangell,
in the third year of Cai^s, and forty one after Christ. As for Saint Paul he
wrote not his Epistle to Rome, till the thirteenth year of ^ Claudius, Cen.
Lib. 1. Cap. 10.
and fifty five years after Christ, and himself came not to Rome till the
fifty eight year after Christ.


R. What would you make of all that?


C. Either ye must grant the Church of Rome was not converted by Saint Peter,
or then there was no Church there before the forty one year after our Lord,
at which time Saint Peter came to it.


R. Let it be so.


C. Then I pray you consider, that the Church of this Land, being little
posterior in time to the Church of Rome, there is no reason they should bear
us down with the shadow of their Antiquity, nor insult over us, as if they
were a mother Church to us, seeing it pleased God to convert us to the
Christian faith, almost as soon as themselves, and that not by them but by
others whom he sent among us.


R. But ye have not made that clear as yet.


C. What I have not, I shall by Gods grace. In the second year of Claudi^s,
and forty four years after Christ, Simon Zelotes an Apostle came to
Britain, and, Preached the Gospel: This was but three years after Simon Peter
came to Rome.


R. How will you prove that?


C. My proofs are; Dorotheus in his Synopsis: Simon Zelotes peragrata
Mauritania, and Aphrorum regione, Christ^m praedicauit tandem in Britannia, vbi
crucifixus, occisus, and sepultus est. Doroth. Again, Nicephorus lib. 2. cap.
40. says that Simon Zelotes having Preached to many Countries, at length
Euangelij doctrinam ad occidentalem Oceanum insulasque Britannica^ perfert, and
both of them are cited by your late Cardinal, writer of the History, Baronius.


R. Is that all you have for you?


C. No: I have more yet; for Joseph of Arimathea, Baron. Annals.
about the year of our Lord fifty three, came also to Britain, and taught
the Gospel: witnesses hereof are Balaeus, Flemingus, Capgrauus, Scropus,
Polidorus Virgilius; and as many think, he was sent by Philip out of France
over to Britain. Moreover Theodoret witnesses, that the Apostle Saint Paul
after his deliverance out of Prison under Nero, Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 10.
Holius.
came into Britain, and taught the Gospel. And the same also is testified by
Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem.


R. I remember indeed that in his Epistle to the Romans 15.24 was then of
purpose to have come to Spain.


C. And you may the more easily think he came to Britain in like manner,
seeing so famous an Author affirms it: and you shall like it the better if you
consider the matter he has in hand, when he makes mention of the conversion of
Britain.


R. I pray you let me hear it.


C. The Graecians alleged that our first propagators of the evangell were base
men, not comparable for wisdom and Learning to their Law-giuers, Lycurgus,
Solon, and the rest: This Father replied that the laws of their Law-giuers
were only received in Graecia, but that our first Preachers of the Gospel had
in short time made the most famous Countries, and Kingdoms of the World to
embrace it. An evident argument of a divine power assisting them: (...), etc.
for says he our Fithers, and Publicans, and that Tent maker, or Cutter of
Leather (so he calls Saint Paul) has not only made the Romans, and these who
live under their Empire to embrace the Christian faith, but also the Scythians,
Sauromatans, Indians, Ethiopians, Persians, Britans, Germans, and in a word
has induced all Nations, (...), to receive the Laws of CHRIST crucified. What
think you of this testimony?


R. Truly I am glad to hear that the Lord among other Nations has also had
mercy on this Country of ours, to communicate to them the grace of the
Gospel.


C. You shall yet hear more; that Aristobolus, mentioned Romans 16. came also to
this Isle, and discharged the Office of a Bishop, as witnesses the forenamed
Dorotheus. May you not see we are not inferior to any Christian Country in
this part of the World, and that we have as many clear witnesses of our
Ancient Christian faith, as any nation of Europe has for them?


R. Indeed I see you have more then I would have believed, if their authority
be good enough.


C. What need you doubt of their authority? for if testimonies of Fathers of
the Primitive Church be good to prove the Antiquity of any Church in Europe,
why should their authority be called in doubt when they speak for our Church?


R. But we are informed that the Bishops of Rome were the first, who sent some
of their Clergy to this Isle to convert it to the faith.


C. You may see the contrary, by that which I have said already; and I will
yet make it more clear to you. The first King of the South part of the Isle
that embraced the Christian faith, was Lucius, in the y^are of our LORD one
hundredth twenty and four. In that same time Donald King of the North part of
it became also a Christian.


R. That is true; but Lucius required the Bishop of Rome to send him some
teachers to instruct him in the Christian faith and (as the Chronicle records)
he sent into Britain, Damianus, and Fugatianus.


C. What will you gather of that?


R. That this I Will was converted by such teachers as the Bishop of Rome sent
into it.


C. How can you say that? seeing many in the Kingdoms were converted before
the Kings were converted, and your own Baronius cannot deny it; these are his
words: Cum diu alioqui any Euangelium Christi illu^ perlatum fuisset, vt
testatur Gilda sapiens: that long before those men Damianus, and Fuga^ianus
came here, the Gospel was here, as witnesses Gilda the wise: Seeing your own
Writers are ^orced to confess it, I marvel with what face can any man say,
that the Gospel came to us from Rome.


R. All that you have yet said makes something for the Church of England;
nothing for the Church of Scotland.


C. W^ inhabit both one Isle; and what good or evil specially in Religion has
come to the one, has been found by manifold experiences easily derived to the
other.


R. But what think you; whether came the light of the Gospel first to you or
to them?


C. That is a Jesuitical Policy to divide them whom GOD has coupled, and to
cause us to contend together in that, wherein we agree jointly to contend with
the Church of Rome: what part of the Isle God did first illuminate with his
light is nothing to the matter: If it was their glory to have the Sun of
righteousness first shining on them, we envy it not; this is sufficient: the
Lord had a Church here in this Isle as soon as in Rome, and neither they nor
we had our faith from Rome; and if ^ou, or any for you will call in doubt the
antiquity of the Church of England, I warrant you, you shall find a number
both of Learned and Grave Divines (wherein they are not inferior to any Church
in Europe) to answer for themselves. And if yet you crave further light
concerning the antiquity of our Church, I will show you that which may content
you if you be reasonable.


R. Let me hear what is that.


C. Mark me this testimony of Tertullian who lived in the two hundredth year
of Christ: Adu^rsus I^daeos. cap. 7.8.
Britannorumloca Romanismaccessa Christo subdita sunt. Now what part of
Britain he means your own Cardinal Ba^onius will declare unto you: for when
he has said, magnam B^itanni^e partem fuisse liberam, then he proves it by
the wall built so often by Victo^ine, by Adri^n; as he cites ex A^lio
Spartianom Adriano, and an other ce^^^tius murus built by Antonin^s Pius; as he
cites out of Julius Capitolinus in Pio. By this says he, it is evident that
Britannia was divided by a wall; ^aron. annal. anno Christi 183 Sect. 6.
that part within the w^ll was possessed by Rom^ns, the other without Britanni
libere possiderunt, qui saepe muros illos egres^ Romanos praelijs provocarun^:
What say ye now of these testimonies?


R. I think indeed that is a great testimony for the antiquity of your
Church.


C. So you may: for this same cause Petrus Cluniacensis vocat Scotos
Antiquiores Christianos, Cen^ur. ^. cap. 2. Ce^t. 3. cap. 3.
calls Scottish men the more ancient Christians. You will make then no more
contradiction, but that these testimonies which record the conversion of
Britain, belong both to the South and North parts of the Isle?


R. Your former argument brought out of Tertullian, and expounded by Baronius
cleares that.


C. Yet if you please, hear what Origin says, Hom. 4. in Ezech.
who lived in the year of CHRIST two hundredth and sixty; he also witnesses
Britanniam in Christianam consentire religionem. To him we may add Jerome, Ad
Euagrium.
in the year of our Lord four hundredth and five: Gallia, Britannia, Africa,
Persis, oriens I^dia, and omnes barbarae Nationes vnum Christum adorant, vnam
obseruant regulam veritatis.


R. But why then by some is Palladius called Scotorum Apostolus?


C. Men may give names as they please; but he and Servanus, Sedulius, Nimanus
and many more came, but in the five hundredth year of our Lord, and may well
have been waterers of our Church, but sure it is they were not the first
planters of it.


R. It is likely indeed to be so.


C. But to return. Under Diocletian in the three hundredth year, great
persecution was made by that Tyrant in all Christian Churches, and among the
rest the Church of South Britain was also persecuted by his Deputies, for the
which many fled to Crachlint King of Scots, who did lovingly receive them, and
assigned to them the Isle of M^n, and erected there a Temple dedicated to
Christ called otherwise Sodo^e^sis ecclesia, wherein they peaceably worshipped
Christ Jesus; and this our own Chronicle witnesses. After this in the days
of Fethelmacus, which was about the ^ift year of the Emperor Constantius,
there came into this Country one Regulus Albatus out of Achaia a Province in
Graecia; but the Country was converted also long before he came: Therefore
^iergus^ King of the Pictes gave him his Palace he had in Fy^^e, Holius. Page
87.
where he built the Church of Saint Andrew: desire you still to hear any more?


R. Truly I am very glad to hear that we have been so ancient Christians;
and yet there remains a doubt in my heart, that the Gospel came never hither
but out of Rome.


C. Remember you not what I have proved; seeing we are but three years in
Christianity behind Rome, think you in so small time they did so increase,
that they spread out their branches to the uttermost parts of the earth? Yea,
rather if you will read the Story, you shall find that for three hundredth
years (wherein are many three years) they were so vexed by the persecutors,
that they could not get their own Church stablished; as after it was when God
relented the persecution. But to come n^erer yet unto you; whether he was an
Apostle or an Apostolic man, that first planted our Church, I will give you
two great reasons that we have our Faith from the Greek or East Churches, not
from the Latin or West Church.


R. Now that is the point, and I pray you once clear it: for I think if you
euince that, the Church of Rome in her best estate has been unto us a sister
Church, but no mother church.


C. My first Argument is from Petrus Cluniacensis Abbas, writing to Bernard,
who affirms that for seven or eight hundred years after Christ, the
Scottishmen did celebra^e the Passover all this time after the Grecian manner,
not aster the Roman.


R. I understand not that.


C. Then I will tell you it. Soon after the days of the Apostles, there
happened a controversy between the Churches of the East and West, about the
celebration of the Passover: They of the East did observe it the fourteenth
day of the Moon, that same day wherein the Jews kept their Passover: They
again of the West, thinking they would have no communion with the Jews, did
celebrate it the next Sabbath after the fourteenth day. Policrates, with the
oriental Bishops, alleged the authority of John, Philip, Policarp, yea the
prescript of the Euangell for their warrant. Victor, and the Bishops of the
West alleged for their warrant, Saint Peter, Saint Paul: Such as were more
moderate, misliked to see a Schism in the Church for so small a matter:
Irenaeus judges, Obseruationes ill^s esse liber^s. Socrates, Ostendit nec
Victorem, nec Policraten iustam habuisse causam de festo Paschatis tam odiose
digladiandi: Nam nec Seruator (inquit) nec Apostoli (...): Seeing neither our
Savior, nor his Apostles by any Law has commanded the observation thereof.


R. Truly it was a lamentable thing, to see so sore a renting of the Church,
for so small a cause.


C. It was indeed: and yet that in this controversy, the Churches of Britain
observed the manner of the Eastern Church, it is an argument they reverenced
the East Church for their mother, from whom the grace of the Gospel had come
to them.


R. It is indeed likely: If these Churches had been planted by Romish
Doctors, they would have also received the Romish ceremonies.


C. But there is yet an other Argument: Histor. Britan. lib. 8. cap. 4.
Galsrid the Cardinal in his Story of Britain, which he wrote in the seven
hundredth year, witnesses that the Britans would not receive Augustinus
Junior, Cent. 2. Cap. 2.
the Legate of Gregory the great, nor yet acknowledge any primacie of the
Bishop of Rome over them: An evident argument they esteemed not the Romish
Church to be their Mother Church. To clear this you shall know that in the
sixth hundredth year Gregorius magnus sent into England Augustinus Junior, to
persuade the Church there to receive the Romish ceremonies, which to that day
they had not known; as Altars, Images, Vestiments; Crosses, wherein albeit he
had not such speedy success as he would, yet at length did he obtain it,
and intended also to effect the like in the Church of Scotland, Cent. 6. li. 5.
cap. 17.
but was strongly resisted by Daganus, and Columbanus, Qui nullam in ritibus
mutationem admittere voluerunt. Again in the seven hundredth year a great
schism was in the church of Britain: some refusing the Ceremonies of the
Romish Church, keeping still their ancient custom; for the which they
pretended the authority of Saint John the Evangelist: Others again embracing
the Romish ceremonies* which part waxed the stronger, in that King Osuvius
inclined to them. Always the matter was debated with so hot contention, that
from words it came to wepons, and twelve hundredth Churchmen were slain that
refused the Romish Ceremonies: this is all the good the Britain Church got
from the Popes Legate; yet the evil rested not here, for at length in the
eight hundredth year, by the persuasion of one Ecbertus, this part of the Isle
was also induced to receive the Romish Ceremonies, and thereafter their corrupt
doctrine. And thus did the Bishop of Rome first obtain superiority over us;
and disgrace by his foolish inventions the glory, and sincerity of the Church
of Britain. By all this discourse which truly I have made unto you, it may be
evident how vainly and without a cause the defenders of the Romish Church brag
of their ancient Primacie over all Churches, and specially how far they wrong
this Isle, when they will have Rome caled a mother to the Churches here: which
unless you will add one syllable cannot be admitted, for indeed she is a
Stepmother, and in a word that Infamous Whore of Babel, who as she has
corrupted the Churches with her abominable Superstitions, no marvel if she
has at length infected us also. That Rome is B^bel I will show GOD willing in
our next conference, where we shall yet more abu^dantly see Gods goodness
toward this Isle, that as we were among the last of them who were deceived by
her inchantme^ts, so (praised be God) we are among the first of these, whom God
by the light of the Gospel has delivered from her bondage: And the LORD more
and more open your eyes to see the truth.


R. God grant me that grace. I will not deny you have wakened thoughts in me
which at this time I cannot utter: And now if you prove Rome to be Babel, I
will think my self happy that God has sent me this occasion, as to call me
out of it among others of his people. But to morrow, God willing, you will (I
hope) keep your promise.


C. If God lend me life, and health, I will not fail.


THE THIRD DAYS CONFERENCE. Concerning the Apostacy of the Church of ROME,
and how she is now become that mother of Whoredoms. REVEL.
C. NOw (Sir) I am come again to keep my promise, and to prove unto you that
Babel in the Revelation signifies Rome.


R. I think that shall be the most difficult labor you have taken in hand
hitherto.


C. Will you make me this promise, to quit your communion with the Church of
Rome, if I prove her to be the Whore of Babel, the mother of Whoredoms?


R. I think it were good reason: for I see what ever that Babel may be, much
evil is spoken of it, and all Gods people are commanded to go out of Babel,
with certification, if they will not, they shall be partakers of her plagues.


C. Go to then, we will first lay this for a ground, that Babel here is not to
be taken literally, neither for Babel in Egypt called now Cayrus, nor yet for
Babel in Caldie: but that figuratively it signifies some other thing besides
any of them, and this is granted by your own Doctors. Hoc primum constet,
Riber. in Apoc. 14.
nomen Babylon^s hic non proprie, sed figura^e accipi: Cum dicit mysterium,
mysticum esse indicat quod dicit, id est, arcanum quippiam latere in nomine
Babylonis, nec ita debere accipi vt sonat.


R. Let that pass, for I see in that general you and they agree.


C. Well then; we will come and see what is understood by Babel: where if you
will first hear how the Romish Doctors expound Babel, you shall see such
confusion among them as declares them to be the builders of Babel indeed, for
one of them understands not what the other says.


R. How so?


C. You shall see how so. The Divines of Rhemes say that Babel, and the Whore
of Babel signifies the universal company of the wicked. Revel. cap. 14.8.
what think you of that?


R. Good ^ooth I cannot think it a solid Commentary: for this Whore of Babel
is said to make all Nations drunken with the wine of her fornications, and it
is a hard speech to say that the universal company of the reproba^e has
corrupted al Nations.


C. You take it up very wisely: And yet that they themselves speak this
without any certain knowledge it appears by that, which they say Cap. 17. 18.
these are their words: if this great City be meant of any one City, and not
of the universal company of the reprobate etc. it is likely to be Old Rome
till the days of Constantine. And again upon the fifth verse of that same
Chapter they say: The first persecuting Emperors were but figures of
Antichrist, and it may well be that the great Antichrist shall sit in Rome also
as his figures sat in Rome.


R. Say the Rhemists, that it may very well be that Antichrist shall sit in
Rome?


C. Yea forsooth, look their own words.


R. I have no skill of that: I never heard but that he should be a Jew of the
Tribe of Dan, and should sit in Jerusalem.


C. That is so uncertain a fable that (as you see) themselves cannot lean to
it, and their speech for us is plain enough, it may very well be (say they)
that Antichrist shall sit at Rome. But to proceed in our purpose, this
exposition called Communis expositio, is rejected by their own companions.
Viega. in Apoca.
In hac multa sunt ad quae visio invita and repugnans trahitur, so says Viega
in Apocal. 17.


R. I think they have reason to say so: but after what manner do they expound
Babel?


C. You shall hear. De Pont. Romans lib. 2. cap. 2.
Bellarmine not only confesses Babel is Rome, but proves it by the testimony
of ancient fathers. In Apo. 14.
Ribera thus, Romae conueniunt aptissime omnia quae de Babylone dicuntur hoc
libro, atqueillud imprimis, quod alij conuenire non potest: Septem capita,
septem sunt montes. Whatsoever in this book is spoken of Babel, agrees most
properly to Rome, especially that which can agree to none other, the Seven
heads are seven hills.


R. That is plain talk: Indeed I have heard much shifting about these hills,
and one of themselves said to me that these seven hills signify seven deadly
sins, all to this end to deny that this Prophecy points out Rome, but I
never heard it confessed before so clearly.


C. You may well say it: for the Rhemists charge the Protestants with madness
for expounding the Seven heads seven hills; they should impute madness to their
own fellows, and not to us, for they are forced to confess that this Babel
is Rome, and the Seven heads seven hills, wherein the whore sits.


R. In truth I see they have the weakest end of the string; some of them
denying Babel to be Rome; some of them not only granting, but proouing it.


C. But because I will hide nothing from you, you shall hear what distinctions
they use: Bellarmine says, by Babel is meant Ethnica Roma sub Imperatoribus,
Ethnique Rome under Emperors. Viega again he says, In si^e cap. 18.
Sermo non es^ de antiqua illa Roma, sed de illa quae s^orebit extremo mundi
tempore, the speech is not of old Rome, but of Rome as it shall be in the last
time of the World: yet he stands not at this but comes (as Ribera also does)
and takes up both the opinions. In Apocal. 14.
Quicquid mali de Roma scribitur in hac Apocalypsi, vel ad tempus illud
spectat, quo gentilibus Imperatoribu^ seruiebat, vel Pontificem suum a se
ei^cerit. Whatsoever evil is spoken of Rome in this Apocalypse pertaines either
to that Rome which was subject to Ethnique Emperors, or to that Rome which
will make defection from the Bishop of Rome and cast him out of their City:
for they grant that their Bishop will be cast out of Rome, that Rome will be
utterly ruinated, and yet say they even then when there shall not be such a
thing as Rome, yet their Pope shall be Bishop of Rome: what think you of this
stuff? see you not how they reele? some of them say Rome was Babel, some of
them say it will be Babel; none of them can deny that this Babel spoken of by
Saint John, the chief seat and City of Antichrist, is Rome.


R. I think it goes very hard with them, when their best Doctors can say no
more in defense of Rome, but it was Babel, or it will be Babel, that is, either
Antichrist sat there, or will set there.


C. I hope you shall think much more before you go: for now I will improve
their distinction, and let you see it is not Ethnique Rome under Emperors, nor
the Town of Rome in the last time of the World, that here is called Babel but
the whorish Church of Rome governed by Apostated Popes.


R. Make that clear and the cause is won. Babel in the Revelation is not
Ethnique Rome under Emperors, but Rome once Christian now corrupted under
Popes.




C. It is evident S. John prophecies of the state of Rome as it will be in the
days of Antichrist, so says the Jesuit Viega* Haec est quarta visio huius
operis; eaque illustrissima, and ad Antichristi tempora pertinens. So also
says the Jesuit Ribera, a ca. 12. ad 21. Est huius libri pars secunda, and
iota ad Antichristum, eiusque tempora pertinet. But the days of persecuting
Emperors, were not the days of Antichrist: if they so say, they destroy all
their own doctrine concerning Antichrist, and therefore this prophecy of
Babel, is not to be understood of the Ethnicke Rome under Emperors. Secondly,
Ethnicke Rome as yet had not embraced the Gospel, and was not married with
Christ, and therefore cannot be this Whore, which Carthusian their own man
expounds to be An adulterous Whore: You shall find no people in holy Scripture
charged with spiritual Whoredom, but such as have been married with Christ,
none can be Apostates from the faith, who never stood in the faith, there
must be (...) before (...). This whoorish Babel then can not be Ethnicke Rome,
unmarried with Christ. Seeing themselves do grant it is Rome, it must be Rome
once Christian, but now corrupted: once Apostolic standing in the faith, now
Apostati^ke fallen from the faith. Thirdly, this Whore of Babel has a cup in
her hand full of abominations, and the filthiness of her fornication^, wherewith
she makes drunken the inhabitants of the earth. By this golden cup Berengandus
their own man understands, Documenta erroribus plena: And so this Babel can
not signify Rome under Emperors, who subdued the world by force of Sword and
plain violence, but must signify Rome under Popes, which has deceived the
world by false doctrine and lying miracles. Fourthly, this Babel is called the
mother of Whoredoms and abominations in the earth, which not only her self
has played the Whore, corrupting the true worship of God, but has enforced
her corruptions and superstitions upon others. Now it is known that old Rome
sought no more but subjection of bodies, leaving the consciences of people free
to any kind of worship they pleased: They subdued the Jews, and forced them
to pay tribute; but left them to their own Religion: yea so far were they
from enforcing their superstitious worship upon any nation, that by the
contrary themselves were infected with the superstitions of all nations, as is
evident by their Pantheon, which they erected in the honor of all Gods. And so
it is not Ethnicke Rome under Emperors which here is called the Mother of
whoredoms. Carthus.
Fifthly, the name of this Babel is mysterium, in quo aliud cernitur, aliud
intelligitur: Quia enim tot simulatis virtutibus decoratur, non omnibus
mulieris huius prauatas innotescet, sed viris ius^is and prudentibus. So then
by this Babel, some mystical enemy is understood, being indeed an enemy,
but in show pretending friendship: and therefore called afterward Gog, and not
Magog, that is, not an open and plain enemy, as is the Turk: But Gog, a
covered enemy: for this cause figured also before by a beast with two horns,
looking like a Lamb, but speaking like the Dragon. To this purpose says
JEROME, In Daniel. 11.
Simulabit se ducem faederis: And Hilarious, that Antichrist shall be contrary
to Christ, under a ^orme of fained and hypocritical godliness. And
Chrysostom, In Matthew. Hom. 49.
Antichrist must be known by his doctrine, not by his titles, miracles, nor
words of godliness. And therefore it is a silly defense of the Jesuits: The
Pope (say they) prayers humbly to God, and calls himself seruus seruorum Dei,
therefore is not an adversary: for the Question is not what he calls
himself, but what he is. But to hold upon this point, it is evident by what
which I have said, that by Babel here is not meant Rome Ethnicke, nor yet Rome
which at the last shall rebel (for both these are open enemies) but Rome under
Popes, a mystical enemy. Sixthly, in this Revelation, there are two women
described; the one Chap. 12. clothed with the Sun, which is CHRIST, having on
her head twelve Stars for a Garland, (the glory of the true Church is the
doctrine of the twelve Apostles) and under her feet the Moon, figuring this
mutable world: This woman (as themselves confess) represents the true Church.
The other woman described Chap. 17. is arrayed in Purple, Scarlet, Gold, and
precious stones, void of inward beauty and chastity, she sets forth her
self with all external bravery, that she may draw many lovers to her. Now
(I say) seeing the first woman signifies the true Church (as themselves
confess) and afterward is called the L^mbes wife, why do they not ^ee that
this whorish woman must signify the false Church? And since they grant that
Babel is Rome, what else can the whore of Babel be, but the whoorish Church of
Rome? And therefore their own Doctors expounding that prophecy of Saint
John, Babel is fallen, and become an habitation of di^els: Cap. 13.
Ribera expounds it of an external desolation, acc^rding to that of ^say,
proph^cied of the first Babel, The ^im, and Z^m shall leap there. But Viega,
Nobis etiam illud dicendum vi^etur cum Aretha, Primasio, Ambrosio, Ansberto,
Haimone, idololatriam eius vrbis significari, desecturamque, esse Romam a fide,
atque adco futuram esse habitationem daemoniorum ob execranda slagitia, and
i^olotriae superstitione^, expounds it also of Rome her falling from the faith,
which he says is a thing which will be, but we say according to truth is a
thing that is done already, the foretold defection is come, Antichrist that man
of sin is discovered, God by the breath of his mouth is daily consuming him.


THE FOVRTH DAYS CONFERENCE. Wherein is declared that ROME is the seat of
Antichrist.
C. GOod morrow ( Sir) how do you to day?


R. The best I can.


C. It is most like you have not rested well this night.


R. To say the truth; Thinking on our conference made my rest the less.


C. It agrees but ill with you to hear the Church of Rome convicted of
Apostasy.


R. I think so indeed, and still will so think till ye resolve this
question: what is the cause, there being so many Wise and Learned men in the
Popes Church, that they cannot see the truth, and follow it?


C. Whether they see or see not I cannot tell you, but you know what the
Apostle says. Brethren ye see your calling, 1. Cor. 1.26
not many wise, not many noble, nor mighty men after the flesh are called, but
God has chosen the foolish things of the World to confound ^he wise.


R. I know that is the Apostles saying; but yet I cannot but marvel what
should hold them back from knowledge of the truth.


C. You shall cease to marvel if you con^^der one thing.


R. What is that?


C. When Christ showed himself to the World, how many of the Nobles, and
Learned Rabbis, did know him? Will you find any more among the Noble^ but
Joseph of Ar^mathea? Will you find any more among the Learned Pharisees but
Nicodemus?


R. Truly not that I remember,


C. Was it then think you a good argument they used against Christ? Does any
of the Rulers, or Scribes believe in Christ^, but only this cursed people who
knows not the Law?


R. No indeed.


C. Be not then moved with the like now. Oh, say the Papists, how many Learned
men are of our Religion? Every man natural, in things pertaining to eternal
life is (...), without a mind, Titus 3.3
till he be illuminate by grace: were he in natural reason as quick as
Aristotle, or in policy as Achitophel, he is but a stark fool till he be
taught of God: and therefore marvel no more that Learned Jesuits cannot know
the truth, then when you hear that Learned Jewish Rabbis could not know
Christ when he was among them.


R. The Lord then make us thankful for revealing the way of life unto us,
which is hid from so many in the World.


C. Amen good Lord. And now for your further confirmation consider these
testimonies I have subioyned. How the Fathers of the first ages point out
Antichrist to come, and warn us to look for him at Rome.



Let no man seduce you by any means, for the day of the Lord shall not come
unless there come first a revolt, (...), and the man of sin be revealed,
the son of perdition, which is an adversary, and extolled above all which is
called God, or that is worshipped: so that he sits in the temple of God,
showing himself as if he were God 2. Thessal. 2.3. Now the mystery of
iniquity works, only he which now withholdeth will let it till he be taken
out of the way.


C. What think you of this Prophecy.


R. I have heard that to be a falling away from the Roman Empire.


C. No (Sir) the most judicious, both Ancient, and Recent, expound it to be a
falling from the faith: As for the Ancients see Augustine de Ciuitate Dei ^ib.
20. Cap. 19. Nulli dubium est eum de Antichristo ista dixisse For the Recents
see Aquinas on this place.


R. But granting it were so, yet this Prophecy is of one single man and cannot
be meant of the Popes of Rome.


C. No that is also a silly shift: when your Churchmen say that the Pope is
Christ Vicar, do they mean any one single Pope?


R. No, but the state or succession of Popes.


C. Very well, and when we say that the Pope is Christ opposite, do we
understand this man, or that man? no truly, but the whole state or regiment of
them since their defection.


R. But I see not how this Prophecy either touches the Pope, or the Church of
Rome; and if it be meant of any defection from the faith, it is meant of
Luther, Calvin, and such as have fallen from the Church of Rome.


C. Compare another Prophecy of the same Apostle concerning the some purpose,
and see how he expounds himself.


R. Where is that?


C. Here are his words 1. Timothy 4.1. Now the Spirit speaks evidently, that
in the last times some shall depart from the faith, attending to Spirits of
error, and Doctrine of Devils: and mark how he subioynes some particular
points of their doctrine which shall come in with the Apostasy, to wit, that
they shall forbid marriage, and command abstinence from meats, which God has
created to be received with thankesegiuing. What think you now, whether does
this touch them or us?


R. I know it cannot concern you, for you forbid none to marie that cannot
contain.


C. Neither can this Prophecy be cast back upon Heresies of the Marcionits,
and others nearest the Apostles days, as the Jesuits do to shift this
Prophecy from themselves: for the Apostles say, this Apostasy shall fall out
in the la^t times: And the former Prophecy says, that the Roman Empire must
first be taken out of the way, then shall the Apostasy work to the height:
as indeed it fell out that the seat of the Empire being translated to
Constantinople, Chr^so^t^^ 2. These. 2. hem. 4.
the Emperor decreased, the Bishop of Rome more and more increased, so that it
is not meant of Heretics nearest the Apostles days, but of such as shall rise
after the decay of the Roman Empire. And who tell me has grown by the* decay
of the Empire? None but the Pope; he has his Imperial seat, his robes, his
crown, his rents, so that the Emperor, except the name and the double Eagle,
has little or nothing of the Empire. And therefore Aquinas, who saw what was
the meaning of that place, moves the doubt: What shall we answer (says he)
seeing the Roman Empire is decayed, how can we deny bu^ Antichrist is come? To
this he answers, we must say the Roman Empire is not away, only the Temporal
power thereof is changed into a Spiritual: what think you, is there not good
stuff here?


R. In truth I think their cause the longer I hear you the weaker.


C. So may you. But yet more to confirm you consider how the Ancient expound
this Prophecy, and still cast it upon the Church of Rome. Irenaeus Lib. 5.
speaking of the number of the beasts name six hundredth threescore and six,
albeit he plainly show it is not his divination, but the accomplishment of the
Prophecy which must find out the number of the name, and albeit he make
mention also o^ other names, as E^an, and Teitan, yet says he sed and (...)
valde verisimile est. Tertullian. contra Marcion. Babylon apud Ioannem Romanae
vrbis figura est, proinde magnae, regno superbae and sanctorum Dei
debellatricis. Tertullian. de resurrectione carnis, see how he expounds that
part of the Prophecy, Only he who now withholds, let till he be taken out of
the way. Donec de medio fiat quis nisi Romanus status? c^ius abscisio in december
reges Anti-christum superinducet, and tunc revelabitur iniquus etc. Ambrose in
2. Thessal. 2. Non prius veniet dominus quam regni Romani defectio fiat, and
appareat Antichristus qui interficiet sanctos reddita Romany liberate sub suo
tamen nomine. Et iterum. Post defectum Romani imperij appariturus est
Antichristus. Cyril Cateches. 15. Veniet Antichristus quum impleta fuerint
tempora Romani imperij. Hilarious contra Auxentium: Anne dubium est in eis esse
futurum, Is there any doubt, but Antichrist shall sit in these same temples,
and houses, which now ye love and honor: Item, Sub specie Euangelicae
praedicationis Christo co^trarius erit, ibid. This proves, that in the
judgment of Hilarious, Antichrist should be a professor, yea, even a Preacher
of the truth: Primasius in Apocal. cap. 16. Tunc cadet Babylon, qua^do
nouissime potestatem persequendi sanctos acceperit; Here also it is clear that
he means not old Rome. Do not these places make clear, that the Apostasy
here prophesied should come after the decay of the Roman Empire? and since
themselves can not deny but the temporal Empire is decayed, how then can they
deny the Apostasy?


R. I think iudeede these places make it clear: specially that which Ambrose
has wherein I mark these things. That first the Empire should decaie and
then Antichrist should appear, and he should restore liberty to the Romans,
but under his own name, and not under the Emperors name.


C. You have marked that very well: for the Pope has made the name of Romans
more famous then the Emperors did, and under color of a spiritual Empire,
has made all church subject unto the Church of Rome, and from his name to be
named Papists. Hieron in Daniel, 11. Antichristus simulabit se ducem foe deris,
hoc est, ^egis, and Testamenti Dei. And albeit the Prophecy of Antichrist was
not so clear to him, and others of these fathers also, as time has made it to
this age; yet expounding these words of the Apostle; He sits in the Temple of
God, he says, this is, Hierosolymis (vt quidam putant) vel in Ecclesia vt
verius arbitramur. quaest. 11. ad Aglasiam. August. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 20.
cap. 19. Rectius putant alij dictum latin, sicutest in Graeco: S^debit in
Templum Dei, quasi ipse cum suis esset Ecclesia Dei. Theophilactus, Haymo,
Lombardus, are of the same mind. The Jesuits of Rhemes having showed how many
fathers expound this Temple of Ierusalems Temple, at length distrusting it as a
vain opinion, they set down this second as more true: That Antichrist, if
ever he were of, or in the Church, shall be an Apostata, or runnegate out of
the Church, and shall usurp upon it by tyranny, and by challenging worship,
religion, and government thereof: so that he himself shall be adored in all
the Churches of the world; this is to sit in the Temple of God; if any Pope
ever ^id so, or shall do, then let the Ad^ersaries call him Antichrist. But
indeed this their confession whereby they would clear their Pope, does plain
soil him: he sits in the Church by profession, but is gone out of it by
Apostasy, and yet usurps government over it by tyranny; in every Church he is
adored as a God on ear^h, having power over the conscience, excommunicating all
such from humane society, as will not be subject to him. What think you of
that talk to give to the Pope? Tu es alter Deus in terris.


R. Who said that?


C. It was said to him in the second L^^erane Council, by Christopher
Marcellus.


R. Good sooth it was shame to the flatterer, and a blame to the Pope if he
blushed not when he heard it.


C. Oh, but that is not the worst; his Canonists style him their Lord God the
Pope.


R. Fie upon that; will they commit such blasphemy?


C. There are their own words: Dic^re Dominum Deum nostrum Papam non pot^isse
s^atuere, Extrau. Ioh. 22. cap. Cum inter etc.
prout statuit, haereticum est. To say, that our Lord God the Pope might have
discerned otherwise, then he has discerned is heretical. And again, that
they make a God of him, these places may let you see: Si Papa suae, Did. 40.
cap. Si Papae, etc.
and sraternae salutis negligens innumerabiles secum ducat cater^atim in
Gehennam, huiusmodi culpam nullus mortalium praesum^t redarguere. And again,
Est instar sacrilegij disputare de factis Papae, It is sacrilege to dispute
upon any of the Popes deeds. Did. ^0. ca. Non nos in glosa, etc.
Or otherwise it is to be said, Quod facta Papae excusantur vt homicidium
Sampsonis, furta Hebraeorum, and adulterium Iacobi: That the evil deeds of
the Pope are to be excused, as the selfe-murther of Sampson, the theft of the
Hebrews, the adultery of Jacob. Is not this to make the Pope a lawless man?


R. I think no less then you say.


C. But what say you to this? Causa 25. quast. ^. ca. Ideo, etc.
Canonibus sacris authoritatem it a praestat vt se illis non subijciat: He in
such sort gives authority to holy Scriptures, that he is not subject to it.
And that as Christ did some things against the Law (as when he touched the
Leper) so the Pope may do some things against the Law. Summa Angelica de
casibus Con. scientiae. D^^it Papa.
And albeit we read that Ba^a^m was rebuked of his own Ass^, by the which
Ass our subjects, by Balaam our Prelates are signified. yet ought not that to
be an example to our Subjects to reprove us.


R. Indeed I think it a meet comparison for him: Let him be Balaam, and let
such as he rides upon be Asses, as to me I thank God I am quit of him.


C. Always by these, and innumerable more testimonies it is evident, that he is
the lawless man that exaltes himself above all that is called God, and that
his blinded captives worship him as God. But we will proceed to the rest of
the testimonies. Greg. lib. 9. Epist. 30. Fiden^er dico quod quisquis se
vniuersalem vocat sacerdotem, aut vocari de^iderat in elatione sua,
Antichristum praecurrit. What think you, does not Gregory here black the
faces of his successors with a visible note of Antichrist? Who, but they are
so called?


R. They will say he speaks that of John Bishop of Constantinople, who at that
time usurped this style.


C. Yea, Dis^. 99. ca. Ecce, etc.
but when Eulogius Patriarch of Alexandria, gave that same style to Gregory
Bishop of Rome; he did sharply reprove him for it. Recedant verba quae
vanitatem instant, and charita^em vulnerant. But he has yet a clearer place:
Rex superbiae prope est, and quod dici nesas est, sacerdotum et exercitus
praeparatur, li. 4. Epist. 38. Sybilla says this King shall be (...),
Oraculorum ^ap. 8.
that is White-headed, and shall be called by a name much like Pontus: Or
otherwise (...), having many Heads or many Crowns: Here he has one mark
from his head, an other from his name: both of these agree to the Bishop of
Rome, who wears solemnly on his head a white Myter of Silver adorned with
three Crowns and precious stones, Ibid.
and in Latin is named Pontifex. And again she says, that the greatest
terror and fury of his Empire; and the greatest woe that he shall work,
shall be by the banks of Tyber. How the fathers of the last ages declare that
Antichrist is come, and point him out sitting at ROME.



The ninth hundred year, Thetgandus Episcopus Treuirensis Pontificem Romanum
Antichristum, and lupum vocat, and Romam Babylonem: Cum sis seruus seruorum,
dominus dominantium esse contendis, libidine dominandi in praeceps ^bis,
quicquid tibilibet, licet, fucusque, factus es Christianis. There he calls
the Bishop of Rome Antichrist, a Wolf, a usurper of domination, a deceiuer of
Christ^ndome, and Rome he calls Babylon: And the like at that same time was
testified by Guntherus Episcopus Coloniensis ad Nicolaum Pontificem Romanum. Tu
pontificis personam praete fers, at tyrannum agitas, sub cultu pastoris lupu^
sentimus, titulus parentem mentitur, tu te factis Iouem esse ostentas; quum sis
seruus seruorum, dominus dominantium esse contendis. Epist. 3.
Bernard says, Bestia illa in Apocalypsi, cui datum est osloquens blasphemias,
and bellum gerens cum sanctis, Petri cathedram occupat, tanquam leo paratus ad
praedam. The beast spoken of in the Revelation, having a mouth speaking
blasphemies, and which Wars against the Saints, is now gotten into Peter's
Chair, as a Lion prepared for his prey: What think ye of these words?


R. What should I think? for my own part I marvel that the Pope did not
burn Bernard for an heretic.


C. So you may: But hear yet mo^e. Io^chimus Abbas, who lived three hundred
years since, says Antichristus iamdudum natus est Romae, and altius extolletur
in sede Apostolica. Antichrist long since is borne in Rome, and shall be
advanced yet higher in the Apostolic seat. Franciscus Petrarcha Archdecon of
Parma, who lived in the thousand three hundredth and fifty year, Epist. 5.14,
17, 18, 19, etc. Compares the Pope to Judas, who betrayed Christ with a kiss,
his Clergy to the I^wes, who said to him, Aue Rex Iudaeorum: His Prelates to
the Phari^ies, ^ho in mockery clothed him with Pu^ple, and after crucified
him. And again, Deny it now if thou can? That thou art she whom S. John
saw in the spirit sitting upon many waters; Thou art she and none other, that
Babylon the mother of the whoredoms of the earth, drunken with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus; thou art she which have made all Kings of the earth
drunken with the Cups of thy poison. In the thousand and three hundredth year,
lib. 2. cap.5. In Synodo Reginoburgensi habita est haec oration ^ quodam
Episcopo contra pontificem Romanum. Sub Pontificis maximi titulo, pastoris
pelle, lupum sae^is^mum (nisi caeci simus) sentimus: Romani slamines arma in
omnes habent Christianos, audendo, fallendo, and bella ex bellis serendo: magni
facti oues trucidant, occidunt pacem, concord^am terris depellunt, intestina
bella, domesticas seditiones ab inferis eliciunt, indies magis ac magis omnium
vires debilitant, vt omnium capitibus insultent, omnes deuorent, vniuersos in
seruitutem redigant, etc. Ingentia loquitur, quasi vero Deus esset: noua
consilia sub pectore volutat, vt nouum sibi constituat imperium, leges
commutat, suas sancit: contamin^t, diripit, spoliat, fraudat, occidit perditus
ille homo, quem Antichristum vocare solent, in cuius front co^tumeliae nomen
scriptum est: Deus sum, errare non possum: in templo Dei sedet; long, lateque,
dominatur. In the thousand and four hundredth year, lib. 1. cap. 4. Johannes
vicesimus tertius, wrote unto the Oriental Church an Epistle, declaring that
there was but one Christian Church only, and that he was head thereof, and
the Vicar of Christ: The Grecians wrote back to him this answer. Potentiam
tuam summam erga sub^itos tuos firmiter credimus, superbiam tuam summam
tolerare non possumus, auaritiam expl^re non valemus: Diabolus tecum quia
Dominus nobiscum. Thy great power over thy Subjects we firmly believe, thy
surpassing pride we can not tolerate, thy avarice we are not able to satisfy:
the devil is with thee, for the Lord is with us.


R. God be merciful to us.


C. Amen. Now (Sir) I must crave your license, for some friends are attending
me, with whom I appointed to meet this hour.


R. Good reason, but before you go, I would fain he are an answer to two
questions, which commonly they demand.


C. Which are those?


R. The one is: Where was your Church before Luther? the other: Are all our
fathers damned?


C. With a very good will. But if you please, defer the conference concerning
them till to morrow.


R. Let it be so, now the Lord be with you.


THE FIFTH DAYS CONFERENCE. Wherein the common question of the Adversaries is
answered: Where was your Church before LVTHER?
C. NOw ( Sir) you remember you propounded two questions to me yesternight.


R. It is very true, and I would gladly hear your answer to them, for* my
further resolution: What think you then, because you call Papistrie heresy,
are you of that mind that all our fathers are damned, and that no Papist can
be saved?


C. I am not to judge of men's persons: many are called Papists who know not
what Papistrie means, and many live Papists who dare not die Papists, or if so
they do, they know not what they do. But Papistrie it self, I affirm it is
a pernicious doctrine, yea as the Apostle calls it, a doctrine of devils,
killing the Souls of them who believe it: But this is the second of your
questions, which we will reserve till the next day.


R. Let it be so. What then say you to the first? Where was your Church before
Luther?


C. Even where our doctrine was, sometime in one Country, sometime in an
other, as it pleased God in his wise dispensati^n, who caries the light of his
Gospel, as he does the Sun, through the World, to illuminate Nations at
s^uerall times therewith according to his will.


R. That is a fair General; but will ye tell us, who were these? What
Country people? What Doctors, who taught as ye teach?


R. Look the Churches of Asia, Asricke, and of Europe, consider them as they
were before the mystery of iniquity came to the hight, and you shall see that
they all had the same doctrine, and form of a Church that we have in all
substantial points pertaining to Religion.


R. But you are not able to name one before Luther, teaching in all things as
he did.


C. This is a piece of Sophistry, whereby your deceivers blind the ignorant.


R. How so, should not the teachers of the truth agree in all things in one
harmony?


C. I grant they should, and thanks be to God, they do also in all substantial
things which are Articles of our faith. But is this a good reason: because some
Doctors in some opinions differ, whereof men may be ignorant and saved
nevertheless, that therefore these Doctors teach no truth, and their Churches
are no true Churches?


R. That seems to be hard indeed.


C. You have reason for you so to think: for in one age Vi^tor with the Church
in the West was in a different opinion from Policrates, and the Churches of the
East; and Jerome had his own discordance with Augustine, against the
exposition of the commandment, Thou shall bear no false witness, in that
question de mendacio: and the first Fathers of the Primitive Church were
Chiliasts; shall it thereupon follow, that because in this point, they taught
not in all things as we do, that therefore they were not a Church?


R. It is no reason.


C. Cyprian in the point of rebaptising, taught not as Cornelius; what of that?
will it follow that he was not a faithful Pastor, or the Church of Carthage
was not a true Church?


R. It follows not indeed.


C. Why then do you urge me to give you one before Luther or Calvin, who in
all points taught as we teach. The Doctors of the Church both ancient and
recent, are men subject to infirmities; for no man upon earth, has his
understanding perfect, whereof it comes to pass, that in some things one of
them differs from an other: But as to the Articles of the faith, and substance
of Christian religion, whereby comes salvation; sure it is Tertullian and
Cyprian, Ambrose, A^gustine, Luther and Calvin have all delivered o^e doctrine,
and did teach the way of God truly.


R. The^ you think the Fathers of the Primitive Church were of your Religion.


C. I think s^ indeed, and hope to die in that same faith where^^ they lived
and died.


R. It would be thought strange to hear that in Italy, that the Doctors of
the Primitive Church were of the Protestants Religion.


C. No marvel it be strange there, where Truth is a stranger: but this answer
was given you and them both, by a worthy Doctor of our Church and we yet stand
to it: Patres in maximis sunt nostri, in multis varij, ^n minimis vestri. Such
Fathers as have written before us, and you both in greatest things are ours, in
many things are doubtful, in smallest things they are yours.


R. Well, I shall remember that (God willing): but in the days of Papistrie,
wherewith you say the world was blinded, where was your Church?


C. Answer me but an other question, and it shall resolve you.


R. What is that?


C. Your Doctors say, that when Antichrist shall come, the Church shall ^lie to
the desert, that is, as themselves expound it: The Church shall be without
public state of regiment, Rhemists. Revel. 12.
and open free exercise of holy functions, neither shall it be unknown to the
faithful which follow it; as this day may be seen the like by the Church of
Roman Catholics in many parts of England.


R. What does that help you?


C. Very much: that which they themselves say, will be done, we say is done:
Antichrist has already chased the Church to the wilderness, and so oppressed
it, that for a time it had no public state of regiment, nor open free exercise
of holy functions: yet was it not unknown to the faithful that followed it,
nor to the enemies that persecuted it, as this day may be seen by the Church
of Christian Catholics in many parts of France.


R. Will ye make that clear, and I think you have won much.


C. What greater clearenesse can you crave? If this answer be good to clear
the Popes Church, when they say it will be obs^ured by Antichrist, and yet be:
is it not as good to justify our Church, when we say it has been obscured by
Antichrist, and yet was?


R. The answer is good enough, only if you can, I would have you qualify it
more particularl^.


C. There is not one age since the days of Christ unto this day, wherein I can
not point forth men, preaching and professing as we do: but because your
doubt is specially of the time of Papistry, I will let you see it is a
needless question for the Popes Church to demand of us, where our Church then
was? for they found us always in their teeth before ever Luther or Calvin was
borne.


R. Make that good.


C. Reme^us a Popish Inquisitor, R^^. cap. 27.
who lived more then three hundred years ago, speaking of the poor men of
Lions, and calling them in contempt Valdenses, Leonistae, says they were more
pernicious to the Church of Rome, then all other sects for three causes: First,
because it has been of longer continuance: for some say this sect has
endured since the Apostles times. The second cause is, because it is more
general: for there is almost no land in the which this Sect does not creep.
The third cause, for that all other sects do bring an horror with the
heinousness of their blasphemies against God; but this Sect of Leonists has a
great show of godliness, because they live justly before men, and believe all
things well concerning God, and all the Articles which are contained in the
Creed, only they blaspheme and hate the Church of Rome. Now there is the
testimony of an enemy making answer for us, which may serve to stop the mouths
of all our enemies from demanding of us any more, Where was your Church before
Luther?


R. I, but he calls them a Sect, and says they blasphemed the Church.


C. So the Priests of the Jews called the Church of Christians, a Sect of
Nazarits, Act. 24.5. What is that to the matter? yet he grants they are such a
Sect, as first, had been from the beginning: secondly, had been in all
Countries, and thirdly, was honest in lise, and sound in faith: save only that
they held the Church of Rome to be the whore of Ba^el. And that yet this
prejudice which you have conceived of our Church may be further removed out of
your mind; I pray you consider this: Think you not, that with good reason we
may affirm that we are in communion with them, who have taught the same
doctrine that we teach? if our doctrine was in former ages, you will not deny
that our Church was then also.


R. That can not be denied.


C. Well then, if you please, name me any controversy of religion, concerning
any Article of faith* between us and the Papists thi^ day, and you shall see
that the ancient fathers take our part in it.


R. That is strange, for they repose their chiefest strength and trust in the
ancient fathers.


C. Brag what they will it is true, I say they may well boast in the dross
of fathers and deck their errors with it, but we shall bring you their finest
gold. Name you the controversy, and you shall try that which I say to be a
truth.


R. There are so many controversies among you, that I know not which of the^ to
name first.


C. Then will it please you to take a view of these, which I have gathered for
my own private use?


R. With a very good will: let me see what they are.


C. They are here in a little s^role, and I have collected the^ for my own
confirmation in the faith; for, as first of all I learned the way of salvation
in the Scriptures, so finding that the Doctors of the Primitive Church exponed
the Scripturs, conformable to the doctrine of our teachers, I was greatly
therein confirmed: for these are the two great proppes of our faith, which
Vincentius gives us against all heresy, cap* 2.


R. You have reason for you* for if your Doctrine be so warranted both by
divine authority of God in his word, and humane testimony of the best Doctors
of the ancient Church, they are to be judged most unworthy that make
contradiction to you.


C. Well, that I may be as good as my word, there they are, I leave them with
you, that you may read them at your own leisure.


R. I thank you for them, and because I am not to tarry in this Town, let
met have (I pray you) a copy of them with me, that I may read the^ at
leisure.


C. So long as you are in the Town you may be doing, otherwise, if occasion
serve you not, as soon as I can provide a copy of them for my self, I shall
send you this to any place you please to appoint.


R. Let it be so, and I shall God willing put you in mind of it.


THE SIXTH DAYS CONFERENCE. Wherein an other Question commonly objected by the
Adversaries is answered: Seeing you cannot deny that your fathers were
Papists, what think you, are they all damned or not? And if they be not
damned, why may not we be of their Religion.
R. WElcome yet (Sir) I see you are not weary, to take pains with me.


C. No in truth, it is no pain but pleasure unto me, if by any means I may be
an instrument to do you good.


R. I thank you for it: Now what say you to our Question, Are all our fathers
damned? Or ^f not, may it not serve us to be ^f their Religion?


C. That is but a subtle que^tion wher^by Jesuits draw ^imple people to a
liking of Papistrie; because forso^t^ some ^f their f^thers lived, and dyed in
it as they allege.


R. And why, think you it not a good reason?


C. Not indeed ^ for some times I find GOD forbids his people to be as their
fathers were: Z^ch 1.
where our Fath^rs have forsaken the Religion of the f^rst Fathers we should
not follow them.


R. That was sufficiently cleared in our first Conference.


C. It was so, yet you force me to remember it. But now before I come to the
point: I will tell you a pretty Story I have read concerning this matter.


R. Let me hear it I pray you.


C. I read that a certain Duke of Frisland named Raboldus, about the year of
our LORD nine hundredth, being persuaded (as he pretended) to embrace
Christianity, as he went to be baptized and had the one of his feet in the
water, he demanded of the Bishops If all his Forefathers were damned? the
Bishops answered more rashly then wisely, they were all damned: whereupon the
Duke pulled back his feet again, saying, Then I will also be damned with
them. Think you this a good answer?


R. No indeed I think it a mad answer.


C. Yet the same is the poison wherewith your Jesuits subtly infect the
hearts of simple ones, that they should rather choose to be damned with their
Fathers th^n saved without them.


R. But will you say to us as these Bishops said to him, That all our Fathers
are damned?


C. Nay that will I not; judgment of election and reprobation pertaines to the
Lord, their persons I leave: but the doctrine of Papistrie I am sure is deadly,
and bringes damnation to the souls of men.


R. Then you will not give judgment of their persons.


C. No indeed: for, as to their persons* I know many this day are so called,
who know not the Doctrine of Papistrie; and, as to them who have lived before
us, howsoever in their life they professed Papistrie, yet in their death they
were forced to seek comfort in our Religion.


R. That is strange that you will say many of our Fathers died in your Religion.


C. Yet it is true, as I will let you see by a little form of visitation of
the sick, used at that time when Antichrists darkness was greatest, to wit,
in the eleventh hundred year, for so the Churchmen spoke to the sick:
Fateris te ^am male vixisse vt meritis tuis pae^^ aeterna ^ebe^tur? Do thou
not acknowledge that thine evil life d^serues eternal death? The diseased
answered, E^iam, ye^: The other* still inquired, Paenitet ^e horum? Repentest
thou th^se sins? The other answered Etiam, yea I do: still he inquire^,
Credis quo^ pro te mortu ^s ^^t dominus Jesus? Beleeuest thou that Jesus died
for thee, and that thou can not be saved but by his death? The other
answers, I do so indeed. Then concludes the Preacher this way: Age ergo, dum
in te superest anima, in h^c sola mortetotam fuluciam tuam constitue, in nulla
alia re habe as fiduciam, huic mortito^um te commit, hac solate totum
contegne, hac morte tetotum inuolue. Et si dominus deus voluerit te iudicare,
dic, Domine mortem domini nostri obijcio inter me and tuum iudicium, aliter
tecum non contendo. Go to then, so long as thy Soul is in thee, in this only
death of Christ place thou thine whole confidence, tr^st not in any other
thing, commit thy self altogether unto this death, with this death only cover
thy self, in it only inuolue thy self: And if the Lord God will judge thee,
then say to him, O Lord, I have nothing to lay betw^ene me and thy judgment,
but the death of the Lord Jesus, otherwise I contend not with thee. See you not
here first, that they warned their people to provide for themselves so long as
they are in the body, and feed them not with a vain hope, as the Romish
Doctors do their people: For the present they send them to a place they call
Purgatory, but promise to bring them again out of it; they first suffering
pains there, and either themselves, or their frinds making due payment for
them on Earth.


R. In good sooth that is a comfortless, and (I may say) a cousning kind of
doctrine.


C. Well, see you not again a renouncing of all other merits; and of all
satisfactions to be made by suffering the pains of Purgatory or otherwise.
And thirdly see you not that the Pastor teaches, and the people professes a
sure confidence, and no dubitation, in Christ's blood only.


R. I see that clearly.


C. Then I say these men might well die with the name of Papist^, but they died
not with the doctrine of Papists: for they renounced all me^ites, both their
own, and any others, and only rested upon the meri^es of Christ.


R. But what will you say of them who have died with all the opinions of
Papistrie?


C. I will answer that as Cyprian answered the like when it was demanded of
him. An damnat^ sunt maiores nostri, qui hun^ vel illum articulum non
intellexerunt? Were all our Fathers damned who understood not this, or that
Article of faith? he answered, Potens est Dominus misericordia sua indulgentiam
dare, non tamen q^ia semel erratum est, ideo semper errandum est. God is able
of his great mercy to give indulgence, but yet there is no reason, that we
should alway^s ^rr^, because they once did err.


R. In truth that is a very modest answer.


C. But hear you what further he says: Si quis ex Antecessoribus nostris, vel
ignoranter, vel simpliciter non hoc obseruanit, and tenuit quod nos Dominus
exemplo suo docuit, potest simplicitatieius de indulgentia Domini venia
concedi; nobis vero non poterit ignosci, quia a Domino admoniti and instructi
sumus; If any of our forefathers, either of ignorance, or simplicity has not
holden and observed that which the Lord has taught us, to do by his example,
there may be mercy granted to his simplicity out of Gods indulgence: but we
cannot be forgiven, who now are otherwise instructed and admonished by the Lord.


R. That answer I see is more sharp, and yet most reasonable; many things are
excusable in the night, that are not tolerable in the day: The servant that
knows his M^sters will, and does it not, is worthy of double stripes.


C. And I am glad you see it, and I would many more had their eyes open to see
it, who think Papistry now tolerable in the days of light, as it was in the
days of darkness: it was a fault then, for even the servant who knows not
his Masters will shall be stricken; but it is a double fault now, for he, who
knows his Masters will, and does the contrary, shall have double s^ripes.


R. Then I see you will not give out, judgment upon the persons of Papists,
whether they be saved or damned.


C. Indeed I will not, and that for two causes: first, because, (as I have
said) many are Papists by name, which are no Papists: some of ignorance, some
of vain glory, some of policy to get themselves the more credit. And as to
these who are infected indeed with the heresies of Papistrie; yet is it
uncertain if they shall so continue, for the Lord is ma^uellous in working with
such as belong to his election, that howsoever for the pr^sent we see them in
sin and ignorance, ye^ know we not what they will be ^ so many secret ways
^^th the Lord in time of sickn^sse, yea, in the very hour of death to draw the
h^arts of m^n toward himself, which are hid from us, that it were but
presumption to judge of an other man's salvation or reprobation.


R. Indeed I comme^d you, for I think you speak with that sobriety which
becom^ a christian.


C. And yet whatsoever I have said concerning the persons of Papists, there is
further to be said of Papistrie it self: that it is a doctrine so full of
heresies, so directly contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, that I dare say,
a man believing all the points of Papistrie, and perseuering in them ^o the end
without repentance cannot be saved.


R. Now that is the point, and I pray you make it clear.


C. It is clear by these places following, which will show you that Papistrie
is a doctrine of Devils, a plague of God, and a just punishment laid on
reprobate men for their sins, and a forerunner of the wrath to come.


R. Good sooth I quake to hear this.


C. You shall see them al particularly qualified: and first there is a
Prophecy made by the Apostle of the defection which was to come, in these
words; Now the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to the spirits of error and doctrine of
Devils: which speak lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience burned with an
hot iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, etc.
Perceive you not here, that the doctrine which forbids marriage and commands
abstinence from meats, is called a doctrine of devils?


R. Very well, but that is meant of heretics, which were soon after the
Apostles days, as Ebio^its, Marcionits, etc.


C. Nay, that is a silly shift, for he says, these teachers shall come in the
latter times; and the departure from the faith, whereof he prophesies, was not
to come till the fall of the Roman Empire: but in the days of Ebion, Marcion,
etc. the Roman Empire was in great glory.


R. But if that be meant of any Apostasy in the later times it is of your
sect (will they say) that has fallen from the church of Rome.


C. It cannot be meant of us: for we neithe^ forbid marriage, nor command
abstinence from meats for conscience sake.


R. That is very true: but may not the Church for some causes command
abstinencie from meats?


C. Yes, for Prayer and devotion, and that for a time only, but not because
any meat is unclean, or one meat is holier then an other* as they think
their Chartrouse Monks more holy that never eat flesh, then others are:
Durand. lib. 6. cap. de alijs ieiu^ijs.
and why forsooth? because flesh and not fish was accursed in the days of Noah.


R. Indeed that seems to be somewhat superstitious.


C. Well, I will enter into no more particulars concerning this question. It is
clear, these are two points of Papisticall doctrine, called by the Apostle
doctrine of Devils; So I proceed, There shall arise false Christ's, and false
Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, so that if it were possible
they should deceive the very elect, Mat. 24.24. The coming of Antichrist by
the working of Satan with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians.
2.9. And in a^^ deceiuablenesse of unrighteousness among them that perish,
because they received not the truth that they might be saved, ibid. ver. 10.
And therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe
lies, verse 11. That all they might be damned, which believed not the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness, ver. 12. All that dwell upon the earth
shall worship the beast, whose names are not written in the Book^ of life of
the Lamb which was slain from the beginning. Revel. 13.8. And he deceived them
which dwelt on earth by the signs which were permitted him to do, ver. 14. If
any man worship the beast, etc. the same shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God, and shall be tormented in fire and brimstone. Reu. 14.9.10. Go
out of Babel my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and receive
not of her plagues. These places make clear unto you, that it is only the
reprobate, worldly-minded called therefore dwellers on the earth, whose names
are not written in the book of life, children of perdition; it is only they (I
say) who are fully and finally deceived with the spirit of Antichrist, and
that in Gods righteous judgment are given over to believe lies, because they
received not the love of the truth: What think ye of these?


R. In truth I am astonished to hear these fearful places.


C. This is yet further cleared by Augustine, who expounding that place of the
Apostle 2. These. 2. Adoccultu^^ Dei iudicium pertinet quod impij ab Antichristo
feducuntur: It pertaines to Gods secret judgment that the wicked are seduced
by Antichrist: Seducentur qui seduci merebuntur, pro eo quod dilectionem
veritatis non receperunt. They shall be deceived who have deserved to be
deceived, because they receive not the love of the truth: and yet more fearful
is the sentence, which he subioynes, Iudicati seducentur, and seducti
iudicabuntur: when they are judged they shall be deceived, and because they
were deceived they shall be judged over again: they are first judged by the
judgment of God, secretly just, and justly secret, whereby now he punishes
the sins of men, delivering them to the Spirit of error, that received not
the love of his truth: and because they were deceived they shall be judged
again in that last and manifest judgment to be made by Christ Jesus, who was
unjustly judge himself, but most justly shall judge the World. This
Commentary makes it clear, that Papistrie is not only a sin, but a present
punishment of God inflicted on man for sin, specially for contempt of the
Gospel; and a procurement of that fearful wrath that is to come, which if it
were considered, men would not esteem Papistrie so indifferent a thing as they
do*


R. God be merciful to them who yet are blinded with these errors, and Lord
make me thankful who has begun to deliver me from that darkness; the
Lord illuminate me more and more with his light, that I may know his way, and
may receive grace to follow it.


C. Amen: But now I remember, I promised before to declare unto you, that
Papistrie impugnes both the Person and offices of Christ, and so in effect
denies that Jesus the Son of Marie is the Christ.


R. That is most strange.


C. It is indeed, and yet it is true, as you shall perceive if you go through
the principal Articles of our faith. And first to begin at Christ person, that
of many we may touch a few, We believe that Jesus Christ is both God and man.


R. And who denies that?


C. You know that old Arriu^ denied his Divinity, and now Papists deny his
humanity.


R. How can you say that?


C. Because they worship and adore a Christ, who is not come in the flesh: To
clear this, I pray you consider that Canon of the Apostles, 1. Ioh. 4.
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits if they be of God:
because many false Prophets are gone out into the World. In this the spirit of
God is known; Every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ to have come in the
flesh is of God. There is a golden rule for us and them both, and mark there
the opposition, Every spirit that says otherwise, is the spirit of Antichrist.


R. Let it be so: What is that against Papists?


C. Yea, it is against them directly, for the word teaches us to worship
Christ, Conceived of the holy Ghost, horn of the Virgin Marie: But they
worship Christ created by a Priest, not conceived by the holy Ghost; a Christ
whose flesh is made of Bread by Transubstantiation, whereby they destroy the
Article of his Incarnation.


R. But they say it is the same Christ who was borne of the Virgin Marie.


C. If it be the same Christ, then must they grant that his flesh is not
created of bread: for that Christ borne of the Virgin Marie was made flesh of
the seed of David by the operation of the Holy Ghost, but this Christ whom they
worship in the Mass has his flesh made of bread by Transubstantiation, and
they are not ashamed to call their Priest for this work Creatorem sui
Creatoris, a Creator of his Creator.


R. But says not our Lord that the Bread given in the Sacrament is his Body?


C. Yea indeed, and so we believe it is: for it is no naked nor common bread
that hoe gives us there the giving of that bread, It is (...), the Communion of
his blessed body.


R. But if it be Bread, how can it be his body?


C. It is needless to demand how? Since he has said it; but I believe it is
his body.


R. But may not Christ of his omnipotent power transubstantiate bread into his
body?


C. And I pray you, may not Christ of his omnipotent power, and truth, give me
his body, except he turn bread into his body?


R. I dare not say so.


C. And you have reason: The Papists charge us that we deny Gods
omnipotency, but the fault is theirs; they deny his omnipotency, when they
say he can not give us his body in the Sacrament, except he make his body of
bread. Do they not here limit the Lord?


R. Well I see it is great wisdom to ponder every thing we believe in the
balance of Gods word, I would not have thought there had been suc^ ^lasphemie
against the person of Christ in that Doctrine of Transubstantiation as now I see
that Canon of the Apostle declares plainly.


C. You may join to this another testimony of the Apostle Hebrews 13. Jesus
Christ yesterday, this day, and the same for ever.


R. What will that make against them?


C. That they are blind to worship a Christ this day, who was not a Christ
yesterday: for you know they grant themselves that before consecration the
bread is not Christ.


R. It is true indeed.


C. Then you may perceive it is but an artificial Christ made by man whom they
worship, and not ^he true Christ. Thus you see how they are injurious to his
person, for the which cause I said to you, that Papists by necessity of
consequence, deny Jesus the son of Marie to be the Christ. Now to his
Offices, they are all comprised under the name Christ, for he is the anointed
King, Prophet, and Priest of his Church.


R. And they will grant all that unto you.


C. I know in word they will, but in effect they take his Offices from him?


R. How can that be?


C. You shall see how: what think you is the office of a Prophet?


R. To teach.


C. You say very well, and for this cause Christ is called the great Prophet
raised up among his brethren: And the great Angel of the counsel of God, who
came into the World to reueile perfectly unto the Church the will of God
concerning man's salvation, and Gods worship: so that now once for all God has
spoken to us in these last days by his son, and we have not to expect from
any other any further declaration of his will.


R. I think no man will deny that.


C. You shall hear how it is denied, if first I make the point more clear unto
you: you know that the father proclaimed from Heaven, first at Jordan, then at
mount Tabor, This is my well-beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear him.
See you not here how we are plainly commanded to learn Gods will concerning
our Salvation from the Son?


R. Yea I see that, and it is good reason.


C. Then if you will come and hear what the Son says, you shall see that as
the Father sends us to the Son, so the Son sends us to the Scriptures: if
we would have eternal life search the Scriptures, and he witnesses plainly
John 17.8. The words which thou gave me, I gave them, meaning to his
Disciples. Where again if you look to the Disciples words: The Scripture
(says Saint Paul) is able to make the man of God perfect, and therefore he
protests Act. 20 that he taught nothing but Moses and the Prophets, and yet
that he had delivered to them the whole counsel of God. See you what a
comfortable harmony is here: The Father bids us hear the Son; the Son
protests the words the Father gave him, he gave to his Disciples; and both of
them sends us to the Scripture, as containing the whole counsel of God
concerning our Salvation.


R. I see all that clearly.


C. Then what spirit are they led with that dare say, It had been good for the
Church the Scripture had never been.


R. Who dare say that?


C. I have heard with mine ears defenders of Papistrie say it: and the
positions of their own Doctors no less blasphemous are extant to be seen:
Lectio Scripturae non, ^antum est invtilis, sed pernitio samultis modis; the
reading of Holy Scripture is not only unprofitable; but pernicious. And
therefore they will not let the people read nor search the Scripture, though
Christ commanded: so to do^: and instoade of Scripture they intrude on the
Church their own decrees, and other traditions, which they make of equal
authority with the Scripture. Thus you see how they take away Christ's
Prophetical office. Now to come to his Priestly office: you know the Priests
office was twofold, first he ought to sacrifice for the people, and next to
pray for them.


R. And they acknowledge both these, that Christ has offered himself in a
propitiatory sacrifice for our sins, and that he still makes intercession
for v^ in heaven.


C. I, but they so acknowledge it, that in both these offices they join others
with Christ, and so make him not a full and perfect Savior of his people by
himself, but a halfe-Sauiour in part.


R. I vnterstand not that.


C. I shall make it clear to you. There is the testimony of the Word
concerning the sufficiency of the merit of Christ's blood. The blood of Christ
his son cleanses us from all sin,


R. They will not be against that.


C. But they are when they make this distinction, that principally Christ's
blood cleanses from sin* but secondarily there must be other things with it
to clens^ sin: as works of satisfaction in this life, and fire of Purgatory
in the life to come. By these also according to their own^ doctrine* sin is
cleansed.


R. For my own part I would always: reserve to Christ his own glory, which I
know he will not give to any other*


C. You have reason for you* and you shall think it so much the more if you
consider with me these two testimonies.


R. What are those?


C. The first is Heb. 1.3. That Christ by himself has made purgation of our
sins.


R. What will you gather of that place?


C. A most necessary observation for clearing this controversy, to wit, that
the purging power of sin is person^ll to Christ, he has done it, by
himself* the virtue and benef^^ of i^ he communicates to others that repent
and believe, bou^^e meriting power, by which God is reconciled* and his iust^c^
satisfied, he transfers not, neither to any man's person nor any other thing
beside.


R. Surely, according to my understanding that is a truth, wherein every
Christian should rest, for it is most comfortable to the conscience, since we
are not ^bl^, neith^r in whole nor in part to satisfy for our own sins.


C. It is so indeed, and that you may be the more confirmed, will you look
how the Jesuits who (...) the light, because it conuinceth them of darkness,
in^translating this place, leave out t^is word By him self: they, say he makes
purgation of sins, but pass by this word, by himself, look you their own
translation.


R. I se^ ind^ed they have it not ^n their translation, but is it I pray you in
the Greek text?


C. Yea forsooth if you can read it, these are the words, (...).


R. In truth this one place makes all their doctrine, concerning the supplement
of Christ's merits, justly to be suspected: for since he has made the purgation
of our sins by himself, what should we look that they are to be purged by
any other?


C. You reason well.


R. I speak as I think: it is either pitiful ignorance, that they see not the
truth, or their wilful malice that they dare mutilate so clear a place of holy
Scripture, leaving it out of their Bible, because it ^akes against t^e^.


C. But now take in with this the other testimony of holy Scripture, whereof I
spoke. you have it Heb. 7. ver. 25. Christ is able to save perfectly ((...))
all that come unto God by him.


R. I see that is also a comfortable place.


C. So it is indeed: for as the first makes you see that Christ's meriting power
is personal, and in himself, not transf^rred to any other* so this makes you
see it is perfect: he has done the work of our salvation in his own person,
and he has done it perfectly: What more can you crave?


R. Truly I crave no more.


C. Away then with these rotten dregs of Papistrie, that teach us to depend
upon other merits, and upon an other blood (as I showed you the first day)
besides the merits of the blood of Christ.


R. For my own part I think never to lean to them, but will rest upon that
only perfect sacrifice of Christ offered on the Cross for my sins.


C. If you abide there, you are upon the sure foundation; and remember you must
renounce all other sacrifices, which derogate from the perfection and
sufficiency of that one sacrifice of Christ.


R. I will indeed*


C. Then for your confirmation mark these places. Christ in the end of the
world has appeared once to put away sin by the sacrif^^e of himself. Heb.
9.26. Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, Heb. 9.28. We are
sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once, Heb. 10.10. This
man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits forever at the right
hand of God. Heb. 10.12. With one offering has he ^onsecrated for ever them
that are sanctified. Heb. 10.14. where remission of sins is, there is no more
offering for sin, Heb. 10.18. Christ needed not daily (as these high Priests)
to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples: for
that did he once, when he offered up himself, Heb. 7.27. without shedding of
blood, is no remission. Heb. 9.22. Perceive you not here that the Apostle
repeating this so often, that Christ was once offered, for taking away our
sins, destroys all other pretended sacrifices for sin, and specially that
sacrifice of the Mass, which they say is a propitiatory sacrifice for the
sins of the quick and the dead.


R. Truly the places are so plain, that very children may understand them,
and I would God that these poor people, who of a blind mind dote after Masses,
thinking by it to get the pardon of their sins, had this benefit of Gods
word, as you have it, that so by the light of it they might come to the
knowledge of the truth.


C. And I wish the same from my heart, But now to confirm you yet further, I
pray you mark how blasphemous and deceitful a thing their Mass is. First, is
not this a mockery of GOD the Father, To desire him to accept his own Son:
Is Christ out of the favor of his Father? said he not; He is my Son in whom I
am well pleased? shall a mortal and miserable sinful Priest be a Mediator, or
Peacemaker between the Father and the Son, praying the Father that he would
accept his Son, and send down an Angel to take up his body into Heaven?


R. Fie upon it: It is a vile blasphemy.


C. Secondly, see you not how it inverts Gods ordinance? for where he has
ordained a Sacrament, wherein God offers and gives his Son to us; they have
changed it into a sacrifice, wherein they offer up the Son to the Father.


R. I see that also*


C. Thirdly, Is it not an injurious thing to Christ, to say that any can offer
him up to God, but himself?


R. It is inde^de: for as no other Sacrifice can satisfy Gods justice, so no
other sacrificer can be worthy to offer him but himself, as is clear out of
your former Testimonies:


C. Fourthly, Is it not a deceiving of the people, to say that an unbloody
Sacrifice (such as they say the Mass is) can be propitiatory to obtain
remission of sins?


R. It is indeed, and expressly against the Word of God you have alleged,
Without shedding of blood there is no remission: they grant themselves that in
the Mass there is no shedding of blood, and how then can it give pardon or
remission of sins?


C. Well then, since by this you see how they derogate from Christ's sacrifice,
which is the first part of Christ's priestly office, I will now let you see how
they also cut away the other, namely, his intercession. Mark that place of the
Apostle, There is one God, and one Mediator of God and Man, the Man Christ
Jesus.


R. They have a distinction for that, and say, there is but one Mediator of
redemption, but for Intercession many.


C. But will you consider the place; and you shall see where the Apostle says,
there is but one Mediator, he is speaking of Intercession and praying, and so
his meaning must be, There is one Mediator of Intercession: read the place and
see.


R. I see it is so indeed.


C. Now with it will you but join this place of Augustine, Qui pro omnibus
interpellat pro quo autem nullus, Cont. Epist. Parme^. l. 2. cap. 8,
is verus and vnicus mediator est: He that interceeds for all, for whom none
interceedes, is the only true Mediator. And there he says it should be a
great absurdity, if Paul were called a Mediator, for so there should be many
Mediators of Intercession.


R. But should not Christians interceede one of them for an other, as we are
commanded, One of you pray for an other.


C. They should indeed: but you must understand, that this and the like
precepts are for Christians here militant on earth in one communion, wherein
alike one of them is bound to help an other by their prayers.


R. But do not they who are in heaven pray for the Church militant on earth?


C. I think they do in general, but not upon any particular knowledge of our
private necessities, troubles or tentations.


R. How can that be?


C. You may soon understand how, for if they know your griefs, it is either by
hearing of your words, or understanding of your thoughts, or by some Revelation
made to them. Think ye they know your thoghts.


R. No indeed, that is proper to God.


C. Think you they hear your voice, when you express in prayer your thoughts
by your words.


R. I cannot think that neither, since they want their bodies which have the
organs of hearing.


C. Then they must know it by Revelation.


R. It is most likely that when we pray, God tells them our necessities.


C. What need you then to pray them to interceede for you.


R. But how shall we go to a King but by his Courtiers?


C. What a silly refuge is that? You have forgotten what you answered even now.
See you not here how that similitude used by Papists is destroyed, to wit, That
as we go to earthly Kings by Courtiers, so we should go to the King of
Heaven, by heavenly Courtiers: for here it is not the Courtier that shows our
necessities to the King, but the King you see shows them to his Courtiers. And
would you not think him a fool, who may have the King himself to speak to,
and knows he will be welcome if he speak as he should, and yet passes by
the King, and depends upon Courtiers to have his turn done by them?


R. I think no less then you say, but how is it then they pray for us in
general?


C. I will show you how: there are four sorts of prayer, one called (...),
whereby we crave ^uill to be diuerted from us; an other called (...), whereby
we s^^ke some good we want to be given unto us: the third is (...), whereby
one of us interceedes for an other: and the fourth is (...), thanksgiving for
good received. Now they who are in heaven are freede from tentation, and so
(...) is not ascribed to them: neither yet is ever (...) in holy scripture
given them: They rest from their labors, they are not busied to be patrones to
several Countries, Cities and Companies of people, having the particular cures
of several diseases parted among them, that is but a doting dream of
Papistri^: but you will find (...), thanksgiving ascribed to them, and (...),
too in general, whereby they pray for some good they yet want, but look to
enjoy: as is evident out of their own words, How long Lord: for this is the
voice of these who want some thing they would feign have.


R. Tell me I pray you what want they who are in heaven?


C. First, these glorified spirits want their bodies, without the which they
can never have full contentment: for the soul and body were created
companions, the perfection of both stands in the promised union of both.


R. I understand that very well: but want they no other thing, for which they
cry, How long?


C. Yea, they want their brethren, all them that belong to the communion of
Saints; their desire shall not be satisfied till all their brethren be where
they are: for God has so provided that they without us should not be
perfected.


R. In truth that is exceeding comfortable, that Adam, Abraham, and the rest of
that congregation of the first borne shall not be perfected till we come to
them, yea, til the full number of Gods Saints be accomplished. But is there no
other thing they long for?


C. Yea, they long and pray for the coming of Christ, Even so come Lord Jesus:
at which time they know very well, that all the promises of God shall be
performed to all and every one of the Saints of God. Thus far you see how
they in Heaven do pray in general.


R. But you think not that we should pray to them in our particular
necessities.


C. No indeed* for beside the former reason, we have no warrant to pray unto
them, and so cannot do it in faith. Will you consider can there be any better
Schoolemasters to teach us how to pray then the persons of the blessed
Trinity? and think you not we are surest when we prai^ in such a manner as
they have taught?


R. That cannot be denied.


C. Then I pray you mark it, there is the voice of God the Father, Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me; there is the precept of God the Son, When you pray you shall say
in this manner, Our Father which art in Heaven etc. there is again the voice
of God the Holy Ghost, who when he teaches us to pray, teaches us, Romans 8.
Cry abba, Father. What say you to these, is there any word here of prayer to
Cherubin, or Seraphin? is there any warrant for turning over of all the prayers
in the Psalm book to the Virgin Marie? O Lady that art my righteousness.
Psalm. 4. O Lady reprove me not in thy wrath. Psalm. 6.


R Truly I can say nothing against them, for I see according to Gods Word it is
the surest and safest way to pray to God by the mediation of Christ.


C. But now I will bring you one clear instance, to let you see how Papistrie
takes away Christ's intercession, and sets him idle in the Heavens.


R. What is that?


C. They say there is in Heaven, a King, God the Father; and a Queen the
Virgin Marie; and that the King has given to the Queen dimidium regni, Gab.
Biel. in Cau. Miss. ^ect. 56.
the half of his Kingdom; the Ministration of Justice he has kept to
himself; the Ministration of Mercy he has given over to the Virgin Marie:
such as seek Justice go to the King of Heaven, such as seek Mercy go to
the Queen, who also by her authority has power to command her Son Christ
Jesus.


R. Good sooth these are too gross speeches, for as you have said, they make
Christ idle in Heaven, or like a child under Tuition: for my own part I will
keep that reverent estimation of the blessed Virgin, that is due to her: but
will ever reserve to Christ the glory of a Savior and Mediator.


C. Let it be so, only now I will let you see that as Papistrie destroies many
Articles of our Christian faith, concerning the person, and Offices of Christ:
So it is a P^st of Commonwealths, loosing all the bands of human fellowshippe
and society.


R. That is strange: for there are many flourishing Kingdoms with unity and
peace that profess Papistrie.


R. Remember you what our Savior says in the Parable. So long as the strong
man keeps his house all is in quiet, but when a stronger then he comes in to
bind him, there begins the battle: So long as Satan possessed the World by
the darkness of Papistrie, there was a miserable felicity in it, and a cursed
unity, such as was in Sodom, where young and old from the four corners of the
City conspired and agreed to one impiety: But now since Christ comes in by
his glorious Gospel to illuminate his own with the light thereof, that which
before seemed peace in Papistrie, now appears to be a fir^ come from Hell
seeking to devour all such as forsake her errors, and embrace the truth of
God.


R. I, but that is a thing wherewith they charge the Gospel, that since it was
preached, many Sects and Heresies are risen up in the world, which were not in
it before.


C. I pray you consider what a Polici^ of Satan that is to disgrace the
Gospel: how many Heresies arose in the Apostles days or soon after, that
was not in the World before. Then came up Simon Magus, Cerinthus, Ebion,
Marcion, Basilides, Menander, Valentinus, Cerdon, Marcion, and many more. Shall
the Gospel be blamed for this? or rather may you not see it is the craft of
the Devil to disgrace the Gospel?


R. Indeed I think it no good reason that the Gospel should be the less
esteemed of. There is but one truth, but manifold errors; and I remember our
Savior warning us of thi^ in that Parable of the Gospel; That where the good
Husbanman sowes good wheat in the day, incontinent comes the Enemy that evil
one, and sowes his popple in the night.


C. Now if you apply that to our present question, the doubt is easily solued:
So long as the World was blinded with idolatry and the Mass (which in effect
is but a Mass of Heresies) Satan lay quiet, he was not troubled in his
Kingdom, and he raised no trouble in the World: but since the light of the
Gospel discovered his darkness, and that he finds his Kingdom decaying,
and himself falling by the preaching of the Gospel, now he bestirres himself
more busily, and does what he can to disgrace this glorious Eva^gell by vile
heresies of some that impugn it, and profane lives of others who profess it.
But as you see, it is no reason why the Gospel should be blamed for any of
these.


R. It is not indeed. But now you remember you began to discourse how
Papistrie is a Pest of Commonwealths, Kingdoms, dissoluing all the bands of
humane fellowshippe, and society among men.


C. Now I will let you see it There is own of their Positions; It is llawfull
to spoil an Heretic of his goods, Great. Cause. 1^.4. glossa.
melius tamen est quod auihoritate indicis fiat: though it were better to do it
by authority of the Judge. In their judgment all Protestants are Heretics,
and so they make it lawful for Papists both to steal and reaue from them.


R. That is strange indeed; and yet I have many times mar^a^led what should
have moved the M^c gregors; and other Licentious Men of our Island* who knew no
Religion, to profess Papistrie, but now I see the reason of it; for it made
their robbery good Christianity.


C. Here are other, Vxor catholica viro haeretico beneuolum reddere non
te^e^ur, Siman^h^ Pacens. Ep^isc^pus Institut. Gregor. 13.
, that is to say in plain t^rmes, a Wife that is a Papist is not bound to
render due ben^uolence to her Husband being a Protestant.


R. That assertion is more shameless then the other, plain contrary (as I
remember) to the Apoles doctrine, 1. Cor. 7.13.
Let not a Woman forsake her husband who believes not, if he be content to
dwell with her.


C. You take it up very well, and you may see how Papistrie breaks the band of
fellowship between Husband and Wife.


R. I see it indeed, and this resolves me of an other doubt, for I have
maruailed often what should move so many Ladies to become Catholic Roman,
but now I see it is a plausible Religion for such Wives as are malcontent
with their Husbands, for it loos^th them from that subjection where unto God
has bound them.


C. Take the third: It disslolues the bands between the Father and the Son
Pater qui filium habet haereticum, C^rd. Alan.
exhaereditare ten^tur^ talem filium* A Father that is a Papist and has ^
Son that is a Protestant, he is bound to disinherit him. Again Pr^pter haere
sin patris s^lij sunt sui iuris, Siman^ha Ep^s. Pacens. Instit. Cathol. lib.
46. ^er. 74.
by the Heresy of the Father the Child^ is fre^d from obedience.


R. Fie upon them that maintain^ such gross positions.


C. Yet there is worse following. Cause. ^3 Quaesi. 8.
Haeretici f^i^ vel consanguineinon dicantur, sed ^^x^alegem sit m^nus tua
super eos, vt ^undas sanguinem ipsorum. Heretics may not be termed Children,
nor Kinsmen, but according to the old Law thy hand must be upon them to spill
their blood. There are all the bands of Nature, Affinity, Consanguinitie,
destroyed by Papistrie, and they think it lawful for Papists to slaie their
own Children or their Kinsmen, if they be Protestants: What think you, is it
good dwelling with such Vipers? and are our Protestants wise to make alliance
by marriages with them?


R. In good faith I am ashamed in their behalf, and I think it no marvel you
call Papistrie a Pest of Commonwealths.


C. You shall hear but one and I will trouble you with no more. It dissolueth
the band of subjection wherein people stand bound to their Princes: Subditi
licite possunt haeretico domino negare obs^quium. Popish Subjects may lawfully
deny obedience to a Protestant King. Again, Non licet Christianis tolerare
regem Haereticum: Bellar. lib. 5. de ^om. Po^ti^. cap. 6.7. and 4.
It is not lawful for Christians to tolerate an Heretical King, they may
expel him, depose him, yea murder him: And this they say is agreeable to the
Apostolic Doctrine.


R. Away with it, for it may rather be called a Doctrine of Devils, who is the
Father of lies, Seditions, Divisions, and Murders.


C. And yet these are the common lessons, which are taught and practiced by the
Doctors, and Disciples of that whorish Church of Rome. But how fals^ly they
call this Doctrine Apostolic. Consider what was the Apostles Doctrine
concerning the obedience of people unto their Kings. Read there what Saint
Peter says.


R. I perceive he bids honor the King, and commands the people to submit them
selves unto the King as Superior, or unto Governors (under him.)


C. Very well: Tell me now who was King, and Supre^me Governor when Peter
wrote this, was it not Nero? a vile Monster, a bloody Persecutor, yet you see
Peter bids not depose him, far less bids he kill him. Look again to the
Fathers of the Primitive Church: see Iustine Martyr, Apol. ad Anton.
Deum solum adoramus, in alijs vobis inseruimus laeti, Imperatores and
Principes honum esse prof^tentes, and simul precantes, vt cum imperiali
potestatem sanam quoque men^em obtinere comperiamini. We worship God only, in
all other things we serve you with gladness, acknowledging you to be the
Emperors, and Princes of men, praying also that with your Imperial power ye
may have a sound mind. Here you see in all things, except in matter of Gods
Worship, Service professed to the Emperor, and Prayer made for such Princes as
are contrary minded to Christianity, but no treason neither taught nor
practiced. The like has Ignatius; Ad Antioch
Caesari sub^iti estote in ijs, quibus sine periculo est ipsa subiectio: Be
subject to Caesar in all things, wh^rein you may without peril of conscience:
Lib. ad Sca^ul.
And Tertullian also, Co^imus Imperatorem vt ho^^inem a Deo secundum, solo Deo
minorem: We reu^rence the Emperor as next and immediate under God, having
none but God above him. Again, Christianis nullius est host is, Tertul.
Apolog. c^p. ^8 29. and 30.
nedium Imperatoris, quem sciens a Deo suo constitui, necesse est, vt and ipsum
di^igat, and reuereatur, and honoret, and salvum velit cum toto Romano Imperio.
A Christian is no man's Enemi^, far less the Emperors Enemy, he knows
that he is placed by the Lord his God and therefore it cannot be but he must
love him, reverence him, honor him, and wish his safety, and the welfare of
the Empire. Let Papists now be ashamed to pretend either Apostles, or
Apostolic men, as if they were Patrons of that pernicious Doctrine, whereby
they teach their people to murder Princes, if they be contrary minded to them
in Religion.


R. Do it if they will they have good cause.


C. Now (Sir) because to morrow is the Sabbath, if you please to go to the
Church I will come and go with you.


R. I am v^rie well content, and I thank you for it.


THE SEVENTH, OR SABBATH DAYS CONFERENCE. Wherein the order observed in the
Church of SCOTLAND, is declared to be conform to the ancient order prescribed
by the Apostles, and practiced in the Primitive Church.
C. GOod morrow (Sir) are you ready to go?


R. When you please.


C. What Church will ye go to or whom of the Preachers desire you to hear?


R. Make you the choice, I will accompany you.


C. Let us go then, because you are a ftranger: here you will pardon me to go
before, and show you the way into the Church, and show you where you should sit.


R. I thank you for it. What is this the people are going to do?


C. They bow themselves before the Lord, to make an humble confession of their
sins and supplications for mercy; which you will hear openly read out by the
publik^ reader. Now when it is done what think you of the prayer?


R. Truly I think there is no thing in it, but that whereunto eueri^ good
Christian should say Amen: and it has done me much good to see the people with
humble reverence, sighing and groaning, accompany the prayer up to God. But
what go they now to do?


C. Every one is preparing (as you see) their Psalme-book, that all of them
with one heart and mouth, may sing unto the Lord. There is the Psalm which the
Reader has proclaimed, if you please you may sing with them, or if you cannot
follow them in your heart.


R. So I will. What does the Reader now, is he making an other prayer?


C. No, yonder book which now he open is the Bible: you will hear him read
some portion of holy Scripture. Vnd^rstand you what he says?


R. Yea for sooth, well enough for he reads very distinctly.


C. These are the three exercises which are used in all our congregations,
every Saboth one hour before the preacher come in, first prayer, then psalms
then reading of holi^ scripture^ and by these the hearts of ^he people are
prepared the more reverently to hear the word, and you see all is done with
great quietn^sse, devotion, and reverence.


R. I see that ind^ed.


C. We have no ser^ice h^re you see in a strange langu^ge the Preacher speaks,
and the people prays in their mother tongue: but the new form of the Romish
Church is to have all their divine service in the latin tongue.


R. Truly, I have ofttimes marvelled at it* what should move them to make their
prai^^^ in a language the people understands not.


C. Vitalianus Bishop of Rome, was the first father of this nouelty.


R. Put what are they doing now?


C. You hear the third Bell ringing, and in this space the reading cease,
and at the and of the Bell ringing, the Preacher will come: But till the
Preach^r come in, read this place of the Apostle Saint Paul, and you shall see
what was the old form used in the Primitive Church, and that ours is very
agreeabie unto it, Read the 1 Corinthians. 14. ver. 6.

And now (Brethren) if I come unto you speaking diverse tongues, what shall I
profit you? except I speak to you either by Revelation, or by knowledge, or
by prophesying, or by doctrine?

7 Moreover things without life which give a sound, whether it be a pipe or a
harp, except they make a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known
what is piped or harped?

8 And also if the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself
to battle?

9 So likewise ye by the tongue, except you utter words that have
signification, how shall it be known what is spoken? for you shall speak in
the air.

10 There are so many kinds of voices (as it comes to pass) in the world,
and none of them is dumb.

11 Except I know then the power of the voice, I shall be unto him that
speaks a B^rbarian, and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto me.

12 Even so, forasmuch as ye covet spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel
unto the edifying of the Church.

13 Wherefore let him that speaks a strange tongue, pray that he may
interpret.

14 For, if I pray in a strange tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding
is without fruit.

15 What is it then? I will pr^y with the spirit, but I will pray with the
understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also.

16 Else when thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he who occupies the
room of the unlearned, say, Amen: at the giving of thanks, seeing he knows
not what thou say?

17 For thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not edified.

18 I thank my God I speak languages more then ye all.

19 Yet had I rather in the Church to speak five words with mine
understanding, that I might also instruct others, then ten thousand wor^es in a
straenge tongue. You see here that by the Apostles precept, the service of God
in the public assemblies of the Church, should be done in such a language as
the people may understand.


R. I see it indeed.


C. Now if it like you for your further confirmation, I will show you how the
same order, which this day is observed in our Church concerning the exercises
of Gods worship, was also observed in the Primitive Church nearest the Apostles
days.


R. It likes me very well to hear it.


C. Then will I tell you it out of Justin Maertyr.


R. What a Father was he? Apol. 2. ad Anton. Pi^m imperat



C. A very ancient and learned man, he lived in the year one hundred and
fifty, and of a Philosopher was converted to be a Christian: he wrote to the
Emp^rour and Senate of Rome, two Apologies in defense of Christian Religion: in
the second of them so he writes, Die qui solis dicitur omnes qui in oppidis;
vel agris morantur, vnum in locum conueniunt, commentari^que Apostolorum, vel
Prophetarum scripta leguntur, quandiu hora patitur, deinde vbi is qui legit
destitit, is qui prae est admonet, and hortatur vt e^ quae lecta sunt bona
imitemur, tum surgimus omnes ac compre^^mur, conclusisqu^ nostris precibus
panis, vinum, and aquae offeruntur, tum is qui primum locum tenet ^odem modo
preces, gratiarumque actionem pro virili mittit, populusque been dicit, dicens,
Amen, and ijs quae cum gr^tiarum action consecrata sunt vnusquisque
participat, eadem ad eos quiabsunt diaconis dantur perferenda, Quibus copiae
suppetunt, ij si volunt, quisque si^o arbitratu quod vult largitur, quodque
colligitur apud eum qui praest reponitur, isque pupillis, and viduis, and ijs
quos morbus, aliaue caeusa inopes fecit, and ijs qui in vinculis sunt, and
hospitib^s ^ubuenit. Upon that day which is called Sunday, all Christians
resident in towns and villages assemble in one place, where the written
Comment^ries of the Prophets and Apostles are read for the space of an hour,
the which being done, the Preacher or President over the flock, admonishes
and exhorts us to follow the wholesome word read: then get we all up and pray
together: our prayers being finished, bread, wine, and water are presented, and
then the Preacher conceiues fervent prayer and thanksgiving, and the people
bless God, saying, Amen: then every one takes a part of these things which
were consecrate by tha^ksgiuing, the same things also are given to the Deacons
to be^ conuaied to these who are absent: And such as have the things of this
world contributes to the poor^ as they please, and that which is collected, is
given him in trust who is President, and he therewith supports the widow,
fatherless, and these whom sickness or any other cause has made indigent, as
also strangers, and these who are imprisoned. I might show you the like out of
of Tertullian, in his Apology, aduersus Gentes, Cap. 39. But now the time
serves not.


R. It needs not for that place, you have brought from the Apostle, and this
other from Justin Mart^r, may let any man see the order and exercise, which
Christians of the church Primitive obs^rued in their holy assemblies for I see
no other thing among them (as you said) but publik^ reading of the word in a
plain language done by the Reader till the Preacher come in, the^ public
singing of Psalms by all the people, th^n preaching, prayer, and collection for
the poor.


C. You take it up very well, and God be praised you see that same order among
us: And you who have seen their service, and dumb guise of their Mass, their
mumbling of prayers in the Latin tongue, and the vnreuerent profaning of the
sabbath, that is among their people for la^ke of discipline, may soon discern
that how soever they brag of an Apostolic Church, yet they have not kept the
ancient Apostolic order.


R. It is true indeed, for if a man will go to a Papists church to hear Mass,
he shall not discern what the Priest says, unless he vuderstand Latin, and
I have many times thought strange of it.


C. But it falls out very well that so it should be: The first Babel for her
proud usurpation, was punished with confusion of Languages, that when the
builder spoke the people knew not what he craved; and justly is the like, Yea a
worse plague, in so much as it is Spiritual powered out upon new Babel, for her
intolerable presumption, that when their Priest speaks the people wots not
what he says.


R. In truth it is a great blindness.


C. And so ye may say: for albeit they had no clear Divine warrant in the
Word, yet considering that God by an extraordinary decree declared his will to
themselves, it is strange they should not give place unto it.


R. Where have you that? Hist. Bohem. Cap. 13.



C. I find it in Aen^as Siluius their own man, that when the Slauonians sought
license from Pope Formosus that they might celebr^te Divine Service in their
own mother tongue, the matter being disputed in the Popes Counsel, a voice
was heard from Heaven saying, Omnis spiritus laudet Deum, and omnis lingua
confiteatur illi: Let every Spirit praise the Lord, and all tongues confess
him: Whereupon at that time that benefit was granted to the Slauonians: but
think ye it not strange that it should be denied to other people?


R. I think so indeed, specially since the Lord has declared his will so
plainly both in his word, and in that extraordinari^ revelation. But we must
let this alone, for there comes the Preacher. And now (I pray you) tell me how
I should behave my self.


C. Trouble you not, do a^ you see others beside you: for first he will
conceiu^ a Pray^r, at the which the people humbles themselves; thereafter he
reads his Text of Holy Scripture, this the people hear with reverence, then
he falls to the preaching which some hear with their heads covered, some
otherwise, (in that you may do as your health requires*) the preaching being
ended he concludes all with a thanksgiving, after which there is a Psalm sung
by the whole Congregation, and then the Minister blesses the people in the
name of the Lord, and so dimits them: you will see no other thing here.


R. Well, I shall observe it the best I can.


C. Now what think of it?


R. In truth I think it a most comely and comfortable order, and I thank God,
it is the best Sabbath day that ever I saw.


C. Considered you his Text, and how he opened it up?


R. Yea I have: Saint Paul in it makes m^ntion of his own conversion, and how
he was receiu^d to mercy by Christ Jesus, of whom he witnesses h^ came into
the World to save sinners.


C. You heard him there declare, how the elect Children of God before their
calling differ not in manners from reprobates, but when grace comes it makes the
difference, and causes them to say with the Apostle, I was a blasphemer, a
persecutor, an Idolater, etc. but now (thanks to God) I am not so.


R. I heard it very well, and from my heart I also give thanks to God, who
has received me to his mercy: for I was plunged in the darkness of
Idolatry, beside many other filthy sins which oppressed me: but the Lord
has delivered me from them all, blessed be God for it. And I thank you (my
dear Brother) who has been an instrument of his grace toward me.


C. Nay (Sir) all thanks and praise be unto the Lord: he seeks and saues
that which was lost, he reduces his own from their wanderings, and gives life
to them who were dead.


FINIS.

