A DEFENSE OF THE TRVE AND Catholic doctrine of the sacrament of the body and
blood of our savior CHRIST, with a confutation of sundry errors concerning
the same, grounded and stablished upon Gods holy word, and approved by ye
consent of the most ancient doctors of the Church. Made by the most
Reverend father in GOD THOMAS ARCHEBYSHOP of Canterbury, Primate of all
ENGLAND and Metropolitan.

Yt is the spirit that gives life, the flesh profits nothing. Ioannis. 6.

This book is divided into five parts.
The first is of the true and Catholic doctrine and use of the sacrament of
the body and blud of our savior CHRIST. The second is against the error of
Transubstantiation. The third teaches the manner how CHRIST is present in his
holy supper. The fowerth is of the eating and drinking of the body and blud of
our Savior CHRIST. The fyft book is of the oblation and sacrifice of our
savior CHRIST.
A PREFACE TO THE READER.
OUR SAVIOVR CHRIST Jesus, according to the will of his eternal father, when
the time thereto was fully co^plished, taki^g our nature upon him, came into this
world from the high throne of his Father, to declare unto miserable sinners,
good news, to heal them that were syck, to make the blind to see, the deaf to
here, and the domb to speak, to set prisoners at libertee, to show that the
time of grace and mercy was come, to give light to them that were in darkness
and in the shadow of death, and to preach and give pardon and full remission of
sin to al his elected. And to perform the same, he made a sacrifice and
oblation of his own body upon the cross, which was a full redemption,
satisfaction, and propitiation for the sins of y^ wholle world. And to
commend this his sacrifice unto al his faithful people, and to confirm their
faith and hope of eternal salvation in the same, he has ordained a perpetual
memory of his said sacrifice, daily to be used in the Church to his perpetual
laud and praise, and to our singular comfort and consolation, That is to say,
y^ celebration of his holy supper, wherein he does not cesse to give him self
with all his benefits to all those that duly receive the same supper,
according to his blessed ordinance. But the Romish Antichrist, to deface this
great benefit of Christ, has taught that his sacrifice upon ye cross is not
sufficient hereunto, without another sacrifice devised by him, and made by the
priest, or else without Indulge^ces, Beads, Pardons, Pylgramages, and such
other pelfray, to supply Christ's imperfection. And that christian people can
not apply to them selfs the benefits of Christ's passion, but that the same
is in the distribution of the bishop of Rome, or else that by Christ we have no
full remission, but be delivered only from sin, and yet remains temporal
pain in Purgatory due for the same, to be remitted after this life by the
Romish Antichrist and his ministers, who take upon them to do for us, that
thing, which Christ either would not, or could not do. O heinous blasphemy and
most detestable injury against Christ. O wicked abhominacion in the temple of
God, O pride intolerable of Antichrist, and most manifest token of the son of
pardicio^, extollyng him self above God, and with Lucifer exaltyng his seat
and power above the throne of God. For he that takes upon him, to supply that
thing which he pretends to be imperfect in Christ, must needs make him
self above Christ, and so very Antichrist. For what is this else, but to be
against Christ, and to bring him in contempt? as one y^ either for lack of
charitee would not, or for lack of power he could not, with all his
bloudsheadyng and death, clearly deliver his faithful, and give them full
remission of their sins, but that the full perfection thereof must be had at
the hands of Antichrist of Rome and his ministers? What man of knowledge and
zeal to Gods honor, can with dry eyes se this injury to Christ, and look upon
the state of religion brought in by the Papists, perceiuyng the true sense of
Gods word subverted by false gloses of man's deuisyng, the true christian
religion turned into certain hypocritical and superstitious sects, y^ people
praiyng with their mouths and hearing with their ears they wist not what, and
so ignorant in Gods word, that they could not discern hypocricie and
superstition from true and sincere religion? This was of late years the face of
religion with in this realm of England, and yet remains in diverse realms.
But thanks be to almighty God and to the kings majesty, with his father, a
prince of most famous memory, ye superstitious sects of Monks and Friars
(that were in this Realm) be clean taken away, the scripture is restored unto
the proper and true understanding, the people may daily read and hear Gods
heavenly word, and pray in their own language which they understand, so that
their hearts and mouths may go together, and be none of those people of whom
Christ complained, Math* 15*
saying: These people honor me with their lyppes, but their hearts be far
from me. Thanks be to God many corrupt weeds be plucked up, which were
wont to rotte the flock of Christ, and to let the growyng of the Lords
harvest.

But what avails it to take away beads, pardons, pilgremages, and such other
like Popery, so long as.ii. chief roots remain vnpulled vp^ whereof so long as
they remain, will spryng again al former impedime^tes of the Lords harvest, and
corruption of his flock. The rest is but branches and leaves, the cuttyng away
whereof, is but like toppyng and loppyng of a tree, or cuttyng down of weeds,
leaui^g the body sta^dyng, and the roots in the ground, but the very body of
the tree, or rather the roots of the wedes, is the popish doctrine of
Transubsta^tiation of the real presence of Christ's flesh and blood in the
sacrament of the altar (as they call it) and of the sacrifice and oblation of
Christ made by the priest, for the salvation of the quick and the dead. Which
roots if they be suffered to grow in the Lords vineyard, they will ouerspreade
all the ground again, with the old errors and superstitions. These injuries to
Christ be so intolerable, that no christ^a^ heart can wyllyngly bear them.
Wherefore seeing that many have set to their hands, and whetted their to les, to
pluck up ye weeds, and to cut down ye tree of error, I not knowing otherwise
how to excuse my self at the last day, have in this book set to my hand and
axe with the rest to cut down this tree, and to pluck up the wedes and
plants by the roots, which our heavenly Father never planted, but were grafted
and sown in his vineyard by his adversary the devil, and Antechriste his
minister. The Lord grant, that this my trauail and labor in his vineyard, be
not in vain, but that it may prosper and bring forth good fruits to his honor
and glory. For when I se his vineyard ouergrowen with thorns, brambles, and
wedes, I know that everlasting wo^ apperteyneth unto me, if I hold my peace,
and put not to my hands and tongue, to labor in purging his vineyard. God I
take to witness (who sees the hearts of al men thrughly unto the bottom) that I
take this labor for none other consideration, but for the glory of his name,
and the discharge of my duty, and the zeal that I bear toward the flock of
Christ. I know in what office god has placed me, and to what purpose, that is
to say, to set forth his word truly unto his people, to the uttermost of my
power, without respect of person, or regard of thing in the world, but of him
alone. I know what account I shall make to him hereof at the last day, when
every man shall answer for his vocation, and receive for the same good or ill,
according as he has done. I know how Antichriste has obscured the glory of
God, and the true knowledge of his word, ouercastyng the same with mystes and
clouds of error and ignorance, thorough false gloses and interpretations. It
pitieth me to see the simple and hungrye flock of Christ, led into corrupt
pastures, to be carried blyndfield, they know not whether, and to be fed with
poison in the stead of wholesome meats. And moved by the duty, office and
place, where unto it has pleased God to call me, I give warnyng in his name
unto all that profess Christ that they flee far from Babylon, if they will
save their souls, and to beware of that great harlot, yt is to say, the
pestiferous sea of Rome, that she make you not dronk with her pleasant wine.
Trust not her sweet promises, nor banquet not with her, for in steed of wine she
will give you sower dregs and for meat she will feed you with rank poiso^.
But come to our redemer and savior Christ who refreshes all that trewely come
unto him, be their anguishe and heaviness never so great. Give credit unto him,
in whose mouth was never found gile, nor untruth. By him you shall be clearly
delivered from all your diseases, of him you shall have full remissyon, A pena
and a culpa. He it is that feeds contynually all that beelong unto him, with
his own flesh that hanged upon the cross, and gives them drink of the blud
flowyng out of his own side, and makes to spring within them, water that
flows unto everlasting life. Lysten not to the false incantacyons, sweet
whisperinges and craftye iuglynges of the subtyl Papystes, wherewith they have
this many years deluded and bewytched the world, but harken to Christ, give
ear unto his words, which shall lead you the right way unto everlasting
life, there with him to live ever as heirs of his kyngedome.

AMEN.
THE FIRST BOOK IS OF THE TRVE AND CATHOLIC DOCTRINE AND USE OF the sacrament
of the body and blood of our Savior Christ.
THE SVPPER OF the Lord, otherwise called The holy Communion or Sacrament of
the body and blood of our savior CHRIST, has been of many men, and by
sundry ways, very much abused, but specially within these four or five
hundredth years. Of some it has been used as a sacrifice propici^torye for
sin, and otherwise supersticiously, far from the intent that CHRIST did
first ordain the same at the beginning, doing therein great wrong and iniurye
to his death and passion. And of other some it has been very lightly
esteemed, or rather contemned and despised, as a thing of small or none
effect. And thus between both the parties has been much variance and
contention in diverse places of Christendom. Therefore to the intent that this
holy sacrament or Lords supper, may here after neither of the one party be
contemned or lightly esteemed, nor on the other party be abused to any other
purpose, than Christ him self did first appoynte and ordeyne the same, and
that so, the contention on both parties may be quieted and ended, the most
sure and plain way is, to cleave unto holy scripture. Wherein what so ever is
found, must be taken for a most sure ground and an infallible truth, and
what soever can not be grounded upon the same (touching our faith) is man's
devise, chaungeable and uncertain. And therefore here are set forth the very
words, that Christ him self and his apostle saint Paul spoke, both of the
eating and drynkyng of Christ's body and blood, and also of the eating and
drinking of the sacrament of the same.

The eating of the body of Christ.
FIRST as concerning the eating of the body and drinkyng of the blood of our
savior Christ, he speaks him self in the.vi. chapter of saint John in
this wise.

Ihon. 6.
Ueryly verily I say unto you, except you eat the flesh of the son of man
and drink his blood, you have no life in you. Who so eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last
day. For my flesh is very meat, and my blood is very drink. He that eats
my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. As the living
father has sent me, and I live by the father, even so he that eats me, shall
live by me. This is the bread which came down from heaven. Not as your
fathers did eat Manna, and ar dead. He that eats this bread, shall live for
ever.

Of these words of Christ it is plain and manifest, Augustine in Joan
Tractat. 26.
that the eating of Christ's flesh and drynkyng of his blood, is not like to
the eating and drynkyng of other meats and drinks. For although without meat
and drink man can not live, yet it follows not, that he that eats and
drynketh, shall live for ever. But as touching this meat and drink of the
body and blood of Christ, it is true, both he that eats and drinks them,
has everlasting life, and also he that eats and drynketh them not, Eodent
tract.
has not everlasting life. For to eat that meat and drink that drink, is
to dwell in Christ and to have Christ dwelling in him

And therefore no man can say or thynk, Aug. de Ciuitate. Lib. 21. cap. 25.
that he eats the body of Christ or drinks his blood, except he dwells
in Christ, and has Christ dwelling in him. Thus have ye heard of the
eating and drinking of the very flesh and blood of our savior Christ.

Chap. 3.
Now as touching the sacraments of the same, The eting of the sacrament of
his body.
our savior Christ did institute them in bread and wine, at his last supper,
which he had with his apostles the night before his death. At which time (as
saint Mathewe says)

Math. 26
When they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, gave it to his disciples and said: Take, eat, this is my body. And
he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, saiynge.
Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new testament, that is shed
for many, for the remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not drink
hensforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day, when I shall drink it new
with you in my fathers kingdom.

This thing is rehearsed also of saint Mark in these words.

Mat^. 14
As they did eat, Jesus took bread, and when he had blessed, he brake it, and
gave it to them, and said: Take, eat, this is my body: And taking the cup,
when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank of it. And
he said to them: This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for
many. Uerily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine,
until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God.

The Evangelist S. Luke utters this matter on this wise.

When the hour was come, Luc. 22.
he sat down, and the.xii. apostles with him. And he said unto them: I have
greatly desired to eat this pascha with you before I suffer. For I say unto
you: Hensforth I will not eat of it any more, until it be fulfilled in the
kingdom of god. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and said: Take this,
and divide it among you. For I say unto you: I will not drink of the fruit of
the vine, until the kingdom of God com. And he took bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and gave it unto them, saying: This is my body,
which is given for you. This do in remembrance of me. Likewise also wha^ he
had supped, he took the cup, saying: This cup is the new testament in my
blood, which is shed for you.

Hitherto you have heard all that the Evangelists declare, that Christ spoke
or did at his last supper, concerning the institucion of the Communion and
sacrament of his body and blood. Now you shall hear what saint Paul says
concerning the same, in the tenth chapter of the first to the Corinthians,
where he writes thus.

1. Cor. 10.
Is not the cup of blessing, which we bless, a comunion of the blood of
Christ? Is not the bread, which we break, a communyon of the body of
Christ? We being many, ar one bread and one body. For we all ar partakers of
one bread and of one cup.

And in the eleventh he speaks on this manner.

1. Cor. 11.
That which I delivered unto you, I received of the Lord. For the lord Jesus,
the same night, in the which he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and said: Take, eat, this is my body, which is
broken for you. Do this in remembrance of me. Likewise also he took the cup,
when supper was done, saying: This cup is the new testament in my blood.
Do this as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as you
shall eat this bread and drink this cup, show forth the Lords death till he
come. Wherefore who so ever shall eat of this bread or drink of this cup
unworthily, shall be gyltie of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man
examine him self, and so eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For he
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drynketh his own damnation,
because he makes no difference of the Lords body. For this cause manny are
weak and sick among you, and many do sleep.

By these words of Christ rehearsed of the Evangelists, and by the doctrine
also of saint Paul (which he confesses that he received of Christ) two
things specially are to be noted.

Chap. 4.
First that our savior Christ called the material bread which he brake,
Christ called the material bread his body.
his body, and the wine (which was the fruit of the vine) his blood. And yet
he spoke not this, to the intent that men should think, that material bread
is his very body, or that his very body is material bread: neither that wine
made of grapes is his very blood, or that his very blood is wine made of
grapes, but to signify unto us (as S. Paul says) that the cup is a
communion of Christ's blood that was shed for us, and the bread is a
communion of his flesh that was crucified for us. So that although in the
truth of his humane nature, Christ be in heaven, and sits on the right
hand of God the father, yet who so ever eats of that bread in the supper of
the Lord, according to Christ's institution and ordinance, is assured by
Christ's own promise and testament, that he is a membre of his body, and
receives the benefittes of his passion, which he suffered for us upon the
Cross. And likewise he that drynketh of that holly cup in that supper of the
Lord, according to Christ's institution, is certified by Christ's legacy and
testament, that he is mad partaker of the blood of Christ, which was shed
for us. And this meant saint Paul, when he says: 1. Cor. 10.
Is not the cup of blessyng which we bless, a communion of the blood of
Christ? Is not the bread, which we break, a communion of the body of
Christ? So that no man can contemn or lightly esteem this holy communion,
except he contemn also Christ's body and blood, and pass not whether he have
any fellowship with him or no. And of those men saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.
that they eat and drink their own damnation, because they esteem not the
body of Christ.

The second thing which may be learned of the foresaid words of Christ and
saint Paul is this: Chap. 5.

Evil men do eat the sacrament but not the body of Christ


that although none eats the body of Christ, and drynketh his blood, but they
have eternal life, (as apereth by the words before recited of S. John) yet
both the good and the bad do eat and drynk the bread and wine, which be the
Sacraments of the same. John. 6.
But beside the Scaramentes, the good eats everlasting life, the evil
everlasting death. Therefore S. Paul says: 1. Cor. 11:
Whosoever shall eat of this bread, and drynketh of the cup of the Lord
unworthily, he shall be guilty of the body and bloudde of the Lord. Here
saint Paul says not, that he that eats the bread and drinks the cup of
the Lord unworthily, eats and drynketh the body and blood of the Lord, but
is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But what he eats and drinks S.
Paul declares, saiynge: ^ Corin. 11.
He that eats and drynketh vnwoorthyly, eats and drynketh his own
damnation.

Thus is declared the sum of all that scripture speaks of the eating and
drinking, both of the body and blood of Christ, and also of the sacrament of
the same.

Chap. 6.
AND as these things be most certainly true, because they be spoken by Christ
him self, the author of all truth, These things suffice for a christen man's
faith concerning this sacrament.
and by his holy apostle S. Paul, as he received them of Christ, so all
doctrines contrary to the same, be most certainly false and untrue, and of all
christian men to be eschued, because they be contrary to gods word. And al
doctrine concerning this matter, that is more than this, which is not grounded
upon Gods word, is of no necessitee, neither ought the peoples heads to be
busied, or their consciences troubled with the same. So that things spoken and
done by Christ, and written by the holy Evangelists and S. Paul, ought to
suffice the faith of christen people, as touching the doctrine of the Lords
supper, and holy communion or sacrament of his body and blood.

Which thing being well considered and waied, shall be a just occasion to
pacify and agree both parties, as well them that hitherto have contemned or
lightly esteemed it, as also them which have hitherto for lack of knowledge
or otherwise, ungodly abused it.

CHRIST ordained the sacrament to move and stir all men to frendeshyp, Chap.
7.
love, and concord, and to put away all hatred, The sacrament which was
ordained to make love and concord, is turned into the occasion of varia^ce and
discord
variance and discord, and to testify a brotherly and unfeigned love between
all them that be the members of Christ: but the devil, the ennemy of Christ,
and of al his members, has so craftily iuggled herein, that of nothing ryseth
so much contention as of this holy sacrament.

God grant that al contention set aside, both the parties may come to this
holy communion with such a lively faith in Christ, and such an unfeigned love
to all Christ's members, that as they carnally eat with their mouth this
sacramental bread and drink the wine, so spiritually they may eat and drink
the very flesh and blood of Christ which is in heaven, and sits on the
right hand of his father. And that finally by his means, they may enjoy with
him the glory and kingdom of heaven. Amen.

Although in this treaty of the sacrament of the body and blood of our savior
Christ, Chap. 8.
I have already sufficiently declared the institution and meaning of the same,
according to the very words of the gospel and of saint Paul, yet it shall
not be in vain somewhat more at large to declare the same, according to the
mind, as well of holy scripture, as of old ancient authors, and that so
sincerely and plainly, without doubts, ambiguitees, or vayn questions, that
the very simple and unlearned people, may easily understand the same, and be
edified thereby.

And this by Gods grace is mine only intent and desire, that the ^locke of
Christ dispersed in this realm (among whom I am appointed a special pastor)
may no longer lack the commoditee and fruit, which springs of this heavenly
knowledge. For the more clearly it is understand, the more swetenes, fruit,
comfort, and edification it brings, to the godly receauers thereof. And to
the clear understanding of this sacrament, diverse things must be
considered.

Chap. 9.
FIRST, that as all men of them selves be sinners, The spiritual hunger and
thirstinesse of the soul.
and thorough sin be in Gods wrath, banyshed far away from him, condemned
to hell and everlasting damnation, and none is clearly innocent, but Christ
alone: so every soul inspired by God, Ephe. 2. Romans 3.
is desirous to be delivered from sin and hell, and to obteyn at Gods
hands, mercy, favor, righteousness, and everlasting salvation.

And this earnest and great desire, is called in scripture, The hunger and
thirst of the soul: with which kind of hunger David was taken, when he
said: Psalm 41
As an heart longs for sprynges of water, so does my soul long for the O
God. My soul has thyrsted after God, who is the well of life. Ps. 62.
My soul thyrsteth for the, my flesh wysheth for thee.

And this hunger the sely poor sinful soul is driven unto, by means of the
law, which shows unto her the horriblenes of sin, Romans 4.
the terror of Gods indignation, Roma. 7.
and the horror of death and everlasting damnation.

And when she sees nothing but damnation for her offenses, Romans 8.
by justice and accusation of the law, and this damnation is ever before her
eyes, than in this great distress the soul being pressed with heaviness and
sorrow, seeks for some comfort, and desires some remedy for her miserable and
sorrowful estate. And this feelynge of her damnable condition, and gredy desire
of refreshyng, is the spiritual hunger of the soul.

And who soever has this godly hunger, is blessed of God, and shall have meat
and drink enough, as Christ him self said: Blessed be they that hunger and
thirst for rightousnes, for they shall be filled full. Math. 5.
And on the other side, they that see not their own sinful and damnable estate,
but think them selves holy enough, and in good case and condition enough, as
they have no spiritual hunger, so shall they not be fed of God with any
spiritual food. Luc. 1.
For as almighty God feeds them that be hungry, so does he send away empty
all that be not hungry.

But this hunger and thyrst is not easily perceived of the carnal man. For
when he hereth the holy ghost speak of meat and drynk, his mind is by and
by in the kytchen and buttery, and he thinks upon his dyshes and pottes, his
mouth and his bealy.

But the scripture in sundry places uses special words, whereby to draw our
gross minds from the phantasyeng of our teeth and belly, and from this
carnal and fleshely imagination. For the Apostles and disciples of Christ,
when they were yet carnal, knew not what was meant by this kind of hunger and
meat, and therefore when they desired him to eat, John. 4.
to withdraw their minds from carnal meat, he said unto them: I have other
meat to eat, which you know not. And why knew they it not? Forsothe
because their minds were gross as yet, and had not received the fullness of
the spirit. And therefore our savior Christ, myndyng to draw them from this
grossenes, told them of an other kind of meat, then they phantasied (as it
were) rebukyng them, for that they perceived not, that there was any other
kind of eating and drinkyng, besides that eating and drinkyng, which is with
the mouth and the throat.

Likewise when he said to the woman of Samaria: Who so ever shall drink of
that water, Iho. 4.
that I shall give him, shall never be thirsty again. They that heard him
speak those words, might well perceive, that he went about to make them well
acquaynted with an other kind of drinking, than is the drinking with the
mouth and throat. For there is no such kind of drink, that with ones
drynkyng, can quench the thirst of a man's body for ever. Wherefore, in saying:
He shall never be thirsty again. he did draw their minds from drinking with
the mouth, unto an other kind of drinkyng whereof they knew not, and unto an
other kind of thirsting, wherewith as yet they were not acquainted.

Also when our savior Christ said: John. 6.
He that comes to me, shall not hunger: and, He that be leueth on me, shall
never be thyrstye. he gave them a plain watch word, that there was an other
kind of meat and drink, then that, wherewith he fed them at the other side of
the water: and an other kind of hungryng and thyrstynge, then was the
hungrynge and thirstyng of the body. By these words therefore he drove the
people to understand an other kind of eating and drinkyng, of hungring and
thyrstyng then that, which belongs only for the preservation of temporal
life.

Now then as the thing that comfort the body, is called Meat and drink,
of a like sor the scripture calls the same thing that comfort the soul,
Meat and drink.

Wherefore as he^e before in the first note is declared the hungre and drought
of the soul, Cha. 10.
so is it now secondly to be noted, what is the meat, The spiritual food of
the soul
drink, and food of the soul.

The meat, drink, food and refreshynge of the soul, is our savior Christ,
as he said him self: Math. 11.
Come unto me all you that travail and be laden, and I will refreshe you.
And, If any man be dry (says he) let him come to me and drink. John. 7.
He that believes in me, flouddes of water of life shall flow out of his
bealy. And, I am the bread of life (says Christ) He that comes to me, Ioh. 6.
shall not be hungry: and he that believes in me, shall never be dry.

For as meat and drink do comfort the hungry body, so does the death of
Christ's body, and the sheddyng of his blood comfort the soul, when she is
after her sort hungry. What thing is it that comfort and norisheth the body?
Forsooth meat and drink. By what means than shall we call the body and blood
of our savior Christ (which do comfort and nouryshe the hungrye soul) but
by the names of meat and drink? And this similitude caused our savior to
say: Iho. 6.
My flesh is very meat, and my blood is very drink. For there is no kind of
meat that is comfortable to the soul, but only the death of Christ's blessed
body: nor no kind of drink, that can quench her thyrst, but only the
bloudsheddyng of our savior Christ, which was shed for her offenses.

For as there is a carnal generation, and a carnal feedyng and nourishement,
so is there also a spiritual generation, and a spiritual feadyng.

And as every man by carnal generation of father and mother, is carnally
begotten and born unto this mortal life, so is every good christian
spiritually borne by Christ unto eternal life.

And as every man is carnally fed and nourished in his body by meat and
drink, even so is every good christian man spiritually fed and nourished in
his soul by the flesh and blood of our savior Christ.

And as the body lives by meat and drink, and thereby increases and grows
from a young babe unto a perfect man, (which thing experience teaches us) so
the soul lives by Christ him self, by pure faith eating his flesh and
drynkyng his blood. And this Christ him self teaches us in the sixth of Ihon,
John. 6.
saying: Uerely verily I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the son
of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. who so eats my flesh
and drynketh my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last
day: For my flesh is very meat, and my blood is very drink. He that eats
my flesh and drynketh my blood dwells in me, and I in him. As the living
father has sent me, and I live by the father, even so he that eats me, shall
live by me. Gal. 2.
And this S. Paul confessed of him self, saying: That I have life, I have it
by faith in the son of God. And now it is not I that live, but Christ lives
in me.

The third thing to be noted is this, Chap 11.
that although our savior Christ resembles his flesh and blood to meat and
drink, Christ^ far excels all corporal food.
yet he far passes and excels all corporal meats and drynkes. For
although corporal meats and drynkes do norishe and continue our life here in
this world, yet they begin not our life. For the beginning of our life we have
of our fathers and mothers, and the meat, after we be begotten, does feed
and nourishe us, and so preserves us for a time. But our savior Christ is
both the first beginner of our spiritual life, (who first begets us unto
God his father) and also afterward he is our lively food and nourishement

Moreover, meat and drink does feed and norishe only our bodies, but Christ
is the true and perfect norishement, both of body and soul. And besides that,
bodily food preserves the life but for a time, but Chrst is such a spirytual
and perfect food, that he preserves both body and soul for ever. Ioh. 11.
As he said unto Martha: I am resurrection and life. He that believes in me,
although he dye, yet shall he live. And he that lives and believes in me,
shall not dye for ever.

Cha. 12.
Fourthly it is to be noted, that the true knowledge of these things, is the
true knowledge of Christ, The sacraments were ordained to confirm our faith
and to teach these things, is to teach Christ, and the beleuyng and
feelyng of these things, is the beleuyng and felyng of Christ in our hearts.
And the more clearly we see, understand and believe these things, the more
clearly we se and understand Christ, and have more fully our faith and
comfort in him.

And although our carnal generation and our carnal nourishement, be known
to all men by daily experience, and by our common senses, yet this our
spiritual generation and our spiritual nutrition, be so obscure and hyd unto
us, that we can not attayn to the true and perfect knowledge and feelyng of
them, but only by faith, which must be grounded upon Gods most holy word
and sacraments.

AND for this consideration our Savior Christ has not only set forth
these things most plainly in his holy word, that we may hear them with
our ears, but he has also ordained one visible sacrament of spiritual
regeneration in water, and an other visible sacrament of spiritual norishment
in bread and wine to the intent, that as much as is possible for man, we may
se Christ with our eyes, smell him at our nose, taste him with our mouths,
grope him with our hands, and perceue him with all our senses. For as the word
of god preched, puts Christ into our ears, so likewise these elements of
water, bread and wine, joined to gods word, do after a sacrame^tal manner, put
Christ in to our eyes, mouths, hands and al our senses.

And for this cause Christ ordained baptism in water, that as surely as we se,
feel and touch water with our bodies, and be washed with water, so assuredly
ought we to believe, when we be baptized, that Christ is verily present with us,
and that by him we be newly borne again spiritually, and washed from our
sins, and grafted in the stock of Christ's own body, and be apparailed,
clothed, and harnessed with him, in such wise, that as the dyuel has no power
against Christ, so has he none against us, so long as we remain grafted in
that stock, and be clothed with that apparel and harnesed with that armor. So
that the washyng in water of baptism, is as it were showing of Christ before
our eyes, and a sensible touching, feelyng and gropyng of him, to the
confirmation of the inward faith, which we have in him.

And in like manner Christ ordained the sacrament of his body and blood in bread
and wine, to preach unto us, that as our bodies be fed, nourished, and
preserved with meat and drink, so (as touching our spiritual life toward
God) we be fed, nourished and preserved by the body and blood of our savior
Christ, and also that he is such a preservation unto us, that another the devils
of hell, nor eternal death, nor syn, can be able to prevail against us, so
long as by true and constant faith, we be fed and nouryshed with that meat and
drink. And for this cause Christ ordained this sacrament in bread and wine
(which we eat and drink, and be chief nutrimentes of our body) to the
intent, that as surely as we see the bread and wine with our eyes, smell them
with our noses, touch them with our hands, and taste them with our mouths, so
assuredly ought we to believe, that Christ is our spiritual life and sustinance
of our souls, like as the said bread and wine is the food and sustinaunce of
our bodies. And no less ought we to doubt, that our souls be fed and live
by Christ, then that our bodies be fed and live by meat and drink. Thus our
savior Christ, knowing us to be in this world (as it were) but babes and
weakelynges in faith, has ordained sensible signs and tokens, whereby to
allure and draw us to more strength and more constaunt faith in him. So that
the eating and drinkyng of this sacramental bread and wine, is as it were a
showing of Christ before our eyes, a smellyng of him with our noses, a feelyng
and gropyng of him with our hands, and an eating, chawyng, digestyng and
feedyng upon him to our spiritual strength and perfection.

Fyftly it is to be noted, that although there be many kinds of meats and
drynkes, Chap. 13.
which feed the body, Wherefore this sacrament was ordained in breead and wine
yet our savior Christ (as many) ancient authors write) ordained this
sacrament of our spyrytual feedyng in bread and wine, rather than in other
meats and drinks, because that bread and wine do most lively represent unto
us the spiritual union and knot of al faithful people, as well unto Christ, as
also emonges them selfs. For like as bread is made of a great number of graynes
of corn, ground, baken, and so joined together, that thereof is made one lofe:
And an infinite number of grapes be pressed together in one vessel, and thereof
is made wine, likewise is the whole multitude of true christian people
spyrytually joined, first to Christ, and then among them selves together, in
one faith, one baptism, one holy spyrite, one knotte and bond of love.

Sixtely, Chap. 14
it is to be noted, that as the bread and wine which we do eat, The unite
of Christ's mystical body
be turned into our flesh and blood, and be made our very flesh and very
blud, and be so joined and mixed with our flesh and blood, that they be made
one whole body together, even so be al faithful christians, spiritually turned
into the body of Christ, and be so joined unto Christ, and also together among
themselves, that they do make but one mystical body of Christ, ^. Co. 10.
as saint Paul says: We be one bread and one body, as many as be
partakers of one bread and one cup. Dionysius
And as one lofe is given among many men, so that every one is partaker of the
same lofe: and likewise one cup of wine is distributed unto many persons,
whereof every one is partaker, even so our savior Christ (whose flesh and
blood be represented by the mystical bread and wine in the lords supper) does
give him self unto all his true members, spiritually to feed them, noryshe
them, and to give them continual life by him. And as the branches of a tree,
or membre of a body, if they be dead or cut of, they neither live, nor receive
any nourishement or sustinaunce of the body or tree, so likewise ungodly and
wicked people, (which be cut of from Christ's mystical body, or be dead
members of the same) do not spiritually feed upon Christ's body and blood, nor
have any life, strength or sustentation thereby.

Chap. 15
Seventhly it is to be noted, that where as no thing in this life is more
acceptable before God, This Sacrament moves al me^ to love and frendshyp
or more pleasant unto man, than christen people to live together quietly in
love and peace, unity and concord: this sacrament does most aptly and
effectuously move us thereunto. For when we be made all partakers of this one
table, what ought we to think, but that we be al members of one spiritual
body? (whereof Christ is the head) that we be joined together in one Christ, as
a great number of grains of corn be joined together in one loofe? Surely they
have very hard and stony hearts, which with these things be not moved. And
more cruel and unreasonable be they then brute beasts, that can not be
persuaded, to be good to their christian brethren and neighbors (for whom
Christ suffered death) when in this sacrament they be put in remembrance, that
the son of God bestowed his life for his enemies. For we see by daily
experience, that eating and drynkyng together, makes friends, and contynueth
frendshippe. Much more than ought the table of Christ to move us so to do.
Wild beasts and birds be made gentle by geuyng them meat and drink, why
then should not christen men wax meek and gentle with this heavenly meat of
Christ? Hereunto we be stirred and moved as well by the bread and wine in
this holy supper, as by the words of holy scripture recited in the same.
Wherefore whose heart soever this holy Sacrament, Communion and supper of
Christ, will not kindle with love unto his neighbors, and cause him to put out
of his heart all envy, hatred and malice, and to grave in the same all amitee,
frendshyp, and concord, he deceaueth him self, if he think that he has the
spirit of Christ dwelling within him.

The doctrine of tra^substa^tiation does clean subuerte our faith in Christ
But all these foresaid godly admonitions, exhortations and comfortes, do the
Papists (as much as lies in them) take away from al christen people, by
their transubstantiation.

For if we receive no bread nor wine in the holy communion, than al those
lessons and comfortes be gone, which we should learn and receive by eating of
the bread, and drinking of the wine. And that fantastical imagination,
gives an occasion utterly to subvert our whole faith in Christ. For if this
sacrament be ordained in bread and wine (which be foodes for the body) to
signifi and declare unto us our spiritual food by Christ, then if our
corporal fedyng upon the bread and wine be but fantastical (so that there is
no bread nor wine there in deed to feed upon, although they apere there to be)
than it does us to understand, that our spiritual feedyng in Christ is also
fantastical, and that in deed we feed not of him. Which sophistry is so
diuelyshe and wicked, and so much injurious to Christ, that it could not come
from any other person, but only from the devil him self, and from his
special minister Antichriste.

Chap. 16.
The eight thing that is to be noted is, that this spiritual meat of Christ
is body and blud, is not received in the mouth, The spiritual etyng is with
^he heart, not with the teethe.
and digested in the stomach (as corporal meats and drynkes commonly be)
but it is received with a pure heart, and a sincere faith. And the true
eating and drinking of the said body and blood of Christ, is with a constant
and a lively faith to beeleue, that Christ gave his body, and shed his
blood upon the Cross for us, and that he does so join and incorporate
himself to us, that he is our head, and we his membr^s, and flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bones, having him dwelling in us, and we in him. And
herein stands the whole effect and strength of this sacrament. And this
faith God woorketh in wardely in our hearts by his holy spirit, and confyrmeth
the same outwardly to our ears, by hearing of his word: and to our other
senses, by eating and drinking of the sacramental bread and wine in his
holy supper.

What thing then can be more comfortable to us, than to eat this meat and
drink this drink? Whereby Christ certyfyeth us, that we be spirytually and
trewely fed and nouryshed by him, and that we dwell in him, and he in us.
Can this be showed unto us more plainly, John. 6.
than when he says him self: He that eats me, shall live by me?

Wherefore whosoever does not contemn the everlasting life, how can he but
highely esteem this sacrament: How can he but embrace it, as a sure pledge of
his salvation? And when he sees godly people devoutly receive the same, how
can he but be desirous oftentimes to receive it with them? Surely no man that
well understands, and diligently wayeth these things can be without a great
desire to come to this holy supper.

All men desire to have gods favor, and when they know the contrary, that
they be in his indignacion, and cast out of his favor, what thing can
comfort them? Now be their minds vexed? What trouble is in their
consciences? All gods creatures seem to be against them, and do make them
afraid, as things being ministers of gods wrath and indignacion toward
them. And rest and comfort ca^ they find none, neither within them, not
without them. And in this case they do hate as well God as the devil: God as
an unmerciful and extreme judge, and the dyuell as a most malicious and ^ruel
tormentour.

And in this sorrowful heaviness, holy scripture teaches them, that our
heavenly father can by no means be pleased with them again, but by the
sacrifice and death of his only begotten son, whereby God has made a
perpetual amitee and peace with us, does pardon the sins of them that believe
in him, makes them his children, and gives them to his first begotten son
Christ, to be incorporate into him, to be saved by him, and to be made heirs
of heaven with him. And in the receiving of the holy supper of our Lord, we
be put in remembrance of this his death, and of the whole mysterye of our
redemption. In the which supper is made mention of his testamente, and of the
aforesaid Communion of us with Christ, and of the remission of our sins by
his sacrifice upon the cross.

Wherefore in this sacrament (if it be rightly received with a true faith) we
be assured that our sins be forgiven, and the leage of peace and the
testament of God is confirmed between him and us, so that who so ever by a true
faith does eat Christ's flesh, and drink his bludde, has everlasting life
by him. Which thing when we feel in our hearts, at the receauynge of the
Lords supper, what thing can be more joyful, more plesaunte or more
comfortable unto us?

All this to be true, is most certain by the words of Christ him self,
when he did first institute his holy supper, the night before his death,
as it appears as well by the words of the Evangelists, as of S. Paul.
Luce. 22
Do this (says Christ) as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me.
And Saint Paul says: As often as you eat this bread, 1 Cor. 11.
and drink this cup, you shall show the Lords death until he come. And
again. Christ said: Luce. 22
This cup is a new testament, in mine own blood, which shall be shed for the
remission of sins.

This doctrine here recited, may suffice for all that be humble and godly, and
seek nothing that is superfluous, but that is necessary and profitable. And
therefore unto such persons may be made here an end of this book. But unto
them that be contencious Papists and ydolaters, nothing is enough. And yet
because they shall not glory in their subtle inuencions and deceiuable
doctrine, (as though no man were able to answer them) I shall desire the
readers of patience, to suffer me a litell while, to spend some time in vain,
to confute their most vain vanities. And yet the time shall not be altogether
spent in vain, for there by shall more clearly appear the light from the
darkness, the truth from false sophistical subtelties, and the certain word
of God, from men's dreams and fantastical inventions.

Chap. 17
BUt these things can not manifestly appear to the reader, except the principal
points be first set out, Four principal errors of the Papists. The first is
of transubstantiation.
wherein the Papists vary from the truth of Gods word, which be chiefly
four.

First the Papis^s say that in the supper of the Lord, after the words of
consecracion (as they call it) there is none other substance remaynyng, but
the substance of Christ's flesh and blud, so that there remains neither
bread to be eaten, nor wine to be dronken. And although there be the color of
bread and wine, the savor, the smell, the bygnes, the fashion, and all other
(as they call them) accidents, or qualities and qua^tities of bread and wine,
yet (say they) there is no very bread nor wine, but they be turned into the
flesh and blood of Christ. And this conversion they call Transubstantion, that
is to say, turnyng of one substance into another substance. And although all
the accidents, both of the bread and wine, remain still, yet (say they) the
same accidents, be in no manner of thing, but hang alone in the air, without
any thing to stay them upon. For in the body and blood of Christ (say they)
these accidents can not be, nor yet in the air, for the body and blood of
Christ and the air, be neither of that bigness, fashion, smell, nor color,
that they bread and wine be. Nor in the bread and wine (say they) these
accidents can not be, for the substance of bread and wine (as they affirm) be
clean gone. And so there remains whitnes, but nothing is white: there
remains colors, but nothing is colored therewith: there remains roundnes,
but no thing is round: and there is bygnes, and yet no thing is bygge: there is
swetenes, without any sweet thing: softnes, without any soft thing: breakyng,
without any thing broken: division, without any thing divided: and so other
qualities and quantities, witout any thing to receive them. And this doctrine
they teach as a necessary article of our faith.

But it is not the doctrine of Christ, but the subtle Inuension of
Antechrist, De summa trini. et fide catholica.
first decreed by Innocent the third, and after more at large set forth by
schole authors, whose study was ever to defend and set abroad to the world
all such matters, as ye bishop of Rome had once decreed. And the devil by his
minister Antichrist, had so daseled the eyes of a great multitude of christen
people in these latter days, that they sought not for their faith, at the
clear light of Gods word, but at the Romish Antichrist, beleuyng whatsoever
he prescribed unto the^, yea though it were against all reason, all senses, and
Gods most holy word also. For else he could not have been very Antichrist in
deed, except he had been so repugnaunt unto Christ, whose doctrine is clean
contrary to this doctrine of Antichrist. For Christ teaches, that we receive
very bread and wine in the most blessed supper of the Lord as sacraments to
admonish us, that as we be fed with bread and wine bodily, so we be fed
with the body and blood of our savior Christ spiritually. As in our baptism
we receive very water, to signifye unto us, that as water is an element to
wash the body outwardly, so be our souls washed by the holy ghost inwardly.

The second is of the presence of Christ in this sacrament.
The second principal thing, wherein the Papists varry from the truth of Gods
word, is this. They say, that the very natural flesh and blood of Christ,
which suffered for us upon the cross, and sits at the right hand of the
father in heaven, is also really, substancially, corporally, and naturally, in
or under the accidents of the sacramental bread and wine, which they call, the
fourmes of bread and wine. And yet here they varry not a little among them
selves. For some say, that the very natural body of Christ is there, but not
naturally, nor sensibly. And other say, that it is there naturally and
sensibly, and of the same bygnes and fashion that it is in heaven, and as the
same was borne of the blessed virgyn Mary, and that it is there broken and
torn in pieces with our teethe. And this appears partly by the schole
authors, and partly by the confession of Beringarius, De consecrati. Distin. 2.
Ego Beringarius.
which Nicholaus the second constrained him to make, which was this. That of
the sacraments of the Lords table the said Beringarius should promise to
hold that faith, which the said Pope Nicholas and his counsel held, which
was, that not only the sacraments of bread and wine, but also the very flesh
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, are sensibly handeled of the priest in the
altar, broken and torn with the teethe of the faithful people. But the true
catholic faith, grounded upon Gods most infallible word, teaches us, that
our savior Christ (as concerning his man's nature and bodily presence) is
gone up unto heaven, and sits at the right hand of his father, and there
shall he tarry until the worlds end, at what time he shall come again, to
judge both the quick and the dead, as he says him self in many scriptures.
Joan. 6.
I forsake the world (says he) and go to my Father. And in another place he
says: Mat. 26
You shall have ever poor men among you, but me you shall not ever have. And
again he says: Mat. 24
Many hereafter shall come and lay: Look here is Christ, or look there he
is, but beloue them not. And saint Peter says in the Acts, Act. 3.
that heaven must receive Christ, until the time that all things shall be
restored.And saint Paul writing to the Colossians, Colos. 3
agrees hereto, saying: Seek for things that be above, where Christ is
sittyng at the right hand of the father. And saint Paul speaking of the very
sacrament, 1. Cor. 11
says: As often as you shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, show
forth the Lords death until he come. Till he come says S. Paul, signifiyng,
that he is not there corporally present. For what speech were this or who
uses of him that is already present, to say, Untyl he come? For Untyl I come,
signifies that he is not yet present. This is the catholic faith, which we
learn from our youth in our common Creed, and which Christ taught, the
Apostles followed, and the martyrs confirmed with their blood.

And although Christ in his humayne nature substantially, really, corporally,
naturally and sensibly, be present with his father in heaven, yet sacramentally
and spiritually he is here present in water bread and wine, as in signs and
sacraments, but he is in deed spiritually in the faithful christian people,
which according to Christ's ordinance be baptized, or receive the holy
communion, or unfeignedly believe in him. Thus have you hard the second
pryncipal article, wherein the Papists vary from the truth of Gods word,
and from the catholic faith.

Now the third thing, wherein they varye, is this.

The Papists say, The third is that evil men eat and drink the very body
and blood of Christ.
that evil and ungodly men receive in this sacrament the very body and
blood of Christ, and eat and drink the self same thing, that the good and
godly men do. But the truth of Gods word is contrary, that al those that be
godly me^bres of Christ, as they corporally eat the bread and drink the
wine, so spiritually they eat and drink Christ's very flesh and blood. And
as for the wicked members of the dyuell, they eat the sacramental bread, and
drink the sacramental wine, but they do not spiritually eat Christ's flesh
nor drink his blood, but they eat and drink their own damnation.

The fourth thing, wherein the Popyshe priests dissente from the manifest
word of God, is this. They say, that they offer Christ every day for
remission of sin, and distribute by their Masses, the merits of Christ's
passion. But the prophets, apostels and evangelists do say, that Christ
him self in his own person made a sacrifice for our sins upon the Cross,
by whose wounds all our diseases were healed, and our sins pardoned, and so
did never no priest, man, nor creature but he, nor he did the same never more
than ones. And the benefit hereof is in no man's power to give unto any
other, but every man must receive it at Christ's hands him self, A^acult. 2.
by his own faith and belief, as the prophet says.

HERE ENDS THE first book.
THE SECOND BOOK IS AGAINST THE ERROVR OF Transubstantiation.
Chap. 1.
THVS HAVE you heard declared four things, wherein chiefly the papisticall
doctrine varieth from the true word of God, The con^utacion of the error of
transubstantiation.
and from the old catholyke Christen faith, in this matter of the lords
supper. Now (lest any man should think that I feign any thing of mine own
head, without any other ground or authoritee) you shall hear by Gods grace
as well the erroures of the Papists confuted, as the catholic truth
defended, both by gods most certain word, and also by the most old
approved authors and martyrs of Christ's church.

And first, Chap. 2.
that bread and wine remain after the words of consecration, and be eaten
and drunken in the Lords supper, The papisticall doctrine is contrary to
Gods word. Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luce. 22.
is most manifest by the plain words of Christ him self, when he
ministered the same supper unto his disciples. For as the Evangelists write,
Christ took bread, and brake it, and gave it to his diciples, and said.
Take, eat* this is my body. Here the Papists triumph of these words, wha^
Christ said: This is my body. which they call the words of Consecration.
For (say they) as soon as these words be fully ended, there is no bread
left, nor none other substance, but only Christ's body. When Christ said
( this,) the bread (say they) remained. And when he said ( is) yet the
bread remained. Also when he added ( my) the bread remained still. And when
he said ( bo-) yet the bread was there still. But when he had fynyshed the
whole sentence, This is my body. than (say they) the bread was gone, and
there remained no substance but Christ's body, as though the bread could
not remain, when it is made a sacrament. But this negative, that there is no
bread, they make of their own brains, by their Unwrytten verities.

Oh good lord, how would they have bragged if Christ had said: This is no
bread. But Christ spoke not that negative, This is no bread, but said
affirmingly, This is my body. not denying the bread, but affirming that his
body was eaten, (meaning spiritually) as the bread was eaten corporally.

And that this was the meaning of Christ, appears plainly by S Paul, in the
tenth chap. to the Corinth. ^. Cor. 10.
the first epistle, where he (speakinge of the same matter) says: Is not the
bread which we break, the communion of the body of Christ? Who understood
the mind of Christ better than S. Paul, to whom Christ showed his most
secret counsels? And saint Paul is not afraid, for our better
understanding of Christ's words, somewhat to alter the same, least we might
stand stiffely in the letters and syllables, and ^rre in mistaking of Christ's
words. For where as our savior Christ brake the bread and said, This is my
body: S. Paul says, that the bread which we break, is the communion of
Christ's body. Christ said, his body: and saint Paul said, the communion of
his body: meaning nevertheless both one thing, that they which eat the bread
worthily, do eat spiritually Christ's very body. And so Christ calls the
bread his body (as the old authors report) because it represents his body,
and signifies unto them which eat that bread according to Christ's
ordinance, that they do spiritually eat his body, and be spiritually fed and
nourished by him, and yet the bread remains still there as a sacrament to
signify the same. But of these words of Consecration shall be spoken hereafter
more at large.

Therefore to return to the purpose, that the bread remains, and is eaten in
this sacrament, appears by the words which go before the consecration.
Mat. 26,
For that Christ took bread, and brake it, and gave it to his disciples, and
said: Take, eat. All this was done and spoken before the words of
consecracion. Wherefore they must needs be understand of ye very bread, that
Christ took bread, brake bread, gave bread to his disciples, co^maundyng them
to take bread, and eat bread. But the same is more plain and evident of the
wine, that it remains, and is dronken at the Lords supper, as well by the
words that go before, as by the words that follow after the consecracion.
For before the words of consecracion, Christ took the cup of wine, and
gave it unto his disciples, Mat. 26. Mat. 14,
and said: Drynk you all of this. And after the words of consecracion
follows, They drank all of yt.

Now I ask all the Papists, what thing it was that Christ commanded his
disciples to drink, when he said, Drink you all of this? The blood of Christ
was not yet there, by their own confession, for it was spoken before the
co^secracion: Therefore it could be nothing else but wine that he commanded them
to drink.

Then I ask the Papists ones again, whether the disciples drank wine or
not? If they say, yea, then let them recant their error, that there was no
wine remainyng after the co^secracion. If they say nay, then they condemn the
Apostles of disobedience to Christ's commandment, which drank not wine as
he commanded them. Or rather they reprove Christ as a Iuggler, which
commanded his Apostles to drink wine, and when they came to the drynkyng
thereof, he him self had conuayed it away.

Moreover, before Christ delivered the cup of wine to his disciples, he said
unto them: Divide this among you. Luc. 22.


Here would I ask the Papists another question, what thing it was that Christ
commanded his disciples to divide among them? I am sure they will not say, it
was the cup, except they be disposed to make men laugh at them. Nor I
think they will not say, it was the blood of Christ, as well because the
words were spoken before the consecration, as because the blood of Christ is
not divided, but spiritually given whole in the sacrament. Than could it be
understand of nothing else but of wine, which they should divide among them,
and drink all together.

Also when the Communion was ended, Christ said unto his Apostles. Uerely I say
unto you, that I will drink no more hencefurth of this fruit of the vine,
Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
until ye day, that I shall drink it new with you, in my fathers kingdom.

By these words it is clear, that it was very wine that the Apostles dra^ke
at that godly supper. For the blood of Christ is not ye fruit of the vine, nor
the accide^tes of wine, nor none other thing is ye fruit of the vine, but very
wine only.

How could Christ have expressed more plainly, that bread and wine remain,
than by taking the bread in his hands, and breakyng it him self, and geuyng
it unto his disciples, comaundyng them to eat it? And by taking the cup of
wine in his hands, and deliueryng it unto them, commaundyng them to divide it
among them, and to drink it, and calling it the fruit of the vine? These
words of Christ be so plain, that if an Angel of heaven would tell us the
contrary, he ought not to be believed. And than much less may we believe the
subtyl liyng of the Papists.

If Christ would have had us to believe (as a necessary article of our faith)
that there remains neither bread nor wine, would he have spoken after this
sort, vsyng all such terms and circumstaunces as should make us believe, that
still there remains bread and wine? What manner of teacher make they of Christ,
that say, he meant one thing, when his words be clean contrary? What christian
heart can patiently suffer this contumely of Christ?

But what crafty teachers be these Papists, who devise fantasies of their
own heads, directly contrary to Christ's teaching, and than set the same
abroad to christen people, to be most assuredly believed as Gods own most
holy word? Saint Paul did not so, but followed herein the manner of Christ's
speaking, in calling of bread, bread, and wine, wine, and never alteryng
Christ's words herein. The bread which we break (says he) is it not the
communion of Christ's body? 1. Co. 10


Now I ask again of the Papists, whether he spoke this of the bread
consecrated or not consecrated? They can not say that he spoke it of the bread
unconsecrated, for that is not the communion of Christ's body by their own
doctrine. And if S. Paul spoke it of bread consecrated, than they must needs
confess, that after consecracion such bread remains, as is broken bread,
which can be none other than very true material bread. And straight ways
after saint Paul says in the same place, 1. Co. 10
that we be partakers of one bread and one cup. And in the next chapter,
speaking more fully of the same matter, four times he names the bread and the
cup, never making mention of any transubstantiation, or remainyng of
accide^tes without any substance, which things he would have made some
mention of, if it had been a necessary article of our faith, to believe that
there remains no bread nor wine. Thus it is evident and plain, by the words
of scripture, that after co^secracion remains bread and wine, and that the
Papisticall doctrine of transubstantiation, is directly contrary to Gods word.

Chap. 3. The Papistical doctrine is against reason.
Let us now consider also, how the same is against natural reason and natural
operacion, which although they prevail not against Gods word, yet when they
be joined with Gods word, they be of great moment to confirm any truth.
Natural reason abhors vacuum, that is to say, that there should be any
empty place, wherein no substance should be. But if there remain no bread nor
wine, the place where they were before, and where their accidents be, is filled
with no substance, but remains vacuum, clean contrary to the order of nature.

We se also that the wine, though it be consecrated, yet will it turn to
vyneger, and the breadde will mowle, which than be nothing else but sour
wine and mowled bread, which could not wax sour nor mowly, if there were no
bread nor wine there at all.

And if the sacraments were now brent (as in the old church they bourned all
that remained uneaten) let the Papists tell what is burnt. They must
needs say, that it is either bread, or the body of Christ. But bread (say
they) is none there. Than must they needs bourne the body of Christ, and be
called Christbourners (as heretofore they have burned many of his members)
except they will say, that accidents bourne alone without any substance,
contrary to all the course of nature.

The sacramental bread and wine also will nourishe, which nourishement
naturally comes of the substance of the meats and drynkes, and not of the
accidents.

The wine also will poison, (as diverse bishops of Rome have had experiences,
both in poysonyng of other, and being poisoned them selves) which poysonyng
they can not ascribe to the most wholesome blood of our savior Christ, but only
to the poisoned wine.

And most of all, it is against the nature of accidents, to be in nothing. For
the definition of accidents, is to be in some substance, so that if they be,
they must needs be in some thing. And if they be in nothing, than they be not.

And a thousand things mo, of like foolishness do the Papists affirm by
their Transubstantiation, contrary to all nature and reason. As that two bodies
be in one place, and one body in many places at one time, and that substances
be gendred of accidents only, and accidents converted into substances, and a
body to be in a place, and occupy no room, and generation to be without
corruption, and corruption without generation, with many such like things,
against all order and principles of nature and reason.

Chap. 4
The Papistical doctrine is also against al our outward senses, called our five
wits. For our eyes say, The papisticall doctrine is also against all our
senses.
they se there bread and wine, our noses smell bread and wine, our mouths
taste, and our hands feel bread and wine. And although the articles of our
faith be above all our outward senses, so y^ we believe things which we can
neither see, feel, here, smell, nor taste, yet they be not contrary to our
senses, at the lest so contrary, that in such things which we from time to
time do see, smell, feel, here, and taste, we shall not trust our senses, but
believe clean contrary. Christ never made no such article of our faith.

Our faith teaches us to believe things that we see not, but it does not bid
us, that we shall not believe that we see daily with our eyes, and hear with
our ears, and grope with our hands. For although our senses can not reach so
far as our faith doothe, yet so far as the compass of our senses does
usually reach, our faith is not contrary to the same, but rather our senses
do confirm our faith. Or else what auailed it to S. Thomas, Ioh. 20.
for the confirmation of Christ's resurrection, that he did put his hand in to
Christ's side, and felt his wounds, if he might not trust his senses, nor give
no credit thereto?

And what a wide door is here opened to Ualentinianus, Marcion, and other
heretics, which said that Christ was not crucified, but that Simon Cyreneus
was crucified for him, although to the syghte of the people, it seemed that
Christ was crucified? Or to such heretics as said, that Christ was no man,
although to men's sightes he appeared in the form of man and seemed to be hu^gry,
dry, weery, to weep, sleep, eat, drink, yea and to dye like as other men do?
For if we ones admyt this doctrine, that no credit is to be given to our
senses, we open a large field, and give a great occasion unto an innumerable
rablement of most heinous heresies.

And if there be no trust to be given to our senses in this matter of the
sacrament, why than do the Papists so stoutely affirm, that the accidents
remayn after the consecration? which can not be judged but by the senses. For
the scripture speaks no word of the accidents of bread and wine, but of
the bread and wine them selves. And it is against the nature and diffinition
of accidents, to be alone without any substance. Wherefore if we may not
trust our senses in this matter of the sacrament, tha^ if the substance of the
bread and wine be gone, why may we not then say, that the accidents begone
also? And if we must needs believe our senses, as concerning the accidents of
bread and wine, why may we not do the like of the substance, and that rather
than of the accidents? Forasmuch as after the consecration the scripture
says in no place, that there is no substance of bread nor of wine, but calls
them still by such names as signify the substances, and not the accidents?

And finally, if our senses be daily deceived in this matter, tha^ is the
sensible sacrament nothing else, but an elusion of our senses. And so we make
much for their purpose, that said that Christ was a crafty iuggler, that made
things to appear to men's sightes, that in deed were no such things, but
forms only, figures, and apparances of them.

But to conclude in few words this process of our senses, let all the
Papists lay their heads together, and they shall never be able to show one
article of our faith, so directely contrary to our senses, that all our senses
by daily experience shall affirm a thing to be, and yet our faith shall
teach us the contrary thereunto.

Now for as much as it is declared, Chap. 5.
how this Papisticall opinion of Transubstantiation is against the word of
God, The papysticall doctrine is contrary to ye faith of the old authors of
Christ's Church.
against nature, against reason, and against all our senses, we shall show
furthermore, that it is against the faith and doctrine of the old authors of
Christ's church, beginning at those authors, which were nerest unto Christ's
time, and therefore might best know the truth herein.

First Justinius a great learned man, Justinius.
and an holy martyr, the oldest author that this day is known to write any
treaty upon the sacraments, and wrote not much above one hundred years after
Christ's ascension.

He writes in his second apology, that the bread, water, and wine in this
sacrament, are not to be taken as other common meats and drinks be, but they
be meats ordained purposely to give thanks to god, and therefore be called
Eucharistia, and be called also the body and blood of Christ. And that it is
laufull for none to eat or drink of them, but that profess Christ, and live
according to the same. And yet the same meat and drink (says he) is changed
into our flesh and blood, and norisheth our bodies.

By which saying it is evident, that Justinius thought, that the bread and wine
remained still for else it could not have been turned into our flesh and
blood, to nourishe our bodies.

Irenaeus contra Valenti^^um. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Next him was Ireneus, above. 150. years after Christ, who (as it is supposed)
could not be deceived in the necessary points of our faith, for he was a
disciple of Polycarpus, which was disciple to saint John the Evangelist. This
Ireneus follows the sense of Justinius wholly in this matter, and almost also
his words, saying, that the bread, wherein we give thanks unto God,
although it be of the earth, yet when the name of God is called upon it, it is
not than common bread, but the bread of thanks geuyng, having two things in
it, one earthly, and the other heavenly. What meant he by the heavenly thing, but
the sanctification which comes by the invocation of the name of God? And what
by the earthly thing? but the very bread, which (as he said before) is of the
earth? and which also (he says) does nourishe our bodies, as other bread
does which we do use?

Origenes in Mat. ca. 15.
Shortly after Ireneus was Origin about 200. years after Christ's ascension.
Who also affirms, that the material bread remains, saying, that the
mattier of the bread avails nothing, but goes down into the bealy, and is
avoided dounewarde, but the word of God spoken upon the bread, is it that
avails.

Cyprian. ad Ceciliu^ li. 2. epistola. 3.
After Origin came Cyprian the holy martyr about the year of our Lord 250. who
writes against them that ministered this Sacrament with water only, and
without wine. For as much (says he) as Christ said, I am a true vine.
therefore the blood of Christ is not water, but wine, nor it can not be
thouhgt that his blood (whereby we be redeemed and have life) is in the cup,
when wine is not in the cup, whereby the blood of Christ is showed.

What words could Cyprian have spoken more plainly, to show that the wine
does remain, than to say thus: If there be no wine, there is no blood of
Christ?

And yet he speaks shortly after, as plainly in the same Epistle. Mat. 26.
Christ (says he) taking the cup, blessed it, and gave it to his disciples,
saying: Drink you all of this, for this is the blood of the new testament,
which shall be shed for many, for the remission of sins. I say unto you,
that from hencefurth I will not drink of this creature of the vine, until I
shall drink with you new wine in the kingdom of my father. By these words
of Christ (says saint Cyprian) we perceive, that the cup which the Lord
offered, was not only water, but also wine. And that it was wine, that Christ
called his blood, whereby it is clear, that Christ's blood is not offered, if
there be no wine in the Chalise. And after it follows: How shall we drink
with Christ new wine of the creature of the vine, if in the sacrifice of God
the father and of Christ we do not offer wine?

In these words of saint Cyprian, appears most manyfestly, that in this
sacrament is not only offered very wine, that is made of grapes, that come of
the vine, but also that we drink the same. And yet the same gives us to
understand, that if we drink that wine worthily, we drink also spiritually
the very blood of Christ, which was shed for our sins.

Eusebius Emissenus.
Eusebius Emissenus, a man of syngular fame in learning, about CCC. years after
Christ's ascension, did in few words set out this matter so plainly, (both
how the bread and wine be converted into the body and blood of Christ, and yet
remain still in their nature, and also how besides the outward receiuyng of
bread and wine, Christ is inwardely by faith received in our hearts) all this
(I say) he does so plainly set out, that more playnnesse can not be reasonably
desired in this matter. For he says, that the conversion of the visible
creatures of bread and wine, into the body and blood of Christ, is like unto
our conversion in baptism, where outwardly nothing is changed, but remains
the same that was before, but all the alteration is inwardely and spiritually.

De conse^r. Distinction. 2.
If thou wylt know (says he) how it ought not to seem to the a new thing,
and impossible, that yearthly and corruptible things be turned into the
substance of Christ, look upon thy self, which art made new in baptism, when
thou wast far from life, and banished as a stranger from mercy, and fro the
way of salvation, and inwardely wast dead, yet suddenly thou beganste another
life in Christ, and wast made new, by wholesome mysteris, and wast turned into
the body of the church, not by seeing, but by beleuynge, and of the child of
damnation, by a secret pureness, thou waste made the chosen son of God.
Thou visibly dyddest remain in the same measure, that thou had before, but
inuisibly thou wast made greater, without any increase of thy body. Thou wast
the self same person, and yet by increace of faith, thou wast made an other
man. Outwardely nothing was added, but all the change was inwardly. And so
was man made the son of Christ, and Christ fourmed in the mind of man.
Therefore as thou (puttyng away thy former vileness) did receive a new
dygnitee, not feelyng any change in thy body, and as the curing of thy
disease, the puttyng away of thyn infection, the wipyng away of thy fylthynesse
be not seen with thine eyes, but are believed in thy mind: so likewise, when
thou do go up to the reverend altar, to feed upon spiritual meat, in
thy faith look upon the body and blood of him, that is thy God, honor him,
touch him with thy mind, take him in the hand of thy heart, and chiefly drynk
him with the draught of thy inward man.

Hitherto have I rehearsed the sayings of Eusebius, which be so plain, that
no man can wyshe more plainly to be declared, that this mutation of the bread
and wine into the body and blood of Christ, is a spiritual mutation, and that
outwardly nothing is changed. But as outwardly we eat the bread, and drink
the wine with our mouths, so inwardly by faith, we spiritually eat the very
flesh, and drink the very blood of Christ.

Hilarious.
Hilarious also in few words says the same. There is a figure (says he) for
bread and wine be outwardly seen. And there is also a truth of that figure,
for the body and blood of Christ be of a truth inwardly believed. And this
Hilarious was within less than. 350. years after Christ.

Epiphanius contra haere ses lib* 3. to. 2. Et in Anacephaleosi. Chrysosto. in
Mat. cap. 26. hom. 83
And Epiphanius shortly after the same time, says, that the bread is meat,
but the virtue that is in it, is it that gives life. But if there were no bread
at all, how could it be meat?

About the same time or shortly after, about the year our Lord. 400. Saint
John Chrysostom writes thus, against them that used only water in the
sacrament. Christ (says he) myndyng to pluck up that heresye by the roots,
used wine, as well before his resurrection, when he gave the mysteries, as
after at his table without mysteries. For he says, of the fruit of the vine,
which surely brings forth no water, but wine.

These words of Chrysostom declare plainly, that Christ in his holy table,
both drank wine, and gave wine to drink, which had not been true, if no wine
had remained after the Consecration, as the Papists feign.

And yet more plainly Saynct Chrysostom declares this matter in an other
place, saying: The bread before it be sanctified, Ad Cesariu^ monachum.
is called bread, but when it is sanctified by the means of the priest, it
is delivered from the name of breadde, and is exalted to the name of the
Lords body, although the nature of bread does still remain.

The nature of bread (says he) does still remayn, to the utter and manifest
confutation of the Papists, which say, that the accidents of breadde do
remain, but not the nature and substance.

At the same time was S. Ambrose, Ambrosius.
who declares the alteration of bread and wine into the body and blood of
Christ, not to be such, that the nature and substance of bread and wine be
gone, but that through grace, there is a spiritual mutation by the mighty
power of God, so that he that worthily eats of that bread, does spiritually
eat Christ, and dwells in Christ, and Christ in him.

For (says saint Ambrose, De ijs qui mysterijs iniciantur Ca. ^lti. and De
sacramentis li. 4. cap. 4.
speaking of this change of bread into the body of Christ) if the word of
God be of that force that it can make things of naught, and those things to
be* which never were before, much more it can make things that were before,
still to be, and also to be changed into other things.

And he brings for example here of the change of us in baptism, wherein a man
is so changed (as is before declared in the words of Eusebius) that he is made
a new creature, and yet his substance remains the same that was before.

Augustinus in sermon ad infa^tes
And saint Augustine about the same time wrote thus: That which you see in the
altar, is the bread and the cup, which also your eyes do show you. But faith
shows further, that bread is the body of Christ, and the cup his blood.

Here he declares four things, to be in the sacrament. Two that we see,
which be bread and wine. And other two, which we se not, but by faith only,
which be the body and blud of Christ.

In lib. sententiarun. Prosperi.
And the same thing he declares also as plainly in an other place, saying: The
sacrifice of the Church consists of two things, of the visible kind of the
element, and of the invisible flesh and blud of our Lord Jesus Christ, both
of the sacrament, and of the thing signified by the sacrament. Even as the
person of Christ consists of God and man, forasmuch as he is very God and
very man. For every thing conteyneth in it, the very nature of those things,
whereof it consysteth. Now the sacrifice of the Church consysteth of two
things, of the sacrament, and of the thing thereby sygnified, that is to say,
the body of CHRIST. Therefore there is both the sacrament, and the thing of
the sacrament, which is Christ's body.

What can be devised to be spoken more plainly against the error of the
Papists, which say that no bread nor wine remains in the sacrament? For as
the person of Christ consists of two natures, that is to say, of his manhod,
and of his Godhead, (And therefore both those natures remain in Christ,) even
so (says saynt-Augustin) the sacrament consists of two natueres, of the
eleme^tes of bread and wine, and of the body and blood of Christ, and therefore
both these natures must needs remain in the sacrament.

For the more plain understanding hereof, it is to be noted, that there were
certain heretyques, as Simon* Menander, Marcion, Ualentinus, Basilides,
Cerdon, Manes, Eutiches, Manicheus, Apollinaris, and diverse other of like
sorts, which said, that Christ was very God, but not a very manne, although
in eating, drinking, sleapyng, and all other operations of man, to men's
judgments he appeared like unto a man.

Other there were, as Artemon, Theodorus, Sabellius, Paulus Samasathenus,
Marcellus, Photinus, Nestorius, and many other of the same sects, which said,
that he was a very natural man, but not very God, although in geuyng the blind
their syghte, the dumb their speech, the deaf their hearing, in healyng
suddenly with his word al diseases, in raysyng to life them that were dead,
and in all other works of God, he showed himself as he had been God.

Yet other there were which seeing the scripture so plain in those two matters,
confessed that he was both God and man, but not both at one time. For before
his incarnation (said they) he was God only, and not man, and after his
incarnation, he ceased from his Godhead, and became a man only, and not God,
until his resurrection or ascension, and then (say they) he left his manhod,
and was only God again, as he was before his incarnation. So that when he was
man, he was not God, and wha^ he was God, he was not man

But against these vain heresies, the Catholic faith, by the express word of
God, holds and believes, that Christ after his incarnation left not his
divine nature, but remained still God, as he was before, being together at one
time, (as he is still) both perfect God and perfect man.

And for a plain declaracion hereof, the old ancient authors give two
examples, one is of man, which is made of two parts, of a soul and of a
body, and each of these two parts remain in man at one time. So that when the
soul, by the almighty power of God, is put in to the body, neither the body
nor soul perishes thereby, but thereof is made a perfect man, having a perfect
soul and a perfect body, remaynyng in him both at one time. The other
example, which the old authors bring in for this purpose, is of the holy
supper of our Lord, which consists (say they) of two parts, of the
sacrament or visible element of bread and wine, and of the body and blood of
Christ. And as in them that duly receive the sacrament, the very natures of
bread and wine cease not to be there, but remain there still, and be eaten
corporally, as the body and blood of Christ be eaten spiritually: so likewise
does the divine nature of Christ remain still with his humanitee.

Let now the Papists auaunt them selves of their Transubstantiation, that
there remains no bread nor wine in the ministration of the sacrament, if they
will defend the wicked heresies before rehearsed, that Christ is not God and
man both together. But to prove that this was the mind of the old authors,
beside the saying of saint Augustyne here recited, I shall also rehearse diverse
other.

Saint Ihon Chrysostom writes against the pestilent error of Apollinaris,
Chrysosto. ad Cesarium monachum.
which affirmed that the Godhead and manhead in Christ, were so myxed and
confounded together, that they both made but one nature. Against who^ saint
Ihon Chrysostom writes thus.

When thou speak of God, thou must consider a thing, that in nature is
syngle, without composition, without conversion, that is invisible, immortal,
incircumscriptible, incomprehensible, with such like. And when thou speak
of man, thou meanest a nature that is weak, subject to hunger, thyrste,
weeping, fear, sweatyng, and such like passions, which can not be in the
divine nature. And when thou speak of Christ, thou ioynest two natures
together in one person, who is both passible and impassible: Passible as
concerning his flesh, and impassible in his deitee.

And after he concludes, saying: Wherefore Christ is both God and man. God by
his impassible nature, and man because he suffered. He himeslfe being one
person, one son, one Lord, has the dominion and power of two natures joined
together, which be not of one substance, but each of them has his properties
distinct from the other. And therefore remains there two natures, distinct,
and not confounded. For as before the consecration of the bread, we call it
bread, but when Gods grace has sanctified it by the priest, it is delivered
from the name of bread, and is exalted to the name of the body of the Lord,
although the nature of the bread remain still in it, and it is not called two
bodies, but one body of Gods son: so likewise here, the divine nature rests
in the body of Christ, and these two make one son, and one person.

These words of saint Chrysostom, declare and that not in obscure terms,
but in plain words, that after the consecracion, the nature of bread
remains still, although it have an higher name, and be called the body of
Christ: to signify unto the godly eaters of that bread, that they spiritually
eat the supernatural bread of the body of Christ, who spiritually is there
present, and dwells in them, and they in him, although corporally he sytteth
in heaven at the right hand of his father.

Gela^ius co^tra Eutiche^ et Nestoriu^
Hereunto accords also Gelasius, writing against Eutyches and Nestorius, of
whom the one said, that Christ was a perfect man, but not God: and the other
affirmed clean contrary, that he was very God, but not man. But against these
two heinous heresies, Gelasius proves by most manifest scriptures, that
Christ is both god and man, and that after his incarnacion remained in him the
nature of his godheade, so that he has in him two natures with their
natural properties, and yet is he but one Christ.

And for the more evident declaration hereof, he brings two examples* the one
is of man, who being but one, yet he is made of two parts, and has in him
two natures, remaininge both together in him, that is to say, the body and
the soul with their natural properties.

The other example is of the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, which
(says he) is a godly thing* and yet the substance or nature of bread and
wine, do not cease to be there still.

Note well these words against all the Papists of our time, that Gelasius
(which was bishop of Rome more tha^ a thousand years passed) writes of this
sacrament, that the bread and wine cease not to be there still, as Christ
ceased not to be god after his incarnation, but remained still perfect god, as
he was before.

Theodoretus also affirms the same, Theodoretus in dialogis.
both in his first and in his second dialoge. In the first he says thus. He
that called his natural body, wheat and bread, and also called him self a
vine, the self same called bread and wine his body and bloudde, and yet
changed not their natures.

And in his second dialogue he says more plainly. For (says he) as the bread
and wine after the consecration lose not their propre nature, but keep their
former substance, form, and figure, which they had before, even so the body
of Christ, after his ascension, was changed into the godly substance.

Now let the Papists choose, which of these two they will grant, (for
one of them they must needs grant) either that the nature and substance
of breadde and wine, remain still in the sacrament after the consecration,
(and then must they recant their doctrine of Transubstantiation) or else that
they be of the error of Nestorius and other, which did say, that the nature
of the Godhead, remained not in Christ after his incarnation. For all these old
authors agree, that it is in the one, as it is in the other.

Chap. 6.
Now forasmuch as it is proved sufficientelye (as well by the holy Scripture,
as by natural operacion, Transubstant^atio^ ^ame from Rome.
by natural reason, by all our senses, and by the most old and best learned
authors, and holy matyres of CHRIST'S church,) that the substance of breadde
and wine do remain, and be received of faithefull people in the blessed
sacrament, or supper the LORD: It is a thing worthy to be considered and
well waied, what moved the school authors of late years to defend the
contrary opinion, not only so far from all experience of our senses, and
so far from all reasone, but also clean contrary to the old Church of
CHRIST, and to gods most holy word. Surely nothing moved them thereto so
much, as did the vain faith which they had in the church and sea of Rome.

For Johannes Scotus, Scotus sup 4. se^. di. 12
otherwise called Dunce, (the subtylest of all the schole authors) in treatinge
of this mattier of transubstantiation* shows plainly the cause thereof. For
(says he) the words of the Scripture might be expounded more easylye, and
more plainlye, without Transubstantiation, but the church did choose this
sense, (which is more hard) ^eeynge moved thereto (as it seems) chyefelye*
because that of the sacraments men ought to hold, as the holy church of Rome
holds: But it holds, that bread is transubstantiate or turned into the
body, and wine into the blood, as it is showed De summa Trinitate et fide
catholica. Firmiter credimus.

And Gabriel also (who of all other wrote most largely upon the Canon of y^
Mass) says thus. Grabriel.
It is to be noted, that although it be taught in the scripture, that the
body of Christ is truly contained and received of christen people, under the
kinds of bread and wine, yet how the body of Christ is there, whether by
conversion of any thing into it, or without conversion, the body is there with
the bread, both the substance and accidents of bread, remainynge there still,
it is not found expressed in the Bible. Yet forasmuch as of the sacraments,
men must hold as the holy church of Rome holds as it is written De
hereticis, Ad abolendam. And that church holds, and has determined, that
the bread is tra^substantiated into the body of Christ, and the wine into his
blood, therefore is this opinion received of al the^ that be catholic, that
the substance of bread remains not, but really and truly is turned,
transubstatiated and changed into the substance of the body of Christ.

Chap. 7.
Thus you have hard the cause, wherefore this opinion of transubstantiation at
this present is holde^ and defended among christen people, that is to say,
because the church of Rome has so determined, although the contrary, by the
Papists own confession, appear to be more easy, more true and more
according to the Scripture.

But because to our English Papists (who speak more grossly herein tha^ ye
Pope himself, affirming that the natural body of Christ is naturally in the
bread and wine) can not, nor dare not ground the^ faith, con^erning
transubsta^tiation, upon the church of Rome^ which although in name, it may
be called, most holy, yet indeed it is the most stynking do^gehill of all
wickedness that is under heaven, and the very synagoge of the devil, which
whosoever follows, can not but stumble, and fall into a pit full of errors.
Because (I say) the English Papists dare not now stablishe their faith upon
that foundation of Rome, therefore they seek Fegge leaves, that is to say, vayn
reasons, gathered of their own brains and authorities, wrested from the
intent and mind of the authors* wherewith to cover and hide their shameful
errors. Wherefore I thought it good, somewhat to travail herein, to take away
those Fygge leaves, that their shameful errors may plainly to every man
appear.

The greatest reason and of most importance, Chap. 8.
and of such strength (as they think) or at the least as they pretend, The
first reason of ye Papists to prove their transubsta^tiation.

Math. 26 Mar. 14. Luc. 22. The answer.


that all the world can not answer thereto, is this: Our savior Christ,
taking the bread, brake it, and gave it to his disciples, saying: This is my
body. Now (say they) as soon as Christ had spoken these words, the bread was
straight way altered and changed, and the substance thereof was converted
into the substance of his precious body.

But what christian ears can patiently hear this doctrine, that Christ is
every day made a new, and made of another substance, than he was made of in
his mothers womb* For where as at his incarnation, he was made of the nature
and substance of his blessed mother, now (by these Papists opinion) he is
made every day of the nature and substance of bread and wine, which (as they
say) be turned into the substance of his body and blood. O what a marvelous
Methamorphosis, and abominable heresye is this? to say, that Christ is daily
made a new, and of a new matter? whereof it follows necessarily, that they
make us every day a new Christ, and not the same that was borne of the virgyn
Mary, nor that was crucified upon the cross, as it shall be plainly proved by
these arguments following.

First thus. If Christ's body that was crucified was not made of bread, but the
body that was eaten in the supper was made of bread (as the Papists say) than
Christ's body that was eaten, was not the same that was crucified.

And again: If Christ's body that was crucified, was not made of bread, and
Christ's body that was crucified was the same that was eaten at his last supper,
than Christ's body that was eaten was not made of bread.

And moreover: If Christ's body that was eaten at the last supper was the same
that was crucified, and Christ's body that was eaten at the supper was made of
bread (as the Papists feign,) than Christ's body that was crucified, was made
of bread.

And in like manner it follows: If the body of Christ in the sacrament, be
made of the substance of bread and wine, and the same body was conceived in the
virgyns womb, than the body of Christ in the virgyns womb, was made of bread
and wine.

Or else turn the argument thus. The body of Christ in the virgyns womb was
not made of bread and wine, but this body of Christ in the sacrament is made of
bread and wine, than this body of Christ is not the same that was conceived in
the virgyns womb.

Another argument. Christ that was borne in the virgyns womb, as concerning
his body, was made of none other substance, but of the substance of his blessed
mother, but Christ in the sacrament is made of another substance, than he is
another Christ.

And so the Antichrist of Rome, the chief author of all Idolatry, would bring
fayfthul christen people, from the true worshippyng of Christ, that was made
and borne of the blessed virgyn Mary, through the operacion of the holy ghost,
and suffered for us upon the cross, to worship another Christ made of bread
and wine, through the consecracion of a Popish priest.

And thus the Popish priests make them selves the makers of God. For (say
they) the priest by the words of consecracion makes that thing which is
eaten and dronken in the Lords supper, and that (say they) is Christ him self
both God and man, and so they take upon them to make both God and man.

But let all true worshippers worship one god, one Christ, ones corporally
made, of one only corporal substance, that is to say, of the blessed virgyn
Mary, that ones dyed, and rose ones again, ones ascended into heaven, and
there sits and shall sit at the right had of his father evermore, although
spiritually he be eueryday amongst us, and whosoever come together in his
name, he is in the mids among them. And he is the spiritual pasture and food
of our souls, as meat and drink is of our bodies, which he signifies unto
us by the institution of his most holy supper in bread and wine, declaryng that
as the bread and wine corporally comfort and feed our bodies, so does he with
his flesh and blood spiritually comfort and feed our souls.

The answer more directly.
And now may be easyly answered the Papists argument, whereof they do so much
boast. For brag they never so much of the conversion of bread and wine into
the body and blood of Christ, yet that conversion is spiritual, and puts
not away the corporal presence of the material bread and wine. But for
as much as the same is a most holy sacrament of our spiritual norishement,
(which we have by the body and blood of our savior Christ) there must needs
remain the sensible element, that is to say, bread and wine, without the
which there can be no sacrament.

As in our spiritual regeneration there can be no sacrament of baptism, if
there be no water. For as Baptism is no perfect sacrament of spiritual
regeneration, without there be as well the element of water, as the holy ghost,
spiritually regenerating the person that is baptized (which is signified by the
said water) even so the souper of our Lord can be no perfect sacrament of
spiritual food, except there be as well bread and wine, as the body and
blood of our savior Christ, spiritually feeding us, which by the said bread
and wine is signified.

And how so ever the body and blood of our savior Christ be there present,
they may as well be present there with the substance of bread and wine, as with
the accidents of the same, as the schole authors do confess them selves, and
it shall be well proved if the adversaries will deny it. Thus you se the
strongest argument of the Papists answered unto, and the chief foundation
whereupon they build their error of transubstantiation, utterly subverted and
overthrown.

An other reason have they of like strength. Chap. 9.
If the bread should remain (say they) than should follow many absurdities,
The second argument for tra^substantiation
and chiefly, that Christ has taken the nature of bread, as he took the
nature of man, and so joined it to his substance. And than as we have God
verily incarnate for our redemption, so should we have him Impanate.

Thou may consydre, The answer.
good reader, that the rest of their reasons be very weak and feeble, when
these be the chief and strongest. Truth it is in deed, that Christ should
have been impanate, if he had joined the bread unto his substance in
unity of person, that is to say, if he had joined the bread unto him in
such sort, that he had made the bread one person with him self. But for as
much as he is joined to the bread but sacramentally, there follows no
Impanation thereof, no more than the holy ghost is Inaquate, that is to say,
made water, being sacramentally joined to the water in baptism. Math. 3. Mark.
1. Luce, 3,
Nor he was not made a dove, when he took upon him the form of a dove, to
signify that he, whom saint John did baptize, was very CHRIST.

But rather of the error of the Papists them selves (as one error draws
an other after it) should follow the great absurdity, which they speak
upon, that is to say, that Christ should be Impanate and Inuinate. For if
Christ do use the bread in such wise, that he does not adnihilate and make
nothing of it (as the Papists say) but makes of it his own body, than is
the bread joined to his body, in a greater unity, than is his humanitee to his
Godhead. For his Godhead is adjoined unto his humanitee in unity of person,
and not of nature. But our savior Christ (by their saying) adioyneth bread
unto his body in unity both of nature and person. So that the bread and the
body of Christ be but one thing, both in nature and person. And so is there
a more entier union between Christ and bread, than between his godheade and
manhead, or between his soul and his body. And thus these arguments of the
Papists, return (like riueted nails) upon their own heads.

Yet a third reason they have, Chap. 10.
which they gather out of the syxte of John, The third reason, John. 6.
where CHRIST says: I am lively bread, which came from heaven. If any manne
eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. And the breadde which I will
give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

Than reason they after this fashion. If the bread which Christ gave, be
his flesh, that it can not also be material bread, and so it must needs
follow, that the material bread is gone, and that none other substance
remains, but the flesh of CHRIST only.

To this is soon made answer: The answer.
that Christ in that place of John, spoke not of the material and sacramental
bread, nor of the sacrementall eating, (for that was spoken two or three years
before the sacrament was first ordained) but he spoke of spiritual bread
(manny times repetynge, John. 6.
I am the bread of life, which came from heaven)and of spiritual eating by
faith, after which sort, he was at the same present time, eaten of as
many, as believed on him, although the sacrament was not at that time made and
instituted. John. 6.
And therefore he said: Your fathers did eat Manna in the deserte, and died,
but he that eats this bread shall live for ever. Therefore this place of S.
John, can in no wise be understand of the sacramental bread, which neither
came from heaven, neither gives life to all that eat it. Nor of such bread
CHRIST could have than presentlye said, This is my flesh, except they will
say that Christ did than consecrate, so many years before the
instititution of his holy supper.

Chap. 11.
Now that I have made a full direct and plain answer to the vain reasons and
cauillacions of the Papists, Authors wrested of the Papists for their
transubstantiaion.
order requires to make likewise answer unto their sophistical allegacions
and wresting of authors unto their phantastycall purposes. There be chiefelye
three places, which at the first show, seem much to make for their intent,
but when they shall be thoroughly wayed, they make nothing for them at all.

Cyprianus De coena domini.
The first is a place of Cyprian, in his sermon of the Lords supper. where he
says, as is alleged in the Detection of the devils sophistrye. This bread
which our lord gave to his disciples, changed in nature, but not in outward
form, is by the omnipotencye of gods word, made flesh.

The answer.
Here the Papists stick toothe and nail to these words, Changed in nature.
Ergo (say they) the nature of the bread is changed. Here is one chief point
of the devils sophistry used, who in allegacion of scripture uses ever,
either to add thereto, or to take away from it, or to alter the sense thereof,
And so have they in this author, left out those words which would open
plainly all the whole matter. For next the words, which be here before of them
recited, do follow these words. As in the person of Christ, the humanitee was
seen, and the diuinitee was hyd, even so did the diuinitee, ineffably put it
self into the visible sacrament. Which words of Cyprian do manyfestly show,
that the sacrament, does still remain with the diuinitee: and that
sacramentally the diuinitee is poured into the bread and wine, the same bread
and wine still remainyng: like as the same diuinitee by unity of person was in
the humanitee of Christ, the same humanitee still remainyng with y^ divinity.

And yet the bread is changed, not in shape, nor substance, but in nature (as
Cyprian truly says) not meaning that the natural substance of bread is
clean gone, but that by Gods word, there is added thereto another higher
property, nature and condition, far passing the nature and condition of
common bread, that is to say, that the bread does show unto us, (as the same
Cyprian says) that we be partakers of the spirit of God, and most purely
joined unto Christ, and spiritually feade with his flesh and blood, so that
now the said mystical bread is both a corporal food for the body, and a
spiritual food for the soul.

And likewise is the nature of the water changed in baptism forasmuch as
beside his common nature (which is to wash and make clean the body) it
declares unto us, that our souls he also washed and made clean by the holy
ghost. And thus is answered the chief authoritee of the doctors, which the
Papists take for the principal defense of their error. But for further
declaracion of saint Cyprians mind herein, read the place of him before
recited fol. 24.

Chap. 12 Chrysostomus.
Another authoritee they have of saint Ihon Chrysostom, which they boast also
to be invincible. Chrysostom (say they) writes thus in a certain homely De
Eucharistia. Do thou see bread? Do thou see wine? Do they avoid beneth,
as other meats do? God forbid, think not so. For as wax (if it be put into
the fire) it is made like the fire, no substance remains, nothing is left:
so here also think thou, that the mysteries be consumed by the substance of
the body.

At these words of Chrysostom the Papists do triumph, as though they had won
the field. Lo (say they) does not Chrysostomus the great clarke say most
plainly, that we se neither bread nor wine? but that (as wax in the fire) they
be consumed to nothing, so that no substance remains? But if they had
rehearsed no more, The answer.
but the very next sentence that follows in Chrysostom (which craftily and
maliciously they leave out) the meaning of saint John Chrysostom would easily
have appeared, and yet will make them blushe, if they be not utterly past
shame. For after the foresaid words of Chrysostom, immediately follow these
words.

Wherefore (says he) when ye comme to these mysteries, do not think, that you
receive by a man, the body of God, but that with tongues, you receive fire by
the Angels Seraphyn.

And straight after it follows thus.

Think that the blood of salvation flows out of the pure and godly side of
Christ, and so coming to it, receive it with pure lips. Wherefore brother, I
pray you and beseech you, let us not be from the church, nor let us not be
occupied there with vain communication, but let us stand fearful and
tremblyng, castyng down our eyes, liftyng up our minds, mournyng privily with
out speech, and reioysyng in our hearts.

These words of Chrysostom do follow immediately, after the other words,
which the Papists before rehearsed. Therefore if the Papists will gather of the
words by them recited, that there is neither bread nor wine in the sacrament,
I may as well gather of the words that follow, that there is neither priest
nor Christ's body.

For as in the former sentence, Chrysostom says, that we may not think, that
we see bread and wine: so in the second sentence he says, that we may not
think, that we receive the body of Christ of the priests hands. Wherefore if
upon the second sentence (as the Papists them selves will say) it can not be
truly gathered, that in the holy Communion there is not the body of Christ
ministered by the priest: then must they confess also, that it can not be
well and truly gathered upon the first sentence, that there is no bread nor
wine.

But there be al these things together in the holy Communion, Christ himself
spiritually eaten and drunken, and norishyng the right beleuers, the bread and
wine as a sacrament declaryng the same, and the priest as a minister thereof.
Wherefore S. Ihon Chrysostom meant not absolutely, to deny that there is bread
and wine, or to deny utterly the priest and the body of Christ to be there,
but he uses a speech, which is no pure Negative, Negatiues by comparison.
but a Negative by comparison.

Which fashion of speech, is commonly used, not only in the scripture, and
among all good authors, but also in all manner of languages. For when two
things be compared together, in the extollyng of the more excellent, or
abasyng of the more vile, is many times used a Negative by comparishon, which
nevertheless is no pure Negative, but only in the respect of the more
excellent, or the more base.

As by example. When the people reiectyng the prophet Samuel, 1. Reg. 8.
desired to have a king, almighty God said to Samuel: They have not rejected
thee, but me. Not meaning by this negative absolutely, that they had not
rejected Samuel (in whose place they desired to have a king) but by that one
negative by comparison he understood two affirmatiues, that is to say, that
they had rejected Samuel, and not him alone, but also yt they had chiefly
rejected God.

And when the prophet David said in the person "of Christ, Psalm. 21.
I am a worm, and not a man. by this negative, he denied not utterly, that
Christ was a man, but (the more vehementlye to express the great humyliation
of Christ) he said, that he was not abased only to the nature of man, but was
brought so low, that he might rather be called a worm, than a man.

This manner of speech was familiar and usual to S. Paul, Romans 7,
as when he said: It is not I that do it, but it is the sin that dwells
in me. 1. Cor. 1.
And in an other place he says: Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the gospel. And again he says: 1. Cor. 1.
My speech and preaching, was not in words of man's persuasion, but in manifest
declaration of the spirit and power. And he says also: 1. Cor. 3.
Neither he that grafteth, nor he that waters, is any thing, but God that
gives the increase. And he says moreover: It is not I that live, Gal. 2.
Gal. 6.
but Christ lives within me. And, God forbydde, that I should rejoice in any
thing, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ephe. 6.
And further, We do not wrestle against flesh and bloudde, but against the
spirits of darkness.

In all these sentences, and many other like, although they be negatiues,
nevertheless S. Paul mente not, clearly to deny, that he did that evil
whereof he spoke, or utterly to say, that he was not sent to baptize (who in
deed did baptize at certain times, 1. Cor. 1.
and was sent to do al things that pertained to salvation) or that in his
office of setting forth Gods word, he used no witty persuasions, (which
in deed he used most discreetely) or that the grafter and waterer be
nothing, (which be Gods creatures, made to his similitude, and without whose
work there should be no increase) or to say, that he was not alive (who both
lived, Romans 15.
and ran from country to country, to set forth Gods glory) or clearly to
affirm, that he gloried and rejoiced in no other thing, 2. Cor. 11.
tha^ in Christ's cross (who rejoiced with all men that were in joy, and
sorowed with all that were in sorrow) or to deny utterly, that we wrestle
against flesh and blood: (which cease not daily to wrestle and war against
our enemies, the world, the flesh and the dyuel.) In all these sentences S.
Paul (as I said) meant not clearly to deny these things, which undoubtedly
were all true, but he meant that in comparison of other greatter things, these
smaller were not much to be esteemed, but that the greater things, were the
chief things to be considered. As that syn committed by his infirmity, was
rather to be imputed to original syn, or corruption of nature, which lay
lurkyng within him, than to his own will and consent. And that although he was
sent to baptyse, yet he was chiefly sent to preach Gods word. And that
although he used wise and discreet persuasions therein, yet the success
thereof came principally of the power of God, and of the workyng of the holy
spirit. And that although the grafter and waterer of the gardeyn be some
things, and do not a little in their offices, yet it is God chiefly, that
gives the increace. And that although he lived in this world, yet his chief
life, concerning God, was by Christ, whom he had living within him. And that
although he gloried in many other things, ye in his own infirmitees, 2. Cor.
11. and. 12.
yet his greattest joy, was in the redemption by the cross of Christ. And
that although our spirit daily fyghteth against our flesh, Gal* 5.
yet our chief and principal fight, is against our gostely enemies, the
subtle and puisant wicked spirits and devils.

The same manner of speech used also S. Peter in his first epistle, 1. Pet. 3.
saying, That the apparayle of women, should not be outwardly with broyded
hear, and setting on of gold, nor in putting on of gorgious apparayle, but
that the inward man of the heart, should be with out corruption.

In which manner of speech, he intended not utterly to forbid al browderyng of
hear, al gold and costly apparel to al women, (For every one must be
apparailed according to their condition, state and degree) but he meant hereby
clearly to condemn all pride and excess in apparayle, and to move all women
that they should study to deck their souls inwardly with all virtues, and not
to be curious, outwardly to deck and adorn their bodies with sumptuous
apparel.

And our savior Christ himself was full of "such manner of speeches. Mat. 6.
Gather not unto you (says he) treasure upon earth. willing us thereby,
rather to set our minds upon heavenly treasure, which ever endures, than
upon earthly treasure, which by many sundry occasions perysheth, and is taken
away from us. And yet wordly treasure must needs be had, and possessed of
some men, as the person, time, and occasion does serve.

Mat. 10
Likewise he said: When you be brought before kings and princes, think not
what and how you shall answer. Not willing us by this negative, that we should
negligently and unadvisedly answer, we care not what, but that we should
depend of our heavenly father, trusting that by his holy spirit, he will
sufficientely instruct us of answer, rather than to trust of any answer to
be devised by our own wit and study.

Mat. 10
And in the same manner he spoke, when he said: It is not you that speak, but
it is the spirit of God that speaks within you. For the spirit of god is he
that principally puts godly words into our mouths, and yet never the less
we do speak according to his mouyng.

And to be short, in all these sentences following that is to say: Mat. 23
Call no man your father upon earth: Mat. 23
Let no man call you lord or master: Mat. 10.
Fear not them that kill the body. Mat. 10
I came not to send peace upon earth. Mat. 20
It is not in me to set you at my right hand or left hand. Ioh. 4.
You shall not worship the father neither in this mount, nor in Jerusalem. Joan.
5.
I take no witness at no man. Joan. 7
My doctrine is not mine. John. 8.
I seek not my glory.

In all these negatiues, our savior Christ spoke not precisely and utterly
to deny al ye foresaid things, but in comparison of them to prefer other
things, as to prefer our father and lord in heaven, above any worldly father,
lord or master in earth, and his fear above the fear of any creature, and his
word and gospel above al worldly peace. Also to prefer spiritual and inward
honoryng of God in pure heart and mind, above local, corporal and outward
honor, and that Christ preferred his fathers glory above his own.

Now forasmuch as I have declared at length, the nature and kind of these
negative speches, (which be no pure negatiues, but by comparison) it is easy
hereby, to make answer to S. John Chrysostom, who used this phrase of speech
most of any author. For his meaning in his foresaid homily, was not that in
the celebration of the Lords supper is neither bread nor wine, neither priest,
nor the body of Christ (which the Papists themselves must needs confess) but
his intent was, to draw our minds vpwardes to heaven, that we should not
consider so much the bread, wine, priest, and body of Christ we should consider
his diuinitee and holy spirit given unto us to our eternal salvation.

And therefore in the same place he uses so many times these words, Think, and
think not. willing us by those words, that we should not fix our thoughts
and minds upon the bread, wine, priest, nor Christ's body: but to lift up our
hearts higher unto his spirit and divinity, without the which his body
avails nothing, as he says him self: Iho. 6.
It is the spirit that gives life, the flesh avails nothing.

And as the same Chrysostom in many places moves us, not to consider the water
in baptism, but rather to have respect to the holy ghost, receued in baptism,
and represented by the water: even so does he in this homily of the holy
communion, move us to lift up our mynds from al visible and corporal things, to
things invisible and spiritual.

In so much that although Christ was but ones crucified, yet would
Chrysostom have us to think, that we see him daily whypped and scourged
before our eyes, and his body ha^gyng upon the Cross, and the spear thruste
into his side, and the most holy blood to flow out of his side into our
mouths. After which manner S. Paul wrote to the Galathia^s, Gal. 3.
that Christ was painted and crucified before their eyes.

Chrysostomus
Therefore says Chrysostom in the same homily a little before the place rehearsed:
What do thou O man? dyddest not thou promise to the priest which said: Lift
up your minds and hearts. and thou dyddest answer: We lift them up unto the
Lord? Art not thou ashamed and afraid being at that same hour found a liar? A
wonderful thing. The table is set forth, furnished with Gods mysteries, the
Lamb of God is offered for thee, the priest is careful for thee, spiritual
fire comes out of that heavenly table, the Angels Seraphyn be there present,
coueryng their faces with vi. wings. All the Angelical powers with the priest
be means and intercessors for thee, a spiritual fire comes down from
heaven, blood in the cup is drunk out of the most pure side unto thy
purification. And art not thou ashamed, afraid, and abashed, not endeuorynge
thy self to purchase Gods mercy? O man, does not thine own conscience
condemn thee? There be in the weke 168. hours, and God asks but one of them
to be given wholly unto him, and thou consumest that in worldly business, in
triflyng and talkyng, with what boldness than shalt thou come to these holy
mysteries? O corrupt conscience.

Hitherto I have rehearsed saint Ihon Chrysostomes words, which do show
how our minds should be occupied at this holy table of our Lord, that is to
say, withdrawn from the consideracion of sensible things, unto the
contemplacion of most heavenly and godly things. And thus is answered this
place of Chrysostom, which the Papists took for an insoluble, and a place that
no man was able to answer. But for a further declaracion of Chrysostomes mind
in this matter, read the place of him before rehearsed fol. 26. and 28.

Chap. 13.
Yet there is another place of saint Ambrose, which the Papists think makes
much for their purpose, Ambros. de ijs qui mysterijs initiantur.
but after due examinacion, it shall plainly appear, how much they be
deceived. They allege these words of saint Ambrose in a book entitled De
ijs qui initiantur mysterijs. Let us prove that there is not that thing which
nature formed, but which benediction did consecrate, and that benediction is of
more strength than nature For by the blessyng, nature it self is also
changed. Moses held a rod, Exo. 7.
he cast it from him, and it was made a serpent. Again he took the serpent by
the tail, and it was turned again into the nature of a rod. Wherefore thou
see, that by the grace of the prophet, the nature of the serpent and rod
was twyse changed. Exo. 7.
The fluddes of Egypt ran pure water, and suddenly blood began to brast out
of the veins of the sprynges, so that men could not drink of the fludde: but
at the prayer of the prophet, the blood of the fludde went away, and the nature
of water came again. Exo. 14
The people of the Hebrews were compassed about, on the one side with the
Egyptians, and on the other side with the sea. Moses lyfted up his rod, the
water divided it self, and stood up like a wall, and between the waters was
left a way for them to pass on foot. And Iordane against nature turned back
to the head of his spring. Does it not appear now, that the nature of the sea
fludds, or of the course of fresh water, was changed? The people was dry, Exo.
17.
Moses touched a stone, and water came out of the stone. Did not grace here
work above nature, to make the stone to bring forth water, Exodus 15.
which it had not of nature? Marath was a most bitter flood, so that the
people being dry, could not drink thereof. Moses put wood into the water,
and the nature of the water lost his bytternes, which grace infused, did
suddenly moderate. 4. Reg. 6
In the time of Heliseus the prophet* an axe head fell from one of the
prophets servants into the water, he that lost the iron, desired the
prophet Heliseus help, who put the helue into the water, and the iron swam
above. Which thing we know was done above nature, for iron is heuier than the
liquor of water. Thus we perceive, that grace is of more force tha^ nature,
and yet hitherto we have rehearsed but the grace of the blessing of the prophets
Now if the blessing of a man be of such valewe, that it may change nature,
what do we say of the consecration of God? wherein is the operation of the
words of our savior Christ? For this sacrament which thou receauest is
done by the word of Christ. Than if the word of Helias was of such power,
that it could bring fire down from heaven, shall not the word of Christ
be of that power, to change the kinds of the elements? Of the making of the
whole world, Ps. 148.
thou haste read that God spoke, and the things were done, He commanded,
and they were created: The word than of Christ, that could of no things,
make things that were not, can it not change those things that be, into that
thing, which before they were not? For it is no less mattier, to give to
things new natures, than to alter natures.

Thus far have I rehearsed the words of Saint Ambrose, if the said book be
his (which they that be of greatest learning and judgment do not think) by
which words the Papists would prove, that in the supper of the Lord after
the words of Consecration (as they be commonly called) there remains
neither bread nor wine, because that S. Ambrose says in this place, that the
nature of the bread and wine is changed.

The answer.
But to satisfy their minds, let us grant for their pleasure, that the forsaid
book was Saint Ambrose own work, yet the same book makes nothing for their
purpose, but quite against them. For he says not, that the substance of
bread and wine is gone, but he says, that their nature is changed, that is to
say, that in the holy communion we ought not to receive the bread and wine,
as other common meats and drynkes, but as things clean changed into a
higher estate, nature, and condition, to be taken as holy meats and drynkes,
whereby we receive spiritual feedyng, and supernatural norishement from
heaven, of the very true body and blood of our savior Christ, through the
omnipotent power of God, and the wonderful workyng of the holy ghost. Which
so well agrees with the substance of bread and wine still remainynge, that if
they were gone away, and not there, this our spiritual feedyng, could not be
taught unto us by them.

And therefore in the most part of the examples, which S. Ambrose allegeth for
the wonderful alteration of natures, the substaunces did still remain, after
the nature and proprieties were changed. As when the water of Iordane
(contrary to his nature) stood still like a wall, or flowed against the
stream toward the head and spryng, yet the substance of the water remained
the same that it was before. Likewise the stone, that above his nature and
kind flowed water, was the self same stone that it was before. And the fludde
of Marath, that changed his nature of bytternesse, changed for all that no
part of his substance. No more did that iron, which contrary to his nature,
swam upon the water, lose thereby any part of the substance thereof. Therefore
as in these alteracions of natures, the substaunces nevertheless remained the
same, that they were before the alteracions: even so does the substance of
bread and wine remain in the Lords supper, and be naturally received and
digested into the body, not withstandyng the sacramental mutacion of the same
into the body and blood of Christ. Which sacramental mutation declares the
supernatural spiritual and inexplicable eating and drinking, feedyng and
digestyng of the same body and bloudde of Christ, in all them, that godly and
according to their duty, do receive the said sacramental bread and wine.

And that Saint Ambrose thus meant, that the substance of bread and wine
remain still after the consecration, it is most clear by three other examples
of the same matter, following in the same chapter. One is of them that be
regenerated, in whom after their regeneration does still remain their
former natural substance. An other is of the Incarnation of our Savior
Christ, in the which peryshed no substance, but remained as well the
substance of his godhead, as the substance which he took of the blessed
vyrgin Mary. The third exaumple is of the water in baptism, where the water
still remains water, although the holy ghost come upon the water, or rather
upon him that is baptized therein.

Lis. 4. De s^^ramentis cap. 4.
And although the same saint Ambrose, in an other book entitled De
sacramentis, does say, that the bread is bread before the words of
consecration, but when the consecration is done, of bread is made the body of
Christ: Yet in the same book, and in the same chapter, he tells in what
manner and form the same is done, by the words of Christ: not by taking away
the substance of the bread, but addyng to the bread, the grace of Christ's body,
and so calling it the body of Christ

And hereof he brings.iiii. examples. The first of the regeneration of a man:
the second is of the standing of the water of the red sea: the third is of the
bitter water of Marath: and the fourth is of the iron that swamme above the
water. In every of the which exaumples, the former substance remained stylle,
not withstandyng alteration of the natures. And he concludes the whole matter
in these few words. If there be so much strength in the words of the
Lord Jesus, that things had their beginning, which never were before, how
much more be they able to work, that those things, that were before, should
remayn, and also be changed into other things? Which words do show
manyfestly, that not withstandyng this wonderful sacramental and spiritual
changyng of the bread into the body of Christ, yet the substance of the bread
remains ye same, that it was before.

Thus is a sufficient answer made unto three principal authoritees, which the
Papists use to allege, to stablysh their error of transubsta^tiation. The
first of Cyprian, the second of S. John Chrysostom. and the third of S. Ambrose.
Other authoritees and reasons some of them do bring for the same purpose, but
forasmuch as they be of small moment and weight, and easy to be answered unto,
I will pass them over at this time, and not trouble the reader with them, but
leave them to be wayed by his discretion.

Chap. 14
And now I will rehearse diverse difficultees, absurditees and inconveniences,
Absurditees that follow of Transubsta^tiation
which must needs follow upon thi^ error of transubstantiation, whereof not one
^oth follow of the true and right faith, which is according to Gods word.

FIRST, if the Papists be demanded, what thing it is, that is broken, what is
eaten, what is dronken, and what is chawed with the teeth, lyppes, and mouth in
this sacrament, they have nothing to answer, but the accidences. For (as they
say) bread and wine be not the visible element in this sacrament, but only
their accidents. And so they be forced to say, that accidents be broken,
eaten, dronken, chawen, and swalowed without any substance at all: which is
not only against all reason, but also against the doctrine of all ancient
authors.





vacuum, which nature utterly abhors.

Fifthly, they are not ashamed to say, that substance

Sixthly, that substance is norished without substance,

These inconveniences and absurditees do follow of the fond Papistical
transubstantintion, with a number of other errors as evil or worse than these,
whereunto they be never able to answer, as many of them have confessed
themselfs.

And it is a wonder to see, how in many of the forsaid things, they vary among
them selves.

Where as the other doctrine of the scripture, and of the old catholic church
(but not of the lately corrupted Romyshe church) is plain and easy, as well to
be understood, as to answer to all the foresaid questions, without any
absurditee or inconvenience following thereof: so that every answer shall agree
with Gods word, with the old Church, and also with all reason and true
Philosophy.

For as touching the first point, what is broken, what is eaten, what dronken,
and what chawed in this sacrament, it is easy to answer, The bread and wine,
as S. Paul says: The bread which we break.

And as concerning the second and third points; neither is the substance of
bread and wine without their proper accidents, nor their accidents hang alone
in the air without any substance, but according to all learning, the
substance of the bread and wine reserve their own accidents, and the
accidents do rest in their own substances.

And also as concerning the fourth point, there is no place left void after
Consecracion (as the Papists dream) but bread and wine fulfill their places,
as they did before.

And as touching the fifth point (whereof the worms or moulyng is engendered,
and whereof the vyneger comes) the answer is easy to make (according to all
learning and experience) that they come, (according to the course of nature) of
the substance of the bread and wine to long kept, and not of the accide^tes
alone, as the Papists do fondly phantasy.

And likewise the substances of bread and wine, do feed and norishe the body
of them, that eat the same, and not the only accidents.

In these answers is no absurdity nor inconvenience, nothing spoken, either
contrary to holy scripture, or to natural reason, Philosophy or experience, or
against any old ancient author, or the primative or catholic church, but
only against the malignant and Papisticall church of Rome. Where as on the
other side, yt cursed synagoge of Antichrist, has defined and determined in
this matter, many things contrary to Christ's words, contrary to the old
catholic church, and the holy martyrs and doctoures of the same, and contrary
to all natural reason, learning and philosophy.

And the final end of all this Antichrists doctrine is none other, but by
subtelty and craft, to bring christian people from the true honouringe of
Christ, unto the greatest ydolatry, that ever was in this world devised: as by
gods grace shall be plainly set forth hereafter.

Thus ends the second book.
THE THIRD BOOK TEACHES THE MANNER HOW Christ is present in his supper.
NOW THIS MATTER OF Chap. 1.
transubstantiation being (as I trust) sufficiently resolved, The presence of
Christ in ye sacrament
(which is the first part before rehearsed, wherein the papistical doctrine
varieth from the catholic truth) order requires next, to entreat of the
second part (which is of the manner of the presence of the body and blood of
our savior Christ in the sacrament thereof) wherein is no less contention,
then in the first part.

For a plain explication whereof, it is not unknown to all true faithful
christian people, that our savior CHRIST (beeinge perfect God, and in all
things equal and coeternall with his father) for our sakes beecame also a
perfect manne, taking flesh and blood of his blessed mother and virgin
Marye, and (saving sin) being in all things like unto us, adioyninge unto
his diuynitie a most perfect soul and a most perfect body: his soul
being endued with life, sense, will, reason, wisdom, memory, and all other
things required to the perfect soul of man, and his body being made of very
flesh and bones, not only having all members of a perfect man's body in
due order and proportion, but also being subject to hunger, thyrste, labor,
sweat, werines, cold, heat, and all other like infirmyties and passions of
man, and unto death also, and that the most vile and painful upon the
cross. And after his death he rose again, with ye self same visible and
palpable body, and appeared therewith, and showed the same unto his Apostels,
and specially to Thomas, making him to put his hands into his side, and to
feel his wounds. Christ corporally is ascended into heaven Act. 1, 3.
And with the self same body, he forsook this world, and ascended into
heaven (the Apostels seeing and beholdinge his body when it ascended) and now
sytteth at the right hand of his father, and there shall remain until the
last day, when he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

This is the true catholic faith, wh^che the scrripture teaches, and the
universal church of Christ has ever believed, from the beginning until
within these four or five hundredth years last passed, that the Bishop of
Rome, with the assistaunce of his Papists, has set up a new faith and
belief of their own devising, that the same body, really, corporally,
naturally, and sensiblye, is in this world still, and that in an hundredth
thousand places at one time, being enclosed in every pyxe and bread
consecrated.

And although we do affirm (according to Gods word) that Christ is in all
persons, Chap. 2.
that truly believe in him, in such sort, that with his flesh and blood he
does spiritually norishe them, and feed them, and gives them everlasting
life* and does assure them thereof, as well by the promise of his word, as by the
sacramental bread and wine in his holy supper, which he did institute for the
same purpose, yet we do not a little varye from the heinous erroures of the
Papists.

For they teach, The difference between the true and the papisticall doctrine
co^cer^ing the presence of Christ's b^by.
that Christ is in the bread and wine: But we say (according to the truth)
that he is in them, that worthily eat and drink the bread and wine.

They say, that when any manne eats the breadde and drynketh the cup,
CHRIST goes into his mouth or stomach with the bread and wine, and no
further: But we say, that CHRIST is in the whole man both in the body and
soul of him, that worthily eats the bread and drinks the cup, and not in
his mouth or stomach only.

They say, that CHRIST is received in the mouth, and enters in with the bread
and wine We say that he is received in the heart, and enters in by faith.

They say, that Christ is reallye in the sacramental bread being reserved
an whole year, or so long as the form of bread remains, but after the
receiuynge thereof, he flies up (say they) from the receiver, unto heaven,
as soon as the bread is chawed in the mouth, or changed in the stomach: But
we say, that Christ remains in the man that worthily receives it, so long
as the manne remains a membre of Christ.

They say, that in the sacrament, the corporal members of Christ be not
distaunt in place, one from another, but that wheresoever the head is, there be
the feet, and wheresoever the arms be, there be the legs, so that in every
part of the bread and wine, is altogether, whole head, whole feet, whole
flesh, whole blood, whole heart, whole lunges, whole breast, whole back, and
altogether whole, confused, and mixte without distinction or diversity. O
what a foolish and an abominable inuencion is this, to make of the most pure
and perfect body of Christ, such a confuse and monstrous body? And yet can
the Papists imagine nothing so foolish, but all Christian people must
receive the same, as an oracle of God, and as a most certain article of their
faith, without whisperyng to the contrary.

Furthermore the Papists say, that a dog or a Catte eat the body of
Christ, if they by chance do eat the sacramental bread: We say that no
yearthly creature can eat the body of Christ, nor drink his blood, but only
man.

They say, that every man good and evil eats the body of Christ: We say,
that both do eat the sacramental bread and drink the wine, but none do eat
the very body of Christ and drink his blood, but only they that be lively
members of his body.

They say, that good men eat the body of Christ, and drink his blood, only
at that time when they receive the sacrament: We say, that they eat, drink,
and feed of Christ continually, so long as they be members of his body.

They say, that the body of Christ that is in the sacrament, has his own
proper form and quantitee: We say, that Christ is there sacramentally and
spiritually, without form or quantitee.

They say, that the fathers and prophets of the old testament, did not eat
the body nor drunk the blood of Christ: We say, that they did eat his body
and drunk his blood, although he was not yet borne nor incarnated.

They say, that the body of Christ is every day many times made, as often as
there be Masses said, and that than, and there, he is made of bread and wine:
We say, that Christ's body was never but ones made, and than not of the nature
and substance of bread and wine, but of the substance of his blessed mother.

They say, that the Mass is a sacrifice satisfactory for sin, by the
devotion of the priest that offers, and not by the thing that is offered: But
we say, that their saying is a most heinous lie and detestable error, against
the glory of Christ. For the satisfaction for our sins, is not the deuocio^
nor offering of the priest, but the only host and satisfaction for all the
sins of the world, is the death of Christ, and the oblacion of his body upon
the cross, that is to say, the oblacion that Christ him self offered ones
upon the cross, and never but ones, nor never none but he. And therefore that
oblation which the priests make daily in their papistical Masses, can not be
a satisfaction for other men's sins by the priests devotion, but it is a mere
elusion and subtle craft of the devil, whereby Antichrist has many years
blinded and deceived the world.

They say, that Christ is corporally in many places at one time, affirmyng
that his body is corporally and really present, in as many places as there be
hoostes consecrated: We say, that as the son corporally is ever in heaven,
and no where else, and yet by his operation and virtue, the Son is here in
earth (by whose influence and virtue, all things in the world be corporally
regenerated, increased and grow to their perfect state.) so likewise our
savior Christ bodily and corporally is in heaven, sittyng at the right hand
of his father, although spiritually he has promised to be present with us upon
earth unto the worlds end. And whansoeuer two or three be gathered together
in his name, he is there in the mids among them, by whose supernal grace all
godly men be first by him spiritually regenerated, and after encreace and
grow to their spiritual perfection in God, spiritually by faith eating his
flesh and drinkyng his blood, although the same corporally be in heaven,
far distant from our sight.

Now to return to the principal matter, Chap. 3.
lest it might be thought a new devise of us, that Christ as concerning his
body and his humayne nature, is in heaven, and not in earth: therefore by Gods
grace, it shall be evidently proved* that this is no new devised matter, but
that it was ever the old faith of the catholic church, until the Papists
invented a new faith, that Christ really, corporally, naturally, and sensibly
is here still with us in earth, shut up in a box or within the compass of
bread and wine.

This needs no better nor stronger proof, The proof hereof by our profession
in our common Creed.
than that which the old authors bring for the same, that is to say, the
general profession of all christian people in the common Creed, wherein as
concerning Christ's humanitee, they be taught to believe after this sort: That
he was conceived by the holy ghost, borne of the virgyn Mary: that he suffered
under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, that he descended into
hell, and rose again the third day, that he ascended into heaven, and sits
at the right hand of his almighty father, and from thence shall come to judge
the quick and dead.

This has been ever the catholyke faith of christian people, that Christ, as
concerning his body and his manhood is in heaven, and shall there continue
until he come down at the last judgment.

And forasmuch as the Creed makes so express mention of the article of his
ascencion, and departing hence from us, if it had been an other article of our
faith, that his body taryeth also here with us in earth, surely in this place
of the Creed was so vrge^t an occasion given to make some mention thereof, that
doutlesse it would not have been passed over in our Creed with silence. For i^
Christ as concerning his humanitee, be both here and gone hence, and both
those two be articles of our faith, when mention was made of the one in the
Creed, it was necessary to make mention of the other, least by professyng the
one, we should be dissuaded from beleuyng the other, being so contrary the one
to the other.

Chap. 4.
To this article of our Creed accords holy scripture, The proof hereof by the
scipture. Ioh. 16.
and all the old ancient doctors of Christ's church. For Christ himself
said: I leave the world, and go to my father. And also he said Mat. 26.
You shall ever have poor folks with you, but you shall not ever have me with
you. And he gave warninge of this error before hand, saying, Mat. 24.
That the time would come, when many deceivers should be in the world, and
say, Here is Christ, and there is Christ, but believe them not, Mar. vlt.
said Christ. And S. Mark writes in the last chapter of his gospel, that ye
Lord Jesus was taken up into heaven, and sytteth at the right hand of his
father. Colos. 3.
And S. Paul exhorts all men to seek for things that be above in heaven,
where Christ (says he) sits at the right hand of God his father. Hebre. 8.
Also he says, that we have such a bishop, that sits in heaven at the right
hand of the throne of Gods majesty. Hebre. 10.
And that he having offered one sacrifice for sins, sits continuallye at
the right hand of God, until his enemies be put under his feet as a foot
stool.

And hereunto consent all the old doctoures of the church.

First Origin upon Matthew reasons this matter, Chap. 5.
how Christ may be called a stranger, The proof thereof by aunciente authors,
that is departed into an other cu^trey, seeing that he is with us alwai unto
the worlds end, and is among al them that be gathered together in his name,
and also in the mids of them that know him not. Origin. in Mat. tracta. 33.
And thus he reasons. If he be here among us still, how can he be gone hence
as a stranger departed into an other country? Whereunto he answers, that
Christ is both god and man, having in him two natures. And as a man he is
not with us unto the worlds end, nor is present with all his faithful that
be gathered together in his name, but his divine power and spirit is ever
with us. Paul (says he) was absent from the Corinthes in his body, when he
was present with them in his spirit. So is CHRIST (says he) gone hense and
absent in his humanitee, which in his divine nature is every where. And in
this saying (says Origene) we divide not his humanitee, (for S. John writes,
that no spirit that divides Jesus can be of God) but we reserve to both his
natures their own properties.

In these words Origene has plainly declared his mind, that Christ's body is
not both present here with us, and also gone hence and estranged from us. For
that were to make two natures of one body, and to divide the body of Jesus,
for as much as one nature can not at one time be both with us, and absent from
us. And therefore says Origin, that the presence must be understand of his
divinity, and the absence of his humanitee.

August. ad Dardanum epist. 57.
And according hereunto S. Augustine writes thus in a pistle ad Dardan. Doubt
not but Jesus Christ as concerning the nature of his manhood, is now there,
from whence he shall come. And remember well and believe the profession of a
christian man that he rose from death, ascended into heaven, sits at the
right hand of his father, and from that place, and none other, shall he come
to judge the quick and the dead. And he shall come (as the angels said) as he was
seen go into heaven, that is to say, in the same form and substance, unto the
which he gave immortalitee, but changed not nature. After this form (says he,
meaning his man's nature,) we may not think that he is every where. For we must
beware, that we do not so stablyshe his dyuinitee, that we take away the
veritee of his body.

These be S. Augustines plain words.

And by and by after he adds these words. The Lord Jesus as god, is every
where, and as manne is in heaven. And finally he concludes this mattier in
these few words. Doubt not but our lord Jesus Christ is every where as
God, and as a dwellar he is in man that is the temple of God, and he is in a
certain place in heaven, because of the measure of a very body.

And again S. Augustine writes upon the In Joan. tracta 39.
gospel of S. John.

Our Savior Jesus Christ (says S. Augustine) is above, but yet his truth is
here. His body wherein he arose is in one place, but his truth is spread
every where.

And in an other place of the same book S Augustine expoundyng these words of
Christ (You shaleuer have poor men with you, Tract. 50.
but me you shall not ever have) says: that Christ spoke these words of the
presence of his body. For (says he) as concerning his divine majesty, as
concerning his providence, as concerning his infallible and invisible grace,
these words be fulfilled which he spoke: I am with you unto the worlds
end. But as concerning the flesh which he took in his incarnation, as
concerning that which was born of the vigin: as concerning that which was
apprehended by the Jews, and crucified upon a tree, and taken down from the
Cross, lapped in linen clothes, and buried and rose again, and appeared after
his resurrection, as concerning that flesh, he said: You shall not ever have
me with you. Wherefore seeing that as concerning his flesh, he was conuersaunt
with his disciples fortye days, and they accompanyeng, seeing and following him,
he went up into heaven, both he is not here, (for he sytteth at the right
hand of his father) and yet he is here, for he departed not hense, as
concerning the presence of his divine Majesty. As concerning the presence of
his majesty, we have Christ ever with us, but as concerning the presence of
his flesh, he said truly to his disciples: Ye shall not ever have me with
you. For as concerning the presence of his flesh, the church had Christ but
a few days, yet now it holds him fast by faith, though it see him not
with eyes,

All these be S. Augustines words.

De essentia diuinitatis.
Also in an other book, entitled to saint Augustine, is written thus. We must
believe and confess, that the son of god (as concerning his divinity) is
invisible, without a body, immortal, and incircumscriptible, but as concerning
his humanitee, we ought to believe and confess, that he is visible, has a
body, and is contained in a certain place, and has truly all the members of a
man.

Of these words of S. Augustyne, it is most clear, that the profession of the
catholic faith is, that Christ (as concerning his bodily substance and nature
of man) is in heaven, and not present here with us in earth. For the nature
and property of a very body, is to be in one place, and to occupy one place,
and not to be every where, or in many places at one time. And though the body
of Christ, after his resurrection and ascencion, was made immortal, yet the
nature thereof was not changed, for than (as saint Augustyn says) it were no
very body. And further saint Augustyne shows, both the manner and form,
how Christ is here present with us in earth, and how he is absent, saying,
that he is present by his divine nature and Majesty, by this providence, and
by his grace, but by his human nature and very body, he is absent from this
world, and present in heaven.

Cyrillus likewise upon the Gospel of saint Ihon agrees fully with S.
Augustyne, Cyrillus in Ihon. lib. 6. ca. 14.
saying Although Christ took away from hence the presence of his body, yet in
the Majesty of his Godhead he is ever here, as he promised to his disciples at
his departing, saying: I am with you ever unto the worlds end.

And in another place of the same book, Libro. 9. cap. 21.
saint Cyril says thus.

Christian people must believe, that although Christ be absent from us, as
concerning his body, yet by his power he governs us and all things, and is
present with all them that love him. Therefore he said, Truly truly, I say unto
you, whersoeuer there be two or three gathered together in my name, there am I
in the mids of them. For like as when he was conversant here in earth as a
man, yet than he filled heaven, and did not leave the company of Angels: even
so being now in heaven with his flesh, yet he fylleth the yerth, and is in
them that love him. And it is to be marked, that although Christ should go away
only as concerning his flesh, (for he is ever present in the power of his
divinity) yet for a little time he said he would be with his disciples:These be
the words of saint Cyril.

Ambrosius in Lucam. li. 10. ca. 24
Saint Ambrose also says, that we must not seek Christ upon earth, nor in
earth, but in heaven, where he sytteth at the right hand of his father.

Gregorius in Ho. paschatis.
And likewise saint Gregorye writes thus. Christ (says he) is not here by
the presence of his flesh, and yet he is absent no where by the presence of
his Majesty.

What subtiltee thynkest thou (good reader) can the Papists now imagyne, to
defend their pernicious error, that Christ in his humayne nature is bodily
here in earth, in the consecrated bread and wine: seeing that all the old
Church of Christ believed the contrary, and all the old authors wrote the
contrary?

For they all affirmed and believed, that Christ, being but one parson, has
nevertheless in him two natures or substaunces, that is to say, the nature of
his Godhead, and the nature of his manhood. They say furthermore, that Christ
is both goone hence from us unto heaven, and is also here with us in earth,
but not in his humayne nature, (as the Papists would have us to believe) but
the old authors say, that he is in heaven, as concerning his manhood, and
neuerlesse both here and there, and every where, as concerning his Godhead. For
although his diuinitee be such, that it is infinite, without measure,
compass or place, so that as concerning that nature, he is circumscribed with
no place, but is every where, and fylleth all the world: yet as concerning his
humayne nature, he has measure, compass and place, so that when he was here
upon earth, he was not at the same time in heaven: and now that he is
ascended into heaven, as concerning that nature, he has now forsaken the
earth, and is only in heaven.

For one nature that is circumscribed, Chap. 6.
compassed and measured, One body can not be in diverse places at one time.
can not be in diverse places at one time. This is the faith of the old
Catholic church, as appears as well by the authors before rehearsed, as by
these that hereafter follows.

Saint Augustyne speaking, Ad Dardanum.
that a body must needs be in some place, says: that if it be not within the
compass of a place, it is no where. And if it be no where, than is it not.

Cyrillus de Trin. lib. 2.
And S. Cyril considering the proper nature of a very body, said: that if the
nature of the Godhead were a body, it must needs be in a place, and have
quantitee, greatness, and circumscription.

If than the nature of the Godhead must needs be circumscribed, if it were a
body, much more must the nature of Christ's manhood be circumscribed and
contained within the compass of a certain place.

Didymus de spiritu sa^cto. lib. 1 cap. 1.
Didymus also in his book De spiritu sancto, (which saint Hierome did
translate) proves, that the holy ghost is very God, because he is in many
places at one time, which no creature can be. For (says he) all creatures
visible and invisible be circumscribed and environed either within one place
(as corporal and invisible things be) or within the proprietee of their own
substance, (as Angels and invisible creatures be) so that no Angel (says he)
can be at one tym^ in two places. And forasmuch as the holy ghost is in many
men at one time, therefore (says he) the holy ghost must needs be God.

Basilius de spiritu sancto. ca. 22.
The same affirms also saint Basyle, That the Angel which was with
Cornelius, was not at the same time with Philippe, nor the Angel which spoke
to zachary in the altar, was not the same time in his proper place in heaven.
But the holy ghost was at one time in Abacuk, and in Danyel in Babylon, and
with Hieremy in prison, and with Ezechiell in Chober, whereby he proves, that
the holy ghost is God.

Wherefore the Papists (which say, that the body of Christ is in an infinite
number of places at one time) do make his body to be God, and so confound
the two natures of Christ, attributyng to his human nature, that thing
which belongs only to his diuinitee, which is a most heinous and
detestable heresy.

Against whom writes Fulgentius in this wise, speaking of the distinction and
diuersitee of the two natures in CHRIST.

One and the self same Christ (says he) of mankind was made a man,
Fulgentius ad Trasimu^ dum Regem lib. 2.
compassed in a place, who of his father is God, without measure or place. One
and the self same person, as concerning his man's substance, was not in
heaven, when he was in earth, and forsook the yearthe, when he ascended into
heaven: but as concerning his godly substance (which is above all measure)
he neither left heaven, when he came from heaven, nor he left not the yearthe,
when he ascended into heaven, which may be known by the most certain word
of Christ him self, who to show the placyng of his humanitee, said to his
disciples: I ascend up to my father and your father, to my God and your God.
Also when he had said of Lazarus, that he was dead, he added, saying: I am glad
for your sakes, that you may believe. For I was not there: but to show the
unmeasurable compass of his diuinitee, he said to his disciples: Behold, I am
with you always unto the worlds end. Now how did he go up into heaven, but
because he is a very man contained within a place? Or how is he present with
faithful people, but because he is very God, being without measure?

Of these words of Fulgentius it is declared most certainly, that Christ is
not here with us in earth, but by his godhead, and that his humanitee is in
heaven only, and absent from us.

Yet the same is more plainly showed (if more plainly can be spoken) by
Uigilius a bishop and an holy martyr. Vigilius Contra Eutychen libro. 1.
He writes thus against the heretic Eutyches, which denied the humanite of
CHRIST, holding opinion, that he was only God, and not manne. Whose error
Uigilius confutynge, proves that CHRIST had in him two natures joined
together in one person, the nature of his Godhead, and the nature of his
manhood. Thus he writes.

Ioh. 14
Christ said to his disciples: If you loved me, you would be glad, for I go unto
my father. And again he said: Ioh. 16.
It is expedient for you that I go, for if I go not, the comforter shall not
come to you. And yet surely the eternal word of God, the virtue of God, the
wisdom of God, was ever with his father, and in his father, yea even at the
same time, when he was with us, and in us: For when he did mercyfully dwell in
this world, he left not his habitation in heaven, for he is every where whole
with his father, equal in diuinitee, whom no place can conteyne, for the
Son fylleth all things, and there is no place that lacks the presence of
his diuinitee. From whence than and whither did he say, that he would go? Or
how did he say, that he went to his father, from whom doubtelesse he never
departed? But that to go to his father, and from us, was to take from this
world that nature, which he received of us. Thou see therefore that it was
the propretee of that nature to be taken away and go from us, which in the
end of the world shall be rendered again to us, as the angels wytnessed,
Act. 1^
saying: This Jesus which is taken from you, shall com again, like as you saw
him going up into heaven. For look upon the miracle, look upon the mystery
of both the natures. The son of God, as concerning his humanitee went from
us, as concerning his diuinitee, he said unto us: Mat. vl^.
Behold I am with you all the days unto the worlds end.

Thus far have I rehearsed the words of Uigilius. and by and by he
concludes thus. He is with us, and not with us, For those whom he left, and
went from them, as concerning his humanitee, those he left not, nor forsook
them not, as touching his diuinitee. For as touching the form of a servant
(which he took away from us into heaven) he is absent from us, but by the form
of God, (which goes not from us) he is present with us in earth: and
nevertheless both present and absent, he is all one Christ.

Hitherto you have herd Uigilius speak, that Christ as concerning his bodily
presence, and the nature of his manhood, is gone from us, taken from us, is
gone up into heaven, is not with us, has left us, has forsaken us. But as
concerning the other nature of his deitee, he is still with us, so that he is
both with us, and not with us: with us in the nature of his deitee, and not
with us in the nature of his humanitee.

Contra Eu^yche^ lib. 4
And yet more clearly does the same Uigilius declare the same thing in an other
place, saying:

If the word and the flesh were both of one nature, seeing that the word is
every where, why is not the flesh than every where? For when yt was in earth,
than verily it was not in heaven: and now when it is in heaven, it is not
surely in earth. And it is so sure, that it is not in earth, that as
concerning it, we look for him to come from heaven, whom as concerning his
eternal word, we believe to be with us in earth: Therefore by your doctrine
(says Uigilius unto Eutyches, who defended, that the diuinitee and humanite in
Christ was but one nature) either the word is contained in a place with his
flesh, or else the flesh is every where with the word. For one nature can not
receive in it self two diverse and contrary things. But these two things be
diverse and far unlike, that is to say, to be contained in a place, and to be
every where. Therefore in as much as the word is every where, and the flesh is
not every where, it appears plainly, that one Christ him self has in him two
natures, and that by his divine nature, he is every where, and by his humain
nature, he is contained in a place, that he is created, and has no beginning,
that he is subject to death, and can not die. Whereof one he has by the nature
of his word (whereby he is God) and the other he has by y^ nature of his
flesh, where by the same God is man also. Therefore one son of God, the self
same was made the son of man, and he has a beginning by the nature of his
flesh, and no beginning by the nature of his Godheade. He is created by the
nature of his flesh, and not created by the nature of his Godhead. He is
comprehended in a place, by the nature of his flesh, and not comprehended in a
place by the nature of his Godhead. He is inferior to angels in the nature of
his flesh, and is equal to his father in the nature of his Godhead. He dyed
by the nature of his flesh, and died not by the nature of his Godhead. This is
the faith and catholyke confession, which the Apostles taught, the martyrs
did corroborate, and faithful people keep unto this day.

All these be the sayings of Uigilius, who (according to all the other authors
before rehearsed, and to the faith and catholic confession of the apostles,
martyrs, and all faithful people unto his time) says, that as concerning
Christ's humanitee, when he was here on earth, he was not in heaven: and now
when he is in heaven, he he is not in earth. For one nature can not be both
contained in a place in heaven, and be also here in earth at one time. And for
as much as Christ is here with us in earth, and also is contained in a place
in heaven, he proves thereby, that Christ has two natures in him, the nature
of a man (whereby he is gone from us, and ascended into heaven) and the nature of
his godhed, whereby he is here with us in earth. So that it is not one nature yt
is here with us, and that is gone from us: that is ascended into heaven, and
there contained, and that is permane^t here with us in earth

Wherefore the Papists (which now of late years have made a new faith)
that Christ's natural body is really and naturally present both with us here
in earth, and sytteth at the right hand of his father in heaven, do err in
two very horrible heresies.

The one, that they confound his two natures, his godhead, and his manhod,
attributynge unto his humanitee, that thing, which appertains only to his
diuinitee, that is to say, to be in heaven and earth, and in many places at one
time.

The other is, that they divide and separate his humain nature, or his body,
making of one body of Christ. ii. bodies, and ii. natures, one which is in
heaven, visible and palpable, having al members and proportions of a most
perfect natural man, and an other which they say is in earth here with us, in
every bread and wine that is consecrated, having no distinction, form nor
proporcion of members. which contrarieties and diversities (as this holy
martyr Uigilius says) can not be together in one nature.

But now seeing that it is so evident a matter, Chap. 7.
both by the express words of scripture, and also by all tholde authors of
the same, An answer to the Papists, alledgynge for them the^e words, This is
my body.
that our savior Christ (as concerning his bodily presence) is ascended into
heaven, and is not here in yerth. And seeing that this has been the true
confession of the catholic faith ever since Christ's ascencion, it is now
to be considered, what moved the Papists to make a new and contrary faith,
and what scriptures they have for their purpose. What moved them I know not,
but their own iniquity, or the nature and condition of the sea of Rome, which
is of all other most contrary to Christ, and therefore most worthy to be called
the sea of Antichrist. And as for scripture they allege none but only one, and
that not truly understood, but to serve their purpose wrested out of tune,
The argument of the Papists.
whereby they make it to gerre and sound contrary to al other scriptures
partainyng to that matter.

Christ took bread (say they) blessed, and brake it, and gave it to his
disciples, saying: This is my body. These words they ever still repeat and
beat upon, that Christ said, This is my body. And this saying they make their
shote anchor, to prove thereby, as well the real and nataral presence of Christ's
body in the sacrament, as their imagined Transubstantiation. For these words
of Christ (say they) be most plain and most true. Than forasmuch as he said,
This is my body. it must needs be true, that that thing which the priest
holds in his hands, is Christ's body. And if it be Christ's body, than can
it not be bread, whereof they gather by their reasonyng, that there is Christ's
body really present, and no bread.

The answer.
Now forasmuch as all their proof hangs only upon these words, This is my
body. the true sense and meaning of these words must be examined. But (say
they) what need they any examinacion? What words can be more plain than to
say, This is my body?

Truth it is in deed, that the words be as plain as may be spoken: The
interpretation of these words, This is my body.
but that the sense is not so plain, it is manifest to every man, that wayeth
substantially the circumstances of the place. For when Christ gave bread to his
disciples, and said: This is my body. there is no man of any discrecion, that
understands the English tongue, but he may well know by the order of the
speech, that Christ spoke those words of the bread, calling it his body, as
all the old authors also do affirm, although many of the Papists deny the
same. Wherefore this sentence can not mean as the words seem and purport, but
there must needs be some figure or mystery in this speech, more than appears
in the plain words. For by this manner of speech plainly understand without
any figure as the words lie, can be gathered none other sense, but that bread
is Christ's body, and that Christ's body is bread. which all christian ears
do abhor to hear. Wherefore in these words must needs be sought out an other
sense and menyng, then the words of them selves do bear.

And although the true sense and understanding of these words, Chap. 8.
be sufficiently declared before, Christ called bread his body, and wine his
blood.
when I spoke of Transubstantiation, yet to make the mattier so plain, that no
scruple or doubt shall remain, here is occasion given, more fully to entreat
thereof. In which process shall be showed, that these sentences of Christ, This
is my body, This is my blood, be fyguratiue speches. And although it be
manifest enough by the plain words of the Gospel, and proved before in the
process of transubstantiation, that Christ spoke of bread, when he said,
This is my body, likewise that it was very wine, which he called his blood:
yet least the Papists should say, that we suck this out of our own fingers,
the same shall be proved by testimonye of all the old authors, to be the true
and old faith of the catholic church. Where as the schole authors and
Papists, shall not be able to show so much as one word of any ancient
author to the contrary.

First Ireneus, Irenaeus contra Valent. lib. 4. ca. 32
writing against the Ualentinians in his fourth book says, that Christ
confessed bread, which is a creature, to be his body, and the cup to be his
blood. And in the same book he writes thus also. Cap. 34.
The bread wherein the thanks be given, is the body of the Lord. And yet
again in the same book he says, Cap. 57.
that Christ taking bread, of the same sort that our bread is of, confessed
that it was his body: And that that thing which was tempered in the chalice,
was his bloudde.

And in the fifth book he writes further, Lib. 5.
that of the chalice, (which is his blood) a man is norished and does grow
by the bread, which is his body.

These words of Ireneus be most plain, that Christ taking very material
bread, a creature of God, and of such sort as other bread is, which wedd
use, called that his body, when he said, This is my body. And the wine also
which doothe feed and noryshe us, he called his bloudde.

Tertulian likewise in his book written against the Jews, Tertulianus
aduersus Iudaeos?
says that Christ called bread his body.And in his book against Martion he
oftentimes repeteth the self same words.

Cyprianus ad Magnu^ ^^. 1. epi. 6.
And S. Cyprian in the first book of his epistles, says the same thing, that
Christ called such bread, as is made of manny corns joined together, his
body: and such wine he named his bloudde, as is pressed out of many grapes,
and made into wine.

Lib. 2. Epist. 3.
And in his second book he says these words: water is not the blood of
Christ, but wine. And again in the same Epistle he says, that it was wine
which Christ called his blood. and that if wine be not in the chalice, than
we drink not of the fruit of the vine. And in the same epistle he says, that
meal alone, or water alone, is not the body of Christ, except they be both
joined together to make thereof bread.

Epiphanius also says, Epi^phan. in Ancorato.
that Christ speaking of a lofe, which is round in fashion, and can not see,
here, nor feel, said of it, This is my body.

And Saint Hierome, Hieron ad Hedibiam.
writynge Ad Hedibia^, says these words. Let us mark, that the bread which
the Lord brake, and gave to his disciples, was the body of our Savior Christ,
as he said unto them: Take and eat, this is my body.

And S. Augustine also says, Augusti. de trinita li. 3. cap. 4.
that although we may set forth Christ by mouth, by writing, and by the
sacrament of his body and blood, yet we call neither our tongue nor words,
nor ynke, letters, nor paper, the body and bloudde of Christ, but that we
call the body and bloudde of Christ, which is taken of the fruit of the
earth, and consecrated by mystical prayer. And also he says, De verbis a
p^stoli, sermo. 2. Cyrillus in Ioannem li. 4. ca. 14. Theodoretus dialogo. 1.
Jesus called meat, his body, and drink his bloudde.

More over Cyrill upon Sayncte John says, that Christ gave to his disciples
pieces of bread,saying: Take, eat, this is my body.

Likewise Theodoretus says, When Christ gave the holy mysteries, he called
bread his body, and the cup myxt with wine and water, he called his blood.
By all these forsaid authors, and places, with manny mo, it is plainly proved,
that when our Savior Christ gave breadde unto his Disciples: saying: Take,
and eat, this is my body, And likewise when he gave them the cup, saying:
Divide this among you, and drink you all of this, for this is my bludde: he
called than the very material bread his body, and the very wine his bloudde.

That bread (I say) that is one of the creatures here in earth among us, and
that grows out of the earth, and is made of many graynes of corn, beaten
into flower, and mixed with water, and so baken and made into bread, of such
sort as other our bred is, that has neither sense nor reason, and finally that
fedeth and nourishes our bodies, such bread Christ called his body, when he
said, This is my body. And such wine as is made of grapes pressed together, and
there of is made drink, which norisheth the body, such wine he called his
blood.

This is the true doctrine, confirmed as well by holy scripture, as by all
ancient authors of Christ's church, both Greeks and Latins, that is to say,
that when our Savior Christ gave bread and wine to his disciples, and spoke
these words, This is my body, This is my blood. it was very bread and wine
which he called his body and blood.

Now let the Papists show some authoritee for their opinion, either of
scripture, or of some ancient author. And let them not constrayne all men to
follow their fond devises, only because they sai, It is so, without any other
ground or authoritee, but their own bare words. For in such wise credit is
to be given to Gods word only, and not to the word of any man.

As many of them as I have read (the bishop of Wynchester only excepted) do
say, that Christ called not the bread his body, nor wine his blood, when he
said, This is my body, This is my blood, and yet in expounding these worde^s,
they vary among them selfs: which is a toke^ that they be uncertain of their
own doctrine.

For some of them say, that by this pronoune demonstratiue (this) Christ
understood not the bread nor wine, but his body and blood.

And other some say, that by the pronoune (this) he meant nether the bread nor
wine, nor his body nor blood, but that he meant a particular thing uncertain,
which they call Indiuiduum vagum, or Indiuiduum in genere, I trow some
Mathematical quiditee, they can not tell what.

But let all these Papists together show any one authoritee, either of
scripture, or of ancient author, either Greek or Latin, that says as they
say, that Christ called not bread and wine his body and blood, but Indiuiduum
vagum, and for my part I shall give them place, and confess that they say
true.

And if they can show nothing for them of antiquitee, but only their own
bare words, than it is reason that they give place to the truth, confirmed by
so many authoritees, both of scripture and of ancient writers, which is, that
Christ called very material bread his body, and very wine made of grapes, his
blood.

Chap. 9.
Now this being fully proved, it must needs follow consequently, that this manner
of speking is a figurative speech. Bread is my body, wine is my blood, be
figurative speeches.
For in plain and proper speech, it is not true, to say, that breadde is
Christ's body, or wine his blood. For Christ's body has a soul, life, sense,
and reason: but bread has neither soul, nor life, sense, nor reason.

Likewise in plain speech it is not true, that we eat Christ's body, and
drink his blood. For eating and drinking in their proper and usual
signification, is with the tongue, teeth, and lyppes, to swalow, divide and chawe
in pieces: which thing to do to the flesh and bloudde of Christ, is horrible
to be heard of any christian.

Chap. 10
So that these speches, To eat Christ's body and drynk his blood, be speches
not taken in the proper signification of every word, To eat Christ's flesh
and drynk his blood, be figurative speeches.
but by translation of these words (eating and drinkyng) from the
signification of a corporal thing, to signify a spiritual thing: and by
calling a thing that signifies, by the name of the thing which is signified
thereby. Which is no rare nor strange thing, but an usual manner and phrase in
common speech. And yet least this fault should be imputed unto us, that we do
feign things of our own heads without authoritee (as the Papists be
accustomed to do) here shall be cited sufficient authoritee, as well of
scripture, as of old ancient authors, to approve the same.

First when our savior Christ in the sixte of John said, Ioh. 6.
that he was the bread of life, the whe^che whosoever did eat, should not dye,
but live for ever. and that the bread which he would give us, was his flesh,
and therefore whosoever should eat his flesh and drink his blood, should
have everlasting life, and they that should not eat his flesh and drink his
blood, should not have everlasting life. When Christ had spoken these words,
with many mo of the eating of his flesh and drinkyng of his blood, both the
Jews and mani also of his disciples were offended with his words, and said:
This is an hard saying. For how can he give us his flesh to be eaten?Christ
perceiving their murmuring hearts (because they knew none other eating of his
flesh, but by chawyng and swalowyng) to declare that they should not eat his
body after that sort, nor that he meant of any such carnal eating, he said
thus unto them. What if you see the son of man ascend up where he was
before? It is the spirit that gives life, the flesh avails nothing. The
words which I spoke unto you, be spirit and life.

These words our savior Christ spoke, to lift up their minds from earth to
heaven, and from carnal to spiritual eating, that they should not pha^tasy,
that they should with their trethe eat him presently here in earth, for his
flesh so eaten (says he) should nothing profit them. And yet ^o they should
not eat him, for he would take his body away from them, and ascend with it
into heaven. And there by faith, and not with teeth, they should spiritually
eat him sittyng at the right hand of his father. And therefore (says he) The
words which I do speak, be spirit and life. that is to say, are not to be
understand, that we shall eat Christ with our teethe grossly and carnally,
but that we shall spiritually and gostly with our faith eat him, being
carnally absent from us in heaven. And in such wise, as Abraham and other holy
fathers did eat him, many years before he was incarnated and borne. 1 Cor. 10
As S. Paul says, that they did eat the same spiritual meat that we do,
and drank the same spiritual drink, that is to say, Christ. For they
spiritually by their faith were fed and norished with Christ's body and blood,
and had eternal life by him, before he was borne, as we have now, that come
after his ascencion.

Thus have you heard, the declaracion of Christ him self and of saint
Paul, that the eating and drinkyng of Christ's flesh and blood, 1. Cor. 10.
is not taken in the common signification, with mouth and teethe to eat and
chawe a thing being present, but by a lively faith in heart and mind to chawe
and degest a thing being absent, either ascended hence into heaven, or else not
yet borne upon earth.

Origin. in Leuit. ho. 7
And Origene declaryng the said eating of Christ's flesh and drinkyng of his
blood, not to be understand as the words do sound, but figuratively, writes
thus upon these words of Christ: Except you eat my flesh and drink my
bludde, you shall not have life in you. Considre (says Origin) that these
things written in gods books, are figures, and therefore examine and
understand them as spiritual, and not as carnal men. For if you understand
them as carnal men, they hurt you and feed you not. For even in the
gospels is there found letter that kylleth. And not only in the old
testamente, but also in the new is there found lettre, that slays him, that
does not spiritually understand that which is spoken. For if thou follow the
lettre or words of this that Christ said: Except you eat my flesh and
drink my bludde. this lettre kylleth.

Who can more plainlye express in any words, that the eatinge and drinkinge
of Christ's flesh and blood, are not to be taken in common significacion, as
the words pretend and sound, than Origene does in this place?

And S. John Chrysostom affirms the same saying, Chrisostom. in Ioannem Hom.
26.
that if any man understand the words of Christ carnally, he shall surely
profit nothing thereby. For what mean these words, The flesh avails
nothing? He meant not of his flesh (god forbid) but he meant of them that
fleshely and carnally understood those things that Christ spoke. But what is
carnal understanding? To understand the words simply as they be spoken, and
nothing else. For we ought not so to understand the things which we se, but
all mysteries must be considered with inward eyes, and that is spirituallye to
understand them.

In these words S. John Chrysostom shows plainli that the words of Christ,
concerning the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blud, are not to be
understand simply, as they be spoken, but spiritually and figuratively.

Aug^stinus de d^ctrina christ lib 3.
And yet most plainly of all other, S. Augustine does declare this matter in his
book De doctrina christiana, in which book he instructs christian people, how
they should understand those places of scripture, which seem hard and obscure.

Seldo^ (says he) is any difficulty in proper words, but either the
circumsta^ce of ye place, or ye conferring of diverse translatio^s, or else the
original tongue wherein it was written, will make the seuce plain. But in word
that be altered from their propre signification, there is great diligence and
heed to be taken. And specially we must beware, that w^ take not literally any
thing that is spoken figuratively. Nor contrary wise we must not take for a
figure any thing, that is spoken properly Therefore must be declared (says S.
Augustine) the manner how to discern a propre speech from a figurative.
wherein (says he) must be observed this rule, that if the thing which is
spoken, be to ye furtherance of charity, than it is a propre speech, and no
figure. So that if it be a commandment, that forbids any euel or wicked
act, or commands any good or beneficial thing, than it is no figure. But if
it commau^d any ill or wicked thing or forbid any thing that is good and
beneficial, than is it a figurative speech. Now this saying of Christ
(Except you eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, John.
6.
you shall have no life in you) seems to command an heinous and a wicked
thing, therefore it is a figure commaundynge us to be partakers of Christ's
passion, keeping in our minds to our great comfort and profit, that his flesh
was crucified and wounded for us. De catec^ rudib. ca. Contra aduers. legis and
Prophet cap. 9.


This is briefly the sentence of S. Augustine in his book De doctrina
christiana.

And the like he writes in his book De catechisandis rudibus, and in his
book Contra aduersarium legis and prophetarum, and in diverse other places,
which for tediousnes I pass over.

For if I should rehearse al ye authorities of S. Augustine and other, which make
mention of this matter, it would weary the reader to much.

Wherefore to all them that by any reasonable means will be satysfyed, these
things before rehearsed are suffyciente, to prove that the eating of Christ's
flesh and drinking of his blood is not to be understand symplye and plainly
(as the words do properly sygnyfye) that we do eat and drink him with our
mouths, but it is a figurative speech spiritually to be understand, that we
must depely print and frutefully believe in our hearts, that his flesh was
crucified, and his blud shed for our redemption. And this our belief in him,
is to eat his flesh and to drynk his blud, although they be not present here
with us, but be ascended into heaven. As once forefathers before Christ's time,
did likewise eat his flesh and drunk his bludde, which was so far from
them, that he was not yet then borne.

Chap. 11.
The same authors did say also, yt when Christ called the bread his body, and
the wine his blud, it was no propre speech that he than used, This is my
body: this is my bloodde, be figurative, speeches. The bread represe^teth
Christ's body, and the wine his blood.
but as al sacraments be figures of other things, and yet have the very names
of the things which they do signifye: so Christ institutinge the sacrament of
his most precious body and blood, did use figurative speeches, calling the
bread by the name of his body, because it signified his body: and the wine he
called his blood, because it represented his blood.

Tertulia nus co^tra Martione^ Libr^. 1
Tertulian herein writing against Martion, says these words. Christ did not
reprove bread whereby he did represent his very body. And in the same book he
says, that Jesus taking bread, and distributing it among his disciples, made
it his body, saying, This is my body. that is to say, (says Tertulian) a
figure of my body. And therefore says Tertuliane, that Christ called bread
his body. and wine his blood, because that in the old Testament bread and
wine were figures of his body and blood.

Cyprianus libr. 2, Epist. 3
And saint Cyprian the holy martyr says of this matter, that Christ's blood
is snewed in the wine, and the people in the water, that is mixte with the
wine: so that the mixture of the water to the wine, signifies the spiritual
commixtion and ioynynge of us unto Christ.

By which similitude Cyprian meant not, that the blood of Christ is vine, or the
people water, but as the water does signify and represe^t the people, so does
the wine signify and represent Christ's blood: and the vnityng of the water and
wine together, signifies the vnityng of christian people unto Christ him self.

And the same saint Cyprian in another place writing hereof says, De vnctio^e
Chrismatis
that Christ in his last supper, gave to his Apostles with his own hands bread
and wine, which he called his flesh and blood, but in the cross he gave his
very body, to be wounded with the hands of the soldiers, that the Apostles
might declare to the world, how and in what manner, bread and wine may be the
flesh and blood of Christ. And the manner, he straight ways declares thus,
That those things which do signifye, and those things which be signified by
them, may be both called by one name.

Here it is certain by saint Cyprians mind, wherefore and in what wise bread
is called Christ's flesh, and wine his blood, that is to say, because that
every thing that represents and signifies another thing, may be called by
the name of the thing which it signifies.

And therefore saint Ihon Chrysostom says, Chrysosto. in Psalm. 22.
that Christ ordained the table of his holy supper for this purpose, that in
that sacrament he should daily show unto us bread and wine, for a similitude
of his body and blood.

Saint Hierome likewise says upon the gospel of Matthew, Hieronym in Math. 26.
that Christ took bread, which comfort man's heart, that he might represent
thereby his very body and blood.

Ambros. de hijs qui mysterijs initiantur. cap. vlt.
Also S. Ambrose (if the book be his that is intiteled De hijs que misterijs
initia^tur) says, that before the consecration another kind is named, but
after the consecracion the body of Christ is signified. Christ said his blood,
before the consecracion it is called another thing, but after the consecracion
is signified the blood of Christ.

De sacramentis li. 6. ca. 4
And in his book De sacramentis (if that be also his) he writes thus. Thou
do receive the sacrament for a similitude of the flesh and blood of Christ,
but thou do obtain the grace and virtue of his true nature. And receiuyng
the bread, in that food thou art partaker of his godly substance. And in ye
same book he says. Lib. 4. cap. 4.
As thou have in baptism received the similitude of death, so like wise do
thou in this sacrament drink the similitude of Christ's precious blood. And
again he says in ye said book. Lib. 4. cap. 5.
The priest says: Make unto us this oblacio^ to be acceptable, which is the
figure of the body and blood of our lord Jesus Christ.

And upon the Epistle of saint Paul to the Corinthians, 1. Co. 11
, he says, that in eating and drinkyng the bread and wine, we do signify the
flesh and blood, which were offered for us. And the old testament (he says)
was instituted in blood, because that blood was a wytnes of Gods benefit, in
significacion and figure whereof, we take the mistical cup of his blood, to
the tuition of our body and soul.

Of these places of saint Chrysostom, saint Hierom and saint Ambrose, it is
clear, that in the sacramental bread and wine, is not really and corporally
the very natural substance of the flesh and blood of Christ, but that the bread
and wine be similitudes, Signs and figures have the names of the things which
they signify.
mysteries and representacions, significations, sacraments, figures and signs
of his body and blood: and therefore be called, and have the name of his very
flesh and blood.

And yet S. Augustyne shows this matter more clearly and fully, August. ad
Bonifatium Episto. 23.
than any of the rest, specially in an Epistle which he wrote ad Bonifatiu^,
where he says, that a day or two before good friday, we use in common speech
to say thus, To morrow or this day.ii. days, Christ suffered his passion.
where in very deed he never suffered his passion but ones, and that was many
years passed. Likewise upon Easter day we say, This day Christ rose from death.
where in very deed it is many hundred years since he rose from death Why
than do not men reprove us as liars, when we speak in this sort? But because
we call these days so, by a similitude of those days, wherein these things
were done in deed. And so it is called that day, which is not that day in
deed, but by the course of the year is a like day. And such things be said to
be done that day, for ye solemn celebracion of the sacrament, which things
in deed were not done that day, but long before. Was Christ offereed any more
but ones? And he offered him self, and yet in a sacrament or representacion,
not only every solemn feast of Easter, but every day he is offered to the
people, so that he does not lie, that says, he is every day offered. For if
sacraments had not some similitude or likeness of those things, whereof they
be sacraments, they could in no wise be sacraments. And for their similitude
and lykenes, commonly they have the name of the things, whereof they be
sacraments. Therefore as after a certain manner of speech, the sacrament of
Christ's body, is Christ's body: the sacrament of Christ's blood, is Christ's
blood: so likewise the sacrament of faith, is faith. And to believe is nothing
else, but to have faith: And therefore when we answer for young children in their
baptism, that they believe, which have not yet the mind to believe, we answer
that they have faith, because they have the sacrament of faith. And we say also
that they turn unto God, because of the sacrament of the conversion unto God,
for that answer partaineth to the celebracion of the sacrament. And likewise
speaks the Apostle of Baptism, saying: that by Baptism we be buried with
him into death: he says not, that we signify burial, but he says plainly,
that we be buried. So that the sacrament of so great a thing, is not called but
by the name of the thing it self.

Hitherto I have rehearsed the answer of S. Augustine unto Boniface a learned
Bishop, who asked of him, how the parents and friends could answer for a
young babe in baptism, and say in his person, that he believes and conuerteth
unto God, when the child can neither do nor think any such thing.

Whereunto the answer of S. Augustine is this that for as much as baptism is
the sacrament of the profession of our faith, and of our conversion unto God,
it becomes us so to answer for young children coming thereunto, as to that
sacrament appertains, although the children in deed have no knowledge of
such things.

And yet in our said answers we ought not to be reprehended as vain men or
liers, forasmuch as in common speech we use daily to call sacraments and
figures by the names of the things that be signified by them, although they be
not the same thing in deed. As every Good friday (as often as it returns from
year to year) we call it the dai of Christ's passion: and every Easter day, we
call the day of his resurrection: and every day in the year, we say that
Christ is offered: and the sacrament of his body, we call it his body: and the
sacrament of his blud, we call it his blud: and our baptism S. Paul calls our
burial with Christ And yet in very deed Christ never suffered but ones, never
arose but ones, never was offered but ones, nor in very deed in baptism we be
not buried, nor the sacrament of Christ's body is not his body, nor the
sacrament of his blood is not his blood. But so they be called, because they be
figures, sacraments, and representacions of the things them self which they
signifye, and whereof they bear the name.

Thus does S. Augustine most plainly open this matter in his epistle to
Bonifacius.

Of this manner of speech (wherein a sign is called by the name of the thing,
Su^er Leui. quest. 57.
which it signifies) speaks S. Augustine also right largly in his questions
super Leuiticum, and contra Adamantium, declaring how blood in scripture is
called the soul. Leui. 17.
A thing which signifies (says he) is wont to be called by the name of the
thing which it signifies, as it is written in the scripture, Be. 41.
The vii. ears be vii. years. The scripture says not signyfieth vii. years,
And vii. kine be. vii. years. and many other like. ^. Cor. 2.
And so said S. Paul, that the stone was Christ, and not that it signified
Christ, but even as it had bin he in deed, which nevertheless was not Christ by
substance, but by significacio^. Even so (says S. August.) because the blood
signifies and represents the soul, therefore in a sacrament or significacion
it is called the soul.

Co^tra Adamantiu^ cap. 12. Leui. 17
And Co^tra Adamantiu^ he writes much like, saying: In such wise is blud ye
soul, as the stone was Christ, and yet thapostle says nor, that the stone
signified Christ, but says it was Christ. And this sentence, Blood is the
soul. may be understand to be spoken in a sign or figure, for Christ did not
stick to say, This is my body. when he gave the sign of his body.

Here S. Augustine rehersing diverse sentences, which were spoken figuratively,
that is to say, when one thing was called by the name of an other, and yet
was not the other in substance but in significacion, as that bludde is the
soul: vii. kyne be vii. years: vii. ears be vii. years: the stone was
Christ. Among such manner of speeches, he reherseth those words which Christ
spoke at his last supper, Math. 26
This is my body, which declares plainly S. Augustines mind, that Christ
spoke those words figuratyuelye, not meaning that the bread was his body by
substance, but by signifycacion.

And therefore S. Augustine says Contra Maximinu^, Contra Maximinu^. li. 3 cap.
22.
that in sacraments we must not considre what they be, but what they signifye.
For thet be signs of things, being one thing and signyfiyng an other. Which he
does show specially of this sacrament saying: In lib. sente^tiarum Prosperi de
co^scrat. distin. 4. hoc est.
The heavenly bread which is Christ's flesh, by some manner of speech is
called Christ's body, when in very deed it is the sacrament of his body. And
that offering of the flesh which is done by the priests hands, is called
Christ's passion, death and crucifiyng, not in very deed, but in a mystycall
signyfycacion.

And to this purpose it is both pleasant, Theodoret, in dialogis.
comfortable and profitable to read Theodoretus, in his Dyaloges, where he
dysputeth and shows at length, how the names of things be changed in
scripture, and yet things remain still. And for exaumple, he proves, that
the flesh of Christ is in ye scripture sometime called a vaylor covering,
some^yme a clothe, sometime a vestiment, and sometime a stole: and the blud of
the grape, is called Christ's blood, and the names of bread and wine, and of
his flesh and blood Christ does so change, that sometime he calls his
body, corn or bread, and sometime contrary he calls bread, his body. And
likewise his bludde sometime he calls wine, and sometime contrary he calls
wine his bludde.

For the more plain understanding whereof, it shall not be amysse to recite
his own saiyngs in his foresaid dialogs, touchi^g this matter of the holy
sacrament of Christ's flesh and blu^. The speakers in these dialoges be
Orthodoxus the right beleuer, and Eranistes his companion, but not
understanding the right faith.

In ye first Dialoge.
Orthodoxus says to his companion.

Do thou not know that God calls bread his flesh?

Eranistes. I know that.


Orth. And in an other place he calls his body corn?


Eran. I know that also, for I have heard him say: John. 12
The hour is come that the son of man shall be glorified. and, Except the
grain corn that falls in the ground, dye, it remains sole, but if it dye,
than it brings forth much fruit.


Orth. When he gave the mysteries or sacraments, he called bread his body,
Mat. 26. Mat. 14 Luc. 22
and that which was myxt in the cup, he called blood.


Eran. 'So he called them.


Orth. But that also which was his natural body, may well be called his body,
and his very bludde also may be called his bludde.


Eran. 'It is plain.


Orth. But our savior without doubt changed the names, and gave to the body
the name of the sign or tooken, and to the tooken he gave the name of the
body. Ihon. 15.
And so when he called himself a vine, he called blud that, which was the
token of blud.


Era. Suerly thou have spoken the truth, But I would know the cause wherefore
the names were changed.


Orthod. The cause is manifest to them that be expert in true religion. For
he would that they which be partakers of the godly sacraments, should not
set their minds upon the nature of the things, which they see, but by the
chaungyng of the names, should believe the thynged which be wrought in them by
grace. Ihon. 12.
For he that called that which is his natural body corn and bread, and also
called him self a vine, Ihon. 15. Mat. 26.
he did honor the visible tokens and signs, with the names of his body and
blood, not chaungyng the nature, but addyng grace to nature.


Eran. Sacraments be spoken of sacramentally, and also by them be
manyfestly declared things which all men know not.


Ortho. Seeing than that it is certain, that the Patriarche called the Lords
body, Genesis 46.
a vestiment and apparelle, and that now we be entered to speak of godly
sacraments, tell me truly, of what thing thynkest thou this holy meat to be a
tooken and figure, of Christ's diuinitee? or of his body and blood?


Era. It is clear, that it is the figure of those things, whereof it bears
the name.


Orth. 'Meanest thou of his body and blood?


Era. 'Euen so I mean.


Orth. Thou haste spoken as one that loves the truth, for the Lord when he
took the token or sign, he said not, This is my diuinitee, but This is my
body, and This is my blood. And in another place, Iho. 6.
The bread which I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life
of the world.


Era. The things be true, for they be Gods words.


All this writes Theodoretus in his first Dialogue.

Dialo. 2.
And in the second he writes the same in effect (and yet in some things more
plainly) against such heretics as affirmed, that after Christ's resurrection
and ascencion his humanitee was changed from the very nature of a man, and
turned into his diuinitee. Against who^ thus he writes

Orth. Corrupcion, health, sickness, and death, be accidents, for they go and
come.


Era. 'It is meet they be so called.


Orth. Men's bodies after their resurrection be delivered from corrupcion,
death, and mortalitee, and yet they lose not their propre nature.


Era. 'Trueth it is.


Orth. The body of Christ therefore did rise quit clean from all corruption and
death, and is impassible, immortal, glorified with the glory of God, and is
honored of the powers of heaven, and yet it is a body, and has the same
bygnes that it had before.


Era. Thy sayings seem true, and according to reason, but after he was
ascended up into heaven, I think thou wylt not say, that his body was turned
into the nature of the Godhead.


Orth. I would not say for the persuacion of man's reason: nor I am not so
arroga^t and presumptuous, to affirm any thing which scripture passes over
in silence, but I have heard S. Paul cry, that God has ordained a day, Act.
17.
when he will judge all the world in justice, by that man which he appointed
before, performyng his promise to all men, and raisyng him from death. I have
learned also of the holy angels, Act. 1.
that he will comme after that fashion, as his disciples saw him go to heaven.
But they saw a nature of a certain bygnes, not a nature which had no bygnes.
I heard furthermore the Lord say, Mat. 24.
You shall see the son of man come in y^ clouds of heaven. And I know that
every thing that men see, has a certain bygnes. For that nature that has
no bigness, can not be seen. Moreover to sytte in the throne of glory, and to
set the Lambs upon his right hand, and the goats upon his left hand,
signifies a thing that has quantitee and bygnes.


Hitherto have I rehearsed Theodoretus words. And shortly after Eranistes says.

Era. We must turn every stone (as the proverb says) to seek out the
truth* but specially when godly matters be propounded.


Orth. Tell me than, the sacrame^tal signs, which be offered to God by his
priests, whereof they be signs say thou?


Era. 'Of the Lords boby and blood.


Orth. 'Of a very body? or not a very body?


Era. 'Of a very body.


Orth. Uery well, for an mage must be made after a true pattern: for Paynters
follow nature, and paynt the images of such things as we see with our eyes.


Era. 'Truthe it is.


Orth. If therefore ye godly sacraments represent a true body, than is the
Lords body yet still a body, not converted into the nature of his Godhead, but
replenished with Gods glory.


Era. It comes in good time, that thou make mention of Gods sacraments for
by the same I shall prove, ye Christ's body is turned into another nature.
Answer therefore unto my questions


Orth. 'I shall answer.


Era. What call thou that which is offered, before the invocation of the
priest?


Orth. We must not speak plainly, for it is like that some be present, which
have not professed Christ.


Era. 'Answere covertly.


Orth. 'It is a norishme^t made of seeds that be like.


Era. 'Than how call we the other sign?


Orth. It is also a common name, that signifies a kind of drink.


Era. But how do thou call them after the sanctification?


Orth. 'The body of Christ, and the blood of Christ.


Era. And do thou believe that thou art made parttaker of Christ's body and
bloudde?


Orth. 'I believe so.


Era. Therefore as the tokens of Gods body and blood, be other things
before the priests invocation, but after the invocation they be changed, and
be other things: so also the body of Christ after his assumption is changed
into his divine substance.


Orth. Thou art taken with thine own net. For the sacramental signs go
not from their own nature after the sanctification, but continue in their
former substance, form, and figure, and may be seen and touched as well as
before, yet in our minds we do consider, what they be made, and do repute and
esteem them, and have them in reverence, acordyng to the same things that they
be taken for. Therefore compare the images to the pattern, and thou shall se
them like. For a figure must be like to ye thing it self. For Christ's body
has his former fashion, figure, and bygnesse, and to speak at one word, the
same substance of his body. But after his resurrection, it was made immortal,
and of such power, that no corruption nor death could come unto it, and it was
exalted to that dignitee, that it was set at the right hand of the father, and
honored of all creatures, as the body of him that is the Lord of nature.


Era. But the sacramental token changes his former name, for it is no more
called as it was before, but is called Christ's boyde. Therefore must his body
after his ascension be called God and not a body.


Orth. Thou semest to me ignorant, for it is not called his body only, but
also the bread of life, as the Lord called it. So the body of Christ we call
a godly body, a body that gives life, Gods body, the Lords body, our
masters body, meaning that it is not a common body, as other men's bodies be,
but that it is the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, both god and man.


This have I rehearsed of the great clerk and holy bishop Theodoretus, whom
some of the Papists perceiving to make so plainly against them, have
defamed, saying that he was infected with the error of Nestorius.

Here the Papists show their old accustomed nature and condition, which is
(even in a manifest matter) rather to lie without shame, than to give place
unto the truth, and confess their own error. And although his adversaries
falsely bruted such a fame against him, when he was yet alive, nevertheless
he was pourged thereof by the whole council of Calcedon, about aleuen hundred
years ago.

And furthermore in his book which he wrote against heresies, he specially
condemns Nestorius by name. And also all his.iii. books of his dialoges
before rehearsed, he wrote chiefly against. Nestorius, and was never herein noted
of error this thousand year, but has ever been reputed and taken for an holy
bishop, a great learned man, and a grave author, until now at this present time,
when the Papists have nothing to answer unto him, they begin in excusing of
them selves, to defame him.

Thus much have I spoken for Theodoretus, which I pray the be not weary to
read (good reder) but often and with delectation, deliberation, and good
advertisement to read. For it conteyneth plainly and brefely the true
instruction of a christian man, concerning the matter, which in this book we
treat upon.

First, Five principal things to be noted in Theodoretus.
that our savior Christ in his last supper, when he gave bread and wine to
his apostles, (sayeuge: This is my body, This is my blood) it was bread which
he called his body, and wine myxed in the cup, which he called his blood: so
that he changed the names of the bread and wine (which were the mysteries,
sacraments, signs, figures and tokens of Christ's flesh and blood) and
called them by the names of the things, which they did represent and signify,
that is to say, the bread he called by the name of his very flesh, and the
wine by the name of his blud.

Second, that although the names of bread and wine were changed after
sanctification, yet nevertheless the things them selves remained the self
same, that they were before the sanctification, that is to say, the same bread
and wine in nature, substance, form and fashion.

The third, seeing that the substance of the bread and wine be not changed,
why be then their names changed? and the bread called Christ's flesh, and the
wine his blood? Theodoretus shows, that the cause thereof was this, that we
should not have so much respect to the bread and wine (which we see with our
eyes, and taste with our mouths) as we should have to Christ him self, in whom
we believe with our hertes, and feel and taste him by our faith, and with whose
flesh and blood (by his grace) we believe that we be spiritually fed and
nouryshed.

These things we ought to remember and reuolue in our minds, and to lift up
our hearts from the bread and wine unto Christ that sytteth above. And because
we should so do, therefore after the consecration, they be no more called bread
and wine, but the body and blood of Christ.

and the bread of thanks gyuyng.

The fifth, that no man ought to be so arrogant

And they would constrayne with fire and fagotte all men to consent (contrary
to the manifest words of God) to these their erroures in this matter of the
holy sacrament of Christ's body and blood.

First that there remains no bread nor wine after the consecration, but that
Christ's flesh and blood is made of them.

Second, that Christ's body is really, corporally, substancially, sensibly and
naturally in the bread and wine.

Thyrdely, that wicked persons do eat and drink Christ's very body and
blood.

Fourthly, that priests offer Christ every day, make of him a new sacrifice
propiciatory for syn.

Thus for shortness of time, do I make an end of Theodoretus, with other old
ancient writers, which do most clearly affirm, that to eat Christ's body,
and to drink his blood, be figurative speches. And so be these sentences like
wise, which Christ spoke at his supper: This is my body, This is my bloudde.

Chap. 12
And meruail not good reder, that Christ at ye time spoke in figures, when he
did institute that sacrament, Figurative speeches be not strange.
seeing that it is the nature of al sacraments to be figures. And although ye
scripture be full of Schemes, tropes, and figures, yet specially it uses them
wha^ it speaks of sacraments.

When the Ark (which represented Gods maiestee) was come into the army of the
Israelites the Philistians said that god was come into the army. ^. Reg. 4.
And God him self said by his prophet Nathan, 2. Reg. 7.
that from the time that he had brought the children of Israel out of Egypt,
he dwelled not in houses, but that he was carried about in tents and
tabernacles. And yet was not God him self so carried about, or went in tents
or tabernacles, but because the arc (which was a figure of God) was so
removed from place to place, he spoke of him self that thing, which was to be
understand of the Arc.

Christ him self used figurative speeches.
And Christ him self often times spoke in similitudes, parables, and figures,
as when he said: Math. 13.
The field is the world, the enemy is the dyuell, the sede is the word of
God: Mat. 11. and. 17.
John is Helias: John. 16
I am a vine, and you be the branches. John. 6.
I am bread of lyte. John. 15 Math. 3.2.
My father is an husband man, and he has his fan in his hand, and will make
clean his flower, and gather the wheat into his barn, but the chafe he will
cast into everlasting fire. John, 4
I have a meat to eat, which you know not. John. 6.
Work not meat that perishes, but that endures unto everlasting life.
John. 10
I am good shepherd. Mat. 25.
The son of man will set the sheep at his right hand, and the goats at his
left hand. John. 10 John, 6, Math, 12,
I am a door: One of you is the devil. Whosoever does my fathers will, he is
my brother, sister and mother. And when he said to his mother, and to Ihon.
This is thy son, this is thy mother.

These with an infinite number of like sentences, Christ spoke in Parables,
Metaphores, tropes and figures. But chiefly when he spoke of the sacraments,
he used figurative speches.

As when in Baptism he said, that we must be baptized with the holy ghost,
Actu. 1,
meaning of spiritual baptism. And like speech used saint Ihon the Baptiste,
Math. 3.
saying of Christ, that he should Baptize with the holy ghost and fire, And
Christ said, Job. 3.
that we must be borne again or else we can not see the kingdom of God. And
said also: John. 4.
Whosoever shall drink of that water which I shall give him, he shall never
be dry again. But the water which I shall give him, shall be made within
him a well, which shall spryng into everlasting life. And saint Paul says,
Romans 6.
that in Baptism we clothe us with Christ, Galat. 3.
and be buried with him. This baptism, washing, and new birth by the fire and
the holy ghost, and this water that spryngeth in a man, and flows into
everlasting life, can not be understand of any material water, material
washyng, and material birth, but by translacion of things visible into
things invisible, they must be understand spiritually and figuratively.

After the same sort the mystery of our redemption, and the passion of our
savior Christ upon the cross, as well in the new, as in the old Testament, is
expressed and declared by many fygures and figurative speeches.

The Pascall lamb
As the pure Paschal lamb without spot, signified Christ. The effusion of the
lambs blood, signified the effusion of Christ's blood. And the salvation of
the children of Israel from temporal death by the lambs blood, signified our
salvation from eternal death by Christ's blood. And as almighty God passing
through Egypt killed all the Egyptians heirs in every house, and left not one
alive, and nevertheless he passed by the children of Isreal's houses, where he
saw the Lambs blood upon the doors, and hurted none of them, but saved them
all by the means of the Lambs bloudde: so likewise at the last judgment of
the whole world, none shall be passed over and saved, but that shall be found
marked with the blood of the most pure and immaculate lamb Jesus Christ.

The Lords supper
And forasmuch as the sheddyng of that lambs blood was a token and figure of
the sheddyng of Christ's blood than to come, and forasmuch also as all the
sacraments and figures of the old testament, ceased and had an end in Christ:
lest by our great unkindness we should peradventure be forgetful of the
great benefit of Christ, therefore at his last supper (when he took his leave
of his apostles to depart out of the world) he did make a new will and
testament, wherein he bequeathed unto us clean remission of all our sins, and
the everlasting inheritance of heaven. And the same he confirmed the next
day with his own blood and death.

And lest we should forget the same, he ordained not a yearly memory (as the
Paschall lamb was eaten but ones every year) but a daily remembrance he
ordained thereof in bread and wine, sanctified and dedicated to that purpose,
saying: This is my body, Math. 26
This cup is my blood, which is shed for the remission of sins. Do this in
the remembrance of me. Admonyshyng us by these words, spoken at the making of
his last will and testament, and at his departing out of the world (because
they should be the better rememored) that whenever we do eat the bread in
his holy supper, and drink of that cup, we should remember how much Christ
has done for us, 1. Cor. 11,
and how he dyed for our sakes. Therefore, says saint Paul: As often as ye
shall eat of this bread, and drink the cup, you shall show forth the Lords
death until he come.

And forasmuch as this holy bread broken, and the wine divided, do represent
unto us the death of Christ now passed, as the killing of the Paschall lamb
did represent y^ same yet to come: therefore our savior Christ used the same
manner of speech of the bread and wine, as God before used of the Paschall
lamb.

Exodus, 12.
For as in the old Testament God said: This is the Lords Passeby, or
Passover, even so says Christ in the new Testament, Math. 26
This is my body, This is my blood. But in the old mystery and sacrament, the
Lamb was not the Lords very Passover or passing by, but it was a figure
which represented his passing by. So likewise in the new Testament, the
bread and wine be not Christ's very body and blood, but they be figures,
which by Christ's institution be unto the godly receauers thereof,
Sacraments, tokens, significations, and representations of his very flesh and
bludde: instructyng their faith, that as the bread and wine feed them
corporally and continue this temporal life: so the very flesh and blood of
Christ feeds them spiritually, and gives them everlasting life.

What fyguratiue speeches were used at Christ's last supper
And why should any man think it strange, to admit a figure in these speches,
This is my body, This is my blood? seeing that the communication the same
night (by the Papists own confessions) was so full of figurative speeches?
For the Apostles spoke figuratively when they asked Christ, Mat. 26 Mat. 14
Luc. 22.
where he would eat his passover or passeby. And Christ him self used the
same figure, when he said: I have much desired to eat this passover with you.

Also, to eat Christ's body, and to drink his blood, I am sure they will not
say that it is taken proprely, to eat and drike, as we do eat other meats
and drynkes.

And when Christ said, This cup is a new testament in my blood. here in one
sentence be two figures. One in this word Cup, which is not taken for the cup
it self, but for the thing contained in the cup. An other is in this word,
Testament, for neither the cup, nor the wine contained in the cup, is
Christ's Testament, but is a token, sign and figure, whereby is represented
unto us his Testament, confirmed by his bloudde.

And if the Papists will say (as they say in deed) that by this cup, is neither
meant the cup nor the wine contained in the cup, but that thereby is meant
Christ's blood contained in the cup: yet must they needs grant, that there
is a figure. For Christ's blood is not in proper speech, the New testament,
but it is the thing that confirmed the new testament. And yet by this strange
interpretation, the Papists make a very strange speech, more strange then any
figurative speech is. For this they make the sentence: This blood is a new
testament in my blood. Which saying is so fond and so far from all reason,
that the foolyshenes thereof is evident to every man.

Now forasmuch as it is plainly declared and manifestly proved, Chap. 13
that Christ called bread his body, Answer to the auctorittes and arguments
of the Papists.
and wine his blood, and that these sentences be figurative speeches, and that
Christ, as concerning his humanitee and bodily presence, is ascended into
heaven with his whole flesh and bloudde, and is not here upon earth, and that
the substance of bread and wine do remain still, and be received in the
sacrament, and that although they remain, yet they have changed their names,
so that the bread is called Christ's body, and the wine his bloudde, and that
the cause why their names be changed is this* that we should lift up our
hearts and minds from the things, which we se, unto the things, which we
believe and be above in heaven, (whereof the bread and wine have the names,
although they be not the very same things in deed.) These things well
considered and waied, all the auctoritees and arguments, which the Papists
feign to serve for their purpose, be clean wyped away.

Cha. 14.
For whether the authors (which they allege) say that we do eat Christ's
flesh and drink his bloudde, One br^fe answer to all.
or that the bread and wine is converted into the substance of his flesh and
blood, or that we be turned into his flesh, or that in the Lords supper we
do receive his very flesh and bloudde, or that in the breadde and wine is
received that which did hang upon the Cross, or that Christ has left
his flesh with us, or that Christ is in us, and we in him, or that he is
whole here and whole in heaven, or that the same thing is in the Chalice,
which flowed out of his side, or that the same thing is received with our
mouth, which is believed with our faith, or that the bread and wine after
the Consecration, be the body and bloudde of CHRIST, or that we be nouryshed
with the body and blood of Christ, or that Christ is both gone hence, and is
still here, or that Christ at his last supper, bare him self in his own
hands.

These and all other like sentences may not be understood of Christ's
humanitee literally and carnally, as the words in common speech do proprely
signify, (for so doothe no man eat Christ's flesh, nor drink his bloudde,
nor so is not the bread and wine turned into his flesh and blood, nor we into
him: nor so is the bread and wine after the consecration his flesh and blud,
nor so is not his flesh and blood whole here in earth, eaten with our
mouths) nor so did not Christ take him self in his own hands.

But these and all other like sentences (which declare Christ to be here in
earth, and to be eaten and dronken of christian people) are to be understand,
either of his divine nature (whereby he is eu^ry where) or else they must be
understood figuratively, o^ spiritually. For figuratively he is in the bread
and wine, and spiritually he is in them that worthyly eat and drink the bread
and wine, but really, carnally, and corporally he is only in heaven, from
whence he shall come to judge the quycke and dead.

This brief answer will suffice for all that the Papists can bring for
their purpose, if it be aptely applied. And for the more evidence hereof, I
shall apply the same to sum such places, as the Papists think do make
most for them: that by the answer to those places, the rest may be the
more easyly answered unto.

The answer to Clemens Epistol 2.
They allege saint Clement, whose words be these, as they report. The
sacraments of Gods secrets are committed to three degrees: to a priest, a
Deacon, and a minister: which with fear and tremblyng ought to keep the
leauynges of the broken pieces of the Lords body, that no corruption be found
in the holy place, least by negligence great injury be done to the portion of
the Lords body. And by and by follows: So many hosts must be offered in
the altar, as will suffice for the people. And if any remayn, they must not be
kept until the morning, but be spent and consumed of the clearkes, with fear
and trembling. And they that consume the residue of the Lords body, may not
by and by take other common meats, least they should mixte that holy portion,
with the meat which is dygested by the bealy, and avoided by the foundament.
Therefore if the Lords portion be eaten in the morning, the ministers that
consume it, must fast unto six of the clock: and if they do take it at three
or four of the clock, the minister must fast until the euenyng.

Thus much writes Clement of this matter: If the Epistle, which they allege,
were Clementes (as in deed it is not.) But they have feigned many things in
other men's names, thereby to stablyshe their feigned purposes. But whose so
ever the Epistle was, if it be thoroughly considered, it makes much more
against the Pap^stes, than for their purpose. For by the same Epistle appears
evidently three special things against the errors of the Papists.

The first is, that the bread in the sacrament is called the Lords body: and
the pieces of the broken bread be called the pieces and fragmentes of the
Lords body. which can not be understand, but fyguratiuely.

The second is, that the bread ought not to be reserved and hanged up, as the
Papists every where do use.

The third is, that the priests ought not to receive the sacrament alone (as
the Papists commonly do, making a sale thereof unto the people) but they ought
to communicate with the people.

And here it is diligently to be noted, that we ought not irreverently and
unadvisedly to approach unto the meat of the Lords table, as we do to other
common meats and drynkes, but with great fear and dread: least we should
come to that holy table unworthily, wherein is not only represented, but also
spirytually given unto us very CHRIST him self. And therefore we ought to come
to that board of the Lord with all reverence, faith, love, and charitee,
fear and dread, according to the same.

Ignatius in Epistola ad Ephesianos Irenaeus Lib 5. co^tra Valentin.
Here I passover Ignatius and Ireneus, which make nothing for the Papists
opinions, but stand in the commendacion of the holy Communion, and in
exhortacion of all men to the often and godly receiuyng therrof. And yet
neither they, nor no man else, can extolle and commend the same sufficiently,
according to the dignitee thereof, if it be godly used, as it ought to be.

The answer to Dionysius de eccle. Hierarch. cap. 3.
Dionysius also, whom they allege to praise and extol this sacrament (as in
deed it is most worthy, being a sacrament of most high dignitee and
perfection, representyng unto us our most perfect spiritual conjunction unto
Christ, and our continual norishyng, feadyng, comfort, and spiritual life in
him,) yet he never said that the flesh and blood of Christ was in the bread
and wine, really, corporally, sensibly and naturally (as the Papists would
bear us in hand) but he calls ever the bread and wine signs, pledges and
tokens, declaryng unto the faithful receivers of the same, that they receive
Christ spiritually, and that they spiritually eat his flesh and drink his
blood. And although the bread and wine be the figures, signs, and tokens of
Christ's flesh and blood (as saint Dionyse calls them both before the
consecracion and after) yet the Greek annotations upon the same Dionyse do say,
that the very things them selfs be above in heaven.

And as the same Dionyse makes nothing for the Papists opinions in this point
of Christ's real and corporal presence, so in diverse other things he makes
quite and clean against them, and that specially in three points, In
transubstantiation, in reseruacion of the sacrament, and in the receauinge of
the same by the priest alone.

Furthermore they do allege Tertulian, The answer to Tertullanus de
resure^ctio^e carnis.
that he constantly affirms, that in the sacrament of the altar we do eat
the body and drink the blud of our savior Christ. To who^ we grant that our
flesh eats and drinks the bread and wine, which be called the body and
blood of Christ, because (as Tertulian says) they do represent his body and
blood, although they be not really the same in very deed. And we grant also,
that our souls by faith do eat his very body and drink his bludde, but
that is spiritually, suckinge out of the same everlasting life. But we deny
that unto this spiritual feedinge is required any real and corporal presence.

And therefore this Tertulian speaks nothing against the truth of our
catholic doctrine, but he speaks many things most plainly for us, and
against the Papists, and specially in three points. First in that he says
that Christ called bread his body. The second that Christ called it so,
because it represents his body. The third, in that he says, that by these
words of Christ, This is my body, is mente, This is a figure of my body.

The answer to Origenes in Numer. Homi. 7.
Moreover they allege for them Origin (because they would seem to have many
aunciente authors, favorers of their erroneous doctrine) which Origin is
most clearly against them. For although he do say (as they allege) that
those things which before were signified by obscure figures, be now truly in
deed and in their very nature and kind accomplished and fulfilled. And for the
declaration thereof, he brings forth three examples, One of the stone that
flows water, an other of the sea and cloud, and the third of Manna, which
in the old testamente did signify Christ to come, who is now come in deed,
and is manifested and exhibited unto us, as it were face to face, and sensibly,
in his word, in the sacrament of regeneracion, and in the sacraments of
bread and wine, Yet Origene mente not, that Christ is corporally either in his
word, or in the water of baptime, or in the bread and wine, nor that we
carnally and corporally be regenerated and borne again, or eat Christ's flesh
and blood. For our regeneracion in Christ, is spiritual, and our eating and
drinking is a spiritual feeding, which kind of regeneration and feeding,
requires no real and corporal presence of Christ, but only his presence in
spirit, grace, and effectual operacion.

And that Origin thus mente, that Christ's flesh is a spiritual meat, and
his bludde a spiritual drink, and that the eating and drynkinge of his flesh
and blood may not be understand literallye, but spirytually, it is
manifested by Origenes own words, in his seventh homylye upon the book
called Leuiticus: In Leuit. hom. 7.
where he shows that those words must be understand figuratively, and who
so ever understands them otherwise, they be deceived and take harm by
their own gross understanding.

And likewise meant Cypriane, The answer to Cyprianus lib. 2. epist. 3
in those places which the adversaries of the truth allege of him,
concerning the true eatinge of Christ's very flesh and drinkinge of his
bludde.

For Cyprian spoke of no gross and carnal eatinge with the mouth, but of an
inward spiritual and pure eatinge with heart and mind, which is to beeleue in
our hearts, that his flesh was ^ente and torn for us upon the cross, and
his bludde shed for our redemption, and that the same flesh and bludde now
sits at the right hand of the father, making continual intercession for us,
and to imprint and digest this in our minds, puttinge our whole affiaunce and
trust in him, as touching our salvation and offering ourselves clearlye unto
him, to love and serve him all the days of our life: this is trewely,
sincerely, and spiritually to eat his flesh and to drink his bludde.

And this sacryfyce of Christ upon the cross, was that oblation which
Cypriane says was figured and signified before it was done, Genesis 9. Genesis 14.
by the wine which Noe drank, and by the bread and wine which Melchisedech
gave to Abraham, and by many other figures which Cyprian there reherseth.

And now when Christ is come, and has accomplished that sacrifice, the same
is figured, signified, and represented unto us, by that bread and wine, which
faithful people receive daily in the holy communion. Wherein like as with
their mouths carnally they eat the bread and drink the wine, so by their faith
spiritually they eat Christ's very flesh and drink his very blood. And
herby it appears that S. Cyprian clearly affirms the most true doctrine,
and is wholly upon our side.

And against the Papists he teaches most plainly, that the communion ought
to be received of all men under both the kinds: and that CHRIST called bread
his body, and wine his blood: and that there is no transubstantiation (but
that bread remains there as a figure, to represent Christ's body, and wine
to represente his blud) and that those which be not y^ lively members of
Christ, do eat the bread and drink the wine, and be nouryshed by them,
but the very flesh and bludde of CHRIST, they neither eat nor drink.

Thus have you heard declared the mind of Saint Cyprian.

The answer to Hylarius. 8. ^^ trinitate
But Hylarius (think they) is plainest for them in this matter, whose words
they translate thus.

If the word was made verily flesh, and we verily receive the word being
flesh, in our Lords meat, how shall not Christ be thought to dwell naturally
in us? who being borne man, has taken unto him the nature of our flesh, that
can not be severed, and has put together the nature of his flesh to the
nature of his eternitee, under the sacrament of the communion of his flesh
unto us. For so we be all one, because the father is in Christ, and Christ
in us. Wherefore whosoever will deny the father to be naturally in Christ, he
must deny first either him self to be naturally in Christ, or Christ to be
naturally in him. For the being of the father in Christ, and the being of
Christ in us, makes us to be one in them. And therefore if Christ have taken
verily the flesh of our body, and the man that was verily borne of the virgyn
Mary is Christ, and also we receive under the true mysterye the flesh of his
body, by means whereof we shall be one (for the father is in Christ, and
Christ in us) how shall that be called the unity of will, when the natural
property brought to pass by the sacrament, is the sacrament of unity?

Thus does the Papists (the adversaries of Gods word and of his truth)
allege the authoritee of Hilarious (either peruersely and purposely, as it
seems, untruly cityng him, and wrastyng his words to their purpose) or else
not truly understanding him.

For although he says that Christ is naturally in us, yet he says also that
we be naturally in him. And nevertheless in so saying, he meant not of the
natural and corporal presence of the substance of Christ's body and of ours
(for as our bodies be not after that sort within his body, so is not his
body after that sort within our bodies) but he meant that Christ in his
incarnacion received of us a mortal nature, and united the same unto his
diuinitee, and so be we naturally in him.

And the sacraments of Baptism and of his holy supper (if we rightly use the
same) do most assuredly certifye us, that we be partakers of his godly
nature, having given unto us by him, immortalitee and life everlasting, and so
is Christ naturally in us. And so be we one with Christ, and Christ with us,
not only in will and mind, but also in very natural properties.

And so concludes Hilarious against Arrius, that Christ is one with his
father, not in purpose and will only, but also in very nature.

And as the union between Christ and us in baptism is spiritual, and
requires no real and corporal presence, so likewise our union with Christ in
his holy supper is spiritual, and therefore requires no real and corporal
presence.

And therefore Hilarious speaking there of both the sacraments, makes no
difference between our union with Christ in baptism, and our union with him in
his holy supper. And says further, that as Christ is in us, so be we in him*
which the Papists can not understand corporally and really, except they will
say, that all our bodies be corporally within Christ's body. Thus is Hilarious
answered unto, both plainly and shortly.

And this answer of Hilarious will serve also unto Cyril, The answer to
Cyrillus.
whom they allege to speak after the same sort that Hilarious does, that Christ
is naturally in us. The words which they recite be these. We deny not (says
Cyril against the heretic) but we be spiritually joined to Christ, by faith
and sincere charitee: but that we should have no manner of conjunction in our
flesh with Christ, that we utterly deny, and think it utterly discrepant from
Gods holy scriptures. For who doubts, but Christ is so the vine tree, and we
so the branches, as we get thence our life. Hear what saint Paul says, We
be all one body with Christ, for though we be many, we be one in him. All we
participate in one food. Thinks this heretic that we know not the
strength and virtue of the mistical benediction? which when it is made in us,
does it not make Christ by communication of his flesh to dwell corporally in
us? Why be the members of faithful men's bodies called the members of Christ?
1. Cor. 6.
Know you not (says saint Paul) that your members be the members of Christ?
And shall I make the members of Christ, parts of the whoores body? God forbid.
And our savior also says: John. 6.
He that eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, dwells in me and I in him.

Although in these words Cyril does say, that Christ does dwell corporally in
us, when we receive y^ mistical benediction: yet he neither says that Christ
dwells corporally in the bread, nor that he dwells in us corporally only
at such times as we receive the sacrament, nor that he dwells in us, and
not we in him, but he says as well, yt we dwell in him, as that he dwells in
us. Which dwelling is neither corporal nor local, but an heavenly, spiritual
and supernatural dwelling, whereby so long as we dwell in him and he in us, we
have by him everlasting life. And therefore Cyril says in the same place, Ihon.
15.
that Christ is the vine, and we the branches, because that by him we have
life. For as the branches receive life and nourishement of the body of the
vine, so receive we by him the natural property of his body, which is life
and immortalitee, and by that means we being his members, do live, and are
spiritually norished.

And this meant Cyril by this word Corporally, when he says, that Christ
dwells corporally in us. And the same meant also saint Hilarious by this
word Naturally, when he said that Christ dwells naturally in us. And as
saint Paul, Colloss. 2.
when he said that in Christ dwells the full diuinitee Corporally, by this
word Corporally, he meant not that the diuinitee is a body, and so by that body
dwells bodily in Christ. But by this word Corporally, he meant that the
diuinitee is not in Christ accidentally, lightly and slenderly, but
substantially and perfectely, with all his might and power: so that CHRIST was
not only a mortal manne, to suffer for us, but also he was immortal God,
able to redeem us.

So S. Cyril, when he said that Christ is in us corporally, he mente that we
have him in us, not lightly and to small effect and purpose, but that we have
him in us substantially, pythelye, and effectually, in such wise, that we
have by him redemption and everlasting life.

And this I suck not out of mine own fyngers, In Ioha^. li^b. 4. cap. 17
but have it of Cyrils own express words, where he says: A little
benediction draws the whole manne to god, and fills him with grace and
after this manner Christ dwells in us, and we in CHRIST.

But as for corporal eatinge and drinkinge with our mouths, and digesting with
our bodies Cyril never meant that Christ does so dwell in us, as he plainly
declares.

Our sacrament (says he) does not affirm the eatinge of a man, An
athema^tismo. 11.
drawing wickedly christen people to have gross imaginacions and carnal
fantasies of such things as be fine and pure, and received only with a
sincere faith. But as two waxes, In Ioha^. Lib 4. Cap. ^7.
that be molten and put together, they close so in one, that every part of the
one, is joined to every part of the other, even so (says Cyril) he that
receives the flesh and blood of the Lord, must needs be so joined with
Christ, that Christ must be in him, and he in Christ.

By these words of Cyril appears his mind plainly, that we may not
grossly and rudelye think of the eating of Christ with our mouths, but with
our faith, by which eatinge (although he be absente hence bodily and be in the
eternal life and glory with his father) yet we be made partakers of his
nature, to be immortal, and have eternal life and glory with him.

And thus is declared the mind as well of Cyryll as of Hylarius.

Basilius. Nissenus and Nazianzenus.
And here may be well enough passed over Basilius, Gregorius Nissenus and
Gregorius Nazianzenus, partly because they speak little of this mattier, and
partly because they may be easyly answered unto, by that which is, before
declared and often repeted, which is that a figure has the name of the thing
whereof it is the figure, and therefore of the figure may be spoken the same
thing, that may be spoken of the thing it self.

And as concerning the eatinge of Christ's flesh and drinkinge of his bludde,
they spoke of the spiritual eatinge and drinkinge thereof by faith, and not of
corporal eating and drnkinge with the mouth and teethe.

The answer to Emissenus.
Likewise Eusebius Emissenus is shortly answered unto, for he speaks not of
any real and corporal conversion of bread and wine into Christ's body and
bludde, nor of any corporal and real eating and drinkinge of the same, but
he speaks of a sacramental conversion of bread and wine, and of a
spiritual eatinge and drynkyng of the body and blood. After which sort,
Christ is as well present in baptism (as the same Eusebius plainly there
declares) as he is in the Lords table. Which is not carnally and corporally,
but by faith and spiritually. But of this author is spoken before more at
large in the matter of transubstantiation. fo. 24.

And now I will come to the saying of S. Ambrose, The answer to Ambrosius de
sacrame^tis libro. 4. cap. 4.
which is always in their mouths. Before the consecration says he (as they
allege) it is bread, but after the words of consecration it is the body of
Christ.

For answer hereunto, yt must be first known what Consecration is.

Consecration is the separation of any thing from a profane and wordely use,
Consecration.
unto a spiritual and godly use.

And therefore when usual and common water is taken from other uses, and put to
the use of baptism in the name of the father and of the son, and of the holy
ghost, than it may rightly be called Consecrated water, that is to say, water
put to an holy use.

Even so when common bread and wine be taken and severed from other bread and
wine, to the use of ye holy communion, that portion of bread and wine, although
it be of the same substance that the other is, from the which it is severed,
yet it is now called consecrated or holy bread, and holy wine.

Not that the bread and wine have or can have any holiness in them, but that
they be used to an holy work, and represent holy and godly things. And
therefore S. Dionyse calls the bread, De eccl Hie rar. cap. 3.
holy bread, and the cup an holy cup, as soon as they be set upon the
aultate to the use of the holy communion.

But specially they may be called holy and consecrated, when they be
separated to that holy use of Christ's own words, which he spoke for that
purpose, Math. 26 Mat. 14. Luc. 22.
saying of the bread: This is my body, And of the wine: This is my blood.

So that commonly the authors, before those words be spoken, do take the
bread and wine but as other common bread and wine, but after those words be
pronounced over them, than they take them for consecrated and holy bread and
wine.

Not that the bread and wine can be partakers of any holiness or godliness, or
can be the body and blood of Christ, but that they represent the very body
and blood of Christ, and the holy food and nourishement, which we have by
him, And so they be called by the names of the body and blood of Christ, as the
sign, token and figure is called by the name of the very thing, which it
shows and signifies.

And therefore as S. Ambrose in the words before cited by the adversaries,
says, that before the consecration, it is bread, and after the consecration,
it is Christ's body: so in other places he does more plainly set forth his
meaning, saying these words: De his qui mysterijs ini cia^tur ca. ul.
Before the benediction of the heavenly words, it is called an other kind of
thing, but after the consecration, is signified the body of Christ. Likewise
before the consecration it is called an other thing, but after the consecration
it is named the bludde of Christ. De sacrame^tis libro. 5. cap. 4.
And again he says: When I treated of the sacraments, I told you that that
thing which is offered before the words of Christ, is called Bread, but
when the words of Christ be pronounced, than it is not called bread, but it is
called by the name of Christ's body.

By which words of S. Ambrose, it appears plainly, that the bread is called
by the name of Christ's body after the consecration, and although it be still
bread, yet after consecration it is dignyfyed by the name of the thing, which
it represents, as at length is declared before in the process of
transubstantiation, and specially in the words of Theodoretus.

And as the bread is a corporal meat, De sacrame^tis lib. 6. ca. 1.
and corporally eaten, so says S. Ambrose, is the body of Christ a
spiritual meat, and spiritually eaten, and that requires no corporal
presence.

Now let us examine S. John Chrysostom, The answer to Chrysostomus.
who in sound of words, makes most for the adversaries of the truth: but
they that be familyar and acquainted with Chrysostomes manner of speaking (how
in all his writings he is full of allusions, schemes, tropes and figures,
shall soon perceive, that he healpeth nothing their purposes, as it shall well
appear by the discussyng of those places, which the Papists do allege of
him, which be specially two. One is in sermon de Eucharistia in Encaenijs.
And the other is De perditione Iudae.

And as touching the first, no man can speak more plainly against them, than
saint John Chrysostom speaks in that sermon. Wherefore it is to be
wo^dered, why they should allege him for their party, unless they be so
blind in their opinion, that they can see nothing, nor decerne what makes for
them, nor what against them. (...) sermon de Eucharistia in Encaenijs.
For there he has these words. When you comme to these mysteries (speaking
of the Lords boorde and holy Communion) do not think that you receive by a
man the body of God, meaning of Christ. These be S. Ihon Chrysostom his own
words in that place.

Than if we receive not the body of Christ at the hands of a man, Ergo, the
body of Christ is not really, corporally and naturally in the sacrament, and so
given to us by the priest. And than it follows, that all the Papists be
liars, because they fayue and teach the contrary.

But this place of Chrysostom is touched before more at length in answeryng to
the Papists Transubstantiation.

Wherefore now shall be answered the other place which the allege of
Chrysostom in these words. De^^rditione Iudae.
Here he is present in the sacrament and does consecrate, which garnished the
table at the maundy or last supper. For it is not man, which makes of the
bread and wine, being set forth to be consecrated, the body and blood of
Christ, but it is Christ him self: (which for us is crucified) that makes
him self to be there present. The words are uttered and pronounced by the
mouth of the priest, but the consecration is by the virtue, might, and grace
of God him self. And as this saying of God (Increase, Genes. 1.
be multiplied, and fyl the earth) ones spoken by God, took always effect
toward generation. Even so the saying of Christ, Math. 26 Marc. 14 Luc. 22.
This is my body* being but ones spoken, does throughout all churches to this
present, and shall to his last coming, give force and strength to this
sacrifice.

Thus far they rehearse of Chrysostomes words. Which words although they
sound much for their purpose, yet if they be thoroughly considered, and
co^ferred with other places of the same author, it shall well appear, that he
mente nothing less, than that Christ's body should be corporally and
naturally present in the bread and wine, but that in such sort he is in
heaven only, and in our minds by faith we ascend up into heaven, to eat him
there, although sacramentally as in a sign and figure, he be in the bread and
wine (and so is he also in the water of Baptism) and in them that rightly
receive the bread and wine, he is in a much more perfection than corporally
(which should avail them nothing) but in them he is spiritually with his
divine power, giving them eternal life.

And as in the first creation of the world, al living creatures had their first
life by gods only word. (for god only spoke his word, and al things were
created by and by accordingly) and after their creation he spoke these
words: Genes. 1.
Increase and multiply* and by the virtue of those words, al things have
gendred and increaced ever since that time: even so after that Christ said;
Math. 26 Marc. 14 Luc. 22.
Eat, this is my body. and Drink, this is my blood, Do this hereafter in
remembrance of me. by virtue of these words, and not by virtue of any man, the
bread and wine be so consecrated, that who so ever with a lively faith does
eat that bread and drink that wine, does spiritually eat, drink and feed
upon Christ, sitting in heaven with his father. And this is the whole
meaning of S. Chrysostom.

And therefore does he so often say, that we receive Christ in baptism,
and when he has spoken of the receauinge of him in the holy Communion, by
and by he speaks of the receiving of him in baptism, without declarynge any
diuersytee of his presence in the one, from his presence in the other.

Ad populu^ Antiochenu^ hom. 61. and in Ioannem hom. 45.
He says also in many places, that we ascend into heaven, and do eat Christ
sittinge there above.

AND where S. Chrysostom and other Authors do speak of the wonderful
operation of God in his sacraments, passing all man's wit, senses, and
reason, he means not of the workyng of God in the water, bread and wine, but
of the meruaylous workyng of God in the hearts of them that receive the
sacraments, secretly, inwardly, and spiritually transformyng them, renuyng,
fedyng, comfortyng and nourishyng them with his flesh and blood, thorough his
most holy spirit, the same flesh and blood still remaynyng in heaven.

Thus is this place of Chrysostom sufficiently answered unto. And if any man
require any more, than let him look what is recited of the same author before
in the matter of transubstantiation.

Yet furthermore they bring for them Theophilus Alexandrinus, The answer to
Theophilactus in Mat. 14.
who (as they allege) says thus. CHRIST gyuynge thanks, did break,
(which also we do) adding thereto prayer. And he gave unto them, saying: Take,
this is my body. this that I do now give, and that which ye now do take.
For the bread is not a figure only of Christ's body, but it is changed into
the very body of Christ. For Christ says: The bread which I will give you,
John. 6.
is my flesh. Nevertheless the flesh of Christ is not seen for our
weakness, but bread and wine ar familiar unto us. And surely if we should
visibly see flesh and blood, we could not abide it. And therefore our Lord,
bearing with our weakness, does reteyne and keep the form and apparaunce of
bread and wine, but he does turn the very bread and wine into the very flesh
and blood of Christ.

These be the words which the Papists do cite out of Theophilus upon the
gospel of saint Mark. But by this one place it appears evidently, either
how negligente the Papists be in serchyng out and examynyng the sayings of
the authors, which they allege for their purpose, or else how false and
deceytfull they be, which willyngly and wittyngly have made in this one place,
and as it were with one breath, two loud and shameful lies.

The first is, that because they would give the more authorite to the words
by them alleged, they (like falls Potycaties that sell quid pro quo) falsify
the authors name, fatherynge such sayenges upon Theophilus Alexandrinus, an
old and ancient author, which were in deed none of his words, but were the
words of Theophilactus, who was many years after Theophilus Alexandrinus. But
such has ever been the Papisticall subtiltees, to set forth their own
inventions, dreams, and lies, under the name of antiquitee and ancient Authors

The second lie or falshod is, that they falsify the authors words and
meaning, subuertynge the truth of his doctrine. For where Theophylactus
(according to the catholic doctrine of ancient authors) says, that
almighty God (co^desce^dyng to our infirmitee) reserueth the kind of bread
and wine, and yet tourneth them into the virtue of Christ's flesh and blood:
They say that he reserueth the forms and apparances of bread and wine, and
turns them into the Uerite of his flesh and blood. so tornyng and alteryng
kinds into fourmes and apparances, and virtue into Ueritee, that of the virtue
of the flesh and blood, they make the veritee of his flesh and blood. And thus
have they falsified as well the name as the words of Theophilactus, turnyng
veritee into plain and flat falsitee.

But to set forth plainly the meaning of Theophylactus in this matter* As
hot and burning iron is iron still, and yet has the force of fire, and as the
flesh of Christ still remainynge flesh, gives life, as the flesh of him
that is God: so the sacramental bread and wine remain still in their propre
kinds, and yet to them that worthyly eat and drink them, they be turned not
into the corporal presence, but into the virtue of Christ's flesh and blood.

And although Theophylactus spoke of the eating of the very body of Christ, and
the drinkyng of his very blood, (and not only of the figures of them) and of
the conversion of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, yet he
means not of a gross, carnal, corporal, and sensible conversion of the
bread and wine, nor of a like eating and drinking of his flesh and blood
(for so not only our stomakes would yerne and our hearts abhor to eat his
flesh and to drink his blood, but also such eating and drinking could
nothing profit and avail us) but he spoke of the celestial and spiritual
eating of Christ, and of a sacramental conversion of the bread, calling the
bread not only a figure, but also the body of Christ^, geuynge us by those
words to understand, that in the sacrament we not only eat corporally
the bread (which is a sacrament and figure of Christ's body) but spiritually
we eat also his very body, and drink his very blood. And this doctrine of
Theophilactus is both true, godly and comfortable.

The answer to Hieronymus super Epistoad Titum.
Besides this, our adversaries do allege saint Hierome upon the Epistle ad
Titum, that there is as great difference between the loaves called Panes
propositionis, and the body of Christ, as there is between a shadow of a
body, and the body it self, and as there is between an image and the thing it
self, and between an example of things to come, and the things that be
prefigured by them.

These words of saint Hierome truly understand, serve nothing for thentent
of the Papists. For he meant that the Show bread of the law, was but a dark
shadow of Christ to come, but the sacrament of Christ's body is a clear
testimony, that Christ is already comme, and that he has performed that which
was promised, and does presently comfort and feed us spiritually with his
precious body and blood, not withstandyng that corporally he is ascended into
heaven.

Augustinus Sedulius.
And the same is to be answered unto all that the adversaries bring of S.
Augustine, Sedulius, Leo, Leo. Fulgentius. Cassiodorus Gregorius.
Fulgentius, Cassiodorus, Gregorius, and other, concerning the eating of
Christ in the sacrament.

Which thing can not be understood plainly as the words sound, but
fyguratiuely and spiritually, as before is sufficiently proved, and herafter
shall be more fully declared in the fourth part of this book.

But here John Damascene may in no wise be passed over, Damascenus de fide
orth. lib. 4. cap. 14.
whom for his auctoritee the adversaries of Christ's true natural body do
reken as a stout champion sufficient to defend all the whole matter alone, But
neither is the authoritee of Damascene so great, that they may oppress us
thereby, nor his words so plain for them, as they boaste and untruly
pretend. For he is but a young new author in the respect of those which we
have brought in for our party And in diverse points he varieth from the most
ancient authors (if he mean as they expound him) as when he says, that the
bread and wine be not figures, which all the old authors call figures, and that
the bread and wine consume not, nor be avoided downewarde, which Origin and S.
Augustine affirm, or that they be not called the examples of Christ's body
after the consecration, which shall manyfestely appear false by the Liturgy
ascribed unto S. Basil.

And moreover, the said Damascene was one of the bishop of Romes chief
proctoures against the Emperors, and as it were his right hand, to set
abroad all ydolatrye by his own handewrytynge. And therefore if he lost his
hand (as they say he did) he lost it by Gods most righteous judgment,
what soever they feign and fable of the miraculous restitution of the same. And
yet what so ever the said Damascene writes in other mattiers, surely in this
place wiche the adversaries do allege, he writes spiritually and godly,
although the Papists either of ignorance mystake him, or else willyngly wraste
him and writhe him to their purpose, clean contrary to his meaning.

The sum of Damascene his doctrine in this matter is this. That as Christ being
both God and man has in him two natures, so has he two natiuitees, one
eternal, and the other temporal. And so likewise we (being as it were double
men, or having every one of us two men in us, the new man and the old man, the
spiritual man and the carnal man) have a double natiuitee: One of our first
carnal father Adam (by whom as by ancient inheritance comes unto us
malediction and everlasting damnation) and the other of our heavenly Adam, that
is to say, of Christ, by whom we be made heirs of celestial benediction, and
everlasting glory and immortalitee.

And because this Adam is spiritual, therefore our generation by him must be
spiritual, and our feedyng must be likewise spiritual. And our spiritual
generation by him is plainly set forth in baptism, and our spiritual meat
and food is set forth in the holy Communion and supper of the Lord. And
because our sightes be so feeble that we cannot see the spiritual water
wherewith we be washed in baptism, nor the spiritual meat wherewith we be fed
at the Lords table, therefore to healpe our infirmities, and to make us the
better to see the same with a pure faith, our savior Christ has set forth the
same, as it were before our eyes, by sensible signs and tokens, which we be
daily used and accustomed unto.

And because the common custom of men is to wash in water, therefore our
spiritual regeneration in Christ, or spiritual washyng in his blud, is
declared unto us in baptism by water. Likewise our spiritual norishement and
feadyng in Christ, is set before our eyes by bread and wine, because they be
meats and drynkes which chiefly and usually we be fed withal, that as they
feade the body, so does Christ with his flesh and blood spiritually feade the
soul.

And therefore the bread and wine be called examples of Christ's flesh and
blood, and also they be called his very flesh and blood, to signify unto us,
that as they feade us carnally, so do they admonish us that Christ with his
flesh and blood does feade us spiritually, and most truly unto everlasting
life.

And as almighty God by his most mighty word and his hollye spirit and
infinite power brought forth all creatures in the beginning, and ever since
has preserved them, even so by the same word and power he woorketh in us
from time to time this marvelous spiritual generation and wonderful
spiritual norishment and feedyng, which is wrought only by God, and is
comprehended and received of us by faith.

And as bread and drink by natural norishement be changed into a man's body,
and yet the body is not changed, but the same that it was before: so although
the bread and wine be sacramentally changed into Christ's body, yet his body
is the same and in the same place that it was before, that is to say, in
heaven, without any alteracion of the same.

And the bread and wine be not so changed into the flesh and blood of
Christ, that they be made one nature, but they remain still distinct in
nature, so that the bread in it self is not his flesh, and the wine his
blood, but unto them that worthily eat and drink the bread and wine, to them
the bread and wine be his flesh and blood, that is to say, by things natural
and which they be accustomed unto, they be exalted unto things above nature.
For y^ sacramental bread and wine be not base and naked figures, but so pithy
and effectuous, that whosoever worthily eats them, eats spiritually
Christ's flesh and blood, and has by them everlasting life.

Wherefore, whosoever comes to the Lords table, must come with all humilitee,
fear, reverence and purity of life, as to receive not only bread and wine,
but also our savior Christ, both God and man, with all his benefits, to the
relief and suste^tacion both of their bodies and souls.

This is briefly the sum and true meaning of Damascene, concerning this
matter.

Wherefore they that gather of him, either the natural presence of Christ's body
in the sacraments of bread and wine, or the adoration of the outward and
visible sacrament, or that after the co^secracion there remains no bread nor
wine nor other substance but only the substance of the body and blood of
Christ: either they understand not Damascen, or else of wilful frowardnes they
will not understand him: which rather seems to be true, by such
collections as they have unjustly gathered and noted out of him.

For although he say, that Christ is the spiritual meat, yet as in baptism
the holy ghost is not in the water, but in him that is unfeignedly baptized: so
Damascene meant not yt Christ is in the bread, but in him yt worthily eats the
bred.

And though he say that the bread is Christ's body, and the wine his blood, yet
he mente not that the bread considered in it self, or the wine in it self,
being not received, is his flesh and blood: but to such as by unfeigned faith
woorthely receive the bread and wine, to such the bread and wine, are called
by Damascene the body and blood of Christ, because that such persons,
through the workyng of the holy ghost, be so knytte and united spirituallye to
Christ's flesh and blood, and to his diuinitee also, that they be fed with
them unto everlasting life.

Furthermore Damascene says not that the sacrament should be worshipped and
adored, as the Papists term it (which is plain ydolatrye) but we must
worship Christ God and man. And yet we may not worship him in bread and wine,
but sittyng in heaven with his father, and being spiritually within our selves.

Nor he says not, that there remains no bread nor wine, nor none other
substance, but only the substance of the body and blood of Christ: but he
says plainly, that as a burning coal is not wodde only, but fire and wodde
joined together. so the bread of the Communion is not bread only, but bread
joined to the diuinitee. But those that say, that there is none other substance
but the substance of the body and blood of Christ, do not only deny that
there is bread and wine, but by force they must deny also, that there is
either Christ's diuinitee or his soul. For if the flesh and blood, the soul
and diuinitee of Christ be four substances, and in the sacrament be but two
of them, that is to say, his flesh and blood, than where be his soul and
diuinitee? And thus these men divide Jesus, separatyng his diuinitee from his
humanitee. Of whom saint Ihon says, Ioh. 4.
Whosoever divides Jesus, is not of God, but he is Antichrist.

And moreover these men do so separate Christ's body from his members in the
sacrament, that they leave him no man's body at all. For as Damascene says, In
librode duabus in Christo v^^l^ntatibus*
that the distinction of members pertayne so much to the nature of a man's
body, that where there is no such distinction, there is no perfect man's body.

But by these Papists doctrine, there is no such distinction of members in
the sacrament, for either there is no head, fete, hands, arms, legs,
mouth, eyes, and nose at all: or else all is head, all feet, all hands,
all arms, all legs, all mouth, all eyes, and all nose. And so they make of
Christ's body, no man's body at all.

Thus being confuted the Papists errors as well concerning
Transubstantiation, as the real, corporal and natural presence of Christ in
the sacrament, which were two principal points purposed in the beginning of
this work. Now it is time some thing to speak of the third error of the
Papists, which is concerning the eating of CHRIST'S very body and drynkyng
of his blood.

Thus ends the third book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK IS OF THE EATING AND DRINKYNG OF the body and blood of our
Savior Christ.
Chap. 1.
THE GROSS error of the Papists, is of the carnal eating and drynkyng of
Christ's flesh and blood, Whether ill men to eat and drink Christ.
with our mouths.

For they say, that whosoever eat and drink the sacraments of bread and
wine, do eat and drynk also with their mouths Christ's very flesh and blood,
be they never so ungodly and wicked persons. But Christ him self taught
clean contrary in the.vi. of John, yt we eat not him carnally with our
mouths, but spiritually with our faith, The god lie only eat Christ.
saying: Uerely verily I say unto you: he yt believes in me, has everlasting
life. I am ye bread of life. Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, and
died. This is the bread that came from heaven, that who so ever shall eat
thereof, shall not dye. I am the lively bread that came from heaven, If any man
eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. And the bread which I will give, is
my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

This is the most true doctrine of our savior Christ, that who so ever
eats him, shall have everlasting life. And by and by it follows in the same
place of John more clearly. Ueryly verily I say unto you, except you eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in
you. John. 6.
He that eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, has life everlasting, and I
will raise him again at the last day: For my flesh is very meat, and my
bloudde is very drink, He that eats my flesh, and drynketh my blood,
dwells in me, and I in him. As the living father has sent me, and I live by
the father, even so he that eats me, shall live by me. This is the bread
which came down from heaven, not as your fathers did eat Manna, and are
dead, he that eats of this bread, shall live for ever.

This taught our savior Christ as well his disciples as the Jews at
Capernaum, that the eating of his flesh and drynkyng of his blood was not
like to the eating of Ma^na. For both good and badde did eat Manna, but none
do eat his flesh and drink his bloudde, but they have everlasting life. For
as his father dwells in him, and he in his father, and so has life by his
father: so he that eats Christ's flesh and drynketh his blood, dwells in
Christ and Christ in him, and by Christ he has eternal life.

What need we any other witness? wha^ Christ him self does testify the
matter so plainly, that who so ever eats his flesh and drynketh his blood,
has everlasting life? and that to eat his flesh and to drink his blood, is
to believe in him? And who so ever believes in him, has everlasting life.
Whereof it follows necessaryly, that ungodly persons (being lymmes of the
devil) do not eat Christ's flesh nor drink his blood, except the Papists
would say, that such have everlasting life.

But as the dyuell is the food of the wicked, which he nourishes in all
iniquitee, and brings up into everlasting damnation: so is Christ the very
fode of al them that be the lively members of his body, and them he norisheth,
fedeth, brings up and cherishes unto everlasting life

Chap. 2.
And every good and faithful christian man feels in him self, bow he
feeds of Christ, eating his flesh, What is the eating of Christ's flesh
and drinking of his blood.
and drynkyng his blood. For he puts the hole hope and trust of his
redemption and salvation in that only sacrifice, which Christ made upon the
Cross, having his body there broken, and his blood there shed for the
remission of his sins. And this great benefit of Christ, the faithful man
earnestly considers in his mind, chaweth and digesteth it with the stomach
of his heart, spiritually receauynge Christ wholly into him, and gyuyng again
him self wholly unto Christ.

And this is the eating of Christ's flesh and drinkyng of his blud, the felyng
whereof is to every man, the felyng how he eats and drynketh Christ, which
none evil man nor member of the devil can do

Chap. 3.
For as Christ is a spiritual meat, so is he spritually eaten and digested
with the spiritual part of us, Christ is not eaten with teeth but with (...)
and gives us spiritual and eternal life, and is not eaten, swalowed, and
dygested with our teeth, tungues, throtes and bealyes.

Therefore says S. Cyprian, Cyprianus de coena Domini.
he that drynketh of the holy cup, remembrynge this benefit of God, is more
thirsty than he was before. And lifting up his heart unto the living God, is
taken with such a singular hunger and appetite, that he abhors all gally
and bitter drynkes of sin, and al savor of carnal pleasure is to him as it
were sharp and sour vinegar. And the sinner being converted, receauyng the
holy mysteries of the Lords supper, gives thanks unto God, and boweth down
his head, knowing that his sins be forgeuen, and that he is made clean and
perfect, and his soul (which God has sanctified) he renders to God again
as a faithful pledge, and than he glor^eth with Paul, and reioyseth, saying:
Now it is not I that live, but it is Christ that lives within me. These
things be practiced and used among faithful people, and to pure minds, the
eating of his flesh is no horror but honor, and the spirit delyteth in the
drynkyng of the holy and sanctifyenge blood. And dooyng this, we whette not
our teethe to byte but with pure faith we break the holy bread. These be the
words of Cyprian.

And acording unto the same S. Austen says, August^ de v^^bis ^omini se^m. 33.
In Joan. tracta. 25.
Prepare not thy jaws, but thy heart. And in an other place (as it is cited of
him) he says, why do thou prepare thy belly and thy teeth? believe, and thou
have eaten. But of this matter is sufficiently spoken before, where it is
proved, that to eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood, be figurative
speeches.

Cha. 4.
And now to return to our purpose, that only the lively members of Christ do
eat his flesh and drink his blud, The Good only eat Christ.
I shall bring forth many other places of ancient authors before not me^cioned.

First Origin writes plainly after this manner. The word was made flesh and
very meat, Origenes in Math* ca. 15.
which whosoever eats, shall surely live for ever, which no evil man can eat.
For if it could be, that he that contynueth evil, might eat the word made
flesh, seeing that he is the word and bread of life, it should not have been
written: Whosoever eats this bread shall live for ever. These words be so
plain, that I need say nothing for the more clear declaracion of them.
Wherefore you shall hear how Cyprian agrees with him.

Cyprianus in sermon de coena domi^i.
Cyprian in his sermon ascribed unto him of the Lords supper, says: The author
of this tradicion said, that except we eat his flesh and drink his blood, we
should have no life in us, instructyng us with a spiritual lesson, and openyng
to us a way to understand so privy a thing, that we should know, that the
eating is our dwelling in him, and our drinkyng is as it were an incorporation
in him, being subject unto him in obedience, joined unto him in our wylles,
and united in our affections. The eating therefore of this flesh, is a
certain hunger and desire to dwell in him.

Thus writes Cyprian of the eating and drynkyng of Christ. And a little after
he says, that none do eat of this lamb, but such as be true Israelites,
that is to say, pure christian menue without color or dissimulacion.

And Athanasius speakinge of the eatinge of Christ's flesh and drinking of his
blood, Athanasius de peccato in spiritum sanctum.
says that for this cause he made mention of his asce^cion into heaven, to
pluck them from corporal fantasy, that they might learn hereafter, that
his flesh was called the celestial meat that came from above, and a
spiritual food which he would give. For those things that I speak to you
(says he) be spirit and life. Which is as much to say, as that thing
which you see, shall be slain, and given for the norishment of the world, that
it may be distributed to every body spiritually and be to all men a
conseruacion unto the resurrection of eternal life.

In these words Athanasius declares the cause why Christ made mention of his
ascension into heaven, when he spoke of the eatinge and drinking of his flesh
and blud. The cause after Athanasius mind was this, that his hearers should not
think of any carnal eating of his body with their mouths (for as concerning
the presence of his body, he should be taken from them, and ascend into
heaven, but that they should understand him to be a spiritual meat, and
spiritually to be eaten, and by that refreshing to give eternal life, which he
does to none, but to such as be his lively members.

And of this eatinge speaks also Basilius, Basilius epistola. 141.
that we eat Christ's flesh and drink his blud, being made, by his
incarnation and sensyble life, partakers of his word and wisdom. For his
flesh and bludde he called all his mystical conversation here in his flesh
and his doctrine, consistinge of his whole life, pertaininge both to his
humanity and diuinitye, whereby the soul is norished and brought to the
contemplacion of things eternal

Thus teaches Basilius how we eat Christ's flesh and drink his blud, which
pertains only to the true and faithful members of Christ.

Hieronymus in Esaiam caput. 66.
Saint hierome also says: All that love pleasure more than god, eat not the
flesh of Jesus, nor drink his bludde, of the which himself says: He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blud, has everlasting life.

^^ Hiere miam.
And in an other place S. Hierome says, that heretics do not eat and drynk
the body and bludde of the Lord.

In Oseam. caput. 8.
And moreover he says, that heretics eat not the flesh of Jesus, whose
flesh is the meat of faithful men.

Thus agrees S. Hierome with the other before rehearsed, that heretics and
such as follow wordly pleasures, eat not Christ's flesh nor drink his blud,
because that Christ said, He that eats my flesh and drinks mi blud, has
everlasting life.

Ambrosius de been dictione patriarcharum caput. 9.
And S. Ambrose says, that Jesus is ye bread which is the meat of Saints, and
that he that takes this bread, dies not a sinners death. For this bread is
the remission of sins. And in an other book to him entitled he writes
thus. This bread of life which came from heaven does minister everlasting
life, De ijs q^^ mysterijs initiantur.
and whosoever eats this bread shall not dye for ever, and is the body of
Christ.And yet in an other book set forth in his name, De sacrame^tis li.
4. ca. 5
he says on this wise: He that did eat Manna, died, but he that eats this
body, shall have remission of his sins, and shall not dye for ever. And again
he says: Lib. 5 ca. 3.
As often as thou drinkest, thou haste remission of thy sins.

These sentences of S. Ambrose be so plain in this matter, that there needs
no more, but only the rehersall of them.

But S. Augustine in many places plainlye discussing this mattier, Augustinu^
in sententijs ex prospero decerptis cap. 339,
says: He that agrees not with Christ, does neither eat his body nor
drink his bludde, although to the condemnation of his presumption, he receive
every day the sacrament of so high a mattier.

And moreover S. Augustine, De Ciuitate Dei lib. 21. capite. 25
most plainly resolves this matter in his book De ciuitate Dei, disputi^g
against two kinds of heretics: Whereof the one said, that as many as were
christened, and received the sacrament of Christ's body and bludde, should be
saved, how so ever they lived or believed, because that Christ said: This is
the bread that came from heaven, that whosoever shall eat thereof, shall not
dye. I am the bread of life, which came from heaven, whosoever shall eat of
this bread shall live for ever.

Therefore (said these heretics) all such men must needs be delivered from
eternal death, and at length to be brought to eternal life. The other said,
that heretics and scismatiques might eat the sacrament of Christ's body,
but not his very body, because they be no members of his body. And therefore
they promised not everlasting life, to all that received Christ's baptism, and
the sacrament of his body, but all such as professed a true faith, although
they lived never so ungodly. For such (said they) do eat the body of
Christ, not only in a sacrament, but also in deed, because they be members
of Christ's body.

But Saint Augustine aunsweringe to both these heresies, says: That neither
heretics, nor such as profess a true faith in their mouths and in their
living show the contrary, have either a true faith (which works by charity
and does none euel) or are to be counted among the members of Christ. For they
ca^ not be both members of Christ and members of the devil. Therefore (says
he) it may not be said that any of them eat the body of Christ. For when
Christ says, he that eats my flesh and drinks my bludde, dwells in me
and I in him. he shows what it is (not sacramentally, but in deed) to eat
his body and drink his bludde: which is, when a man dwells in Christ,
that Christ dwells in him. For Christ spoke those words, as if he should
say: He that dwells not in me, and in whom I dwell not let him not say or
think, that he eats my body or drinks my blood.

These be the plain words of S. Augustine, that such as live ungodly,
although they may seem to eat Christ's body (because they eat the sacrament of
his body) yet in deed they neither be members of his body, nor do eat his
body.

Also upon the gospel of saint Ihon he says, In Johan. tractatu. 26.
that he that does not eat his flesh and drink his blood, has not in him
everlasting life. And he that eats his flesh, and drynketh his blood has
everlasting life. But it is not so in those meats, which we take to sustain
our bodies. For although without them we can not live, yet it is not
necessary, that whosoever receives them, shall live, for they may dye for
age, sickness or other chances.

But in this meat and drink of the body and blood of our Lord, it is
otherwise. For both they that eat and drink them not, have not everlasting
life: And contrary wise, whosoever eat and drink them, have everlasting life.

Note and ponder well these words of saint Augustyne, that the bread and wine
and other meats and drynkes (which norishe the body) a man may eat and
nevertheless dye: but the very body and blood of Christ no man eats, but
that has everlasting life. So that wicked men can not eat nor drink them,
for then they must needs have by them everlasting life.

And in the same place saint Augustyne says further. The sacrament of the
unite of Christ's body and blood, is taken in the Lords table of some men to
life, and of some men to death: but the thing it self (whereof it is a
sacrament) is taken of all men to life, and of no man to death. And moreover he
says. This is to eat that meat and drink that drink, to dwell in Christ,
and to have Christ dwelling in him. And for that cause, he that dwells in
him. And for that cause, he that dwells not in Christ, and in whom Christ
dwells not, without doubt he eats not spiritually his flesh nor drynketh
his blood, although carnally and visibly with his teethe, he byte the sacrament
of his body and blood.

Thus writes saint Augustyne in the xxvi. Homely of saint Ihon. And in the
next homely following, In Johan. tract. 27.
he says thus. This day our sermon is of the body of the Lord, which he said
he would give to eat for eternal life. And he declared the manner of his gift
and distribution, how he would give his flesh to eat, saying: He that eats
my flesh and drynketh my blood, dwells in me and I in him. This therefore is
a token or knowledge, that a man has eaten and dronken, that is to say, if he
dwell in Christ, and have Christ dwelling in him. If he cleave so to Christ,
that he is not severed from him. This therefore Christ taught and admonished by
these mystical or figurative Words, that we should be in his body under him
our head, among his members, eating his flesh, not forsakyng his unity.

De doctrina Christiana. li. 3. cap. 14.
And in his book De doctrina Christiana, saint Augustyne says (as before is at
length declared) that to eat Christ's flesh and to drynk his blud is a
figurative speech, signifiyng the participation of his passion, and the
delectable remembrance to our benefit and profit, that his flesh was
crucified and wounded for us.

And in another sermon also De verbis Apostoli he expounds what is the eating
of Christ's body and the drinkyng of his blood, De verbis Apoctoli. sermo. 20.
saying: The eating is to be refreshed, and the drinkyng what is it but to
live? Eat life, drink life: And that shall be, when that which is taken
visibly in the sacrament, is in very deed eaten spiritually and drunken
spiritually.

By all these sentences of S. Augustyne it is evident and manifest, that all
men, good and evil, may with their mouths visibly and sensibly eat the
sacrament of Christ's body and blood, but the very body and blood them selves
be not eaten but spiritually, and that of the spiritual members of Christ,
which dwell in Christ, and have Christ dwelling in them, by whom they be
refreshed and have everlasting life.

And therefore says saint Augustyne, In Johan. Tract. 57.
that when the other Apostles did eat bread that was the Lord, yet Judas did
eat but the bread of the Lord, and not the bread that was the Lord. So that
the other Apostles with the sacramental bread did eat also Christ him self,
who^ Judas did not eat. And a great number of places more has saint Augustyne
for this purpose, which for eschewyng of tediousnes, I let pass for this
time, and will speak some thing of saint Cyrill.

Cyrillus in Johan Lib. 4 cap. 10.
Cyrill upon saint Ihon is Gospel says, that those which eat Manna, dyed,
because they received thereby no strength to live ever (for it gave no life,
but only put away bodily hunger) but they that receive the bread of life,
shall be made immortal, and shall eschew all the evils that partayne to death,
living with Christ for ever.And in another place he says. ^ap. 18.
Forasmuch as the flesh of them to Christ does naturally give life,
therefore it makes life, that be partakers of it. For it puts death away
from them, and utterly dryueth destruction out of them.

Cap. 14.
And he concludes the matter shortly in another place in few words, saying,
that when we eat the flesh of our savior, then have we life in us. For if
things that were corrupt, were restored by only touching of his clothes, how
can it be, that we shall not live that eat his flesh? And further he says,
Cap. 17.
that as two waxes that be molten together, do ru^ne every part into other: so
he that receives Christ's flesh and blood, must needs be joined so with him,
that Christ must be in him, and he in Christ.

Here saint Cyrill declares the dignitee of Christ's flesh, being
inseperately annexed unto his diuinitee, saying, that it is of such force and
power, that it gives everlasting life. And whatsoever occasion of death it
fyndeth, or let of eternal life, it puts out and dryueth clean away all the
same, from them that eat that meat and receive that medicine. Other medicines
or plasters sometime heal, and sometime heal not, but this medicine is of that
effect and strength, that it eats away all rotten and dead flesh, and
perfectely heals all wounds and sores, that it is laid unto.

This is the dignity and excellency of Christ's flesh and blood joined to
his divinity, of the which dignytie, Christ's adversaries the Papists,
deprive and rob him when they affirm, that such men do eat his flesh and
receive this plaster, as remain still sick and sore, and be not helped
thereby.

And now for corroboration of Cyrils saying, Chap. 5.
I would thus reason with the Papists, and demand of them, When an
unrepentant sinner receives the sacrament, whether he have Christ's body
within him or no?

If they say no, than have I my purpose, that euel men although they receive
the sacrament of Christ's body, yet receive they not his very body. If they
say yea, Then I would ask them further, Whether they have Christ's spirit with
in them or no?

If they say nay, then do they separate Christ's body from his spirit, and his
humanitye from his divinity, and be condemned by the scripture as very
Antichrists that divide Christ.

And if they say yea, that a wicked man has Christ's spirit in him, then the
scripture also condemns them, Roman. 8.
saying: that as he which has no spirit of Christ's, is none of his, so he
that has Christ in him, lives because he is justified. And if his spirit
that raised Jesus from death dwell in you, he that raised Christ from death,
shall give life to your mortal bodies, for his spirits sake, which dwells
in you.

Thus on every side the scripture condemns the adversaries of gods word.

And this wickedness of the Papists is to be wondered at, that they affirm
Christ's flesh, blud, soul, holy spirit, and his deite to be a man, that is
subject to sin, and a limme of the devil. They be wonderful iuglers and
coniurers, that with certain words can make god and the dyuell to dwell
together in one man, and make him both the temple of god, and the temple of the
devil. It apeareth that they be so blind, that they can not see y^ light from
darkness: Beliall from Christ, nor the table of y^ lord, from the table of
devils. Thus is confuted this third intolerable error and heresye of the
Papists, That they which be the lymmes of the devil, do eat the very body
of Christ, and drink his bludde, manifestly and directly contrary to the
words of Christ himself, who says: Who so ever eats my flesh and drinks
my bludde, has everlasting life.

Chap. 6.
But least they should seem to have nothing to say for themselves, The
answer to y^ Papists 1. Cor. 11.
they alleag S. Paul in the eleventh to the Corinth. where he says: He that
eats and drinks vnwortheli, eats and drinks his own damnation, not
discerninge the lords body.

But S. Paul in that place speaks of the eatinge of the bread and drinkinge
of the wine, and not of the corporal eating of Christ's flesh and blud, as it
is manifest to every man that will read the text. For these be the words of S.
Paul: Let a man examine himself, and so eat of the bread and drynk of the
cup, for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own
damnation, not discerninge the Lords body.

In these words S. Paul's mind is, that for as much as the bread and wine in
the Lords supper, do represent unto us the very body and blud of our savior
Christ, by his own institution and ordinance, therefore although he sit in
heaven at his fathers right hand, yet should we come to this mystical bread and
wine with faith, reverence, purite and fear, as we would do, if we should come
to see and receive Christ himself sensibly present. For unto the faithful
Christ is at his own holy table present, with his mighty spirit and grace,
and is of them more frutefully received, than if corporally they should receive
him bodily present. And therefore they that shall worthily come to this gods
board, must after due trial of themselves, considre first, who ordained this
table, also what meat and drink they shall have that come thereto, and how
they ought to behave themselves thereat. He that prepared the table is Christ
himself. The meat and drink wherewith he feeds them that come thereto as
they ought to do, is his own body* flesh and blud. They that come thereto,
must occupy their minds in considering how his body was broken for them,
and his blud shed for their redemption. and so ought they to approache to this
heavenly table with all humblenes of heart, and godlynes of mind, as to the
table wherein Christ himself is given. And they that come otherwise to this
holy table, they come unworthily, and do not eat and drink Christ's flesh and
blud, but eat and drink their own damnacion: because they do not duly
considre Christ's very flesh and blud, which be offered there spiritually to be
eaten and drunken, but dispising Christ's most holy supper, do come thereto as it
were to other meats and drinks, without regard of the lords body, which is
the spiritual meat of that table.

Chap. 7.
But here may not be passed over the answer unto certain places of ancient
Authors, which at the first show, The answer to the Papists authors
seem to make for the Papists purpose, that euel men do eat and drink the
very flesh and bludde of Christ. But if those places be truly and throughely
waied, it shall appear, that not one of them makes for their error, that
euel men do eat Christ's very body.

Augustinus contra Cresconium lib. 1 cap. 25.
The first place is of S. Augustine contra Cresconium gra^maticum, where he says,
that although Christ himself say, He that eats not my flesh and drinks
not my bludde, shall not have life in him. yet does not his apostels teach
that the same is pernicious to them which use it not well? for he says:
Whosoever eats the bread and drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily
shall be gylty of the body and blood of the Lord.

In which words S. Augustyne seems to conclude, that as well the evil as the
good do eat the body and blood of Christ, although the evil have no benefit
but hurt thereby.

But consider the place of S. Augustyne diligently, and then it shall evidently
appear, that he meant not of the eating of Christ's body, but of the sacrament
thereof. For the intent of saint Augustyne there, is to prove that good things
avail not to such persons, as do evil use them, and that many things which
of them selves be good, and be good to some, yet to other some they be not
good. As that light is good for whole eyes, and hurts soore eyes: that meat
which is good for some, is evil for other some: One medicine heals some, and
makes other sick. One harnes does arm one, and combreth another: one coat
is mete for one, and to straight for another. And after other examples, at the
last S. Augustyne shows the same to be true in the sacraments, both of
Baptism and of the Lords body, which he says do profit only them, that
receive the same worthily.

And the words of saint Paul, which saint Augustyne cites, do speak of
the sacramental bread and cup, and not of the body and blood. And yet saint
Augustyne calls the bread and the cup, the flesh and blood, not that they
be so in deed, but that they so signify, As he says in another place contra
Maximinum.

Contra Maximinu^. lib. ^. cap. 22
In sacraments (says he) is to be considered, not what they be, but what they
show. For they be signs of other things, being one thing, and signifiyng
another.

Therefore as in baptism, those that come faynedly and those that come
unfeignedly, both be washed with the sacramental water, but both be not washed
with the holy ghost, and clothed with Christ: so in the Lords supper, both
eat and drink the sacramental bread and wine, but both eat not Christ
himself, and be fed with his flesh and blood, but those only which
worthily receive the sacrament.

De bap. contra Donast. lib. 5. ca. 8.
And this answer will serve to another place of saint Augustyne against the
Donatistes, where he says, that Judas received the body and blood of the
Lord. For as S. Augustyne in that place speaks of the sacrament of Baptism,
so does he speak of the sacrament of the body and blood, which nevertheless
he calls the body and blood, because they signify and represent unto us the
very body, flesh and blood.

Chap. 8.
And (as before is at length declared) a figure has the name of the thing that
is signified thereby. Figures be called by the names of the things which they
signify,
As a man's image is called a man, a Lions image, a Lion: a birds image, a
bird: and an image of a tree and herb, is called a tree or herb. So were we
wont to say, Our lady of Walsyngham: Our lady of Ipiswyche: Our lady of Grace:
Our lady of pytie: saint Peter of Myllan: Saint Ihon of Amyas. and such
like, not meaning the things them selves, but calling their images by the name
of the things by them preprese^ted. And likewise we were wont to say, Great
saint Christopher of York or Lyncolne: Our lady smyleth, or rocketh her
child: Let us go in Pilgrymage to saint Peter at Rome, and saint James in
Compostella, And a thousand like speeches, which were not understand of the
very things, but only of the images of them.

So does saint Ihon Chrysostom say, that we see Christ with our eyes,
touch him, feel him, and grope him with our hands, fix our teethe in his
flesh, taste it, break it, eat it, and digest it, make read our tongues and
dye them with his blood, and swalowe it, and drink it.

And in a Cathechisme by me translated and set forth, I used like manner of
speech, saying, that with our bodily mouths we receive the body and blood of
Christ. Which my saying diverse ignorant persons (not used to read old
ancient authors, nor acquainted with their phrase and manner of speech) did
carpe and reprehende, for lack of good understanding.

For this speech, and other before rehearsed of Chrysostom, and all other
like, he not understand of the very flesh and blood of our savior Christ
(which in very deed we neither feel nor see) but that which we do to the
bread and wine, by a figurative speech, is spoken to be done to the flesh
and blood, because they be the very signs, figures and tokens instituted of
Christ, to represent unto us, his very flesh and blood.

And yet as with our corporal eyes, corporal hands and mouths we do
corporally see, feel, taste, and eat the bread, and drink the wine (being
the sign and sacraments of Christ's body,) even so with our spiritual eyes,
hands and mouths, we do spiritually see, feel, taste, and eat his very
flesh and drink his very blood.

Eusebius Emissenus. in sermo. de Eucharistia
As Eusebius Emissenus says: When thou come to the reverend altar to be
filled with spiritual meats, with thy faith look upon the body and blood of
him that is thy god, honor him touch him with thy mind, take him with the
hand of thy heart, and drink him with the draught of thine inward man. And
these spiritual things require no corporal presence of Christ him self, who
sytteth continually in heaven at the right hand of his father.

And as this is most true, so is it full and sufficient, to answer all things
that the Papists can bring in this matter, that has any appearance for their
party.

Chap. 9.
Now it is requisite, to speak some thing of the manner and form of
worshippyng of Christ, by them that receive this sacrament, The adoration of
the sacrament
lest that in the stead of Christ him self, be worshipped the sacrament. For
as his humanitee, joined to his diuinitee, and exalted to the right hand of
his father, is to be worshipped of all creatures, in heaven, earth, and under
the earth: (...) if in the stead thereof, we worship the signs and
sacraments, we committee as great Idolatrye as ever was, or shall be to the
worlds end.

And yet have the very Antichrists (the subtilest enemies that Christ has
(by their fine inventions and crafty scholastical diuinitee, The simple people
be deceived.
deluded many simple souls, and brought them to this horrible Idolatry, to
worship things visible, and made with their own hands, persuadyng them, that
creatures were their creator, their God and their maker.

For else what made the people to run from their seats to the altar, and
from altar to altar, and from sakeryng (as they called it) to sakeryng,
peepyng, tootyng, and gasynge at the thing, which the priest held up in his
hands, if they thought not to honor that thing, which they saw? What moved
the priests to lift up the sacrament to hye over their beads? or the people
to cry to the priest, hold up, hold up, and one man to say to an other,
stoop down before, or to say: This day I have seen my maker. And, I can not
be quiet, except I see my maker ones a day? What was the cause of al these,
and that as well the priest as the people so deuoutely did knock and kneel at
every syghte of the sacrament? but that they woorshypped that vysyble thing,
which they saw with their eyes, and took it for very God? For if they
worshypped in spirit only Christ, sitting in heaven with his father, what
needed they to remove out of their seats to toote and gaase? as the apostles
did after Christ, when he was gone up into heaven. If they worshypped nothing
that they saw, why did they rise up to see? Doubtless many of the simple people
woorshipped that thing which they saw with their eyes.

And although the subtyl Papists do color and cloak the matter never so
finely, saying that they worship not the sacraments, which they see with
their eyes, but that thing, which they believe with their faith to be really
and corporally in the sacraments, yet why do they than run from place to
place, to gase at the things which they see, if they worship them not? giuyng
thereby occasion to them that be ignorant, to worship that which they see. Why
do they not rather quietly sit still in their seats, and move the people to
do the like, woorshyppynge God in heart and in spirit, than to gadde about
from place to place, to see that thing, which they confess them selves is
not to be worshipped?

And yet to eschew one inconvenience (that is to say, the worshyppyng of the
sacrament) they fall into an other as evil, and worship* nothing there at al.
For they worship that thing (as they say) which is really and corporally, and
yet inuisibly present under the kinds of bread and wine, which (as before is
expressed and proved) is utterly nothing. And so they give unto the ignorant
occasion, to worship bread and wine, and they them selves worship nothing
there at all.

But the Papists (for their own commoditee to keep the people still in
Idolatrye) do often allege a certain place of S. Augustyne upon the Psalms,
August. in psalm. 98.
where he says, that no man does eat the flesh of Christ, except he
first worship it, and that we do not offend in worshippyng thereof, but we
should offend, if we should not worship it.

That is true, which saint Augustyne sayt^ in this place. For who is he,
that professes Christ, and is spiritually fed and nourished with his flesh
and blood, but he will honor and worship him, sittyng at the right hand of
his father, and tender unto him from the bottom of his heart, all laud,
praise and thanks, for his merciful redemption?

AND as this is most true, which saint Augustyne says, so is that most
false which the Papists would persuade upon saint Augustynes words, that
the sacramental bread and wine, or any vysyble thing is to be woorshypped in
the Sacrament. For saint Augustynes mind was so far from any such thought,
that he forbyddeth utterly to woorship Christ's own flesh and blood alone,
but in consideracion, and as they be annexed and joined to his diuinitee. How
much less than could he think or allow, that we should worship the
sacramental bread and wine, or any outward or visible sacrament? which be
shadows, figures and representacions of Christ's very flesh and bloudde.

And saint Augustine was afraid, lest in worshyppyng of Christ's very body, we
should offend, and therefore he byddeth us, when we worship Christ, that we
should not tarry and fix our minds upon his flesh (which of it self
avails nothing) but that we should lift up but our minds from the flesh to
the spirit, which gives life: and yet the Papists be not afraid by crafty
means to induce us, to worship those things, which be signs and sacraments
of Christ's body.

But what will not the shameless Papists allege for their purpose, when they
be not ashamed to maynteyne the adoration of the Sacrament, by these words of
saint Augustins? wherein he Speaks not one word of the adoration of the
sacrament, but only of Christ him self.

And although he say, that Christ gave his flesh to be eaten of us, yet he
meant not, that his flesh is here corporally present, and corporally eaten,
but only spiritually. As his words declare plainly, which follow in the same
place, where saint Augustine as it were in the person of Christ, speaks
these words.

It is the spirit that gives life, but the flesh profits nothing. The
words which I have spoken unto you, be spirit and life. That which I have
spoken, understand you spiritually. You shall not eat this body, which you
se, and drink that blud which they shall shed, that shall crucify me. I
have commended unto you a sacrament, understand it spiritually, and it shall
give you life. And although it must be visibly minystred, yet it must be
inuisibly understand.

These words of sayncte Augustine with the other before recited, do express
his mind plainly, that Christ is not otherwise to be eaten than spiritually,
(which spiritual eating requires no corporal presence) and that he
intended not to teach here any adoration, either of the visible sacraments,
or of any thing that is corporally in them. For in deed there is nothing really
and corporally in the bread to be worshipped, although the Papists say, that
Christ is in every consecrated bread

But our Savior Christ him self has given us warnyng before hand, that
such false christians and false teachers should come, and has bydde us to
beware of them, Mat. 24.
saying: If any man tell you that Christ is here, or Christ is there, believe
him not. For there shall rise false Christ's and false prophets, and shall
show many signs and wonders, so that if it were possible, the very elect
should be brought into error. Take heed, I have told you before hand.

Thus our Savior Christ (like a most loving pastor and savior of our
souls) has given us warnyng before hand, of the perils and dangers that
were to come, and to be wise and ware, that we should not give credit unto
such teachers, as would persuade us to worship a piece of bread, to kneel
to it, to knock to it, to creep to it, to follow it in Procession, to lift
up our hands to it, to offer to it, to light candels to it, to shut it up in a
cheste or box, to do all other honor unto it, more than we do unto God:
having always this pretense or excuse for our Idolatry, Behold, here is
Christ. But our savior Christ calls them false Prophets, and says:
Take heed, Mat. 24
I tell you before, Believe them not, If they say to you: Behold Christ is
abroad or in the wilderness, go not out. And if they say, that he is kept in
close places, believe them not.

And if you will ask me the question, who be those false Prophets and
seducers of the people, Cha. 10. They be the Pap^stes that have deceived the
people.
the answer is soon made: The Romish Antichrists and their adherentes, the
authors of all error, ignorance, blyndenesse, superstition, hypocrisy, and
ydolatrie.

Innocentius tertius.
For Innocentius the third (one of the most wicked men that ever was in the sea
of Rome) did ordeyne and decree, that the host should be diligently kept under
lock and keye.

Honorius tertius.
And Honorius the third, not only confirmed the same, but commanded also, that
the priests should diligently teach the people from time to time, that when
they lyfted up the breadde called the host, the people should then reverently
bow down, and that likewise they should do when the priest carries the
host unto sick folks. These be the statutes and ordynances of Rome, under
pretense of holiness, to lead the people unto all error and Idolatry: not
bringing them by breadde unto Christ, but from Christ unto bread.

But all that love and believe Christ him self, Cha. 11.
let them not think, that Christ is corporally in the breadde, An
exhortation to the true honoryng of Christ in the sacrament.
but let them lift up their hearts unto heaven, and woorshyp him, syttyng
there at the right hand of his Father. Let them worship him in them selves,
whose temples they be, in whom he dwells and lives spiritually: but in no
wise, let them worship him, as being corporally in the breadde. For he is not
in it, neither spiritually (as he is in manne) nor corporally, (as he is in
heaven) but only sacramentally, as a thing may be said to be in the
figure, whereby it is sygnyfyed.

Thus is sufficientely reproved the third pryncipall error of the Papists,
concerning the Lords supper, which is, That wicked members of the devil, do
eat Christ's very body, and drink his blood.

Thus ends the fowerth book.
THE FIFTH BOOK IS OF THE OBLATION AND SACRIfice of our Savior Christ.
Chap. 1. The sacrifice of the Mass.
The greatest blasphemye and injury that can be against Christ, and yet
uniuersally used through the Popish kingdom, is this, that the priests make
their Mass a sacrifice propitiatory, to remit the sins as well of them
selves, as of other both quick and dead, to who^ they list to apply the same.
Thus under pretense of holiness, the Papistical priests have taken upon them to
be Christ's successors, and to make such an oblacion and sacrifice, as never
creature made but Christ alone, neither he made the same any mo times than
ones, and that was by his death upon the cross.

Chap. 2.
For as saint Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews witnesses, Although the high
priests of the old law offered many times (at the least every year ones) yet
Christ offers not him self many times, Heb. 9. The difference between the
sacrifice of Christ, and the priests of the old law.
for then he should many times have dyed. But now he offers him self but
ones, to take away, sin by that offering of him self. And as men must dye
ones, so was Christ offered ones, to take away the sins of many.

And furthermore S. Paul says, That the sacrifices of the old law, although
they were contynually offered from year to year, yet could they not take away
sin, nor make me^ perfect. For if they could ones have quieted men's
consciences, Heb. 10.
by taking away sin, they should have ceased and no more have been offered. But
Christ with ones offering, has made perfect for ever, them that be
sanctified: puttyng their sins clean out of gods remembrance. And where
remission of sins is, there is no more offering for sin.

And yet further he says, concerning the old testament, that it was
disanulled and taken away, Heb. 7.
because of the feblenesse and unprofitableness thereof, for it brought nothing
to perfection. And the priests of that law were many, because they lived not
long, and so the priesthod went from one to an other: but Christ lives ever,
and has an everlasting priesthood, that passes not from him to any man
else. Wherefore he is able perfectly to save them that come to God by him,
for as much as he lives ever to make intercession for us. For it was meet
for us to have such an high priest, that is holy, innocent, without spotee,
separated from sinners, and exalted up above heaven: who needs not daily to
offer up sacrifice (as Aaro^s priests did) first for his own sins, and than
for the people. For that he did ones, when he offered up him self. Here in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, S. Paul has plainly and fully described unto us, the
difference between the priesthode and sacrifices of the old testamente, and
the most high and worthy priesthode of Christ, his most perfect and necessary
sacrifice, and the benefitte that comes to us thereby.

For Christ offered not the blud of calves, sheep and goats (as the priests of
the old law used to do) but he offered his own blood upon the Cross. And he
went not into an holy place made by man's hand (as Aaron did) but he ascended
up into heaven, where his eternal father dwells, and before him he makes
continual supplication for the sins of the whole world, presentynge his
own body, which was torn for us, and his precious blood, which of his most
gracious and liberal charitee, he shed for us upon the Cross.

And that sacrifice was of such force, that it was no need to renew it every
year, as the bishops did of the old testament, (whose sacrifices ^ere many
times offered, and yet were of no great effect or profit, because they were
sinners them selves that offered them, and offered not their own blood, but
the blood of brute beasts) but Christ's sacrifice ones offered, was sufficient
for evermore.

Chap. 3. Two kids of sacrifices.
And that al men may the better understand this sacrifice of Christ (which he
made for the great benefit of all men) it is necessary to know the
distinction and diuersitee of sacrifices.

One kind of sacrifice there is, which is called a Propiciatorie or merciful
sacrifice, that is to say, such a sacrifice as pacifieth Gods wrath and
indignation, and obteyneth mercy and forgeuenes for all our sins, and is the
ransom for our redemption from everlasting damnation.

And although in the old testament there were certain sacrifices called by that
name yet in very deed there is but one such sacrifice, The sacrifice of Christ.
whereby our sins be pardoned, and gods mercy and favor obtained (which is
the death of the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ) nor never was any other
sacrifice propiciatorie at any time, nor never shall be.

This is the honor and glory of this our high priest, wherein he admits
neither partner nor successor. For by his one oblation he satisfied his father
for all men's sins, and reconciled mankind unto his grace and favor. And who
soever deprive him of this honor, and go about to take it to them selves, they
be very Antichrists, and most arrogant blasphemers against God, and against
his son Jesus Christ, whom he has sent.

An other kind of sacrifice there is, which does not reconcile us to God,
but is made of them that be reconciled by Christ, to testify our duties unto
god, and to show our selves thankful unto him. And therefore they be called
Sacrifices of laud, praise and thanks geuyng.

The first kind of sacrifice Christ offered to God for us, the second kind
we our selves offer to God by Christ.

And by the first kind of sacrifice Christ offered also us unto his father,
and by the second we offer our selves and all that we have unto him and his
father.

And this sacrifice generally is our whole obedience unto God, in keeping his
laws and commandments. Of which manner of sacrifice speaks the prophet
David, Psalm. 50.
saying: A sacrifice to God is a contrite heart. And S. Peter says of all
christen people, 1. Pet. 2.
that they be an holy priesthode, to offer spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ. And S. Paul says, That always we offer unto God a
sacrifice of laud and praise by Jesus Christ. Heb. 13.


Chap. 4.
But now to speak somewhat more largely of the priesthode and sacrifice of
Christ, he was such an high bishop, A more plain declaration of the sacrifice
of Christ.
that he ones offering him self, was sufficient by ones effusion of his blud,
to abolyshe sin unto the worlds end. He was so perfect a priest, that by one
oblatio^ he purged an infinite heap of sins, leauyng an easy and a ready
remedy for all sinners, that his one sacrifice should suffice for many years,
unto all men that would not show them selves unworthy. And he took unto him
self, not only their sins that many years before were dead, and put their
trust in him, but also the sins of those, that until his coming again,
should truly believe in his gospel. So that now we may look for none other
priest nor sacrifice, to take a way our sins, but only him and his
sacrifice. And as he dyeng ones, was offered for all, so as much as pertayned
to him, he took all men's sins unto him self. So that now there remains
no mo sacrifices for sin, but extreme judgment at the last day, when he
shall appear to us again, not as a man to be punyshed again, and to be made a
sacrifice for our sins (as he was before) but he shall come in his glory,
Heb. 9.
without sin, to the great joy and comfort of them, which be purified and
made clean by his death, and continue in godly and innocent living, and to the
great terror and dread of them that be wicked and ungodly.

Thus the scripture teaches, that if Christ had made any oblation for sin
more than ones, he should have dyed more thanne ones: for as much as there is
none oblation and sacrifyce for sin, but only his death. And now there is
no more oblation for sin, seeing that by him our sins be remytted, and our
consciences quieted.

AND althowgh in the old Testament, Chap. 5.
there were certain sacrifices, called Sacryfices for sin, The sacrifices of
the old law.
yet they were no such sacrifices, that could take away our sins in the syghte
of God, but they were ceremonies, ordained to this entente, that they should
be as it were shadows and fygures, to signify before hand the excellent
sacrifice of Christ that was to comme, which should be the very true and
perfect sacrifice for the sins of the whole world.

And for this signification they had the name of a sacrifice propiciatorie, and
were called sacrifices for sins, not because they in deed took away our
sins, but because they were images, shadows, and fygures, whereby godly men
were admonyshed of the true sacrifice of Christ than to come, which should
truly abolyshe syn and everlasting death.

And that those sacrifices, which were made by the priests in the old law,
could not be able to purchase our pardon, and deserve the remission of our
sins, S. Paul does clearly affirm in his said epistle to the Hebrews, Heb.
9.
where he says: It is impossible that our sins should be taken away by the
blood of oxen and goats.

Wherefore all godly men, although they did use those sacrifices ordained of
God, yet they did not take them as things of that value and estimation, that
thereby they should be able to obteyn remission of their sins before God.

But they took them partly for fygures and tokens ordained of God, by the
which he declared, that he would send that seed, which he promised to be the
very true sacrifice for sin, and that he would receive them that trusted in
that promise, and remytte their sins for the sacrifice after to come.

And partly they used them as certain ceremonies, whereby such persons as
had offended against the law of Moses, and were cast out of the congregation,
were received again among the people, and declared to be absolved.

As for like purposes we use in the Church of Christ, sacraments by him
instituted. And this outward castyng out from the people of God, and receiuyng
in again, was according to the law and knowledge of man, but the true
reconciliation and forgeuenes of sin before God, another the fathers of the
old law had, nor we yet have, but only by the sacrifice of Christ, made in
the mount of Caluary. And the sacrifices of the old law were pronostications
and figures of the same than to come, as our sacraments be fygures and
demonstrations of the same now passed.

Now by these foresaid things may every manne easily perceive, Cha. 6.
that the offering of the priest in the Mass, The mass is not a sacrifice
propiciatorie.
or the appointyng of his ministration at his pleasure, to them that be quick
or dead, can not merit and deserve, neither to himself, nor to them for whom
he lyngeth or says, the remission of their sins: but that such Popish
doctrine is contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, and injurious to the
sacrifice of Christ.

For if only the death of Christ be the oblation, sacrifice and price wherefore
our sins be pardoned, then the act or ministration of the priest can not
have the same office. Wherefore it is an abominable blasphemy, to give that
office or dignitee to a priest, which perteyneth only to Christ: or to
affirm that the Church has need of any such sacrifice, as who should say,
that Christ's sacrifice were not sufficient for the remission of our sins:
orels that his sacrifice should hang upon the sacrifice of a priest.

But all such prestes, as pretend to be Christ's successors in making a
sacrifice of him, they be his most heinous and horrible adversaries. For never
no person made a sacrifyce of Christ, but he him self only. And therefore
saint Paul says, Heb. 7.
that Christ's priesthood can not pass from him to another. For what needs
any mo sacrifices, if Christ's sacrifice be perfect and sufficient? Heb. 8.
And as saint Paul says, that if the sacrifices and ministration of Aaron,
and other priests of that time, had lacked nothing, but had been perfect and
sufficient, then should not the sacrifice of Christ have been required (for it
had been but in vain, to add any thing to that, which of it self was
perfect) so likewise if Christ's sacrifice which he made him self be
sufficient, what need we every day to have mo and mo sacrifices? Wherefore all
Popish priests, that presume to make every day a sacrifice of Christ,
either must they needs make Christ's sacrifice vain, imperfect and
vnsufficent, or else is their sacrifice in vain, which is added to the
sacrifice, which is already of it self sufficient and perfect.

But it is a wondrous thing, to see what shifts and cautels the Popish
antichrists devise, to color and cloak their wicked erroures. And as a
chain, is so joined together, that one lynke draws an other after it, so be
vices and erroures knit together, that every one draws his fellow with him.
And so does it here in this mattier.

For the Papists (to excuse them selves) do sai, Chap. 7.
that they make no new sacrifice, A confutacion of the Papists cauillacion.
nor none other sacrifice then Christ made (for they be not so blind, but
they see, that then they should add an other sacrifice to Christ's sacrifice,
and so make his sacrifice imperfect) but they say, that they make the self
same sacrifice for sin, that Christ him self made.

And here they run hedlonges into the fowlest and most heinous error that
ever was immagined. For if they make every day the same oblation and
sacrifice for sin, that Christ himself made, and the oblation that he made
was his death, and the effusion of his most preciouse bludde upon the
cross, for our redemption and price of our sins: then follows it of
necessity, that they every day slaye Christ and shed his bludde, and so be
they worse then the wicked Jews and Pharisees, which slew him, and shed his
bludde but ones.

Chap. 8.
Almighty god the father of light and truth, banish all such darkness and
error out of his church, The true sacrifice of al christian people.
with the authors and teachers thereof, or else convert their hearts unto him,
and give this light of faith to every man, that he may trust to have
remission of his sins, and be delivered from eternal death and hell, by the
merit only of the death and bludde of Christ: and that by his own faith,
every man may apply the same unto himself, and not take it at the
appoyntement of Popish priests, by the merit of their sacrifices and
oblations.

If we be in deed (as we profess) christian me^, we may ascribe this honor
and glory to no man, but to Christ alone. Wherefore let us give the whole
laud and praise hereof unto him, let us fly only to him for socour, let us
hold him fast and hang upon him, and give our selves wholly to him. And
forasmuch as he has given himself to death for us, to be an oblation and
sacrifice to his father for our sins, let us give our selves again unto him,
making unto him an oblation, not of goats, sheep, kine and other beasts that
have no reason, (as was accustomed before Christ's coming) but of a creature
that has reason, that is to sai, of our selves, not killing our own bodies,
but mortefying ye beastly and unreasonable affections, that would gladly rule
and reign in us.

So long as the law did reign, god suffered dum beasts to be offered unto
him, but now that we be spiritual, we must offer spiritual oblatio^s, in the
place of calves, sheep, goats and doves. We must kill devilish pride, furious
anger, insatiable covetousness, filthy lucre, stinking lechery, deadly hatred
and malice, foxy wilines, woluish ravening and devouring, and al other
unreasonable lusts and desires of the flesh. And as many as belong to
Christ, Galat. 5^
must crucify and kill these for Christ's sake, as Christ crucified himself
for their sakes.

These be the sacrifices of chrystian men, these hosts and oblations be
acceptable to Christ. And as Christ offered himself for us, so is it our
duties after this sort to offer our selves to him again. And so shall we not
have the name of christian men in vain, but as we pretend to belong to Christ
in word and profession, so shall we in deed be his in life and inward
affection. So that within and without we shall be altogether his, clean from al
hyporisie or dissimulacion. And if we refuse to offer our selves after this
wise unto him, by crucifiyng our own wills, and co^mittyng us wholly to the will
of god, we be most unkind people, superstitious hypocrites, or rather
unreasonable beasts, worthy to be excluded utterly from all the benefits of
Christ's oblation.

And if we put the oblation of the priest in the steed of the oblation of
Christ, Chap. 9. The Papish mass is detestable ydolatry, utterly to be
banished from al christian co^gregatio^s
refusing to receive the sacrament of his body and bludde our selves (as he
ordained) and trustinge to have remission of our sins by the sacrifice of the
priest in the Mass, and thereby also to obtain release of the pains in
Purgatory, we do not only iniurye to Christ, but also commit most
detestable ydolatry. For these be but false doctrines, without shame devised,
and feigned by wicked Popish priests, Idolatres, Monks and Friars, which for
lucre have altered and corrupted the most holy supper of the Lord, and
turned yt into manifest Idolatrye. Wherefore all godly men ought with all
their heart to refuse and abhor all such blasphemy against the son of God.

And forasmuch as in such Masses is manifest wyckednes and Idolatrye
(wherein the priest alone makes oblation satisfactorye, and applies the same
for the quick and the dead at his will and pleasure) all such popish Masses
are to be clearlye taken away out of chrystiane Churches, and the true use
of the Lords supper is to be restored again, wherein godly people assembled
together, may receive the sacrament every man for himself, to declare that he
remembers what benefit he has received by the death of CHRIST, and to
testifye that he is a membre of Christ's body, fed with his flesh and
drinking his bludde spiritually.

CHRIST did not ordain his sacraments to this use, Chap. 10 Every man ought
to receive the sacrament him self, and not one for another.
that one should receive them for another, or the priest for all the lay
people, but he ordained them for this intent, that every man should receive
them for him self, to ratify, confirm and stablishe his own faith and
everlasting salvation. Therefore as one man may not be baptized for another
(and if he be, it avails nothing,) so ought not one to receive the holy
Communion for another. For if a man be dry or hungry, he is never awhit eased,
if another man drink or eat for him: or if a man be all befyled, it healpeth
him nothing, another man to be washed for him: So avails it nothing to a man,
if another man be baptized for him, or be refreshed for him with the meat
and drink at the Lords table. And therefore said saint Peter: Actu. 2.
Let every man be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. And our savior
Christ said to the multitude: Math. 26.
Take and eat. And further he said: Drink you all of this. Whosoever therefore
will be spiritually regenerated in Christ, he must be baptized him self. And
he that will live him self by Christ, must by him self eat Christ's flesh
and drink his blood.

And briefly to conclude, he that thinks to come to the kingdom of Christ
himself, must also come to his sacraments him self, and keep his
commandments himself, and do all things that partaine to a christen man
and to his vocation himself, least if he refer these things to another man
to do them for him, the other may with as good right claim the kingdom of
heaven for him.

Chap. 11.
Therefore Christ made no such difference between the priest and the lay man,
that the priest should make oblacion and sacrifice of Christ for the lay man,
The difference between the priest and the lay man
and eat the Lords supper from him al alone, and distribute and apply it as
him likes. Christ made no such difference, but the diffre^ce that is between
the priest and the lay man in this matter, is only in the ministration: that
the priest (as a common minister of the church) does minister and distribute
the Lords supper unto other, and other receive it at his hands. But the very
supper it self, was by Christ instituted and given to the whole church, not to
be offered and eaten of the priest for other men, but by him to be delivered to
all that would duly ask it.

As in a princes house the officers and ministers prepare the table, and yet
other (as well as they) eat the meat and drink the drink: so do the priests
and ministers prepare the Lords supper, read the Gospel, and rehearse
Christ's words, but all the people say thereto: Amen. All remember Christ's
death, all give thanks to God, all repent and offer themselves an oblacion to
Christ, all take him for their Lord and savior, and spiritually feade upon
him, and in token thereof they eat the bread and drink the wine in his
mistical supper.

And this nothing diminishes the estimation and dignitee of priesthod and
other ministers of the church, The dignitee of priests.
but auaunceth and highly commends their ministracion. For if they are much
to be loved, honored and esteemed, that be the Kings Chauncelours, Judges,
officers, and ministers in temporal matters: how much than are they to be
esteemed, that be ministers of Christ's words and sacraments, and have to them
committed the keys of heaven, to let in and shut out, by the ministration of
his word and Gospel?

Now forasmuch, Chap. 12.
as I trust, that I have plainly enough set forth the propitiatory sacrifice of
our savior Jesus Christ, The answer to the Papists.
to the capacitee and comfort of all men that have any understanding of
Christ, and have declared also the heinous abhominacion and Idolatry of the
Popish Mass (wherein the priests have taken upon them the office of Christ, to
make a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the people) and have also told
what manner of sacrifice christen people ougt to make, it is now necessary to
make answer to the subtle persuacions and sophistical cauillacions of the
Papists, whereby the have deceived many a simple manne, both learned and
unlearned.

The place of saint Paul unto the Hebrews (which they do cite for their
purpose) makes quite and clean against them. Hebre. 5
For where saint Paul says, that every high priest is ordained to offer
gifts and sacrifices for sins. he spoke not that of the priests of the New
testament, but of the old, which (as he says) offered calves and goats. And
yet they were not such priests, that by their offerynges and sacrifices they
could take away the peoples sins, but they were shadows and figures of
Christ, our everlasting priest, which only by one oblacion of himself takes
away the sins of the world. Wherefore the Popish priests, that apply this
text unto them selves, do directly contrary to the meaning of saint Paul, to
the great injury and prejudice of Christ, by whom only saint Paul says, that
the sacrifice and oblacion for the sin of the whole world was accomplished
and fulfilled.

And as little serves for the Papists purpose the text of the Prophet
Malachie, Mal. 1.
that every where should be offered unto God a pure sacrifice and oblation. For
the prophet in that place spoke no word of the Mass, nor of any oblacio^
propitiatory to be made by the priests, but he spoke of the oblation of all
faithful people (in what place soever they be) which offer unto God, with
pure hearts and minds, sacrifices of laud and praise: propheciyng of the
vocacion of the Gentyles, that God would extend his mercy unto them, and not
be the God only of the Jews, but of all nations, from East to West, that with
pure faith call upon him, and glorify his name.

But the adversaries of Christ, Chap. 13.
gather together a great heap of authors, which (as they say) call the Mass
or holy communion a Sacrifice. An answer to the authors.
But all those authors be answered unto in this one sentence, that they called
it not a sacrifice for sin, because that it takes away our sin (which
was taken away only by the death of Christ) but because it was ordained of
Christ to put us in remembrance of the sacrifice made by him upon the cross.
And for that cause it bears the name of that sacrifice, as S. Augustine
declares plainlye in his Epistle ad Bonifacium, Augustinu^ ad Bonifac.
before rehearsed in this book, fol. 64. And in his book De fide ad Petrum
diaconum before rehearsed also. De ciuitat. lib. 10. cap. 5
And in his book De ciuitate Dei, he says. That which men call a sacrifice,
is a sign or representacion of the true sacrifice.

And the Master of the sentence (of whom all the school authors take their
occasion to write) judged truly in this point, Lombardu^ li. 4. did. 12
saying: That which is offered and consecrated of the priest, is called a
sacrifice and oblation, because it is a memory and representacion of the true
sacrifice and holy oblation made in the altar of the cross.

And S. John Chrysostom, Chrysostom. ad Heb. ^o. 17
after he has said that Christ is our Bishop, which offered that sacrifice
that made us clean, and that we offer the same now, least any man might be
deceived by his manner of speakinge, he opens his meaning more plainly,
saying: That which we do, is done for a remembrance of that which was
done by Christ. For Christ says: Do this in remembrance of me. Also
Chrysostom declaring at length, that ye priests of the old law offered ever
new sacrifices, and changed them from time to time, and that christian people
do not so, but offer ever one sacrifice of Christ: yet by and by (lest some me^
might be offended with this speech) he makes as it were a correction of his
words, saying: But rather we make a remembrance of Christ's sacrifice. As
though he should say: Although in a certain kind of speech we may sai, yt
every day we make a sacrifice of Christ, yet in very deed, to speak
properly, we make no sacrifice of him, but only a co^memoration and remembrance
of that sacrifice. which he alone made, and never none but he. Nor Christ
never gave this honor to any creature, yt he should make a sacrifice of him, nor
did not ordain the sacrament of his holy supper, to the intent yt either the
people should sacrifice Christ again, or that ye priests should make a sacrifice
of him for ye people: but his holy supper was ordained for this purpose, that
every man eating and drinking thereof, should remember that Christ died for him,
and so should exercise his faith, and comfort him self by the remembrance of
Christ's bnefites, and so give unto Christ most hearty thanks, and give himself
also clearly unto him.

Wherefore ye ordinance of Christ ought to be followed, ye priest to minister the
sacrament to ye people, and they to use it to their consolation. And in this
eating, drinking and using of the lords supper, we make not of Christ a new
sacrifice propitiatory for remission of sin.

But the humble confession of al penitent hearts, Chap. 14.
their knowledgyng of Christ's benefytes, The lay persons make a sacrifice as
well as the priest.
their thanks giving for the same, their faith and consolation in Christ,
their humble submission and obedience to gods will and commandments, is a
sacrifice of laud and praise, accepted and allowed of god no less, then the
sacrifyce of the priest. For almighty god without respect of person, accepts
the oblatyon and sacrifyce of priest and lay person, of king and subject, of
master and servant, of man and woman, of young and old, yea of English,
French, Scot, Greek, Latin, Jew and Gentyle, of every man accorig to his
faithful and obedient heart unto him, and that through ye sacrifice
propiciatory of Jesus Christ.

And as for the sayi^g or singing of Mass by ye priest, Chap. 15
as it was in time passed used, The Papistical mass is neither a sacrifice
propiciatorye, nor of thanks giuinge Luce. 16.
it is neither a sacrifyce propiciatorye, nor yet a sacrifyce of laud and
praise, nor in any wise allowed before god, but abominable and detestable, and
thereof may well be verefied the saying of CHRIST: That thing which seems an
high thing before men, is abhominacion before God.

They therefore which gather of the doctors, that the Mass is a sacrifice for
remission of syn, and that it is applied by the priest to them, for whom he
says or sings: they which so gather of the doctors, do to them most
grievous injury and wrong, most falsely belying them.

Chap. 16.
For these monstrous things were never seen nor known of the old and
primitive church, There was no papisticall Masses in the Primative church.
nor there was not than in one Church many Masses every day, but upon
certain days there was a common table of the lords supper, where a number of
people did together receive y^ body and blud of the lord: but there were then
no daily private Masses, where every priest received alone, like as until this
day there is none in the Greek churches but one common Mass in a day. Nor
the holy fathers of the old church would not have suffered such ungodly and
wicked abuses of the Lords supper.

But these private Masses sprange up of late years, partelye through the
ignorance and supersticion of unlearned Monks and Friars, (which knew not
what a sa^ifyce was, but made of the Mass a sacrifice propiciatorye, to
remytte both sin and the pain due for the same) but chiefly they sprange of
lucre and gain, when priests found the means to sell Masses to the people,
which caused Masses so much to increase, that every day was said an
infinite number, and that no priest would receive the communion at an other
priests hand, but every one would receive it alone: neither regardyng the
godly decree of the most famous and holy counsel of Nice (which appoints in
what order priests should be placed above Deacons at the Communion, Consilium
Niconum caput. 14.
) nor yet the Canones of the Apostles, Canones Apostolorum Cap. 8.
which command that when any Communion is ministered, all the priests
together should receive the same, or else be excomunicate. So much the old
fathers mislyked, that any priest should receive the sacrament alone.

Therefore when the old fathers called the Mass or supper of the Lord a
Sacrifice, they meant that it was a sacrifice of lauds and thanks geuyng (and
so as well the people as the priest do sacrifice) or else that it was a
remembrance of the very true sacrifice propitiatorye of Christ: but they meant
in no wise that it is a very true sacrifice for sin, and applicable by the
priest to the quick and dead.

For the priest may well minister Christ's words and sacraments, to all men
both good and bad, but he can apply the benefit of Christ's passion to no man
(being of age and discrecion) but only to such as by their own faith do
apply the same unto them selves. So that every man of age and discrecion,
takes to him self the benefits of Christ's passion or refuses them,
himself, by his own faith, quick or dead. That is to say, by his true and
lively faith (that works by charitee) he receives them, or else by his
ungodliness or feigned faith rejected them.

And this doctrine of the scripture clearly co^dempneth the wicked inue^cions
of the Papists in these latter days, which have devised a purgatory to
torment souls after this life, and oblations of Masses said by the priests,
to deliver them from the said torments, and a great number of other
commodities do they promise to the simple ignorant people by their Masses.

Cha. 17.
Now the nature of man being ever prone to Idolatry from the beginning of the
world, The causes and means how papistical Masses entered into ye church.
and the Papists being ready by all means and policy to defend and extol the
Mass for their estimacion and profit, and the people being superstitiously
enamored and doted upon the Mass, (because they take it for a present remedy
against all manner of euyls,) and part of the princes being blinded by
Papistical doctrine, part loving quietness, and loathe to offend their clergy
and subjects, and all being captive and subject to the Antichrist of Rome,
the state of the world remainyng in this case, it is no wonder that abuses
grew and increased in the church, that superstition with Idolatry were taken
for godlynes and true religion, and that many things were brought in without
the authoritee of Christ.

The abuses of the papisticall Masses.
As Purgatory, the oblacion and sacrifisyng of Christ by the priest alone, the
application and appointyng of the same to such persons as the priest would
sing or say Mass for, and to such abuses as they could devise, to deliver
some from Purgatory, and some from hell, (if they were not there finally by God
determined to abide, as they termed the matter) to make rain or fair wether,
to put away the plage and other syckenesses both from man and beast, to halowe
and preserve them that went to Jerusalem, to Rome, to saint James in
Compostella, and to other places in pilgrimage, for a preservative against
tempest and thunder, against peryls and dangers of the sea, for a remedy
against morren of cattle, against pensiveness of the heart, and against all
manner affliction and tribulacion.

And finally, they extol their Masses far above Christ's passion: promisyng
many things thereby, which were never promised us by Christ's passion. As
that if a man hear Mass, he shall lack no bodily sustenance that day, nor
nothing necessary for him, nor shall be let in his journey, he shall not lose
his sight that day, nor dye no sodayn death, he shall not wax old in that
time that he hears Mass, nor no wicked spirits shall have power of him, be
he never so wicked a man, so long as he looks upon the sacrament. All these
folishe and deuilishe superstitions, the Papists of their own idle brain
have devised of late years, which devises were never known in the old
church.

And yet they cry out against them that profess the gospel, Chap. 18.
and say that they dissent from the church, Which Church is to be followed.
and would have them to follow the example of their church. And so would they
gladly do, if the Papists would follow the first church of the Apostles,
which was most pure and incorrupte, but the Papists have clearly va^ied
from the usage and examples of that church, and have invented new devises of
their own brains, and will in no wise consent to follow the primitive
church, and yet they would have other to follow their church, utterly variyng
and dissentyng from the first most godly church.

But thanks be to the eternal God, the manner of the holy Communion (which is
now set forth within this Realm) is agreeable with the institution of
Christ, with saint Paul and the old primitive and Apostolic church, with
the right faith of the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross for our
redemption, and with the true doctrine of our salvation, iustificacion and
remission of all our sins by that only sacrifice.

A short instruction to the holy communion
Now rests nothing, but that all faithful subjects will gladly receive and
embrace the same, being sorry for their former ignorance, and every man
repentyng him self of his offenses against God, and amendyng the same, may
yield himself wholly to God, to serve and obaye him all the days of his life,
and often to come to the holy supper, which our Lord and savior Christ has
prepared: And as he there corporally eats the very bread and drynketh the very
wine, so spiritually he may feade of the very fleashe and blood of Jesus Christ
his savior and redemer, remembryng his death, thankyng him for his benefits,
and lokyng for none other sacrifice at no pristes hands for remission of his
sins, but only trustyng to his sacrifice, which being both the high priest,
and also the lamb of God (prepared from the beginning to take away the sins
of the world) offered up himself ones for ever, in a sacrifice of sweet smell
unto his father, and by the same paid the ransom for the sins of the whole
world. Who is before us entered into heaven, and sits at the right hand of
his father, as patron, mediator and intercessour for us. And there has
prepared places for all them that be lively me^bres of his body, to reign
with him for ever, in the glory of his father, to whom with him, and the holy
ghost, be glory, honor and praise for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
CERTAIN FAVTES.
Leaf Page Line Read 23 2 in the margent ^^de Irenaeus contra Valentinum libro.
4. cap. 34. 48 1 2 Corporally generated increase, and grow. etc. 59 1 4 Christ
called not bread his body. 72 2 16 This baptism and washing by the fire and
the holy ghost, this new birth, this water that spryngeth in a man, and
flows into everlasting life, and this clothyng and buryall, can not be
understand of any material baptism, materyall washyng* material birth,
clothing and burial, but by translation of* etc. 96 2 8 For as much as the
flesh of Christ does naturally give life, therefore it makes them to live*
etc. 97 ^ 30 That as he which has not the spirit* etc

All other faults may be easyly corrected.

A TABLE OF THE CHIEF AND PRINCIPAL MATTERS Contained in this Book.
The contents of the first book.
THe abuse of the Lords supper. Fol. 1. The eating of the body of Christ.
Eodem The eating of the sacrament of his body fol. 2. Christ calls the
material bread his body fol. 4. Evil men do eat ye sacrament, but not the body
of Christ. fo. 5. Things sufficente for a christen man's faith, concerning
this sacrament Eodem The sacrament which was ordained to make love and concord
is turned into the occasion of variance and discord fo. 6. The spiritual
hunger and thirstynesse of the soul. fol. eod. The spiritual food of the
soul fol. 8. Christ far excels all corporal food fol. 9. The sacraments
were ordained to confirm our faith. eode^, Wherefore this sacrament was
ordained in bread and wine. fol. 11. The unity of Christ's mistical body Eodem
This sacrament moves all men to love and friendship. fol. 12. The doctrine of
transubstantiation does clean subvert our faith in Christ. Eodem. The
spiritual eating is with the heart, not with the teethe. fol. 13. Four
principal errors of the Papists fol. 14. The first is of transubstantiation.
fol. eod. The second is of the presence of Christ in this sacrament. fol. 15.
The third is that evil men eat and drink the very body. and blood of Christ
fol. 17. The fourth is of the daily sacrifice of Christ fol. eod.
The contents of the second book.
The confutation of the error of Tra^substantiation. fol. 17. The Papistical
doctrine is contrary to Gods word. Eode^ The Papistical doctrine is against
reason. fol. 20. The Papistical doctrine is also against our senses. fol. 21.
The Papistical doctrine is contraye to the faith of the old authors of
Christ's Church fol. 23. Transubstantiation came from Rome fol. 29. The first
reason of the Papists to prove their Transubstantiation, with the answer
thereto fol. 31. The second argument for Transubstantiation, with the
answer. fol. 33. The third^ argument, with the answer, fol. 34. Authors
wrested of the Papystes for their transubstantiation. fol. 34. Negatives by
comparison fol. 36. Absurditees that follow of transubstantiation. fol. 43.
The contents of the third book.
The presence of Christ in the sacrament fol. 45. Christ corporally is
ascended into heaven fol. ^od. The difference between the true and the
Papisticall doctrine concerning the presence of Christ's body fol. 46. The
proof whereof by our profession in our common creed. fo. 48 An other proof by
the holy scripture fo. 49 Also an other proof by ancient authors, fol. eodem.
One body can not be in diverse places at one time fol. 52. An answer to the
Papists, alledgyng for them these words, This is my body fol. 56. The
argument of the Papystes fol. eod. The interpretation of these words, This is
my body. fol. eod. Christ called bread his body, and wine his blood fo. 57.
Bread is my body, wine is my bloudde, be figurative speeches fol. 59. To eat
Christ's flesh and drink his blood, be figurative speeches fol^. eod. This is
my body: This is my bloudde, be figurative speeches fol. 62. The bread
represents Christ's body, and the wine his blood fol. eod. Signs and
fygures have the names of the things, which they sygnifie fo. 64. Five
principal things to be noted in Theodoretus. fo. 70. Figurative speeches be
not strange, fo. 71. Christ him self used figurative speeches, fol. eodem
The Paschall Lamb, folio. 72. The Lords Supper, folio eodem. What figurative
speeches were used at Christ's last supper, folio 73. Answer to the
auctoritees and arguments of the Papystes, folio 74. One brefe answer to
all, fol. eod. The aunsweres to all the doctors, folio, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79,
80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87.
The contents of the fourth book.
Whether evil men do eat and drink Christ fol. 90. The godly only eat
Christ Eodem, What is the eating of Christ's flesh, and drinkyng of his blood.
fol. 91. Christ is not eaten with teethe, but with faith Eodem. The good only
eat Christ fol. 92. The answer to the Papystes, that do affirm that the
evil do eat Christ's body etc. fo. 97. The answer to the Papystes authors,
which at the first show, seem to make for them foli. 98. Figures be called
by the names of the things which they sygnifie. fol. 99. The adoration of the
sacrament folio. 101. The simple people be deceived Eodem. They be the Papists
that have deceived the people fol. 103. An exhortation to the true honoryng of
Christ in the sacrament. foli. 104.
The contents of the fifth book.
The sacrifice of the mass fol. 104. The difference between the sacrifice of
Christ, and of the priests of the old law folio eodem Two kinds of
sacrifices fol. 106. The sacrifice of Christ, folio eodem. A more plain
declaration of the sacrifice of Christ. fo. eod. The sacrifices of the old
law fol. 107. The mass is not a sacrifice propiciatorye, fol. 108. A
confutation of the papists cauillation, fol. 109 The true sacrifice of all
christen people. Eodem The Popish Mass is detestable Idolatry, utterly to be
banished from all christen congregations. fol. 110. Every manne ought to
receive the sacrament himself, and not one for another. fol. 111. The
difference between the priest and the lay man. Eodem The answer to the
Papists, concerning the sacrifice propiciatorie fol. 112. An answer to the
authors fol. eodem The lay persons make a sacrifice as well as the priest. fol.
114 The Papistical Mass is neither a sacrifice propitiatorye, nor of thanks
geuyng. Eodem There was no Papistical Masses in the primative church Eodem The
causes and means how Papisticall Masses entered into the Church fol. 115 The
abuses of the Papisticall Masses fo. eod. What Church is to be followed fo.
116. A short instruction to the holy communyon fol. eod.
Here ends the Table


IMPRINTED at London in Poules churcheyarde, at the sign of the Brazen
serpent, by Reynold Wolf.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO DOMINI. M.D.L.


