LONDONS LAMENTATION for her Sins: AND Complaint to the LORD Her GOD.

Out of which may be picked a Prayer for Private Families, for the time of this
fearful INFECTION.

And may serve for a Help to Holiness and Humiliation for such as keep the
Fast in Private: Together with a Sovereign Receipt against the PLAGVE.

By W. C. Pastor at White chapel.

IER. 47. 6, 7. O thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be
quiet? Put up thy self unto thy scabberd, rest and be still. How can it be
quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge? etc.

LONDON, Printed for G. Fayerbeard at the North side of the Royal Exchange.
1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Lord Mayor of London, the Right Worshipful the
Sheriffs and Aldermen, and the rest of the Godly Citizens and Offiers, who
have either stayed in their Places and Duties during this Visitation: or sent
their large and comfortable Benevolence for the Poor. The Blessings of this
and a better Life.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
IT was the Ordinance and Appointment of GODS own Wisdom in the Law, that all
his Sacrifices and burnt Offerings should be seasoned with Salt, the Fire
importing Zeal, by which every Sacrifice must be offered, and the Salt
signifying Discretion with which it must be seasoned: If it wanted either of
these; it could not be accepted. Now, as this literal Fire and Salt belonged
to the Jews, so the Spiritual is both commended and commanded to us, that
live under the sweet yoke of the Gospel even to the Worlds end: Namely, that
all our Sacrifices and Service, if we mean to have them acceptable to God, or
available to our selves, must not only be offered with the Fire of holy
Zeal; but tempered with holy Wisdom, and seasoned with the Salt of due
Discretion; therefore says* Christ even in his Gospel, Mark. 9. 49
Every one shall be salted with Fire, and every Sacrifice shall be seasoned
with Salt: Whereunto Saint Paul alluding exhorts Romans 12. 2.
all Christians to see that Their Service and Sacrifice, be not only holy and
lively, but also reasonable.

Hence it is Right Honorable, and Worshipful, that as our gracious King, out
of his Humility and holy Zeal, commanded public Fasting and Prayer, for the
diuerting of this public Judgment: So now, out of holy and deep discretion
has suspended for a time those public meetings within the City: Out of no
dislike of Fasting and Prayer, nor any weariness of those holy Exercises, as
some Malignant Spirits maliciously traduce Him. But out of conscience to his
God and care of his Subjects lives: wisely considering (and in our knowledge
most truly) that seeing the sick and sore (do what we Ministers could to the
contrary) mingled themselves confusedly, with the sound (by which means its
more then manifest, many thousands have perished in this City and Suburbs.) It
therefore lay upon him as Supreme Magistrate and Gods Lieutenant to look to
the lives as well as to the Souls of all his people, and to take order, that
the Fasts ordained for the bettering of the Soul, should not so be used, as to
tend to the destruction of the body. Leaving us therefore in this distressed
City, the Lords Day or Sunday for our souls, which being of Divine
Institution, can admit no Dispensation by humane power, and still commending
and commanding us that Day to fast and pray in private, and all the Kingdom
else to do it in public for us: And for the saving of our lives, and to avoid
the tempting and provoking of God. Has wisely forbidden all other public
meetings of dangerous concourse in places Infected, till order can be taken
(which is no easy thing to do) to keep the sound and sick asunder.

Now as all those that be well are notwithstanding to repair to the Church, to
be partakers of the public Prayers and the holy service appointed for that
day, so, for a help, of Humiliation and holy Devotion to them that stay at
home, whereof also many thousand Families especially in our Suburbs are not
able to buy the Book, I have therefore been persuaded to make public this
Meditation, Confession, and Prayer, which in these days of public Calamity,
I walking hourly through the valley of the shadow of Death, (burying forty,
fifty, sometime sixty a day, and in the Total, more then two thousand
already) I poured out in the presence of my God: First, in private for my
self, afterward for the use of those many thousand sick souls that are or
have been in my great poor Parish: And lastly, that hereby I might offer some
Sacrifice and special piece of Service in way of holy thankfulness to the
Lord our God, who has hitherto pleased to preserve me, and my Brethren the
Pastors of this City by his own hand and power, beyond all humane help and
hope; walking continually, even in the midst of the fiery flames always in
danger, and never in more peril then in the Pulpit: wherein the Lord has
been so marvelous, and so magnified, his love and power upon us, as if he
should now take us away, yet has he so delivered us, in discharging our
duties, and by his holy Angels kept us, thus being in our way, till he has
literally made good that promise in the Psalm, yea, and much more: for alas
we have not only seen a thousand fall at one side of us, and ten thousand at
another, but (alas, alas, that our sins should so provoke our God) even more
then ten thousand on the one, and more then twenty thousand on the other. Which
mighty work of God, if we should sit still and swallow and superficially pass
over, and not commend it, to our Brethren in the Country, whose turns must
follow God knows how soon, as sure as God has begun with us; and if we did
not preserve the memory of it, and represent it to Posterity, for their
instruction, and that the Generations yet unborn may praise the Lord; all holy
men would accuse us, Gods Church would censure us, our own Consciences would
condemn us, and God himself take vengeance of us, as most unthankful
Caitiffes, even Monsters of Mankind, and unworthy to breath upon the Earth.

Being therefore in some sort touched with the sense of this hand of our God,
both of his hand of Justice and of Mercy, and being euerymoment put in mind of
our mortality, either by the sound in our ears, or sights in our eyes; can we
but be moved (unless we were senseless Stocks and Stoics) to take into our
serious and continual Consideration, the now most lamentable Case, of this
late so flourishing a City, and of this whole Kingdom into which this
wildfire of Gods wrath begins so fast to fly, and can we but lay to heart so
great a sorrow? Or dare we for our souls but deal truly with our God, in
seeking sincerely and carefully searching out the true cause in our selves, in
our people, and in the whole Kingdom that should thus provoke the Lord against
us? Certainly some heavy judgment must fall upon us if we do not, and will
follow them whoeuer they be that double and dissemble with their God in this
case.

And if any that be abroad and yet vnvisited, think I deal too far and too
freely in this Confession. I ask no more but to forbear his judgment, til
they be under the hand of God, as we have bin now three months and more, and
then they will judge I am too short: The while God in mercy pardon that, and
wherein I may be thought to go too far, I shall easily answer it to God or Gods
Anointed: and shall sigh and sob in secret to consider the wrath and woes that
wait for those wicked ones, who as they deeply have had their hand in pulling
down this Plague, so carelessely seek to pass it over, and look not after
the God that has smitten them, and the whole Land for their sakes, and will if
they turn not betimes, smite them down to Hell: What stony hearted Stoicke
can he be who sees more then forty thousand Christians, many as good, and some
better then Himself laid in the dust, in little more then twice forty days,
and is not humbled under the Hand that did it, and sensible of the Sin that did
procure it? Can he be a good Servant of God or Subject to his Sovereign,
that besides ten thousand aged, weak, and poor, shall see an Army of ten
thousand more, brave, lusty, and serviceable young men, and ten thousand
more comely and mariageble young women, and ten thousand more young Infants,
whose proof and hope had been still before them, already taken out of one
Corner of this Kingdom, and sits not down in dust and ashes mourning to that
God that took them, for that King that lost them, with that Land that wants
them. For that Sin that plucked them from us? I dare pronounce upon him from
God whoeuer he be that can or dare thus slightly and sliely pass by the
works of God, and laughes in his sleeue at such a judgment as this, is marked
up by God for some greater vengeance as sure as the fourteenth of Ezekiel is
Gods true Word. For if he that mournes for sin be the man that is Marked by
God for blessing and deliverance, what is he that makes a sport of sin; and
lays from his heart the Judgments thereby procured, but one that's sealed up
for confusion and destruction: O therefore that my heart were a Fountain, and
my eyes Rivers of tears, that I might worthily bewail the sins of our
Nation together with mine own, and weep for the slain of the Daughter of my
people: So cried the holy Prophet of the abundance of his holy Zeal; and so I
am sure in their several measures do all the Ministers and men of God amongst
us, that have but tasted of the same spirit, mourning for the desolations of
this City; and more for the Contagion that causes it, and most of all, for
the sins that procured them both: And who would not care to sacrifice
themselves what way the Lord should please, so the wrath of God might be
pacified toward this Church and Nation, and those plagues removed which are
the cause of this Plague: And till these be removed, we shall find the
Prophets tell us true, that either this Plague shall still stay and creep like a
Canker over our whole body, or else only make make way to some more fearful
that shall follow after it.

That this may be prevented, he cannot be a Christian that will not both cry to
God, and confess to him the public, and private, and personal sins that be
the cause thereof. And as all that are enabled and taught by the holy Spirit of
God; to pour out their souls in humble Prayer, and hearty Confession, will in
holy obedience to the holy Prophets Hos. 14. 2.
counsel; Take unto themselves words, and return unto the Lord: So for those
that cannot open their mouths as they desire, and yet have hearts that groan
after God, and souls that seek the Lord. For their assistance only have I
been persuaded to publish this, which now I leave to them, and them and it
together, with our selves to the merciful acceptance and gracious blessing of
our Good God: who grant us all in these days of danger (when sometimes almost a
thousand a day are picked up, and plucked away before our faces) So to live and
so to dye, as when we dye we may be sure to live for ever. And so to part with
one another here, as we may be sure to meet in Heaven: And here so to confess
our sins, as at the last Day Christ may confess us to be his own. And so to
pray here as we may praise God eternally in Heaven.

LONDONS LAMENTABLE COMPLAINT to her GOD. Containing, A Prayer for the time of
Infection: before confession of SIN. A Meditation upon the causes and remedy
of this Plague: A Thanksgiving for Gods mercy even in this Cross.
Most high and holy Jehovah thou being of beings, who gives life and being to
every Creature, give leave unto us, the most unworthy oues of all thy Children,
to come before thee, and present our petitions at the Throne of Grace; We
durst not rush so rudely into thy holy presence, mighty Lord God, nor beg so
boldly so great a savor, were it not that thou have graciously vouthsafed, not
only to call and inuit us, but even Matthew. 11. Psalm. 50.
command us to come unto thee, and call upon thee in the day of our affliction,
and have moreover mercifullypromised, that thou will hear us and deliver us,
that we may glorify thy great Name: In this confidence we take comfort, to
come to thee O Lord, in this day of our trouble, and common calamity of our
Church and Kingdom. And first we do all, in the name one of another, and we
for our parts, every one of us for himself, humbly and freely cousesse, we
have all had our hands in this blood, and each one borne apart, in pulling down
these heavy plagues upon this City and our Nation: O Lord we do none of us
excuse our selves, but we do every one of us accuse, and arraigue our selves
at the bar of thy Justice, and we do all pronounce our selves guilty in thy
sight: Nor are we only tainted with Original sin in our natures, but Lord our
lives are stained, with all actual pollutions, in our thoughts, words, and
deeds, by sins of Commission and Omission, by sins not only of Ignorance, but
even of negligence carelessness and presumption: Miserable sinners that we
are, we have not only committed soul and fearful things, abominable to thy
pure and holy Majesty, dishonorable to thy holy Religion, offensive to thy
holy Law, and therefore just prouocations of thy Wrath: but alas, we have
sometime totally omitted, and at the best always failed in all the good and
holy duties required at our hands: We have not been humbled for thy
judgments, nor thankful for thy mercies, as we ought to have been,
therefore thy mercies being abused, have heretofore made way for thy
Judgments, but we wicked wretches have been bettred by neither of both. Thou
have written Hos. 8. 12.
to us the great things of thy Law, but we have not regarded them, Thou have
revealed to us thy blessed Gospel, but we have not believed it; Thou have
honored us with thy love, but we have not walked worthy of it: Thou have
afforded us blessed means and many opportunities to do good, and by well
doing to come nearer unto thee, but we have, either so neglected them, or
abused them, as thereby we have done much evil instead of good: Thou have
also given us time to turns and repent, but we have turned it the wrong way,
and misspent it in vanities: Thou have she wed us the way, and offered us the
means to know and fear thee, but we have wilfully wandered in our own ways,
and have not cared to come near thee, and have put thy fear far from us,
Such sinful Caittfs are we O Lord, as the means of thy honor, we have
turned to thy dishonor, our own helps into hindrances, our Comforts into
Crosses, and our Crosses into Curses, thy Mercies into Judgments, and thy
Uisitations into vengeance: And the gracious blessings that were given us, as
helps to bring us nearer thee; We have perverted, to drive us further from
thee: Thy heavenly word, and holy Sacraments, which thou have graciously given
us, (more then to many other Nations) to be the means of our Conversion, and
Salvation, we have profaned and perverted, to our hardening in sin, and
agrauating our condemnation.

These O Lord are the common and general sins of our times, of Us, our City,
and our Nation, which as an universal deluge running over our Land, we also
have been carried away by the violence of these sinful streams: besides the
personal sins prevailing in this age, as baine swearing, inordinate drinkings,
super fluous feastings profuseness in gaming, vanity and pride in apparel,
oppressions and frauds in bargaining, profaning thy Sabbaths, neglect of thy
poor members, contempt of thy Word, and holy Ministers, formalitie in
Religion, dullness in devotion, coldness in charity; In all which O Lord and
every one of them, we are not able to excuse, much less exempt our selves,
besides also the public sins of our State, in letting our Laws be laid a
sleep against Idolatry and Superstition, whereby much Popish impiety has
not only been practiced in private, but so publicly professed, that even the
Remish Dagon did stand in defiance with thy holy Arc, whereby thy Religion
has been villified, thy Ordinances despised, thy great Name dishonored, and
thy Sauctuarie trodden under foot: Nor was this the sin alone of some set over
us, who by their places, ought rather to have defended thy truth and maintained
the Integrity thereof with their lives and blood, and yet either wickedly, or
weakly have given way to these enormities, whereby Poperte and Idolatry, were
in a sort invited and prepared for, before they came; But in this sin, like
the sin 1. Kings 14. 16.
of Jeroboam, all our Israel has sinned against the Lord of Hoasts, for alas
we have all either had our hands, or held our tongues, and not been zealous in
the cause of thee our God And when for this our profaneness and presumptions
against thee, Thou have declared thy self angry against us, both at home, and
abroad, we have been so far from fearing thee, and seeking thy face, in
Prayer, and Fasting, and holy humiliation in true contrition, and hearty
repentance: As contrariwise when other Nations were sighing, and sorrowing for
our sin and security, we were lul'd asleep, and cried peace, peace, when
there was none: And when other Churches were fasting and praying, we alas were
masking, feasting and playing: And when as thy Gospel had glutted us, so as
holy Lectures, begun to be now held, like meat out of season, and preaching
in some places to be put down, pet even then O Lord, were the Theaters
magnified, and enlarged, where Satan is served and sin secretly instilled, if
not openly professed. Thus have thou O mighty God been little better then
forgotten among us these many years: And thus has thy glorious Name been
dishonored, thy precious Religion billified, thy gracious Ordinances despised,
thy fearful Judgments neglected, thy bounteous Mercies abused, thy holy
Councels contemned, thy fatherly warnings not regarded, and thy sacred Word in
thew, and ceremony advanced, but indeed and truth trodden under foot. It is
true O Lord, we thought and spoke otherwise of our selves while our plenty
pleased us, our prosperity bewitched us, and worldly carnalities blinded us:
Then we seemed to our selves to be a glorious Nation, a beautiful Church and
outwardly appeared to be a people that did Es^y. Job.
righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinances of their God; But now that
affliction has made us wiser, and thy corrections have opened our eyes, now we
see what we are, and are ashamed of our selves: Now we cast the dust of
contempt upon our own heads, we go out of our selves, and we cry to thee in
the hearing of thy holy Angels, and all thy holy Churches upon earth, we are
unclean, we are unclean; and like unclean Le^
and loathsome Leapers deserve to be cut off from the blessed body of thy
Church, May even to be rooted out of the Land of the Living, as being the
Nation, next unto the Jews, who having been honored, and blessed by thee,
above all the World, have most dishonored thee of all other, playing with thy
Mercies, dallying with thy Judgments, and profaning all thy holy things, not
considering we are no better then the fly playing with the candle, we in our
sins being flax and stubble, and thou our God in thy fury a consuming fire.
Therefore it Heb.
is O Lord, that now thy mercies are gone aside, and given place unto thy
Justice, and thy Justice provoked has kindled thy wrath and the fire of thy
wrath being now broke out in the most fearful Pestilence this Nation ever
saw: Now our beauty is turned into Ashes, our Melody into Mourning, our Songs
into howlings, our glory into confussion of face, our triumphs into tears,
and our flourishing City into a Wilderness, there being now at our doors
nothing but death, destruction, and desolation, nothing but misery and
mourning, crying and confusion in our streets; This is our present estate O
Lord, and it is thy doing, and herein only are we happy that we see thy hand,
and know, and believe it to be thy doing: And we all confess O Lord,
righteous art Psalm. 119.
thou in all thy ways, and most just are all thy judgments: For seeing we all
offended thee, therefore now thou make us one offend another; And because we
feared not thee, thou have now justly made us afraid one of another. And
because we wickedly and carelessly misspent our time, now thou have made us
weary of our time, and brought to pass that which thou did threaten, that
in the morning we wish it were evening, and in Deu. 18. 67.
the evening that the morning would appear and as though we were either weary
of our time, or afraid of the air, we breath in we vainly wish, the long
desired Summer, would now fly fast away, and turn us over, to the cold and
careful Winter: And because we poisoned all things by our sins now thou
justly make us fear poison, in our very meat, drink, and apparel: Nay but
for thy special mercy, we are not safe in our Pues, and Pulpits in our Church:
And because we delighted not to come to thy house, now thou make us glad to
fly from our own houses. And because we cared not to come to thy house for
the food of our souls, thou have justly brought it to this, that we know not
whither to go, nor to what house safely to send for the food of our bodies:
and because we have wickedly set our hearts, upon the miserable Mammon of this
World, thou have now in Justice made a great number at their wits and, not
knowing what to do with it, where to hide it, with whom to leave it, nor whom
to trust with it, neither can they carry it with them, nor dare they tarry
with it themselves, and because they would lend nothing in Charity, they have
now none left, to lend unto at all: And now they that love it best, (by thy
wonderful Judgment) are afraid to touch it, least that which formerly
poisoned their souls, should now infect their bodies; O Lord how wonderful
are thy works, and how just are all thy Judgments.

And now, O Lord, that we see our case, and are sensible of thy hand that is
upon us, what shall we say, what shall we think might be the cause of this
so fearful a Plague? and that so merciful and pitiful a Father, is now
become so severe and angry a Judge? Shall we be so Foolish as to think it
comes because our King is not Crowned, as though former experience has not
proclaimed the contrary? Or so Profane as to ascribe it to the Summer, and
Season of the year, as though thou were not God as 1. Ki. 20. 18
well of the Winter as the Summer? Or so Proud as to think that because we
have hitherto held up thy Religion, better then some other Nations, and have in
some measure maintained the Preaching of thy Word, and have been a Sanctuary
and Refuge, For some distressed Christians of other Countries, we may
therefore with the Hypocritical Jews trust unto our external Prefession, and
cry, The Temple of the Ier.
Lord, The Temple of the Lord, as though thou had need of any Nation to keep
up the credit of thy cause? Or so Presumptuous, as to think that because thou
have taken us to be thy Church, and some of thy Children are amongst us, thou
can not therefore be angry with us? Or because we have done some good, we
may be therefore the bolder in Cuill? Or because there be some holy Lots
amongst us, therefore our Sodom cannot be consumed? O, Lord, all these be the
broken staves of Egypt, these cannot comfort us in this our Calamity. These
will not uphold us in this day of our distress, and this hour of temptation,
that thou have brought upon us: No, Lord, all these and all other like to
these, are either lies or vanities: And thy holy Prophet has told us, and we
Jonas 2.
believe it, that those who trust to lying vanities forsake their own mercies.
Therefore, O Lord, we renounce; for those our Idle and Idol conceits have
spoken vanity, our Deuiners have seen a lie, and have told false Dreams, O,
Lord, they comfort us in vain: For contrariwise thy Word has taught us, thy
Spirit informs us, and now our own Consciences tell us, that our own ways
and doings have procured this upon us, and none but our selves, and nothing but
our sins have pulled down this Plague, and that we have forsaken thee the Lord
our God, who did lead us the right way, but with thy people Israel, we have
committed two evils, we have forsaken thee, the Fountains of Living Waters, and
have hewes our selves broken Cisternes that can hold no water. Thus have we
requited thee the Lord our God, being a foolish people and unkind, therefore
now our own wickedness both correct us, and our backslidings do reprove
us, and have made us know, and see, and feel; how evil and bitter a thing it
is that we have forsaken thee the Lord our God, and that thy fear was not in
us.

And now, O Lord, that we see our case, and see also the cause of it, now what
shall we do for remedy, where shall we seek relief, whither shall we go,
to whom shall we fly, but even from thee unto thee, even from thy deserved
anger, to thy undeserved mercy? For destruction is from our selves, but
Salvation is of thee, O Lord, and thou art he that can both wound and heal,
both kill and make alive: None but thou could have laid this upon us, none
but thou can remove it from us: To thee therefore do we lift up our eyes,
O thou that dwell in the Heavens, and do beseech thee help us in this
distress, for vain is the help of Man, and though our sins plead against
us, and make thee for a time keep back thy comfort from us, pet our eyes
Psalm. 123. 2.
shall wait upon the Lord our God until he have mercy upon us: For whateuer
we Mal. 3. 6.
be, thou art the Lord that changest not, for else thy Children should be all
consumed: We therefore take comfort, and say one to Hos. 6. 1, 2.
another. Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn us, he will
heal us: He has smitten, and he will bind us up, after two days he will
revive us, in the third day he will ravse us up, and we shall live in Psalm. 22.
4.
his sight. For art not thou he in whom our Fathers trusted and were delivered?
Art not thou the God that brought thy people through the raging Sea, and
through the barren Wilderness into the Land of Peace and Plenty? Art not thou
he that saved thy Servants in the fiery Oven, in the Lions den, and in the
Whales belly? And is there not Psalm. 130. 4
mercy with thee, else there should not be left a man on the earth to fear
thee? And is not Psalm. 100. 4
that mercy of thine everlasting, and endures to al Generations? And though we
be cast into the last ends of the World, and may fears that the Storehouse of
thy mercies is exhaust and spent, yet have not thou taught us Psalm. 136.
twenty times in one Psalm, that thy mercy endures for ever? And in that
mercy, have thou not made a covenant of Peace, Parson, and Reconciliation with
the Sons of men? And have thou not sealed that Covenant, and made it firm in
the blood of thy blessed Son? And have thou not proclaimed thy self to be
the God that keeps Covenant and Mercy to thousand Generations? Seeing then
thou have vouchsafed to take us and make us thy people, and to receive us into
thy holy Covenant, and have pleased to place thy holy Tabernacle among us, and
honored us with thy holy Word and Sacraments, and have among us hundreds and
thousands whom thou have separated from the sinful mass of Mankind, and
sanctified, and sealed for thy self, so as they run not riot with the wicked
World, but wait on thee in the holy ways of thine Ordinances, Judgments, and
Mercies, and lay to heart thy words and warnings, and mourn in Sion for the
affliction of Joseph, and for their own, and the sins of others, and for the
iniquities of the Time: Therefore our Faith bids us believe, and the truth and
certainty of thy Covenants causes us to hope, that thou will chastise us to
our correction, but not plague us to destruction: And in this confidence we
come unto thee, thou Father of Mercies, and are bold to beseech thee to call to
mind thy Covenant, whereby thou have bound thy self, to be our God, and to
take us to be thy People, and never to forsake us (although by our sins we
have forsaken thee) as long as by Faith we cleave unto thee, and in Repentance
and Humility do seek thy face: And in the virtue and merit of that blessed
blood of thy holy Son, which he has shed for us, and all Believers, we take
boldness to our selves, to challenge at thy hands the performance of those
sweet promises, thou have made unto us, and sealed in his blood shedding.

And first we beg at the hands of thy holy Majesty (even rather then our
lines, or beliuerances from this dreadful Plague) peace and pardon to our
poor Souls, and assurance of thy love in Christ, for our eternal happiness:
and then we beseech thee not so much to deliver our bodies from this Plague,
as to save our souls from sin which is the Plague of all Plagues, and the true
cause of this Plague, therefore we cry and pray with thy holy Prophet, Lord
have mercy upon us, and heal our souls, which have sinned against thee. Then
we beseech thee, thou God of compassions, look in mercy upon this Land, make
us not like Sodom, Gomorrha, as we have deserved, we confess we are under
thy Hand, and all the World could not have laid this on us, but only thou, O
Lord, And it was time for thee O Lord, to lay to thy hand, for we had almost
made void thy Law: Thou have therefore justly taken us under thy hand, and
because thy gentle warnings were despised, thy holy Counsels contemned, thy
Judgments neglected, and thy Mercies abused, thou have therefore justly given
way to thy wrath, and let loose thy heavy Judgments upon our Land: Yet this is
our comfort, and Man, nor Devil can take it from us, that we are in thy hand,
O Lord, and with thee is mercy. And as we bless thy Name, that thou have not
given us over into the cruel hands of merciless men, the wicked bloody
Papists, so in this, our souls take comfort, that we are under the hand of our
heavenly Father, whose mercies are great: And in the multitude of those thy
mercies, we look up to thee, O Lord, and beseech thee, be merciful to this
Land. Thou art our Father, and we have foully offended, therefore thou must
needs correct us, or else thou louedst us not, and punish us also, or else thou
were not just: Correct therefore Lord, and spare not, but yet in thy Judgment,
not in thy fury, lest we be all consumed. And forasmuch, as corrections are to
work our not only Humiliation, but Reformation also, we beg not the
remoouing of thy Judgment, till it has wrought thy work, and not only
brought us down under thy hand, but even purged our hearts, and renewed the
face of our Church and Commonwealth. And seeing till then, O Lord, we neither
may expect, nor dare desire thou should remove it, we beseech thee to
prepare us all to be both willing and ready to meet thee our God, and now to
be content, thou glorify thy self in us, and upon us by Life or Death, so
thou save our Souls: But when it has done thy work, and finished that for
which thou did send it upon us, then, O Lord, in mercy remove it from us:
And prevent the other grievous plagues that must needs follow upon, and after
this.

And howsoever thy just and long forborne Decree is now gone out against us, so
as yet our cries and tears move thee not, Nay, the Prayers of our Prophets
prevail not with thee, Insomuch as those Noabs, Ezekiel. 14.
Daniels and Jobs, that are among us, are only able to deliver themselves (and
scarce that, O Lord, so great is the Contagion of our sins) yet we beseech
thee give us leave to take comfort, in believing thine own Word, and trusting
to that which no mortal Creature, no Humane Assurance, but thine own holy
Self have told and Hab. 3. 2.
taught us: Even that in Wrath thou rememberest Mercy, and that thou keep
not anger for ever, but that thy mercies endure for ever. And that thou have
not only betrothed us unto thy self in faithfulness Hose 2. 19. ^^.
and truth, but even married thy self to us, and though we wickedly, in our
spiritual Idolatries, and other sinful courses, cut off our selves from thee,
and whorishly given our selves to others: yet most mercifully have thou called
upon us, to return again to thee, and thou will receive us: But miserable
Catiffes that we are, we cannot turn to thee, we could of our selves fall away
from thee, but of our selves, we cannot return home unto thee: Cause us
therefore to return, O Lord, and seeing thou so love us, as thou will not
leave us, we beseech thee also loose us not, nor suffer us good Lord to loose
our selves, but renew our hearts toward thee, and cause us to cry and mourn
after thee, and say with Ephraim, turn thou us and we shall be turned,
convert us, and we shall be converted, thou art the Lord our God: And bring
us back again, O Lord, the right and holy way: First, make our faces ashamed
of our backslidings, and our Souls more grieved for the same, then for the
Plague that is upon us: Then make us seek thee sincerely, and not slauishly,
and out of Love more then Fear, and make us turn unfeignedly and with the
whole heart: And let us not come, with sorrow only in our hearts, but holy
words also in our mouths, and take unto our selves the words that thou have
taught us, Hos. 14. 2. ^
and say unto thee, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will
we render the calves of our lips.

And that our Prapers be not bull, let us, whet and sharpen them by Fatting;
nor let us bring thee Bare words, but let our humiliation be accompanied with
works of Mercy, Piety, Pity, and Compassion: And that the Humiliation of us
bath Prince and People, may be both more acceptable to them and available to
us, stir up the holy heart of our holy Phineas, thy Servant and our
Sovereign, that he may stand up in the Zeal of his God, and execute thy just
Judgment upon the Zimryes, and Cozbyes, that be amongst us, even the great
sins, and bold Sinners of this Nation, that then, as thy Word has told us,
thy Plague may be stayed. To which end also make our Mosesses, to stand in the
Gappe, and our Aarons, with the sweet Incense of their holy Prapers, to stand
betwixt the living and the dead, and stir up our Priests, the Ministers of
the Lord, to weep for us before thy Altar, and let them cry and say, Spare thy
people, O Lord, and give not over thine Heritage to reproach: Let not the
Papists and Schismatickes insult over us; Let them not say at their Idolatrous
Meetings, nor profane Conuenticles, Where is now their God? for thou art our
God, and thou art in Heaven, and thou do what thou please, and all thy
ways are right, and the Just walk in them, but Transgressors shall fall
therein: Let them know, O Lord, that thou being our Father, and we having
justly provoked thee, thou will take thy Children in hand, and that they ought
not to have rejoiced over us, in the day of our destruction: O suffer them not
good Lord, to make thy correction, their advantage: O let them not lay their
hands upon our substance, in this Day of our Calamity, suffer them not to
stand in the crossewayes, to cut off those whom thou shall spare, and make a
prey of those that shall remain: We shall ever acknowledge, how great soever
this Plague be, yet thy mercies are greater, in that thou tookest us into
thine own hand to correct us, and gave us not over into the hands, of these
men the Iesuited Papists, whose mercies are cruel, and their cruelties
insatiable: Therefore good Lord, when thou have removed thy hand, let us not
fall into their hand, but save us for thy self, and let us live to call upon
thy Name, and let us desire rather now to dye under the hand of thee our
Father, and in thy fear and love, then to live to heap sin upon sin, and
to be reserved for further vengeance, or to be exposed to the cruel Papists the
wicked Enemies of Religion. O look upon us in mercy Lord, who lie down in
the dust of Desolation, and are covered with confusion of our faces, O look
down upon us, who look up unto thee, and who desire to rend our hearts though
not our garments, and to turn to thee the Lord our God, O look upon this
desolate, and distressed City, who now may cry to all her stately Sisters the
Cities of Europe, and to all her beautiful Daughters, the Cities of England,
and with ashes now upon her head, instead of her stately and costly Crown
Psalm. 46.
calls upon them all and says, Come and behold the works of the Lord what
desolations he has made in the midst of my most wealthy and populous streets,
learn by me, Esaias.
and seek the Lord while he may be found, left he pull down your Pride: And
rejoice not over me, O thou mine Enemy, thou Daughter of Babylon, lest the
Lord turn his wrath from me to thee, and hasten the vengeance, so long ago
deserved by thee, and pronounced upon thee; trust thou in thy Horses and in thy
Chariots, thy Idols and thy Idol Superstitions, We will remember Prou.
the Lord our God, For thy Name, O Lord, is a strong tower, and the righteous
flying unto it, are always helped: Thou have spoken it Lord, and we believe
it, and in that belief are we bold to press unto thee, nay, to press thee
with performance of thy promise. Therefore, O thou that art the Psalm.
helper of the friendlesse, help us in this City, who are forsaken by so many
friends, and left destitute by them, that should have stood to us in this day
of our desolation, but have Psalm.
not thou told us, that if our Fathers and Mothers should forsake us, yet thou
Lord wilt take us up: Thou therefore who see our friends fail us and our
acquaintance to stand afar off, stand thou so much the nearer us, O Lord our
God: And now that humane helps fall short, Help thou us O Psalm.
God of our Salvation for the glory of thy Name: O thou in whom the Fatherless
finds mercy, in thee let the comfortless findcomfort, In thee let this
desolate City find consolation.

Look mercifully upon us who come unto thee, with tears in our eyes, sorrow
in our souls, Lamentations in our mouths, heaviness in our hearts, works of
mercy in our hands, and humilitation of the whole man: And thou that loosest
not a tear, forgettest not one desire, but hear every greane, and counts
the very sighs and sobs of all thy Saints, give us comfort, and fill our
hearts with hops, that this humiliation of our King and his people shall not be
fruitless, but after it is not barely performed but accomplished, and
perfected, as thou appointest it shall then prevail with thee our God, not
only to make an end of our miseries, but to remember and renew thy Cauenant
with us, and to bring us and this City, and our whole Land, both Court and
Kingdom nearer unto thee, and having in this fire of affliction consumed our
corruption, and purged away our dross both in Church and Commonwealth, wilt
make us come out new creatures, both high and low, both public and private
persons, pure as Silver, and as Gold most precious before thee: And wilst
hereby work out that inward Renouation, and that outward Reformation, in our
Church and State, in our Court and Kingdom, and all that see it Psalm. Psalm.
shall say; This has God done, for they shall shall perceive it is thy work:
Then we that did sow in tears, shall reap in joy: Then the long night of our
sorrow being ended, the long desired morning of our joys shall shine forth:
The voice of the Turtle shall be Esaias.
heard in our Land, Blessed shall then they all be that come to us in the Name
of the Lord: And beautiful the feet of those, that bring us the glad tidings
of the Gospel, whose faces formerly have been contemned, Old things shall
then be done away, and all things shall be made new. Truth shall flourish, and
Heresy find no footing, Justice shall reign, Oppression shall be oppressed:
The hand of Briberie shall be broken: The arm of injustice cut off, and the
Mouth of Iniquity shall be stopped: Then shall our Sons grow as plants, and
our Daughters be like polished precious ftones, Our Garners shall be full, and
our Cattle shall increase, we shall fear no breaking of Enemies to invade us,
nor hear any news or noyses to affright us, no cries, nor clamours, nor
complaynings in our streets; Our poor shall eat and be satisfied, and our rich
shall rejoice in the blessings of their God: Our Priests shall be clothed with
Salvation, and Sions Saints shall sing aloud for joy: Our Princes shall be
wiser, and our Judges better instructed, and instead of serving themselves and
the time, will then learn to serve the Lord with Psalm. 2.
fear, and rejoice to him with reverence. Then shall our King and Queen joy
in thy Psalm. 21.
strength, O Lord, and exceedingly rejoice in thy salvation: Then all our
friends shall rejoice with us, and all our enemies be covered with confusion,
and the World shall say, Blessed are the people that be in such a case, Psalm.
144
yea a thousand times blessed the people, that have such a Lord for their God,
who has purged them, from their old pollution, and purified them for himself,
that now he may dwell among them for evermore.

Hear us G God of Mercy for thy Name sake, But Lord we beseech thee begin
with the better part first, even the spiritual sores of our Souls and of our
Land, remove those Plagues first which has pulled down this Plague, therefore
begin we beseech thee at the right end, and make us not healthful and found
in body, and leave us sick in soul, and miserable in our spiritual state;
Turue us therefore O God of our salvation cause thy loving countenance to shine
upon us, and we shall be safe: Bring us again into thy Temples with joy, and
into thy Courts with praifs, satisfy us early with thy Mercies, and comfort us
according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us: Now let thy work
appear unto thy Servants, and thy gloeie unto their Children: Then we will gee
into thy house with true Burnt offerings, and with theerefulnesse of heart will
pay thee our vows, which our lips have uttered, and our mouths have spoken in
the days of our affliction. And we that be thy People and sheep of thy
Pasture will give thee thanks for ever, and shows forth thy Praises unto the
Generations that shall follow after us, unto the Worlds end.

And this our poor Prayer which here we have presented, and this*our weak
thanksgiving which we have here rendered to thy holy Majesty, we humbly beg
may be accepted, not for our selves alone, but for thy whole Church, even the
blessed body of thy dear Son. Nor for our friends alone, but even our
enemies, for whom we implore rather thy Mercy to couuert them, then thy
Justice to corfound them, yet if they will not be reclaymed, restrain their
rage, good Lord, and frustrate all their fury, make the malice of Man turn to
thy praise, and if our Prayers can do them no good, at least, let their
causeless Curses and cursed Plots do us no hurt: Stand by all the Armies and
Forces of thy Church both by Sea and Land, and by all them that stand up for
thy holy Cause, especially that chief Champion of thy Church, thy devoted
Servant our Sovereign Lord, rouse up his Royal heart, inflame him more and
more with zeal and love to thee, that thy Church may find him and thy foes
may feel him to be the Great Defender of thy Christian Faith, and the Man of
Men whom thou have marked for thy self, even a second Cyrus raised up anointed
Esaias: 44. ^
and sanctified by thy self to perform all thy pleasure, and to execute thy
great and glorious Designs, not only for the building up of our Jerusalem, in
the Reformation and Restoration of our Church, but to subdue the Nations before
thee, and to weaken and loose the Loins of such Kings as will not open their
hearts to thee. The promise thou did please to make to Cyrus, who knew thee
not, make good we beseech thee much more to Him who knows thee, and fears
thee, and submits his soul unto thee, and casts his Crown down at thy feet:
That is, Make him thy great Shepherd, hold up his Right hand, subdue thine
enemies before Esaias. 45. 1* 2, 3, 4.
him, open to him all doors of difficulties break in pieces the gates of
Brass, and cut in sunder the bars of Iron, and go before him when he goes
to make the crooked places of the World straight. To which end give him good
Lord beside all thy other blessings, the Treasures of darkness, and hidden
riches of secret places, that even thereby also he may know that thou the Lord
who have called him and set him on work, art able to payhis Armies, and provide
for him; do this O Lord for Jacob thy Servants sake and Israel thine Elect.
Bless the Queen. Thou that have made her His, make her also Thine, that so
she may be a help to him, a blessing to us a comfort to the distressed
Churches of France and a Joy to the Christian World: Bless therefore good
Lord, and make powerful all means of her Conversion public and private, and
for the settling of her soul in thy holy Truth, and in the ways of
righteousness: And besides the Prayers of us, and thy whole Church over the
World, daily made for Her, we beseech thee graciously to regard the serious
supplications which we are sure his Majesty daily powers out before thee, for
her happy and speedy Connersion* Esaias,
that so she may be a Pursing Mother as he is a nursing Father to thy Church
Shine from Heaven with the beams of Love and Mercy upon those glorious
Servants of thine, the King and Queen of Bohemia, and their Royal Branches,
and as thou haft honored them not only to believe in thee, but to suffer for
thee, so give them in thy good time; a blessed Issue of all their unjust
sufferings, and in the mean time arm them with Faith and Patience to wait on
thee. Look down in Mercy, and bless with thy special blessing the High
Court of Parliament, be with them at their Meetings, Consultations and
Conclusions, set thy fear before their eyes, and let thy glory be their
greatest Aim, knit the hearts of Prince and People one to onother, and all to
thee; Confound all private Plots any way tending to the hinderance of the
comfortable continuance of that blessed Meeting, till they have first
discovered, and then found means to cure the Corruptions, Plagues, and great
diseases of this Church and State. Bless this whole Land, make his Majesty's
Council faithful to thee, least otherwise they prove false to him, Purge the
Tribe of Leui, that their lips may preserve pure knowledge, and their lives may
express the Life of true Religion. Refine our Nobility, from the fill thie
dregs of Popery, and all ignoble bafenesse, Cleanse the hearts and hands of
our Judges and Magistrates, and purify our People in this furnace of
Affliction, and humble us all from the King unto the Captive, that so we may
be a People prepared for the Lord. And look down in Mercy as thou art a God
of Mercy upon those many hundreds, nay yet, alas, alas, thousands of our dear
brethren in this Land, and especially in this City, who still lie groaning
under the burden of thy Wrath, and the Sword 2. Sam. 24. Lu. 13. 1. 2.
of thy destroying Angel: Alas O Lord these Sheep, what have they done? Or
are we better then our Brethren? Or are these thousands that fall before our
faces any greater sinners then the rest? Or rather have not we sinned more
then they, and yet they are smitten, rather then we? O how wonderful Romans 9.
are thy works, how unsearchable are thy Judgments, and thy ways past
finding out. Again, how infinite and unmeasurable are thy Mercies to all them
that fear thee, and seek thy Face? Therefore we beseech thee Psa. 79. 11.
let the sorrowful sighing of these thy Prisoners come before thee, and
according to the greatness of thy power, preserve thou those that are
appointed to dye. At least, we beseech thee as thou emptiest the Earth, fill
the Heavens, and whom thou take from us, Lord take unto thy self and fill
thy heavenly Mansions with their Souls, whose bodies have left so many houses
desolate in our streets. And for so many of us whom thou please to preserve,
Lord, Let us not live, but to honor thee; therefore mark us with Ezekiel. 9.
thy holy stamp, and seal us for thy self; that when the Angel of Justice
sees us sorrowing for our sins, and for the iniquity of the time, and
mourning for the Miseries and sighing for the sufferings of thy Saints, and
laying to our hearts the affliction of Joseph, he may then not only pass by
us, but even in the midst of this common calamity leave us some badge of thy
blessing, and some better Testimony of thy Love, in the holy use of this thy
Judgment, then the more secure times of our lives past have formerly afforded
us.

Thus Lord, have we powered out our souls into the bosom of thy Mercy: Thou
art he that hears the Prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come, and if all
flesh may come shall not then thy Children be bold to press unto thee? And
seeing we have poured out our hearts to thee, O pour not out the Uialls of thy
Wrath upon us, but pour down upon us the new of thy favor, the showers of
sweet Compassion.

Hear us thou blessed Father, plead for us thou blessed Son, help our
infirmities thou blessed Spirit of Grace, and make thou Intercession for us,
with those holy groans Romans 8.
that cannot by us be expressed: Hear us and answer us thou glorious
Trinity in holy Unity, not for any Merits of ours, for we lay our hands upon
our mouths, nay, we abhor our selves in dust and ashes, but Job 42. 6*
only for the precious bloud-shedding, and all sufffcient Satisfaction of Jesus
Christ, the Surety and Savior of our Souls, the Mediator of our Peace, and
the Eternal High Priest of the New Testament. In whose blessed Name and holy
words, we shut up this our weak Prayer, offer this our poor Sacrifice, and
tender this pitiful complaint of our poor souls unto the hands of thy
heavenly Majesty, as he has taught us, and left us in his holy Gospel the
Charter of our Peace: Our Father, etc.

A SOVEREIGNE MEDICINE FOR and against the Plague: Being an ancient and
approved Antidote, and the sure and infallible way how to escape the Plague,
or at least the Plague of the Plague.
TAke thy Heart (for there begins the Plague) and every morning, wash it, in
the tears of true repentance and hearty sorrow for thy sins: But that it
may be thoroughly washed, see first thou stretch it upon the tenters, or rather
set it upon the rack, of a strict Examination, that so it may pour it self
out, and make a free and full Confession: Then mollify it in the precious
Oil, and bathe it in the blood of Jesus Christ the true Balm of Gilead, by a
true and lively Faith. Being thus cleansed, then strengthen it by cordial
comforts confected of nothing else, but the pure and sweet promises of the
Gospel: And this Confection is only to be made; by the skillful hand of the
holy Physician and Spiritual Apothecarie, the Minister of God, whom thou shall
always find at the sign of the Bible, or the Holy Lamb, and there thou art
sure of true and wholesome Simples; But take heed of them at the Crossekeyes,
or the Sign of Agnus Dei, for though the Shops be gorgeous, and all things
gloriously painted, thou art sure to be coozened with counterfeit Drugs, and
with the corrupt Balsome of Egypt, in stead of the true Balm of Gilead.

Thy Heart thus rectified, let it then command thy tongue and lips, to
acknowledge that thou for thy part by thy sins of Commission and Omission
have had thy hand, and borne thy part in pulling down, this Pestilence and all
other plagues of God: Let it then command it self to promise and vow, that if
thou for thy part, may by the power and mercy of God be preserved, thou will
perform some special service to him, his Church or Children, more then
before: And let it command the said tongue and lips to utter and publish the
same promise, the better to bind it self to obedience. Let it then command the
eyes, to turn away from beholding, and the ears from hearkening after
vanity, and yield themselves, the instruments of holy Observation, to mark
and consider the works of the Lord; It must then command the hands, to keep
themselves free from corruption, and that they be painfully, and faithfully
employed in the honest labor of thy lawful Calling, and thy feet to walk in
those ways, and tread only in those steps, which God has appointed thee.

This done, then take for thy Breakfast, in the Name of the Lord, a Chapter of
the blessed Bible, and so set thy self unto thy work, and faithful labor of
thy lawful Calling. Then after thy days labor done, bodily refection, take
for thy Spiritual Dinner and Supper thy heartfull of holy Observations of
those mighty Works of God, both of his Justice and Mercy toward thy self
and others: which all that day long, either thine eyes have seen, or thine
ears have heard of. Then the day being done, see that thou and thine for your
Banquet, or rear Supper, do close up your stomachs, with those true
Sweet-meates, certain selected Chapters of the blessed Bible: Then after a
holy Commemoration, of what every one has heard or seen, or observed that day
touching the wondrous Works of God, and application of the same one to
another: and each one to himself, Let then the Heart command the Tongue with
comfort and boldness, to recommend the souls and bodies of Thee and Thine
into the blessed tuition, powerful protection and safe keeping of the Keeper
of Israel.

But forget not noe thing as thou would have all this profitable, and to do
thee any good, namely, to learn (which thou may do, of that excellent
Apothecary Heb. 11. 38.
Saint Paul) what it is to live the life of faith, when natural reason and
humane helps not only fail thee, but happily are all against thee: This Faith I
tell thee aforehand is not easily found, but I deal truly with thee who had
it, and can teach thee how to get it, for though himself cannot give it thee,
yet he will both direct and lead thee, and bring thee acquainted with that
holy Spirit, who gave it him, and will not deny it thee if thy Tongue do
beg it, and thy Soul seek it: Never so little of this Faith is precious,
therefore so thou get it and have it right, care not for the quantity; for it
is a holy Elixir, a true Quintessence which will presently and perpetually
multiply, beyond ordinary belief, to the infinite enriching of the Soul that
enioyes it.

But this Faith has one strange property, that although it will be content
to be gathered up by grains of young and weak Christians, and treasured up
by drammes and ounces of such as be rich and strong men in Christ, yet can it
not abide to be measured or mixed with Scruples: For these Scruples are of a
contrary nature to true Faith: but otherwise, be it more, be it less, so it be
true, its perfect, and thou shall find thy self happy if thou have it: for the
least quantity of this Faith will afford thee every Morning and Evening a
proportion of that true Treacle, or Methrydate, which yet was never made at
Venice (except closely in some corners) by reason of that great Iugler the
Pope, who conueyes in corrupt Drugs and false Ingredients: This Methrydate is
made of more strange Simples, then be the blood of Scorpions, or the flesh of
Vipers: For it is and must be confected of the flesh and body, and blood of a
Man, but such a Man as the World never had a Second, for he must be the child
of Adam, and yet the Son of no Man, and a true Man, and yet no Man to be his
Father: Now his blood taken from him while he is alive, and yet so taken from
him as he must needs dye, is of that Sovereign excellency, and that infinite
virtue and Merit, as the Quintessence that may be extracted out of it, (which
only this forenamed Faith can do,) Is that Superexcellent, nay,
Supercelestiall Methry date of that high infallible, and inualuable virtue, as
the Soul that out tastes of it Morning and Evening, did never perish, nor
shall to the Worlds end. Therefore, I say again, as thou would have this
Medicine work, and become powerful for thy preservation, forget not to take a
taste of this continually, the first thing in the Morning, and the last at
Night.

Then lie thee down in Peace, and securely take thy rest, for thou art free
from the fear of all that are able to hurt thee. But be sure, for a sign
whereby to know this Physic works well, that instantly when thou wakest thy
heart, do forthwith fix it self on God, and upon him bestow thy first
thoughts: And so when thy body has received so much sleep and rest as may
make it serviceable for the Soul, then up with it in the Name of the Lord,
that so both Body and Soul may set themselves to serve their God: Then taking
this Medicine, and following all the former directions, thou may safely enter
upon thy business, and adventure upon the dangers of that day both thou and
thine. Provided first, that you always intermixe (as occasion is) together
with the duties of your Calling, such works of Piety toward God, Justice and
Equity toward Man, Mercy and Charity toward the Poor, as the Divine
Providence shall lay before thee, or cast in thy way: For take it for a Rule,
that these four must always go together, and God himself has so joined
them all together, as cursed be the Man that puts them asunder, for he
carries such a heart about him, as this Physic can never do him good: But
where these four are conscionably conjoined, this Physic never failed to
work his work: but where any of the four is wanting, and totally neglected,
there the other three will do no good, but contrariwise, if they cannot get
the company of their companion, they mourn and pine away, and in a short time
will be gone, and stay no longer there, where they cannot be complete.

Provided also that Man, nor God do ever find thee out of thy way, but always
either walking faithfully in thy lawful calling, or else doing some good in
the performance of some of the foresaid duties of Piety, Justice, or Mercy:
For these be the ways of a Christian, and he that is found out of all these
is utterly out of his way, and consequently out of that protection which God
has granted to them that wait on him, which runs in these words, That He
has given his Angels charge over Psalm. 91. 11.
them, to keep them in all their ways, etc. And the power of this Protection
no Creature can infringe. So as by virtue thereof, the Servants of God have
walked in safety in the midst of such dangers as has been an amazement to
the World, and a wonder to themselves: And for the want of this, many thousands
have miscarried, not only of Gods Enemies, who walk in wrong and wicked ways,
but even such of his friends and followers, who being misled by the World or
their own Presumptions, took to themselves the boldness to step aside, out
of their own ways, and so have shifted themselves out of that shelter or
safety, which otherwise they might have challenged as their own.

And lastly, Provided that in all times of danger thou take heed of tempting
God, for otherwise thou may justly provoke him to deny his blessing to this
Medicine, without which, as Sovereign and powerful as it is, it can do no
good. Now if thou will avoid this fearful and dangerous Sin of tempting GOD,
thou must take heed:

First, of putting thy self into any needless danger: And it is then
needless, when without necessary cause or lawful calling, either for gain or
pleasure, or any private respect thou puts thy self into places, or among
persons infected.

Secondly, thou must also at thy utmost peril, carefully use all good helps
of Nature and Art, which Gods good Providence affoords thee, whether they be
commended unto thee by the Learned Physician, or approved by true and real
experience, and whether they be means Preservative, Curatiue, or Restoratiue.

Thirdly, thou must be wary of all wilful distemper, and be diligent in
keeping a careful and orderly diet, not only for moderation and sobriety, in
respect of the quantity both of meat, and drink especially, but also for
Wisdom in the choice of the quality and condition of that little thou feedst
upon.

And lastly, abhor more then Poison or the Plague it self these wicked
Opinions, and all that hold them.

First, that the Pestilence is not infectious in it self, and of it own
nature, but so immediately, and only the hand of God, as none become infected,
but only by his stroke.

Secondly, that every man's days are so numbered, as do or not do what he
will, he cannot live longer, nor die sooner then his day and hour appointed.

Thirdly, that therefore all careful avoiding of persons or places infected,
and diligent using of means appointed for prescruation are needless and to no
purpose.

The foulness and falsenesse of all these three appears:

Leuit. 13. etc.
First, in that the Leaper must be shut up, and all men avoid him, yea, though
^. Kings. 15.
he were a King, which being nothing so deadly as is the Pestilence, (seeing
some lived with it many years) It is manifest it was so commanded, only in
respect of the Contagion.

Job 2.
Secondly, that Jobs Friends being loving, wise, and Religious, and coming to
comfort him, having the Pestilence, Leprosy, or some such contagious
sickness, stood afar off, and refused to come near him.

Esaias 38. 5*
Thirdly, Hezekiah having (that which never man had else) a Lease of his life
for fifteen years, from him that was able to make it good, yet used all
ordinary means and humane helps, for preserving his health, and prolonging
his life.

Acts 27.
Fourthly, Saint Paul having an express grant from God, of the lives of every
one in the Ship with him: yet the next day, when the Mariners, who are the
means under God to command and rule, and save a Ship, would have craftily
conuayed themselves out, to have saved their own lives, leaving Paul and the
rest to be saved by that promise and power of God: Saint Paul plainly told
Verse 31.
the Captain, If these men go out of the Ship we cannot be saved. For
howsoever that condition of using means was not expressed, yet he knew it to
be employed, which was all one. Lastly, our Lord Jesus himself, whose Deity
could deliver Mar. 39. 10 and 4. 1, 2.
him from all danger, yet to teach us to be careful in use of all good means,
and to let us see how made these men be, when such as had Plagues pressed too
near upon him, called for a little Ship to wait upon him, because (says the
Text) of the multitude, lest they should throng him. Yet he that refused the
throng, refused not his duty, he that fled from the danger, fled not from
his calling, but preached Gods Word unto them, himself in the Ship, and the
people on the shore.

The last wicked opinion to be avoided, is, that none who love, fear and
serve God, and believe in him can dye of the Plague, and all that do, do want
Faith: The wickedness of which Doctrine appears in this, that diverse of the
dearest of Gods Saints have tasted, nay drunk as deeply the Cup of all
external Crosses, and bodily afflictions whatsoever, as any Unbelievers or
Enemies of God have done. Again, in that many of Gods Children, who in common
Calamities turn to the Lord in Faith and true Repentance, howsoever thereby
they saved their Souls, yet for their bodily lives were swept away with the
rest, by the general Judgment: As a great number of them that perished in the
Flood, and diverse of those that dye by the hand of Justice, and all Histories
and Ages afford frequent examples.

And lastly, if thou would take heed of tempting God, stand in thy station,
make Conscience to do thy duty, Fly not with Jonah from the presence of
Jonah. 1.
the Lord, for he can follow thee, and find thee where ever thou art, and
reach thee afar off as well as at home, and make Jonah feel him (being fled
from his duty) even when he thought himself most safe, and slept securely:
Thou therefore that may boldly beg Gods blessing in thy place and duty, how
dare thou tempt and try the power of God, by flying from it. Use this
Medicine and observe these Rules, and as sure as God is true and just, thou
may boldly believe the Plague shall either not touch thee, or not hurt thee;
but in stead of a Plague shall be a Blessing to thee: And whereas many of GODS
good Children have taken and died of this Infection, as it is manifest on the
one side they wanted not Grace, nor Faith for Salvation, so it is as clear on
the other; that thev some way failed in the use of this Medicine either, in not
belceuing what in this case ought to be believed, or in not doing something to
be done for their deliverance in this danger: In all which Cases, the Rule of
Christ is certain: according to thy faith, and consequently thy obedience,
which always waits on true Faith, So be it unto thee.

This Medicine is so ancient and so approved, that since the World began it was
never found to fail in one particular, saving only such as either seem to use
it but did not, or using it in part; yet failed in some particulars which in
the use of Medicines may not be allowed. And by the virtue of this Medicine
alone, many about this City have been preserved to this day, whose Callings
and Duties ineuitably bound them within the reach of such dangers, from which
all the humane helps in the World could not have delivered them: And still if
they fail not in Faith, nor discharge of their Duties: God who is the Author
of this Medicine will not fail in performance of his promise.

FINIS.

