The Author to the Reader.
If Satan's might and force of sin
Here seems thy soul to wound,
A sovereign salve this book prescribes,
Direct to cure it sound.
Esteem this salve, and exercise
Each day and night the same,
So shall your soul well cured be
Which sin brought out of frame:
Regard it more then worldly wealth,
No treasure like to this,
No money can buy save to cure*
Our soul, if this should miss.
I. A. Minister and Preacher of Gods Word.

A SOVEREIGN Salve to cure a sick Soul, infected with the poison of sin.

Wherein is Contained,

1 The strength and force of the poison of sin.

2 How man's soul became poisoned?

3 How the soul of man poisoned by sin may be cured, and restored.

These parts are all Authentical, and comprised in a most short and
Compendious method, briefly to be read, that they may be Effectually Practiced.

Newly Published by I. A. Minister and Preacher of GODS Word.

LONDON: Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, and are to be sold by FRANCIS GROVE,
dwelling at the sign of the Windmill, near to St. Sepulchers Church. 1624.

The Book to the Reader.
If I had tongue to speak with voice,
Oh then most loud still should I cry,
All those that hear me would rejoice,
Now for to buy me presently.
Each greater book of price more dear
Which you may buy, cannot contain
Effectual physic which is here,
Souls health from sin for to regaine,
Direction true in me is penned,
Rightly to cure thy soul from sin:
Have care to use me as thy friend,
Now read me through, if thou begin.
First, of the strength and force of the poison of sin.
TO be plain in words, certain in sense, and short in writing, I will
briefly describe the strength of the poison of sin. It is a spiritual poison,
The breach of Gods Law, 1 Ioh. 3.4. The which whosoever commits is of the
Devil, 1 John 3.8. Yea, it is the vile, and most damnable thing in the world.
The only Noli me tangere, which no man without the displeasure of Almighty
GOD, could ever taste, or touch in the least degree. For, Via peccati
ingredientes contaminat, progredientes obstinat, egredientes exterminat. Sin
in the first entrance defiles, in the progress hardens, and at his going
out destroys. It causes all those that commit it to dishonor God, to
crucify Christ a fresh, and to grieve the Holy Ghost: It makes the Angels to
moure, and all Gods creatures to groone and sigh under the burden of it, Romans
8.22.

It is the very excrement of the Devil, that old Serpent; the age of it is
almost as old as the world: for scarce was there a world, but it was a
prisoned world with sin; and almost no sooner was there a man, but he was
infected with this poison. And so strong was this poison, even at the first
committing of sin, that it made all the world mourn for her mallidy, the
which neither Ghiron, Esculapius, nor Apollo could ever heal: No, if all the
Angels and men both of heaven and earth were in one, they could never heal it.

Our poisoned souls could not be cured without a Mithradate confection of the
best blood that ever was in the world, even the most precious blood of Christ
Jesus, the only begotten Son of God. So this spiritual poison can be
nowayes cured, but by a spiritual antidote; this most deadly poison must have
the most sovereign antidote; only here is the difference, that as hell gives
the poison, so heaven gives the helps.

There is no sin so small, that has not cost the Son of God even a sea of
sorrows. O what a hell (think we) was Jesus Christ in for our sins, when
he swet both water and blood, and prayed thrice most fervently to have that
bitter cup pase from him? Yea he brake out into this sundring voice, and cried
to God his Father. Quare dereliquisti me? Why has thou forsaken me?

Whose bloody sweat came trickling down to the ground Luke 22.44. In the which
(no doubt) he felt the force and strength of sin, the wrath of God against
it, the Justice of God requiring punishment for it, the power of the Law
pronouncing condemnation to it; the force of death, the tyranny of Satan, and
the torment of hell, which was forcible enough to have drawn streams of
tears out of the driest eye that ever was in the head of man, and to have
excited a multitude of sorrowful groans out of the hardest heart that ever
GOD made.

Oh, was the strength of sin so great, that it caused Christ to shed dropps
of blood for our sins, and cannot we shed forth one tear for the same?

Oh, I beseech you, let the horror of it be always fresh in our memory, and
the meditation thereof imprinted in our hearts, that we may remember those
grievous dropps of that most precious blood, which Jesus Christ shed for our
sakes, for our sins, for our souls, and for our salvation. Let us love him
for it, thank him for it, and serve him for it, all the days of our lives. So
that our hands may tremble and shake for fear, and our whole body may quake
with terror of it, when any evil imagination is hatched in our hearts, or any
wicked deed should be acted with our hands, that we may be ever terrified from
nourishing sin in our bosom, whose condition is so vile and base. For such
is the nature of sin, enter where it will, it is the heart it aims at, and
it will not stay until it comes there: because sin and Satan love no
venison but the heart, no foul but the breast, and no fish but the soul. The
heart is the throne where sin would reign, and the soul it self is the
seat where sin would sit. And therefore, the more sin labors to poison
that part, the more should we strive to preserve it.

If our heart be Gods throne then is he a most vile traitor to God and
himself, that suffers sin, Gods great enemy, that proud, presumptuous,
aspiring Tyrant, to sit in the seat, and tyrannize in the throne of the
Sovereign Majesty of Almighty God.

Thus we may see, that the very subject and seat of sin is the heart and
soul of man, that most glorious and precious part, which God made like to
himself, and for the which the Son of God was crucified.

And as sin delights to sit and captive both the heart and soul of man, so
the longer it reigns there the worse it is; for as in good things the elder
the better; so in the evil of sin, the elder the worse, and the more they
will grow in number. Ask one of the holiest men, he that had fewest sins;
They are more in number (says he) than the hairs of my head. Oh who can
understand his errors? Psalm 40.12. Psalm. 19.12. Or who can tell how often he
offends? Yea, sin is grown so foul, so great, and is so scattered abroad
into so many men's hearts, that S. John says, Totus mundus in maligno positus
est: The whole world lies plungeth in wickedness.

Now to speak more of the evil of sin, it appears in three things; First in
the deformity. For God does loath it. Secondly, in the iniquity, For the Devil
does love it. Thirdly, in the general contagious poison and leprosy thereof:
(as S. John says) the whole world is infected therewith.

Secondly, how man's soul became infected therewith.

At the beginning, God suruaying his works with the eyes of his wisdom,
after they had passed the hand of his power, his Justice pronounced this
infallible sentence, Genesis 1.31, Lo they were all very good. How then came
it to pass, that man's soul became poisoned? And Christ says in another
place, From the beginning it was not so. Mat. 19.8. Solomon says, God made man
righteous, Eccles. 7.29.

The answer whereof our Christian Philosophy shows us, that our poisoned
souls which defile our whole nature came from the fault and fall of Adam; and
from the curse of the earth through Adams transgression. For the Devil, that
Roaring Lion, in whom the full perfection of malice lies, knowing how to most
hurt, has poisoned the Fountain, Adam and Eve: and the Fountain once
poisoned, then the streams issuing from the same are sure and most certainly
infected. The which David confesses in the person of all regenerate men, I was
shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me, Ps. 51.

Thus our spiritual poison came into the soul and body of man by the
subtlety of Satan, that arch-enimy of mankind. For he being once an Angel
in Heaven, a goodly creature, would needs become a God, and consequently a
Creator. Now, a Creator must needs make something, and therefore here we may
behold his work; Lo^, it is even sin, for sin is the true creature, and
only work of the Devil. And as he is a spirit, so he has society with the
spirits, as bodily creatures have with our bodies.

Thirdly, How the soul of man poisoned by sin, may be cured and restored.

The soul of man that is poisoned by sin, must begin to be cured in this
life, but it cannot be perfected in this life: For whatsoever is begun here
in grace, in the life to come shall be perfected in glory.

And for this great cure, we ought diligently to observe three things.

1. First, we must know our selves, what estate we are in, that we may see
how we are poisoned.

2. Secondly, we must use the remedy to cure the poison.

Thirdly, we must take our medicine in due time.

Therefore, he that has ears to hear, let him hear; and that has eyes to
see, let him see, and diligently observe what salve he must take to cure this
poison of sin. The first and principal thing is to take this precept of the
philosopher, Nosce teipsum, Know thy self; It is the first thing to be done
to this cure, and the beginning of all grace: For in vain is the medicine
ministered, where the disease is dissemblingly covered, and kept unknown.

Wherefore, whosoever thou be that feel thy self to be infected with this
poisoning sin, and art inwardly touched with any care of thine own
salvation, and do groan with earnest desire to stand in favor again with
God; thou must seriously enter into thy self, and make a true survey of thine
inward man, that thereby thou may know how sin has poisoned thee both in
greatness and danger. For until thou know thy sins, and how they have
infected thy soul, that thy conscience may be convicted by them, thou can
never be cured. No man can rightly acknowledge his own sins, no man can
truly confess his faith, no man can duly use the Sacraments, that does not
first earnestly try and examine his own conscience: That is, thoroughly to try,
narrowly to search, and dilligently to prove, who, and what manner of person
he is, and in what case he feels himself, how deeply his own conscience
is poisoned with sin. And withal, to know how, and which way he may come
into favor again with God. To the same effect S. Paul says, Let every man
prove his work, Gal. 6.4. And again, Prove your selves whether you be in the
faith, 2. Cor. 12.5. Examine your selves, and be sorrowful for your sins;
not for some sins, but for all sins wherewith you are infected and
poisoned: And that not for an hour, nor a day, nor for a week, nor a month;
but mourn for your misdeedes, and be sorry for your sins continually, even
so long as you live.

We must do as the Prophet David did, when he had considered his ways, and
found they were evil, He ever after turned his feet unto the testimonies of
the Lord. Ps. 119.56

So must every one do, that minds to be cured from the poison of his sin;
examine his own conscience, and make his heart smart for his sin, by
aggrauation thereof.

The Church of God confesses not her sins lightly, but with wonderful
grief. Dan. 9.

Secondly, we must use the remedy to cure the poison of sin.

As by nature we hate every thing that hurts us, how much more by grace
should we abhor sin that wounds us? Amongst all the works of the
Devil, there was none so mighty and malicious as the poisoning and destroying
the souls of men by sin.

So for to cure our souls from this deadly poison, our Savior Jesus Christ,
that heavenly Physician, has accordingly given us a remedy proportionable to
our malady, out of his glorious storehouse of the holy Scriptures If we will
he cured from the poison of sin, we must take Christ, and the virtuous
physic he gives us by a lively faith; but we must keep and retain him,
and it, by holiness of life. These two, faith and holiness are the two bonds
of our union with Christ: Faith brings Christ to us, and holiness keeps him
with us, and us with him. If any man (says Christ) hear my voice, and open
the door, I will come into him, and will stay with him, and he with me. Thus
by faith we take this heavenly Physic, and by holiness we keep it.
Wherefore, all those which formerly obeyed sin, if they will be cured from
the poison thereof, by faith and holiness of life, they must now withstand it.
They which were wont to yield unto it, must now strive against it: they which
were wont to delight in it, must now lament it: they which did formerly let
sin reign and captive their souls in them, must now reign over it, quench
it, and subdue it, and fly from it, as from the most venomous sting of a
Serpent. If the filthy and stinking poison of their sins cannot move them,
let the shortness and uncertainty of their lives dampe them. If the shortness
of their lines cannot, let the small number of them that shall be saved fray
them. If that cannot, tell Death terrify them. If Death cannot, let the day of
judgment shake them. If all these cannot, then will the torments of hell for
evermore torment them.

Thirdly, we must take our medicine in time.

For common experience teaches us, that Tempus est pretiosum, breue, and
irreuocabile, Time is precious, short, and irreuocable, Qui non ost hodie, cras
minus aptus erat, He that is not ready to receive this Heavenly physic to
day, will be less ready to morrow. Let us therefore take this time while we
have it, for we have no time but this present time; the time past is not ours,
it is gone, and cannot be recalled the time to come is not, for being not
come, it may be it never shall come: Only the present hour is ours, let us
take and make good use of it.

So that now, even now is the time to take this wholesome and brauenly physic
to purge away our sins; while we are here in this life, the time is in our
hands. Now the door is open, but after this life it will be shut. Therefore
now while the Gospel shines, now while Christ calls, now while he speaks,
now while he kneeketh, let us amend our former lives; let us now therefore
hear Gods word, let us now obey him, let us make this day our day to return
unto God. And although we could never be moved by reading any book
heretofore, or by hearing Gods word preached hitherto, yet let us now be moved
at the last, and with good Ezechias, let us be afraid of Gods threatening,
sorrow aforehand, examine our consciences, and mourn for our sins, let us
cleanse and purge our hearts and souls from this poison, and let us never
drink, nor taste that deadly dregs again. Let us walk no more so
inordinately in it, wallow no more in the filthy mire of it, obey no more the
lust of it, nor give our members any more to be weapons to fight for it: But
with all our power let us oppose it, resist it, and manfully with all our force
fight against it. Oh let us shake off our sins, banish them, send our dearest
darlings packing, and never pity them, never love them, never be led by them,
for they would poison our souls most deadly unto eternal destruction.

To conclude, God grant that we may all, and every one of us forsake our sins
in time, before it be too late; and as Physicians do heal many sore maladies
with sharp medicines: so give grace O eternal and most gracious God, that
these my labors (though they seem unsavory, and sharp to the wicked) may
yield such sound and godly Physic, that they may become a salve to cure, and
preserve the souls of the godly, in their zeal of thy glory.

And furthermore grant O sweet Jesus, that it may offer and minister all such
spiritual Physic unto the souls infected with the poison of sin, that it
may be a means to withdraw them from the same. And that the salve, which is
here presented unto such as are sick, and almost past recovery, may work so
effectually one them, that it may both strengthen, help, and heal them of
that damnable poison, wherewith they are so deadly infected.

This GOD grant, without whose help all the labor of man is in vain. And
thus both from the poison of sin, and the punishment due for the same, the
Lord deliver us all, even for his dear Son Christ Jesus his sake, our only
Savior, To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all honor, glory,
praise, power, and dominion, both now, and for ever. Amen.

The Author to the Reader.
Gentle Reader, I most humbly desire thee, (what so ever thou be) that
gatherest any spiritual Physic to cure thy souls mallady out of these my
labors to pray unto my Savior Jesus Christ for me, to direct me with his
holy Spirit, and give me his grace, to use it to salve and cure my own soul;
that as I endeavor to cure thee in words, I may also labor in deeds to raise
and preserve my self from all my sins, to the setting forth of Gods glory,
and the salvation of my own soul, which God grant for his Son Jesus Christ
his sake, Amen.

FINIS.

