THE WORKS OF MERCY, BOTH CORPORAL, AND SPIRITVALL.

LONDON, Printed by G. Eld and M. Flesher. 1621.

Mercies Works corporal.
TO feed the Hungry. To give drink to the Thirsty. To clothe the Naked. To
ransom the Captives. To harbor the Harbourlesse. To visit the Sick. To bury
the Dead.
Mercies Works spiritual.
TO correct the Sinner. To instruct the Ignorant. To counsel the Doubtful. To
comfort the Sorrowful. To bear Wrongs patiently. To forgive all Men. To pray
for others, even our Enemies.
To the truly Noble in Virtues (the perfection of Nobleness) the most
Illustrious Honor of his noble House and Name, The Right Honorable, John Earl
of Bridgwater:
This Sacred Poem is most humbly consecrated, as a Testimony of his especial
love and service,

BY Your Lordships faithful honorer, RAPHE CRANE.

THE AVTHORS PREFACE.
THe City had my Birth, my Father (free
Of a much famed, and royal Marchant-Taylors.
Company)
With good esteem bore offices of worth:
My education past, I then went forth,
And tried the Air of diverse noble Counties,
There tasted some free favors, generous bounties.
Much variation I have had since then
With one blessed Gift, A Ready Writers Pen,
(The use whereof (without vainglory told)
It not extinguished yet, though I am old.)
First was I seven years Servant, painful Clarke,
Unto a Clarke of the Counsel, and did mark
Within the circuit of those hopeful years,
The goodness and nobility of the Peers,
Those reverend Lords, those Counselors of State,
Upon whose virtues I must meditate
While I have breath; and praise while I am able,
Each gracious Cl: of the Couns:
Second of that honored Table.
And (as a thankful River, that does send
His Tribute to the Ocean) I commend
One special Sacrifice (with heart sincere)
Unto his worth whom I called Master (there.)
That (hapless) thence I sl^pt, (wanting firm hold)
I only sigh the fate, but leave 't untold.
The Signet and the Priuie-Seale was next,
(Those dear Colleagues) who give me for my Text
A Field of honor, and shall be my Song,
Whilst Fame a Trumpet has, or I a Tongue.
Some gentleness from thence I still possess,
Which makes their goodness more, my sorrows less.
To the Tribe of Leuy (heavens chief Miracles)
I have done service, writ their Oracles;
Which so divine Instinction does infuse,
(For their blessed sakes) I Will make my Soul their Muse,
And pray with the best power my zeal affords,
All happy Gifts, to crown their sacred words:
The Holy Ghost, in Cloven Tongues and Fire,
Descend on them, when they good things desire.
But most of all does my laborious hand
Amongst the renowned and learned Lawyers stand
A Monument; each Office, and each Court
Vouchsafing me such matter of Report,
That if my voice to the utmost world could stretch,
Even thither should their fames and honors reach.
And some employment has my useful Pen
Had amongst those civil, well-deseruing men,
That grace the Stage with honor and delight,
Of whose true honesties I much could write,
But will comprise't (as in a Caske of Gold)
Under the Kingly Service they do hold.
Should there be here a harsh objection cast,
Why (having tried so many ways, and past
So many places) All, or none of these,
Could me establish: (oh) let them but please
To note what I have heard some Merchants say,
That what they'ue got on Land, they'ue lost at Sea;
'Twill stop the current of that crook'd conceit,
And light unto constructions far more straight:
For so (God knows) have I by Storms and Flood
Of Time and Sickness, lost my Land-got good.
Lo, this has been my life's sad Pilgrimage,
Unto this hour (the Evening of my Age)
City and Countries I have seen, and Court,
And in them some of each degree, each sort,
Of each Sex too (for even my willing duties
Reflected have upon some Female Beauties)
To whom my Soul has vowed such dear affection,
I shall not give it ample satisfaction,
If Deaths darke-night, my sight-depriued eyes,
A shaking hand, or ought else should arise,
Ere I had consecrated (with my Name)
Some speaking honor to their living Fame.
And amongst all them, whom I have (thus) observed,
You stand in a chief place, and are (thus) served:
True worth will neu'r esteeme't a wandering Shift,
For a poor man, in a poor well-meant Gift,
To tender his hearts-zeale; but take it aright,
As Christ accepted the poor Widows Mite.
Do you but so, and of the Leapers ten,
I Will be the Tenth, and humbly come again,
And pay my vows, and in a way more known
Sing double honor to your virtues shown.
The humbly devoted, R. CRANE.

The Works of MERCY, BOTH Corporal and Spiritual.
MAn of polluted lips, dare thou aspire
So high a Work? Call for celestial fire:
Inuoke some holy hand to guide thy pen,
Some circumcized heart, to teach thee ^ when
Thou but conceiu'st a verse, sett'st down a line,
Sigh for thy state, weep for those sins of thine
Those Actual ones, that Justice have called down,
And made the Almighty with an angry frown
Fright Blessedness from thee, making thy life
A Vale of misery, a Den of strife;
Scarce suffering thee, in almost sixty years,
See ought but dangers, mischiefs, debts, and fears;
Laying on thy Soul such heaviness, such woe,
As, but his Mercy help thee, thou must go
(And speedily) unto a Grave, forlorn,
Wayling, and wishing thou had neu'r been borne.
Alas, but what am I, that he should daigne
In his abundant Grace, to raise again
Me (groueling earth) that in confusion lies,
Not daring to his Throne erect mine eyes?
O my dejected Spirit, rowse thy self,
Be not with cares (as worldlings are with pelf)
Wholly be-numm'd: thy God (benign, and good)
Knows even for thee, thy Savior shed his blood:
Be thou but penitent, and he will smile;
Wash thee with Tears, and he with sacred Oil
Will cheer thy looks, and thou shall clearly see
The loving kindness he intends to thee.
The Scales are fallen already: I behold
Divine Infusion (happy man) am told
That his blessed Providence (never forsaking)
Did first excite thee to this Undertaking:
He bids thee write; rely on him, and send
Thy prayers up, and he will fairly end
This thy design, and thou shall comforts find,
Both to thy trauaild life, and troubled mind.
Lead by this Fiery-Conduct (this dark night)
Lo thus I wander, (hopeful Israelite)
MERCIES FIRST WORK CORPORAL: To feed the Hungry.
WEll may this Work ('among all true Christians blessed)
Be placed as a Forerunner to the rest;
By night the Pillar, and the Cloud by day,
By which all Mercies Works may find their way:
For the sharp sting of Hunger to assuage,
Being an affliction that feels greatest rage,
Offspring of Famine, that, of Plagues the third,
Threatened for sin, in the most sacred Word,
By how much it appears the bitt'rer grief,
The fairer Mercy shines in the relief:
Then, to give Bread, implies Gods work in heaven,
Since Christ (the Bread of life) was to us given,
When we had starved Souls: duty binds us then
To comfort the necessities of men:
And while w' have time our charity must be shown
Not leave it to be done after wee're gone,
By the slow bounty of another aid,
Who perhaps too, by thy example swaid,
Will part from nothing till his dying day,
So may thy Goodness be lost every way,
And tossed from ones Trust to another care,
Till there be nothing to trust to but Air.
Christ is the Bread of life; Dole then at death
Is but dead charity: whilst God gives breath,
Be thou a giver to those stand in need,
And with thine own eye see the hungry feed:
Then on the next thou can not choose but think,
Feeding the Starved, thou wilt give the Thirsty drink.
So by one step of Mercy, thou wilt ascend
To the full height of goodness in the end:
Climbing the Corporal Works, there will appear
Then Jacobs Ladder ( the Spiritual) clear.
MERCIES SECOND WORK CORPORAL: To give drink to the Thirsty.
ANother raging enemy, like the first,
Sets upon man (afflicted) and that is Thirst,
Terror of Surfets, and that plague his fell
Upon full bowls; witness that wretch in hell,
(Who shows the torment best) when all his song
Was but for one poor drop to cool his tongue:
But Christ, that sets reward to him that gives
But a poor cup of water, and releeues
His Christian brothers want, his thirst to appease,
Held it too dear for that rich Gluttons ease.
What charity can less, then to afford
A cup of water? Yet with Christ thy Lord
It has a rich acceptance: which shows plain,
Man's poorest Alms are not bestowed in vain.
Mark but the Blessings that are showered from heaven
On this (the feeblest bounty can be given)
The Lord shall satisfy thy soul in Drought,
Make fat thy bones, thy courage bold and stout,
And like a watered Garden thou shall grow,
Nay like a Spring, whose waters ever flow.
Thy Barnes shall crack with plenty for the first,
For this, thy Presses with new wine shall burst.
Here are two Steps: if thou can get so far,
I know thou wilt cloth Need when thou see it bare
MERCIES THIRD WORK CORPORAL: To clothe the Naked.

HE that did first uncover Nakedness,
Had the first curse from man, whose tongue did bless
At the same instant his two other Sons,
In whose acts the first modest Story runs.
We Are taught by Gods Law, we should not withold
Our brothers garment, (his defense from cold)
And called his covering: which instructs us still
How well this work is pleasing to Gods will,
To clothe the Naked: To incite us more
To this most seemly Mercy to the poor,
The Lord himself the first example showed
On our first Parents, whom he (naked) clothed.
Humanity instructs us to this care,
And creatures that no name of Reason bear:
That gentle Bird (tender and kind to man)
Seeing the bareness of a Christian,
Will cover him ore with leaves before it rest,
Then sing a dirge upon his mossie breast.
Who can so dull a Charity profess,
But will, of all wants, pity Nakedness?
If nothing stir him up, this only can,
He sees his first Shame in an Vncloath'd man.
That thought I hope will raise him to this deed,
To which, being mounted, he will still proceed;
And having got three steps up, he will see
In what distress and wants poor Prisoners be.
MERCIES FOVRTH WORK CORPORAL: To ransom Captives.
THe more the charitable man proceeds,
Flow greater miseries to meet his deeds:
If he look now with Mercies melting eye
Into the Gaoles where wretched Prisoners lie,
Four miseries joined in one he there shall see,
Hunger, Thirst, Bareness, and Captivity:
He then that truly cleeres this combinde grief,
Fairly sets off four works in one relief.
This (amongst all afflictions) most extends,
When man lies locked both from his means and friends:
Sure, from the infernal Lake 'twas first derived,
For so, lost-Soules lie of all joys deprived:
'Twas the most cruel punishment indeed
That ever was devised to vex true Need;
To make Necessity more helpless; Want
More miserable; Scarcity, more scant:
As who should say, We Will invent plagues anew,
We Will bar all means, and see what heaven will do.
Such are the merciless Creditors, that join
Misery to want, as they do blood to coin
Devouring widows houses under color
Of long lip-praying, making their plague fuller.
Let Prisons swallow needy Souls no more,
But rich Trust-Breakers that have made 'em poor:
On this thy Charity may boldly venture,
Clear 'hem of True-men, that great Thieves may enter;
For now there is no room, nor would it hold,
To put up Sheep and Goats both in one Fold.
If thou desir'st this wrong but to redress,
I Will trust thy Mercy for the Harbourlesse.
MERCIES FIFTH WORK CORPORAL: To harbor the Harbourlesse.
THis hospitable Mercy stands in need
Of small incitement, it has been a Deed
So gloriously requited, that none can
Deny that succor to a Christian;
If he remember how the times of old
Have been rewarded, he will neu'r grow cold:
For Truth proclaims it (then to be believed)
In Strangers shapes Angels have been received:
So Abraham's Hospitality was blessed,
And the like charity in Lot expressed,
Which past not unrewarded, for next Morn
From burning Sodom he was safely borne.
This were enough (from all) this work to extract,
Seeing such Blessings purchased by the act:
Say we receive not Angels, we are sure
To entertain Christ, which is far more pure,
(In his afflicted members) this too we win,
Letting in Charity, we shut out Sin;
And this good more: if cheerfully thou impart
Thy house to Christ, he will come into thy heart:
Then putt'st thou on all works of blessed kinds,
Thou Wilt run to visit those whom Sickness binds.
MERCIES SIXTH WORK CORPORAL: To visit the Sick.
THe motives that should most persuade dull minds
To offices of Mercy of all kinds,
Are to consider well how like they look
To all Gods Works, the Glass, the sacred Book,
Which shows 'hem clearly to man's mortal eye
That he might follow 'hem more effectually.
Here is a Mercy (though it seem a pain)
Which God begins, to draw us on again,
The Sick to him, the healthful to the Sick,
Both for his glory, to keep Mercy quick.
We say of them which have a Sickness on 'hem,
These words, Gods visitation is upon 'hem:
Shall not we visit whom he visits then?
What work can be a glory more to men,
Then reverently to second (yet most free)
Gods visitation with our company?
To be a visitant there where God is chief,
And the first visitor, can this be grief?
Or Shame? or Danger? Say the last it be,
Thy comfort is, the same God visits thee:
And when thy health's restored, more care thou wilt have
Both of the Sick, and those that want a Grave.
MERCIES SEVENTH WORK CORPORAL: To bury the Dead.
WIth this fit care did Abraham first begin,
And bought a Field to bury his Dead in:
And Joseph was the first that honor gave
To the dead Corpse, embalmed it for the Grave:
Nay God himself (which should move most of all)
Gave Moses in a valley Burial.
More: mark the glorious promise of his Truth,
No Blessing bears a fairer spring, or youth
In the most beautiful Word: mark it again,
Let it be graven on the hearts of men;
Where ere thou find'st the dead, have this regard,
Take 'hem, and bury 'hem; and for reward,
I Will give thee (in this gift comes all in one)
The first place in my Resurrection.
Tobit, amidst his precepts to his Son,
Gently warnes this, as needful to be done,
When IN me dead, bury me: and next of all,
(As if he scarce had spoke of Burial)
Bids the same Care he of his Mother have,
Whom, when She dies, seal up in the same Grave.
Thus, when thou have performed the last request
To the Works Corporal, and Interred, in rest,
With a clear Conscience, and untroubled heart,
Thou may lay claim to the Spiritual part.
These made Paralells.
Corporal. Spiritual. To feed the Hungry. To correct the Sinner. To give
drink to the Thirsty. To instruct the Ignorant. To clothe the Naked. To
counsel the Doubtful. To ransom the Captives. To comfort the sorrowful. To
harbor the Harbourlesse. To bear wrongs patiently To visit the Sick. To
forgive all men. To bury the Dead. To pray for others, even our Enemies.

MERCIES FIRST WORK SPIRITVALL: To correct the Sinner.
TO feed the Hungry, Mercies first degree,
May with this first Spiritual par aleld be:
For a Stray-Sinners-Soule that long has swaru'd
From Christ (life's Bread) may be called hunger-staru'd.
Then to Correct, and turn that Soul to Good,
Is rightly said to give Spiritual Food.
So much for the Coherence: and through All
The Corporal Works so meet Spiritual.
GOd rebuked Laban, 'cause he did pursue
Jacob; Christ Paul; Paul rebuked Peter too
Boldly and openly* which shows we ought
To reprove Sin in any: it is so taught
Throughout the word, by Law, and by the Lamb,
Who all-obedient, for the obedient came.
List to the counsel of the Holy Ghost,
Where dwells all goodness plentifully most,
If thy weak brother through temptation fall,
Restore him, ye that are Spiritual.
So says the Spirit of all comforts beauty,
Which shows this work is a Spiritual duty:
It is a Mercy to the Souls of men,
And brings 'hem to the way of life again.
One duty so depends upon another,
He that Corrects, will sure Instruct his Brother:
(Coheres with that before, for he that feeds
The hungry, will give drink to him that needs)
It Is such a Golden-chaine, so linck'd together,
In Soul, and Body, it is the same in either.
MERCIES SECOND WORK SPIRITVALL: To instruct the Ignorant.
TO give the Thirsty Drink, the second Act
Of Mercy Corporal, is this Mercies Tract:
For what is Ignorance but the fearful Thirst
And drought of knowledge, in Gods wrath often cursed,
Swearing the Erring and Idolatrous Breast
Should never enter into his fair Rest.
In wars of Ignorance they are said to live,
And Fire and Thirst are the fairest fruits wars give.
I give you Milk to drink (says Paul) not Meat,
Which shows the faintn^sse of an Ignorant heat.
God calls the Glory of the Ignorant, Drought,
And like men famished their life's joys go out.
Instruction, like a River, then let in,
Waters the Soul that lay even parched with Sin:
And mark their glorious reward that do it,
They that to right ways turn the wandrers foot,
Themselves like fixed Stars (who Erring never)
Shall in the eternal kingdom shine for ever.
'Twas the Command Christ his Disciples gave,
Go teach all Nations (willing all to save)
And what makes perfect his Command, Baptize,
That in their Souls a heavenly Spring might rise.
Then to instruct the Ignorant, is to give
Spiritual Drink, by which the Soul may live.
When Food and Drinke's given, divine Charity says
Counsel the Doubtful, clothe the bare in Faith.
MERCIES THIRD WORK SPIRITVALL: To counsel the Doubtful.
TO clothe the Naked, (that third Step in Grace)
With this Spiritual Work may rank in place:
There Is Nakedness in Soul, which is in Man
The greatest want, when Christ is not put on;
His Sufferings, his Righteousness, his Merits,
Which are the vestments that adorn meek Spirits.
Those Souls are decked with Graces, and shine most,
Set with the Counsels of the Holy Ghost.
Then to be Doubtful, and of hard belief,
Is miserable Nakedness: a grief
Which most needs Counsel, and best power of Man,
Since it first proved the Jews Reiection.
Faith is that Wedding Robe; in which not dressed,
We are disgraced, and turned out from the Feast:
Which still confirms th'vnseemelinesse of Doubt:
Faith's called a Breast Plate: if we walk without,
We are not only bare, but want Defense,
And every Evil knows our Indigence.
Every temptation wounds, with the least touch,
The force, though weak, the Doubter helps it much,
And sticks-in his own Arrow; his flesh cleaues
Wide open to Ills, whose heart no Faith receives:
He that to this Souls Succor lends a hand,
Helps to remove this house, built upon Sand,
And sets it on a Rock, (his Saviors Trust)
To the next Work of Comfort he will be just.
MERCIES FOVRTH WORK SPIRITVALL: To comfort the Sorrowful.
TO Ransom Captives, the fourth Mercy placed
In the first Rank, may with this Work be graced.
There are Spiritual Captives, when within
The Soul lies geyu'd with Fetters made of Sin,
Chained to despair, and Guilt of ill demerit,
To Comfort, is to Ransom such a Spirit:
Or at the least, to set the mind in frame
With the sweet thought of their Redeemers name:
That sacred Ransom for all penitent men,
Laden with Sorrow, for their load of Sin.
To this most beauteous Mercy (says Saint Paul)
Gods special Attribute, may move us all.
The God of comfort, being Gods glorious name,
Whence we receiving ours, must give the same
To the afflicted Conscience, ease her load
With what our selves are comforted of God.
Christ in sweet words makes known himself to be
The Lord of Comfort, saying, Come to me
You heavy laden: what can more be named?
The Holy Ghost, he is generally proclaimed
A Comforter: his special work on Earth,
Is to raise Joy upon our second Birth.
Well with a Christian may this Work agree,
So Starre-like fixed in the whole Trinity,
To light and guide Compassion in Mankind,
That the next Work it may the easier find.
He that lends pity to griefs mournful song,
Patience will bless his Soul to bear a wrong.
MERCIES FIFTH WORK SPIRITVALL: To bear Wrongs patiently.
TO give to those a harbor that have none,
Was a Work Corporal in the fifth place shown;
As Patience now in this Spiritual form,
Which has a welcome for wrongs sharpest storm:
And to give Injuries house-roome, is no more
Then to lodge Enemies, distressd and poor;
Which makes our Acts the nobler in their course,
And puts our Evils to the weaker force:
"As wrath consumes it self, opposed by none,
"So Injuries endured, their stings are gone.
That God, which (last) of Comfort held the name,
Is (here) the God of Patience; both the same:
By his long-suffring, Penitence works our peace,
And by our Patience we our Souls possess:
Our Patience having a possession then,
Who should lodge there, but Injuries of men?
That place to Evils properly belongs,
" The house of Patience, is the Inn of wrongs.
The holy Prophets are before us placed,
As precedents of Patience; but most graced
By Christ, and his Endurings: witness Scorns,
Spite, Blasphemies, Reproaches, Buffets, Thorns,
Last his most precious Suffering, that excels,
And has raised Patience above all Virtues else;
And for the Thornie-Crowne, pricked it with Stars
Shining through Corporal or Spiritual Wars.
Who would not bear wrongs, since in the end they prove
All Jewels, set about their Crown above?
Without the next, impossible he should live;
He that bears wrongs, will graciously forgive.
MERCIES SIXTH WORK SPIRITVALL: To Forgive all men.
THe Visitation of the sick, the sixth
Of Corporal Works, is with this Mercy fixed:
For on the Bed of Sickness, harshest men
Will both forgive, and ask forgiveness then:
That time, the most reuengefull Spleen will melt,
In tears, and not in blood, his Revenge felt.
The motive then to draw this good Work on us,
Is to think still that Sickness were upon us:
And as the Worldling when he is sure to die,
Will then give all, no man more liberally;
For reason of his Bounty this we give him,
Because he can nor keep, nor carry with him:
So he that is most reuengefull, most malicious,
Will show himself in that kind then least vicious:
When Visitation, like a frostie Night,
Binds up the Rivers of his Blood and Spite,
If he be good, and a right Christian,
He will forgive (as Charity ties man)
If he be neu'r so vilde, he will forgive then,
In that he has no power to iniure men.
Howeuer, by this blessed example live,
Because our Christ forgave, let us forgive:
For his sake honor it; and in this respect,
It being the special mark of Gods Elect:
The next will sweetly fall into thy way,
For he that pardons, will be apt to pray*
MERCIES SEVENTH WORK SPIRITVALL: To pray for others, even our enemies
THe burying of the dead, not disagrees
With this Work, Praying for our Enemies:
For as Obliuion's said to be a Grave,
And Ills (forgotten) their true burial have;
So when we pray for foes, we there comprise
The funeral of all our Injuries,
Never in life to be remembered more,
But like things buried, sealed, and covered ore:
This praying-loue, which makes up Charity best,
And both, fair Mercy in this Tract expressed,
Is like a Toombe-stone here upon Deaths Inn,
And couers the great multitude of Sin.
Blessed Saint Steven thus with loud voice cride,
And buried his foes wrongs before he did,
Lord, lay not to their charge this sin (though deep)
And when he had thus spoke, is said to sleep,
To show the meekness of his death, and that
Wrongs were no sooner pardoned, but forgot.
It is a Mercy that Christ lights us to,
Forgive them, for they know not what they do:
Your enemies love, do well to the^ that spite you,
Bless the^ that curse, and pray for the^ that smite you
Among Mercies works this shines the special Iem,
Both to bring wrongs to the Grave, and pray for them:
As Christian Charity uses this remorse,
Prayers are often said over an ill man's coarse
(To the worlds judgment) which this work implies,
We ought to pray even for our Enemies.
Who loves these Works (both ways in number seven)
Will shine amongst men, and be a Star in heaven.
FINIS.

