THE POETICAL ESSAYS OF Alexander Craige SCOTOBRITANE.

printer's device of William White, featuring a chariot drawn by dragons driven
by a male figure or Triptolemus or Demeter (McKerrow 188b)

Seen and allowed.



Imprinted at London by Wllliam White, dwelling in Cow-lane near Holborne
Conduit. 1604.

THE AVTHOR TO HIS BOOK.
WHen Dedal taught his tender Son to flee,
Out through the subtle watrie vaults of air:
Go not too high, nor yet too low, said he:
Of Floodes beneath, of Fire above beware:
So homebred Rimes you Icare-like must rise,
Midway betwixt the Vulgar and the Wise.
For you shall be unto the vulgar sort
No fit propine, because not understood:
And with the Wise you must have small resort,
Since they can reap in reading you no good:
Like Dedalus I then direct, thus fly,
Go neither low, nor yet I pray too hie.
And though you be directed to a King,
By any means approach not Court I pray,
For some will say my precepts prick and sting,
And some shall scorn, some carpe, some cast away:
But (as you must) if toward Court you go,
Since freindes are few, I pray you breed no foe.
Aerij montes et mollia prata, nemusque
et vos carminibus flumina not a meis,
Quod me tam gracilem voluistis far Poetam
indignor, magnae laudis amore calens.
TO MY DREAD SOVEREIGN JAMES, by the grace of God, of Britain, France and
Ireland, King.
CAtulus Lactatius having done the utmost of his endeavors to stay his
Soldiers that fled before their enemies, put him self among the Run-awayes,
and dissembled to be a Coward, to bear them company; That so they might
rather seem to follow their Captain, then run away from the Enemy: This
was a neglecting of his reputation, to conceal the shame and reproach of
others. I have (accomplished Archi-Monarch) with the rest of these Boreo-Britan
Poets, been ingrately silent; and with the cold ashes of Fear, have covered
the coals of my Love: Because (as Archileonida said to the Thratian Legates,
There were many more more valiant Citizens in Sparta, then her Son Brasidas,)
I found my self but a doltish Cheril, among so many delicate Homers: And thus,
neither durst I praise thy Fortunes, nor congratulate thy Greatness; But now am
bold to present to your most sacred eyes these lovely litures, both to
encourage others, and make satisfaction for my (seeming ingratitude) long
silence. I intend not with those Macedonian Parasites to call Alexander, the
Son of Jupiter: nor with Hermodorus to make Antigonus the son of Phoebus. I
write not to enlarge thy fame, which is boundles; nor to beg reward, which I
merit not; nor to purchase praise, which I crave not; but in few lines to show
the infinity of my Love to your Grace. When Vitellius, at the Battle of
Cremona was slain, the Parthian King Vologesus sent Ambassadors to Vespasian,
offering him forty thousand Parthian Horsemen to aid him, (This was a
glorious and joyful thing to be sought unto with offers of so great
assistaunce, and yet not to need them): So thanks were given to Vologesus, and
he at perpetual peace from thencefoorth with the Romans. I have sent (dread
Liege) those Papers Congratulatorie, and Paroenetic, to your Majesty, not that
your Highness needs them, but with Vologesus, to show my Love to Vespasian, and
purchase his thanks. If you like my labors, they come not too late: if you
loath them, they come too soon to light. Thus, bold as a true and loving
Subject, fearful as a blushing and onmanumitted Prentice in Poesy, I remain
your Maiestes,

Borne Subject, and bound beadman, Alexander Craige.

TO THE READER.
THE famous Grecians had a Law, (though after mittigated by Charondas) that who
soever for fear did run away from Battle, should be punished with death. So,
least I should come in the reverence of that Law, or be called a Cowward, I
have presumed to publish these my long conceyted Poems to common light: And
like that valiant Bayard (who feeling himself deadly wounded, and unable to
sit on his Horse, commanded his Soldiers to lay him against a tree, but in
such sort, as he might die with his face to the Enemy) I resolve, since I have
already from wisest censors, received my death shot, by printing my papers, to
die with my face to the Foe. And since (loving Lector) Non omnibus datur adire
Corinthum, I am contented to be poynted at for a foolish Poet, so I may be
reputed a faithful Subject. Mauricius forewarned by Dreams, and sundry
Prognostications, that Phocas should kill him, demanded of Philip his son in
law who this Phocas was? Who answered, he was a faint and cowardly fellow. The
Emperor thereby concluded, he was both cruel, and a murderer. I fear no
foe () save faynting Phocas, who cowardly concealing his own, will cruelly
murder my Verses. Thus humbly submitting my homely labors to thy charitable
casligation, I rest.

Thine as thou decerns and deserves, Alexander Craige.

1. SONET. TO HIS MAJESTY.
WHen others cease, now I begin to sing;
And now when others hold their peace, I shout:
(The Lord preserve sweet Leonatus King,
That he may rule great Britane round about:)
But if perhaps your Majesty shall doubt,
what makes me fing when others hold their peace:
My rusticke Muse when as each one cried out,
Could not be heard from so remote a place,
Dombe Wonder then my Sense did so confound,
The greater stroke astonisheth the more,
When as I heard thy name so much renound,
I felt as lying in a sound no sore:
But now revived, I sing, when others cease,
(In wonted mercy Lord preserve thy Grace.)
2
WIth mutual loss, with none or little gain,
When Ilion fair was fully set on fire,
Proud Paris by his horie rival slain,
And Tyndaris brought back to her Empire:
I know not if the Phrygians did require
Melitides, but lo when Troy was wrackt,
Kind fool he came (some say at their desire)
Yet said he naught, but sighed to see them sacked:
He then was kind, I hinder now great Prince:
He wept, I smild, to see thy Troy but blood:
He sent for, I unsought, and had long since
Been here, if that my coming could done good:
Yet in this point our kindness I conione,
We come kind fools to help when all is done.
3
GReat Pompey caused his Heralds to proclaim
A public Feast to nations far and near,
The young, the old, the rich and poor, all came,
As welcome guistes unto that Princely cheer:
One blind man at a lame began to spear,
What shall we do? go said the lame, take way,
I shall be guide, thou on thy back shall bear
My lamed limbs; and thus they keep the day.
Look peerless Pompey on my Lines and me,
They lame, and I without thy sight am blind:
We come from farthest Scottish coasts to thee,
Some portion of thy royal Feast to find:
It restes in thee to welcome us therefore,
And make me rich, that I may beg no more.
TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. Epistle Congratulatorie and Peraenetic.
Scarce had my Muse respir'd the smallest space,
From paynting praises of our civil Pace,
Packed up by thee most gracious King of late
In Calidons disturbed unquiet state,
When lo the Kalendes of this pleasent Spring,
Unto my ears did joyful tydinges bring,
That bles'd Eliza had resignd her breath,
And paid the last and hindmost debt to death:
(O fearful death! the fatal end of all,
With equal Mace thou chops both great and small)
And thou designed her Diadems to weyre,
Of royal blood her nyest agnat heir.
Thou like a Noah long has kep't thy Arc,
Thoyld many storm by day, and gloomie dark:
Yet would not break thy ward till time thy God,
Has lent thee leave, and bids thee walk abroad:
But his command since thou would nothing do,
Lo he has joined his blessings thereunto.
Come forth with Wife and Children, sweet command,
The blessing breok and multiply the land.
Thus am I solu'd of all my wonted doubt,
Nor wits nor weirdes thy fortunes bringes about,
But that eternal providence above:
Which thou art bound to serve, with fear and love.
Those news of new, have waked my sleeping vain,
And makes me write unto your Grace again
Most hearty greetings of thy happy chance,
Since thou art King of England, Ireland, France,
Besides that famous and vnmatch'd renown
Of thy unconquered old and Scottish Crown.
Long desuetude has rusted so my quill,
My wits are weak, but great is my good will.
Though scoffing Idiots will my pains deprave,
And Aristarchus all the credit have.
I am to thee (dread Leigt) thy aerie Elfe:
I borrow but thy words to praise thy self.
Let Muse-foe Mars elsewhere abroad go dwell,
Of wars and wounds let foreign Fachions smell:
Peace dwells with thee, where it has dwelt so long.
Prone to propell, and to permit no wrong.
Wise Periander wreates that Crowns of Kings,
On many fearful fluctuations hings:
And that a Monarch's surety no way stood
In victories, in warrie broils, and blood:
But in the love of Subjects trust and true,
Thence said the saige did settling sure ensue.
Grave Xenophon thy registers records,
That deeing Cyrus spoke those self same words.
Aratus rare, said so to Philip great,
That love and peace confirm's a Kings estate:
In speculation Schoolmen been diume,
But thou exceeds them Sovereign Sire sensine:
For thou has put their sacred gnom's in ure,
Perfection in thy practique makes thee sure.
Let foreign lands now look with enuies ee,
And who would rule, let him come learn at thee:
When ather Momus or Rhamnusia barks,
Thy wits are wondrous both in wreats and warkes.
Often times said Otho in a rage, that he
Had rather choose nor be a King to die.
And Diocletian said, to be a King,
And well to rule, was most difficill thing.
When Dionise at Siracusa swear
That Damocles some while his Crown should wear:
But being crowned, he plainly did protest
He never could-be blithe to be so blessed.
Were those on life for to behold thee now.
They could not reign, nor could they rule as thou.
Thy match on mould nor was, nor yet shall be:
Thus might they learn for to be Kings at thee.
Ariston's praise is thine, as I suppose,
Thou keeps thy friends, and reconciles thy foes:
Vespasian-like, whom Rome obeyed with love,
A Shepherd both, and careful King you prove:
Thy fold been broke, and lo thou has taken pain:
To recollect thy erring flocks again.
Thy Scepter and thy Sheephooke both are one,
Thou under heaven, their Herd and Lord alone.
And now as Homer painted Priam forth,
Thou has beside thee men of wit and worth:
Can any harm or strange thing now betide thee,
Vcalegon Antenor are beside thee.
Like Macedo the wondering world may doubt thee,
Parmenio and Philotas are about thee.
For all these Kingdoms which thou do command,
A part by hop's, a happy part in hand,
Thou has a Kingdom to thy self unknown,
Look rightly too, and Cecil is thine own.
Were Plato now on life, then would he say
That thy republikes blessed are this day:
For thou art wise, and now wise counsel hants,
And with thy wisdom thou supplies their wants.
Yet this much more I plainly must impart,
A friendly counsel from a faithful heart:
Though far from Jove and thunderclaps I dwell,
My Lines of love, of truth, and zeal shall smell,
Read then my Rymes most wise and prudent Prience,
And let a Hog, teach Minerue, but offense.
Not that I think your Grace has any need,
Or know's not else what is here before you reed.
No, I attest great sacred Jove above,
I only write to manifest my love:
While in my tugure (such is my estate)
I take repast of poor vnpeppered Kate.
I thank my God for such as he does give,
And pray's withal, that well, and long thou live:
And in seces at solitary times,
Thou art remembered in my rusticke Rymes.
Sinetas poor unto the Persian King,
Cold water in his hollow palm did bring:
Which Artaxerxes lovingly out-dranke,
And gave Sinetas both reward and thank.
Right so those riuols of my poor Ingyne,
I here present, from out this palm of mine.
Read then (dread Liege) those trauails of my love.
Elaborate, and done for thy behoue.
1 Thus I begin, since adulations vain,
In Courts wid Kings and Monarch must remain:
To assentators thou must give some ear,
But be no prouder of their praise a hair:
For Macedo would needs be called a God,
And to this end his Edicts blew abrod:
Which on his head did heap disgrace the rather
Since he ashamed that Phillip was his father.
2 Give Parasites enough, but not too much,
And be not lavish, least thy luck be such
As Timon Coliteus, who outspent
On Demeas and Gnatonides his rent;
Of that unthankful numer live a new,
To promise much, and to perform but few:
Be thou the stone (precellent Prince) of such,
For to secerne the honest minds from such.
3 The faithful man that once has done thee good,
And for thy life has ventered life and blood;
Be thankful still to him, do not despite him,
But with thy self think thou can nee're acquit him:
Prove not unkind to cause true Phocion die,
That thus has fought, and wun the field for thee,
But when such frieuds so nigh thy sides are seen,
Remember then but them thou had not been.
4 Serapion who is not taught to speike,
Let him not want, suppose he shame to seike:
He is thine own, and loves thee as the leave,
His speaking looks will tell when he would have:
Be (prudent Prince) a Pompey in this case,
A benefit unsought has double grace.
5 Change not too often the Rulers of thy state,
For that may breed intestiue strange debate:
The Fleeis else full, from sucking more will slake,
But hungry Gnats will make thy wounds to ache:
I pray for them as did Hymera old,
For Dionise, the tigtish tyran bold,
(Lord save said she, our King from death, disgrace,
For were he gone, a worse would get his place)
Since in this point th'apodosis is plain,
I turn my style unto your Grace again.
6 If any friend in loving form reveal
Twixt you and him your o'ursights, love him well:
(Since Plato says, the brauest minds bring forth
Both hateful vice, and virtue of most worth.
Wise Plutarch writes, in fertile Egypt grew
With medicable, enuenomd herbs anew.)
Do no rebuke, nor public shame approve,
But friendly counsel, which proceeds from love:
Be not a drunk Cambises in dispeire,
For counsel kind to kill Prexaspes heir.
7 Take Turinus, and smooke him to the death,
Who falsely sels for bribes thy royal breath.
8 Though Alexander in a raging ire,
For praising Philip his renouned Sire,
Kind Clitus killed, be thou more meek in mind,
And to the praysers of thy Parents kind.
9 Within thy heart let no injustice hant,
Let not the wronged man weep for justice want:
Pansanias plaintes proud Philip did disdain,
And cruelly for his contempt was slain.
10 A Woman old fell down upon her knee,
And cried Demetr. us, hear my plaints and me?
I have no leisure answered he again.
He takes no leisure said the wife to reign.
Do not thine ears Demetrius-like obdure,
With patience hear the sad and plaintiue poor.
11 Proud Leo spoyld Justinian his croune,
Deformed his face, and cut his nose quite down:
But when he got his Diadems again,
He punished those that erst procured his pain.
Each gut of rheum that from his nose did floe,
Gave argument for to cut off a foe.
O do not thou great Prince delight in blood!
Of cruelty thou know's can come no good;
Be thou Licurgus, though thou lackes ane ee.
Forgive Alcander, make him man to thee.
13 Vitellius-like have not a facill will,
Now to grant grace, and straight command to kill.
13 Great are thy fortunes, far beyond belief.
Thou needs no Realms, nor foraine rents by reife.
Thy mind may well luxuriat in thy wealth,
Thy Crown's are thine but blood or strife or stealth:
And since thy fortunes are so rare: O than!
Each day with Philip, think thou art a man.
14 Though Agathocles Sicil did enjoy,
Yet was he sometime but a Potters Boy:
And that his pride should not become too great,
In vessels but of Loame he took his meat.
Thy witt's the weird's with great promotion tryes,
For wonder few are happy both and wise:
Though thou be free from blast's of any storm,
Be humill still, and keep thy wonted form.
15 Wreat not thy Law's with blood as Draco did,
The God of heaven such cruelty forbid:
A happy Life, makes ay a happy end,
Be thou a Solon, Dracois Law's to mend.
16 Herodotus the Histor, and right so
The Poet Pindars wreats, with many mo,
That Monarch's great, examples good should give,
Since from their Lords the Laiks learn to live.
Kinkes be the glass, the very fcoole, the book,
Where private men do learn, and read, and look:
Be thou th'attractiue Adamant to all,
And let no wicked wrest thy wits to fall.
Go not to Delphos where Apolio stands,
Licurgus-like with offerings in thy hands,
By hellish votes and oracles to see
What to thy Law should paird or eiked be:
From great Jehovah counsel seek, and he
Shall give both Gnom's and Oracles to thee,
And shall thy spir't with prudence so inspire,
As all the world shall wonder and admire.
17 From Countries far great King behold and see,
With rich Oblations Legates come to thee:
With Vexores, and Tanais be glaide,
Of fame and honor let it not be said,
Thou art a greedy Ninus; fie for shame,
That were a stain unto thy Noble name.
18 Last, since thou art the child of Peace, I see
Thy works, and writes, are witness both with me:
(Thy works I have no leisure to unfold;
And though I had, are tedious to be told:
Thy Writes are wondrous both in prose and ryme)
Let Virtue wax and flourish in thy time:
Though thou be best, and greatest both of Kings,
Among Poets all, is none so sweetly singes.
Thou art the sweet Musaeus of our days;
And I thy Prentice, and must give thee praise:
Some other Writer must thy Worth proclaim,
Thou shall not sing upon thy self for shame:
Thou have transalpine Poets of thine own,
Whose tragique Cothurus through the world are known:
Thou has likewise of homebred Homers store,
Poor Craige shall be thy Cheryl, and no more,
Since all my life suppose I Poetze,
I see seauin Philippeans must suffize:
Not that thou art not liberal at will;
No, no, wise Prince, but cause my Verse are ill.
Yet since this fury is but lent to few,
Let us not want, thou shale have Verse anew:
If these seem pleasant, I shall sing again;
If not, I will from being bold abstain,
And cease to write; but never cease to pray,
The God of heaven preserve thee night and day.
THE MOST VIRTUOUS and accomplished Prince ANNA, Queen of Britane, France,
and Ireland; Complains the absence of her Lord and Spous JAMES, King of the
foresaid Realms.
WHere habit was, dwells sad Privation now,
And I am made an Orphane from delight:
To want the sweet fruition of thy sight,
In balefull bed my body when I bow,
Yea neither can I tell, nor can ye trow,
How black alace and noisome is each night,
Nor yet how loathsome is this common light,
Since absence made divorce twixt me and you.
I am thy Phaebae, thou my Phoebus fair:
I have no light nor life, but lent from thee,
Cursed then be absence, causer of my care,
Which makes so long this loathed eclipse to be.
What wonder I through lake of presence pine?
Worm's have alace their Sun, and I want mine.
Scotlands Tears.
WHen fabling Aesop was at fatal Delphos taken,
And there by doom condemned to be precipitat and slane
He like a woman weep't, and took delight in teaires,
Cause they alleuiat and made less the conscience of his caires.
But Solon when he spied his dearest son was dead,
He weepd the more, because his teaires to grief gave no remead:
Yet neither he nor he by teaires could salve his ill,
Though of those salt and fruitles floods impetuus spaits they spil
Then maimed Scotland thou made Orphane from delight,
Whom all the hosts of heavens abhor with undeserved despite.
With deeing Aesop mourn, or woeful Solon weep:
And tho as they, thou weep in vain let not thy sorrow sleep:
With frustrat Aesau shout, curse life and wish to dee,
Since Jacob with his mothers help thy blessing steals from thee:
Now rival England brag, for now, and not till now
Thou has compeld unconquered hearts and sturdy necks to bow.
What neither wits, nor wars, nor force before could frame,
Is now accomplished by the death of thy Imperial Dame.
Eliza fair is gone, into the land of rest,
To that Elisium predecried and promised to the blessed:
And England for her sake now weaires the sabill weed,
But Scotland if thou rightly look thou has more cause indeed.
They for a Dian dead, Apolloes beams enjoy,
And all their straying steps allace, our Titan does tonnoy
Now dawn's their glorius day with Phoebus rays bespred,
And we are but Cymmerian slaves with gloomy clouds ou'reled.
Rich neighbor nation then, from thy complaining cease:
Not thou, but we should sigh, and so to our complaints give place.
Our Garland lacks the Rose, our chatton tins the stone,
Our Volier wants the Philomel, we left allace alone.
What art thou Scotland then? no Monarchy allace,
A oligarchie desolate, with straying and onkow face,
A maimed body now, but shaip some monstrous thing,
A reconfused chaos now, a country, but a King.
When Paris fed his flocks among the Phrigian plains,
Aenone's love was his delights, his death were her disdaynes.
But when allace he knew that Priam was his Sire,
He left Aenone sweet, and syne for H^lene would aspire.
Proud Pellex England so thou art the adulterat brid,
Who for Aenone thinks no shame to lie by Paris sid.
Who knows ere it be long, but our your happy King,
With Belgic, Celtic, Aquitan, to his Empire may bring?
And he (why should he not) your Troynauant shall leave,
And unto Parise spur the post, his right for to receive?
Then, then shall England weep, and shed abounding teaires,
And we shall to our comfort find companions in our caires.
And till it so befall, with pity, not with scorn,
Upon this confinde Kingdom look, as on a land forlorn:
Wise Plato would not once admit it in his mind,
He loved Xenocrates so well, he could become unkind,
And no more can we think dread Liege, though thou be gone,
Thou will vngratly leave us thus disconsolat allone,
By Contrars Contrars placed, no dout most clearly kith,
And now thy absence breeds our bale, whose biding made us blithe.
O were thou not both wise and good, we should not mourn,
We would not for thy absence weep, nor wish for thy return.
Long sleep made Rufus loose the use of both his eene.
O do not thou sweet Prince make stay, lest thou forget us cleene
Like Epimenides when thou returns again:
The shapp of al things shall be chaing':, thine own sheep shall be slain,
Democrit rather choose no King at all to be,
Then over wicked men to rule, and such allace are we:
Our Jewel England joys, and yet no way does wrong us;
The world may see we were not worth, that thou should be among us:
But since it must be thus, and thou art forced to flitt,
Now like a Heart in to the mids of thy great body sit:
And from thy Troynauant, which pleasures store impairts,
Behold thy Kingdom's round about thy hand in all the Airts;
Examples old thou taks, and layis before thy face,
The famous Numids thought the midst to be most honored place
Thus by Hyempsals side Adherbal Salust sets,
And so Iugurtha in the midst we reed no intrance gets.
Grave Maro maks likway, the Queen of Cartage brave,
Betwix Ascanius and the wise Aeneas, place to have,
Does not Apollo too in proudest pomp appear,
With bright and day-adorning beams in his meridian sphere?
So thou has choos'd the midst, of all thy Kingdom's known;
For look about thee where thou list, thou looks but on thine own
And since the Gods decree (Great King) that so shall be,
Since Peace must flourish in thy time, and Wars must cease and die,
But competition too, since thou has Englands Crown,
Which was a Heptarchie of old, of uncontrolled renown,
Let Us and Al-bi-on, that we with one consent,
One God, one King, one Law, may be to adore, serve, keep, content.
In Rome the Sabins grew, with Tyrians Trojans mixed,
And Judah joined with Israel, but least we seem prolixt,
And that our loving plaint's, and tears may now take end,
Thee to thy Crowns, thy Crowns to thee, the great good God defend.
CALIDONS COMPLAINT At the apparent Voyage to her England, of ANNA Queen of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland: with HENRY Prince of Wales, her most
gracious Son.
AND shall no light at all to len us light be left?
Shall Sunn, Moon, fixed and those small erratic stars be reft?
And was it not enough that Titan took the flight?
Might not sweet Cynthia yet made stay for to have lent us light?
Since Sun and Moon must go, and that bright Harie starr,
Let Pluto now compare with us in darkness if he darr,
From darkness was alace our deriuation old
The fatal name MKOTIA naught but darkness does unfold,
Shall our estate allace from state be thus downthrowne,
Shall Scotland hensforth have again no cround K. of their own?
Shall we from King, Queen, Prince, and all their brood disseuer?
And shall not Scotland be again inhabited for ever?
Shall ghastly Ziim cry, and Oim make there sport,
Within the Palaces where once but Monarch's made resort?
At liberty alas shall Fauns and Satyrs lope,
And to a hellish cold dispare convert our former hope:
And dare not Orpheus look but once again abacke?
Or shall we find nothing at all, but fundamental wrack?
Would God that vmquhyle Dame (the wisest Dame in deed,
That ever Britain erst has borne, or yet again shall breed)
Would God as yet she were to brook her trident Mace,
Then should we not bin poynted at for wrake, scorn, and disgrace
Thou saild the glassie salt and conquered endless fame,
In prime of love Heroic Prince, to see thy Danish Dame,
In sl^eing towrs of tree thou croc'd the bounded Roares,
And brought our Queen, thy sacred Spous to Calidonian shoares wind,
O let not love wax cold! nor be not now unkind,
Thou need not fear for foamie floods, nor pray for prosperous
Since she sweet Dame is seik, thy Son but young in years,
With Cancer Leo burns above into their torrid Spheers:
Make then a bles'd return to see them both again,
But o allace! we ware those words unto the winds in vain:
For they must go to thee; more to increas our cairs,
And leave no thing behind them here, but sorrow, sighs, and teairs.
The^ whereto serve those plaints? who know's what is appointed,
Or what the Destanies decrees to do with their Anointed.
Nor Dou^ir, nor those Alps, nor Tybers volted Arche,
Unto that Archunonarche great King James must be a March:
The heauins of the great Prince hade care in to thy Coode,
And kept thee when thou no thing knew of ather bad or good.
How many treasons strange, and conspirations great,
Have bin contrived against thy crown, and standing of thy state?
Before thou was, and since thou has eskaip'd huge snairs.
Be blithe Tued marched thy kingdoms once, and now must march thy cairs
Thy name shall be enough to conquer seas and lands,
And manumit afflicted Greece from Turks and tyrans hands.
When Rome shall be subdew'd, may thou no go abroad,
And make Bizantium old obey the great alguiding God.
But if thou greyus great King our greiued hearts to glade,
Of thy triennall visiting, perform thy promeis made.
Fair gracious Dame, whose match nor was, nor shall be seen,
Though fortune smile, remember yet that thou was first our Queen
Accompleisd peereles Prince in body both and mind,
Think on thy native soil with love, and be not called unkind:
And so since King, Queen, Prince, and all our all must go,
The Trinity above preserve this Trinity be-low.
ELIAZABETH, LATE QVEENE OF ENGLAND, HER GHOST.
CEase loving Subjects, cease my death for to deplore,
And do no more with dririe cries my dolful hearse decore
Though like Cynegirus, when both the hands are gone,
Ye would detain me with your teeth in my Imperial throne.
Be Thracians now I pray, and hence-foorth cease to moan,
Ere it be long in quiet peace ye shall find five for one:
For if you can believe my prophetizing ghost,
Aeneas gave Anchises trust, you shall not think me lost.
The death of one (some say) the birth of one should be:
Three mails and femels two you have, most famous five for me:
For as I sealed my Will, my Designation dew,
And did concredit by the rest to my Achates true:
So now my ghost is glad, that by my care his pain,
My countries have their lawful King, the King his crowns again,
Then bransh imbellis'd soil, most pleasant, most perfect:
The only earthly Eden now for pleasure and delighte.
Rich England now rejoice, heave up to heaven thy hands.
The blessed Lord has blessed thy bounds beyond al other lands.
Since no Sardanapal is now become thy King,
No Dionise nor Nero proud, my death to thee does bring.
A King vnwoont to give, or yet to take offense:
A godly David rules now, a Prophet and a Prince.
The Pupil now is blithe, the Widow weeps not now,
No depredations in thy bounds, the Rushbush keeps the Kow,
The Lions now agree, and do in Peace delight:
The Thirsel now defends and guards the red Rose and the white.
The british Saints shake hands with crosses joined and spread,
Whose colors on the glassie salt no terror small have bred:
Those now conioynd in one through Neptuns bounded roares,
Shall make the ventring mercheand sail secure to forane shoares:
Flee swift-wingd Fame and tell the best and rarest new's
That time has yet brought soorth by night or days delightful hew's,
For Ships and Swans most rich, most fair, and samous Thamis,
Tell Neptune, Thetis, Triton too the haps of great king JAMES.
Thou murdring Galliglas, who long my Laws withstood,
Learn to obey, and bath no more thy blade in british blood:
All you my Subjects deire, do homage dew to him,
And that shall make my blessed ghost in boundles joys to swim.
SONET, To his Majesty of the Union of the two famous Realms Scotland and
England.
SCilurus had twice forty Children male,
And teaching them in peace to pass their days,
And that no foe should against their force preuale,
His loving mind he wisely thus bewrayes:
A bundle of Darts before their eyes he lays,
And prayed each Son to break the same: at length,
When he and he to crush those Darts assayes,
But all in vain; he told them Unions strength.
You are a Father, and a famous Prence,
Great are the bounds which are great King thine own,
And like a sacred Scilure in this sense,
Keeps Britain whole, least it should be overthrown.
The God of heaven effect what thou intends,
And bring thy proiects to their happy ends.
To the Queens most Excellent Majesty.
1. SONET.
IN Pallas Church did wretched Irus stand,
And saw her painted on the Chalk-whit wall,
With Book in one, and Sword in other hand:
And on his face (poor soul) did flatlings fall.
Syne said aloud, since I allace am thrall
To poverty, that I may not propine
Thy Godhead great, with gift nor great nor small,
Yet while I live, my service shall be thine.
So all the powers of this my poor Ingyne,
Shall be (Fair Dame) employed to pen thy praise.
Thou in Cymmerian gloomie dark shall shine,
And on thy Virtues, worlds to come shall gaize.
Thus Irus-like wise Pallas I adore,
And honor thee, since I can do no more.
2. SONET. Of her Highness Natall; being the shortest day.
GReat mighty JOVE from his imperial place,
And all the GODS for blythnes of Thy Birth,
Came down from Heaven to see thy fairest face,
Glad to Be guarded by thy beauties girth.
And Neptune fet his Flocks out through the Firth,
With all the Nymphs in Floods and Seais that dwell:
On Balens backs they mounted, made their mirth,
To see thy shapp, all leiuing leids excel:
And Phoebus father to the Fooll that fell,
In lowest state his yocked Horse did stay;
But fearing least thy beam's should burn him sell,
He stole aback, and upward went away.
And for thy saik thy Natall day each yeir,
He visits yet into his lowest spheir.
3. SONET. New yeir Gift.
THis Apill round I send, o matchles fare!
As children do for thryse als good agane,
Not such as that by which the Enbean rare,
The love of his Atlanta suift did gane:
Nor that by which Acontius did beguile
Cydippe sweet in sacred Dian's Fane.
My mind abhors all such invention vile,
No secre it slight does in my gift remane:
It more resembles that which Ate threw
Among Pallas, Juno, Venus, Dames divine.
To thee great Queen of all this courtly crew,
I do present this painted A pill mine.
Were it of Gold, or Paris I, fair Dame,
It should be thine, thou best deseru's the same.
4. SONET.
THose famous old Gymnosophists of Inde,
Which Alexander did so much admire,
And compted but as churlish and unkind,
Cause they refused his offered Gold and geir.
Their greatest care and study was we heir,
To view and mark the motions of the Sunn,
To know his courses in his Zodiac Spheir.
From Phospor's rising till the night begun.
Such is my state, O sacred Saint by thee,
I am a poor Gymnosophist of thine,
Thou art that Sunn which I delight to see,
No wealth I wish but that on me thou shine.
They longed for night, so long-some was their day,
Blithe would I be for to behold thee ay.
TO THE VIRTUOUS AND ACCOMPLISHED Sir JAMES HAY Knight, one of his Highness most
royal bedchamber.
WHen a bad Wrestler became a knauish Physician, Courage (said Diogenes to him)
thou has reason so to do; for now shall thou help to put them in the ground,
who heretofore have laid thee on it. I am from a luckles lover, become an
infortunat Poet, and have determined with Courage, to write Ditties against my
rival, that breeds my disgraces, and with Archilochus, Iambics, I mind to
make Lycambes hang him self. Agrippina foretold by Astrologues, that her Son
Nero should kill her: answered. Let him kill me, so he may be Emperor, and
succeed to Claudius: all my senses in woeful lingage (which makes me beg thy
patrocinie) like facidic Astrologs tell me my Pamphlet of the Cuckoe and
Philomel, shall be unwelcome to many, and receive strange Commentartes: but if
you be content, I care not; my greatest ambition is to breed your content: my
pleasure to please you, whose Adamantiue virtues have drawn the Iron of my
love. In public or private, in peaceable negotiations, or occupations to
leiue, or die greatly, or gloriously, I know no form or fortune of man, I can
admire or regard with so much honor, with so much love; yea, at all adventures
of life and death, thou may command.

Thine own poor friend and seruient, CRAIGE.

THE CVCKOE, AND PHILOMEL.
CRAIGE to his Rival.
THE Cucko once (some say) would Philomel assail,
Arachne-like, if she or she in singing should prevail:
The garrient Goke would needs with Prognes sister strive,
And proudly prease poor Philomel of dew praise to deprive
Then was the long eard Ass made Judge unto their Song,
Who with the Cucko sentence gave, and wrought the other wrong.
O Arbiter unfit to such discording tunes,
Yet iarring notes from Layis divine rude Nature still seiuns.
This mak's poor Philomel repent, and often repeit,
In thornie braiks by sabill night the Arcadian beasts decreit.
Such is my careful case, my rival foe I see,
For all these charming Songs of mine is far preferred to me:
For all the Sonnets sweet that I can sing or say,
Or send to her, I cum no speid, the Cucko is my stay:
And she whom still I serve, most like that long eard beast,
Maks me by her decreit to leave inglorious and disgraced.
But what remeid I rest, content to want reward,
Since Cuckoes are in such account, and Philomel debard.
Since Phoebus stcops to Pan, and Minerue glad to yield
Unto th'inuennomd Spiders webb, I gladly loose the field,
Yet shall I still complain, nay shall she heir me ery,
The Philomel sings to her self, and henceforth so shall I.
APOLOGY FOR HIS RIVAL.
THE Cucko once (it is true) in singing, did compare
With Prognes sister Philomel, Pandions daughter fair:
And then the Asine grave, pronounced a sentence true,
For many arguments, of which fond Riual read those few.
The Cucko with sweet songs saluts the yearly Spring,
Poor Philomel in tragic tunes of Terens wrongs does sing.
Through tops of tallest trees the soaring Cucko flies,
While Philomel in lowest shrubs complains, dispairs, and dies.
The Cuckoes not's declare of humane life the date,
While hart-broke Philomel must still her painful plaints repeat.
The Cucko sings her name, no borrowed note nor strange,
While Philomel for Itis blood, a thousand tunes must change.
The Titling does attend the Cucko late and air,
And of her eggs and Plumeles birds she taks continual care,
None tends poor Philomel, for all her charms and chrils,
Yea if she fleip, the poynted thorn out-through her breist-bone thrils
The Cucko spends the Spring in mirth both eve and morn,
And to the ielus heirar still portends the forked Horn.
At Iunoes suit great Jove became a Cucko fair:
Why should the brood of Grecian Kings, with Gods above compaire?
Then Phoebus stoop to Pan, be Minerue glad to yeeild
Unto th'inuennomd Spiders web, for thou must loose the field:
And thou must be content to weep, and want reward,
Since Cuckoes are in such account, and Philomel debard.
Thou to thy self complains, alone thou weeps and murns,
Do so poor soul till fortune change, whose favor goes by turns.
APPELLATION TO THE LION.
THe Lion some time went abroad to spy his pray,
And with the Fox he made the Ass companions of his way,
Through wildsome wayles ways, and foraine fells they fare,
To find some food, which found, the Ass would needs divide and share,
And thus triparts the pray, and sets his terce aside:
Yet died therefore; just punishment of ignorance and pride.
But lo the fraudfull Fox did greeid and grief disgyse,
And by the Asins misery with wealth of wills was wise,
Now neither perrils past, nor no examples new,
Can move the Asins of this age; O damned iudocil crew:
That long eaird beast my Judge has made my rival sleep,
Fools concolor in favors lap, while I poor wretch must weep.
Then Lion great of Kings, and King of Lions all,
To thee my Sovereign and my Judge, I do appeal and call:
Thou hears and sees my wrongs, thou must dread Liege alone
Correct the Cucko, and detrude the Asine from his throne.
I like Xantippus Dog, have faund and followed thee,
And will thou suffer me in sight of Salamin to die.
It greeues my heart to see those Cuckoes of the Spring,
Those tamed beasts, whom Bion haits, what flattering tunes they sing.
I burst when I behold brave Homers Cloak so bare,
When cu'ry fool and simple sheep the golden fleece does wear
To thee alone I fly, in hope to find refuge:
Why should the leaud and lasie Ass to numered lyus be Judge?
My Fortune and my Fate do both depend on thee,
My Spring expireth, shall I sing, or shall I silent be?
Set down thy sentence heir, and quickly cure my care,
Or let my wretched life take end twixt silence and dispare.
EPISTLE TO HIS FRIEND.
I Am fully persuaded, that no man living has a more forgetful mind of
benefits received, then my self; and none more maliciously mindful of
smallest injuries, then miserable I: In the first a Melitides, who could not
number five: In the last, a vindictiue Darius, who least he should forget the
wrongs he received from the Athenians, caused his Paige when soever he sat
down to his Table, sing to him, Sir remember the Athenians. Thy courtasies,
thy loving kindness, thy hospitality, patrocinie in perels, and thy omnerited
munificence are all forgotten, and thy least escapes (Anonym friend) are here
too much remembered, which both condems thy inconstancy, and my unkindness: thy
wavering, and my weakness. The Pythagorians make good to be finit, and evil
infinite: so is humane waikenes redier to repay in greatest measure the smallest
evil, then to repay in smallest measure the greatest good received: read then
() thy faults, and my follies: and while thou reads, mend the first in thy
self, and pity the last in

Thine old, and if thou will, yet loving Friend, CRAIGE.

TO HIS ANONIM FRIEND and Mistres PALINODE.
IN Annals old we read Jove had but daughters two,
The one with Ceres he begat, Proserpine hight, and so
Her for her beauties saik, proud Pluto Prince of hell,
Amid the flowrie meadows spoild, and keeps unto him sell:
The other Helene sayre in likeness of a Swan,
He gat with Laeda, and beguild poor Tyndarus her man,
Her Theseus took away, and had to Athens home,
And made her Hymen's rupture long ere Menelaus come.
Thus Jove no daughter had vnspoyld at all you see,
Yet must Pirithous have one to keep his oath, or dee.
Brave Theseus was his friend, his love he would not have:
Then must Proserpine be spoild from Plutoes pitchie cave:
(For who can be content bright beauty should be chaind,
Or in Cymmerian gloomy dark with Dis should be detaind?)
Thus to the hells he haists, and is by Cerber slain:
And Theseus till Alcides came, in fetters did remain:
O monument most rare of true and perfect love,
Which neither beauty nor the hells could any way remove.
Though Tyndaris was blazed the brightest that has been,
Pirithous would from her love for Theseus love absteene:
And when Pirithous took journey toward hell,
Brave Theseus would accompany his friend, as stories tell:
But faith, nor truth on earth, nor friendship now is naine,
And Pithias now will loose his life, or Damon come again.
There is no love allace upon this mournful molde,
Least Mydas-like a man may turn each thing by tuch in gold.
False Eriphile now regards but greeid of gain,
And will betray Amphiaraus to get a golden chain.
The Belidean Dames in number five times ten,
(There is no Hypermnestra now) will kill their married men.
False proud Polinices will Theban crown possess,
And banish poor Eteocles against parents will express:
And proud Plexirtus too Leonats bastard brother,
Makes Tydeus strive with Tolenor, and one to kill the other.
Urania Klaius sturs with Strephen still to strive.
Nor can the Prince of Macedon find Musidor online.
Thus look from sex to sex, no faith nor truth remains,
Crow's flee but where the Carrion lies, and worldlings go for gains,
I speak not now allace, by speculation vain,
A practique in my person past procurs my peereles pain:
For why, I som-time had a Mistres and a Friend,
She falls falte frequent to that sex: he les worth nor I weind;
She limping Vulcan still admits in Mauors bed,
He like a subtle Sinon goes in Damons liuerie cled:
She Pluto black for me does in her bed embrace,
He but a cause has cast me off: O carecontryuing case.
Was thou not once to me Pandora deir and sweit,
Till thou untied the balefull box with painful plages repleit.?
And was thou not again a Kallias unto me?
But foolish Alcibiad I, to trust so much in thee.
Then, Som-time Friend, farewell; farewell my late lost Love:
A Lais light, a Sinon falls, thus maks me to remove.
Betwix this doolefull deuce, how can my days endure,
Sense he has played the hypocrit, and she the hateful hoore?
And yet for kindness old, I will conceyl your names,
And make your conscience black, a Judge to both your secret shames:
And sense both thou, and thou, have thus contrived my fall,
Dis keeps my Dame, Dis katch my friend, and make me free of all.
SONET.
I Some time had a Mistres, and a Friend;
She fair, he good; and lovely both to me:
But both are waxed vnwoorthier nor I weind:
Deceitful she, and most unconstant he:
Thus for each line, I give my self a lie,
That heretofore in to their praise I pend,
He, she, and I, are always chayng'd all three:
They first, I last; and thus our Loves must end.
True Friends allace, like blackest Swans are rare,
And fairest faices full of most deceat.
This causes me alone for to regreat,
And from each eye to wring a bloody tear:
And since no sex beneath the Sun is true,
False friend fareweell, fair facill Dame adieu.
To his Calidonian MISTRESS.
THemistocles after a great Victory by nauall Battle, came to visit the
slaughtered bodies of his Enemies, and found by the Sea side many Jewels and
Chains scattered. Then said he to his friend who then by chance followed him,
Gather these spoils, for thou art not Themistocles. This worthles Epistle like
a loose or neglected Jewel, though the wise and worthy Themistocles ouerpas,
I pray thee sweet Mistes peruse and preserve, least it perish; sense too, and
for thee, it is done: when I am absent, or dead, it may breed thy delight, and
make thee happily remember thou once had

A loving and kind man, CRAIGE.

TO HIS CALIDONIAN MISTRESS.
WHEN I remember on that time, that place,
Where first I fixed my fancy on thy face,
The circumstances how, why, where, and when
My Mistres thou, and I became thy Man:
Whilst I repeat that process full of pain,
How first we met, and how we twind again,
Our sweet acquaintance, and our sad depart,
It breeds a sea of sorrows at my heart:
And yet for all these sorrows I sustain,
With sigh swollen heart, and tears bedewed eyne,
As I have loved, so shall I love thee still
Unto the death, hap either good or ill.
And now I swear by that true love I owe thee,
By all the sighs which day by day I blow thee:
By all the verse and charming words I told thee,
By all the hopes I have for to behold thee:
By all the kisses sweet which I have reft thee,
And all the tears I spent since last I left thee:
That absence helps (not hinders my desire)
And sets new force and Fagots to my fire:
Each thing that chance presents and lets me see,
Brings arguments and bids me think on thee.
For when they told me of that wrathful flame,
Which from the high and holy heaven down came
On Paul's fair Church, and that cloud-threatning Steeple,
And how it flamed in presence of the people.
Then with my self thought I, this fire was quensht,
But mine endures, and by no tears is drensht:
And were not hope accrestis with desire,
I had long since consumed amid this fire.
And when I viewd those walls of Farnhame sayre,
Where Lamuel with his Lady made repair:
I laid me down beside the ditch profound,
Where Guineuer dispairing Dame was dround,
And fell on sleep upon that fatal brinke,
And still on thee sweet heart I dream, I think.
And were it not, that by the tract of time
The well was full with earth, with stone, and lime,
There had I drowned, and by my fatal fall
Made end with her of love, and life, and all:
Yet half ashamed least curious eyes should find me,
I went away, and left huge teaires behind me.
And when I spide those stones on Sarum plain,
Which Merlin by his Magic brought, some feign,
By night from far I-erne to this land,
Where yet as oldest Monuments they stand:
And though they be but few for to behold,
Yet can they not (it is well known) be told.
Those I compard unto my plaints and cries,
Whose total sum no numers can comprise.
Old Woodstocks wrackes to view I was despos'd,
Where Rosamond by Henry was enclosed:
The circuits all and wildesome ways I view,
The Laberinth, and Cliffords fatal Clew.
And where those time-worne monuments had been,
Where naught remains but ruins to be seen:
Yet in my heart more wracks, more ways I fand,
Then can be made by any humane hand.
And all these wondrous wonders which I see,
Makes me but wonder more and more on thee.
That thou be well both day and night I pray,
And for thy health once I carrouse each day:
From pype of Loame and for thy saike I souke,
The flegm-attractiue far-fett Indian smouke:
Which with my brain and stomach bears debate,
And like the lethall Aconite I hate,
That poysning potion pleasant seems to me,
When I determe it must be drunk for thee.
From Venus sports I do indeed abstain,
Nor am I now as I was wont so vain:
Chaste Dians laws I do adore for good,
Who killed her love Orion in the flood.
Drunk Bacchus maits I hold for none of mine,
I taste no Celtic nor Iberian Wine:
Look on my Lyns Lyoeuns, none they smell,
But Helicons poor streams, where Muses dwell.
For all those rare delights which England yields,
Of faces fair, of brave and fertile feilds:
For all the pleasurs which our Court frequent,
Such as man's heart would wish, or wit invent:
Yet I protest, I rather beg with thee,
Then be sole King, where seau'n were wont to be.
But when my Friend thy berar spurd with pane,
The Poist to see this Chalkie shore agane,
And brought thy symboll discolor of new,
With commendations kind, but not anew,
I asked him how thou was? he shook his head.
What man (quoth I) and is my Mistres dead?
No (answered he) but seik deir friend: Quoth I,
Thou know's I love; I pray thee make no lie.
In faith but seik, and is no doubt err now,
As weell (said he) as ather I or you.
This he affirmd with solemn oaths anew:
And yet allace I doubt if they be true
Here where the Pest approaches us so narr,
To smoother breath before we be aware:
For at the gates of our most royll King,
Corrupted Carions lie; O fearful thing:
Yet fear I still for thee, my love is such,
And for my self I fear not half so much:
And now I fear these fears ere it be long.
Will turn to Agues, and to Fevers strong.
Long are my nights, and doleful are my days:
Shot sleeps, long waks; and wildsom are my ways:
Sadd are my thoughts, sour sighs; and salt my tearis:
My body thus else waik both wayns and wearis.
For loss of Calice, Marie Englands Queen,
Had sighs at heart, and teai^^ about her eyne,
When I am dead, cause r^^ my heart said she;
And in the same shall ^^^^ce written be,
Die when I will, thy name shall well be knawne,
Within my (...) ^oods characters drawn.
But if (fair Dame) as yet on liff thou be,
This Papyre then commends my love to thee:
And if thy life by wrathful weirds be lost,
Chaste Laura then thy Petrarch loves thy ghost:
And yet any hopes assures me thou art weell,
And in these hopes a comfort hidd I feell.
This for the time sweet heart, that thou may kno,
I leave thy man, and love but thee; and so,
Till by thy wreat I know thy further will,
I say no more, but sigh, and seals my Bill.
SONET.
FRom this Abydos where I duyne and die,
And sore God know I against my heart remain,
I wreat with woe sweet Sestian Saint to thee,
And black this Paper with the Inck of pain,
No waltering waves of Neptune moone-mou'd maine:
Nor Hellesponts impetuous contrare tide,
No Sea nor Flood, no stormy Wind nor Rain,
Are lets or batrs that from thy boun^^ I bide,
My ways allace does ielous Argus keep,
And I am not acquent with Mercur's skill,
To lull and bring his watching eyes asleep,
That I may wish, and thou may have thy will:
Yet till we meet, a constant Hero prove,
And whill I live thou art Leanders Love.
CRAIGE.

To the Kings most Royal Majesty.
1. SONET.
KInd Attalus in Annals old we reid,
Was King of Pe^^ame by the Romans aid,
He long time brookt the same, but foraine feid,
Which made those noble Romans to be glad:
And yet because he had no heyrs, it is said
He to those foresaid Romans did resign,
His Diadem and Crown, and what he hade
He gave to them, that erst made him a King.
Hade I been made no Poet S. but Prince
Of fertile bounds for Parnase bare and dry,
Your Grace had got my Crown and all long since,
For I laik heyrs, and none more kind then I.
To use thee sweet enchanting Poets vain,
You gave me Reuls, I give you Ryms again.
2. SONET.
ANACREON two days two nights did watch,
Till he returned Policrates again;
These Talents two which he receiud, fond wratch,
To wake for wealth, and pinch him self with pain.
But contrare ways, I saikes soull am slain:
I wake for want, and not for wealth allace:
My voice is hoatse with cries; dry is my brain,
Yet get I not the smallest grain of grace.
A Cythared though poor, did sweetly sing,
Cause Dionise did promise him reward.
And thus to thee I wreat most gracious King,
In hope thy Grace will once my greiffs regard:
And by my Penthy praises shall be spread,
From rising Sunn to his Hespereanbed.
Non omnis moriar. CRAIGE.

To the Author.
WHY thought fond Greece to build a solid fame,
On fleeing shades of fables passing vain?
Why did herself-deceauing fancy dream,
That none but she, the Muses did maintain?
She said, these sacred Sisters did remain
Confind within a Craig which there did lie,
That great Apollo self did not disdain,
For that rough Palace, to renounce the sky:
That there a Well still drawn, but never dry,
Made Laymen Poets eir they left the place:
But all were ta'ls, which Fame does now belly,
And builds up Albions glore, to their disgrace.
Lo here the CRAIGE, whence flow's that sacred Well,
Where Phoebus raigns, where all the Muses dwell.
To Aytone.

