A SERMON OF PREDESTINATION, Preached at Saint MARY'S in OXFORD: By RI:
CRAKANTHORP.

LONDON, Printed for John Teage, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Golden Ball. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, SIR EDWARD BARRET, Knight.
SIR, I have often wished, that some opportunity might be offered unto me, to
testify that loving and honorable respect which I have ever born unto you.
Finding no other, I gladly embraced this present occasion of publishing this
Sermon, concerning Predestination, which I long since preached, and of late
reuiewed. For seeing diverse conferences which I had at your house, concerning
this, and some other like arguments, first of all occasioned me to think of the
reuiewing, and then of publishing thereof: I was desirous to offer the fruits
of that labor, as a testimony of my loving affection unto you. And your
unfeigned love to Gods truth, and that religious affection, which from your
honorable Progenitors, as an hereditarie blessing, is descended unto you, do
persuade, yea, even assure me, that you will accept this not so much as a
pledge of mine, a^ of the love of God unto you. For that right and interest
which your self, and every one of Gods children have in Gods Election, makes
delightful, yea, sweetneth unto them; as every doctrine of Gods Word, so this
especially, wherein is contained the chiefest treasures of their spiritual
comfort. In the handling whereof, I have endeavored, according to that measure
of knowledge which God has vouchsafed unto me, to satisfy the minds of the
godly, and clearly remove those principal doubts, and cauils, which occasion
some maliciously to carpe; others, in the weakness of their understanding, to
stumble and take offense at this holy doctrine. What I have performed in this
so weighty and obscure an argument, I willingly submit to the judgment of Gods
Church and children, not doubting but the same God, who put these meditations
into my heart, will accompany the same with his own blessing unto the hearts
of many of his children, and servants. In which confidence, together with my
hearty desire to God, that he will continue and multiply his blessings upon
you, I remain

Your Worships in all duty, Richard Crakanthorpe.

A SERMON OF PREDESTINATION.
2. PET. 1. 10. Wherefore, Brethren, give rather all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.
THE blessed Apostle, in these words, Right W11. and beloved in the Lord,
clearly sets down, as you see, that holy doctrine of Gods Predestination, and
Election of his children unto eternal life; of which, by Gods assistance, I
intend at this time to entreat. I am not ignorant, that some of later times,
following the old Massilians, De his taceri exigunt, quorum altitudinem nullus
attigerit: and Doctrinam hanc, ^tiamsi vera sit, non promendam di^unt. Prosp.
Epist ad Aug. Quidam quaesti^n^m inexplic^bil^m dicunt. Hilar. Epist ad August.
Quidam quaestionem esse inexplicabilem dicunt, and perpetuo sepiliendam
silentio, ait Amb. Cathar. in Summar opinionum de ^ raedest. Ex ^oc numero fuit
Erasmus, cuiu^ haec verba, Quid ^utilius quam h^^ evulgar^? lib. contra Luther.
not only themselves avoid and shun this doctrine as a Rock: but by reason
of the great and manifold difficulties which they find herein, judge it a very
perilous and dangerous doctrine to be taught: not fit to be published, and
preached in the Congregations of Gods people; whose ouer-fearfull modesty, to
say the best of them, ought chiefly to bridle the rash curiosity of all such,
as not contenting themselves with those bounds which the sacred Scriptures set
down, dare pry into the secret and most hidden Counsels of the Lord; Let such
men remember what Moses Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
teaches, The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: and let them learn
of Saint Paul, Romans 12. 3.
not to presume to understand, above that which is meet to understand: but
that they understand according to sobriety.

Further also, their timorousnes^e in this point, should warn us all to be
very circumspect, and wary, unto which of Gods Children we deliver and divide
this portion of the food of life: for the Word of God, as it contains milk
Heb. 5. 12, 13
and meats of easy digestion for Infants, and the weaker sort of Gods
household; so for them that be stronger in faith, and of riper judgment and
knowledge, it has store and plenty of stronger meats. And though every part
of this spiritual food be most wholesome for Gods Children, yet this doctrine
of Gods Predestination, and Election, which is most strong, but most wholesome
meat, is much more fit for this and such like, most judicious and learned
Auditories, then for those who are but children in understanding, and nouices
in the school of Christ.

But wholly, as they teach, to debar the Church and people of God, from
hearing this most comfortable doctrine, what is it else, but to conceal and
suppress the most gracious mercies of God, and deprive his people of the
chiefest comfort which can enter into the heart of a mortal man? Nay, what
else is this, but even to betray the truth of God, and to harten and encourage
most wicked men, who in the insolency of their profane hearts, cease not to
oppugn Scripsit contra doctrinam de Praedestinatione quidam Ioh. Scotus circa
annum 850. quem docto and pio l^bro ^ f^ta^it Ecclesia Lugdunensis. Ante hunc,
circa (...) 490. Epis^opu^ quidam Faustus Rhegiensis, Pel^gianisinum ceculte
d^fendens, libris duobus de liber, Arbit. Praedestinationem oppugnauit: and ^am
tenentes H^reticos vocat. Et Lucidus in Epistola Fausti libro (...) ita inquit,
Damno qui dicit alios deputatos ad mo^tem al^^s ad vitam. Quam Lucidi
Epistol^^^pro Catholica commendat Bar. an. 490. nu. 29. and 30. and clarius
Annotat. praefix. lib. Fausti in BB. 5. patr. tom. 4. pa. 795. In euertenda
Praedestinatione consentiunt Alb. Pighius and Georg. Siculus. Calu. l. de
aetern. Praede^t. inter eius Opusc. pa. 950.
this doctrine, and in most reuiling manner to blaspheme this holy truth,
accounting and calling it (which without horror I can not utter,) not only an
humane device Commentum vocat explodendum. Auth. libelli de Christi Seruatoris
efficacitate. Rat. 7. Augus^inus ^nduxit h^rreadum Praedestinationis dogma.
Id^m Rat. 103. Absurdissimum est creder^ Deum elegisse paucos quos seruaret,
relictis caete^is. Idem Rat. 23. Haec distinctio, quae excludit bonam hominum
partem, est a malo Spiritu. Idem Rat. 6. I abhor your horrible doctrine. Author
libel. cui titulus, Confutation of the careless by necessity. Sect. 23.
and figment, but even a detestable and diabolical doctrine, such as has no
ground A capite ad calcem habemus scripturam nobis fauentem, and contrariam
sententiam damnantem. Auth. l de Christi Seru. effic. Rat. 100. Quicquid de
Praedesinatione (...) adim^s, Philosophica tantu^ argutia niti, non in
Scriptura tradi clamat Georg, Siculus, Calu. libr. citat. pa. 989.
nor warrant out of the Word of God. Shall they with such insolency, and
impiety, blaspheme the truth of God? and shall the Watchmen of Israel be silent
at the hearing of these Rabshekaes, thus to revile the Lord of Hoasts?
Doubtless if we be silent, and hold our peace hereat, not only the mouths of
Babes and Children shall be opened; but as our Savior says, the very stones
shall defend the truth, and sing Hosanna unto our God.

Again, the Word of God, as it is most perfect and sufficient, not wanting any
one point at all, which is needful for our instruction, and knowledge; so may
we not once think, without great dishonor unto God, that any one jot or
tittle, much less any maine point of doctrine delivered therein, is
superfluous for the Church of God: specially seeing God himself has told us,
that the things re^ealed belong to us, and to our children for ever: And
again, that whatsoever things are written, are written for our learning.
Seeing then this doctrine of Predestination and Election, is not only laid
down, but often repeated and inculcated in the Word of God: Why should we be
wiser then God, to conceal that from Gods people, which God will have both us
to teach, and them in due time and season to learn, and believe? Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
Romans 15. 4.


Now for the difficulties which in this case they pretend, I can not in truth
deny; but that as every Article of our faith, so specially this, may justly
seem hard and obscure unto us, whose knowledge is darkened with infinite mists
both of our natural, and of that habitual ignorance which we have added unto
it. But we are all to be so far from being dismayed herewith, that this
should rather be a spur unto us, to stir us up every day to grow and
increase in the knowledge of God, and of his Word, that so we might more
plainly both discern our selves, and be able to instruct others in that truth,
and point out unto them every part of that path which leads unto everlasting
life. Yet let us even herein also behold and admire the wisdom and the
mercies of our most gracious God, that howsoever those things, for the
continual exercise of Gods children, are wrapped up in sundry difficulties, so
that an Elephant may swim therein; yet, withal, they are so tempered by Gods
Spirit, and fitted for our capacities, that neither this, nor any one point of
all our faith is without such evident and clear proofs in the Word of God, as
that for the most a Lamb may wade in them, and for them all, such as best
serve for the instructing of Gods people, and the full satisfying of any
Christian and believing soul. For thy word Psalm. 119. 105
is a light unto our feet, and a Lantern unto our steps, it gives Psalm.
19. 7.
wisdom and understanding, even unto the simple. And it is truly said by
Saint Austen, In ijs quae aper^^ in Scriptura posita sunt, inueni^ntur illa
omnia, quae continent fidem moresque viuendi. lib. 2. de doct. Christ. c. 9.
that whatsoever belongs either to our Faith, or good life, that is plainly
set down in the Scriptures of God. Wherefore they which affray the people of
God with these difficulties, do no otherwise then those Messengers, and Spye^,
which Moses sent to see the Land of Canaan. Surely, said Number. 13. 28, 32.
they, the Land flows with Milk and Honey, but the people are strong that
dwell in the Land, they be Giants, and the sons of Anak, and the Cities are
walled, and exceeding great, we be not able to go up against them, for they
are stronger then we. So they brought an evil report of the Land, causing the
people to be faint-hearted, and murmr against the Lord: So these men, having
like diligent Spies, considered and viewed every part of this doctrine, know
right well, that it is a doctrine of exceeding comfort, and that it flows
with Milk and Honey; but they bring an evil report upon it, and upon the Word
of God, when they affray Gods people from entering hereunto, with the greatness
of those difficulties, as it were with so many Giants and sons of Anak, which
they have ^pyed and seen herein, Let not us, with those evil Spies, provoke
the wrath of God by our distrust and diffidence; but with Caleb and Joshua, men
in this action, highly renowned of God himself, let us harten and encourage
the people, and in confidence and assurance of the aid of our God, say unto
them, Let us go up at once, and possess the Land, for undoubtedly we shall
overcome it. Let us then in the name and fear of God enter into this doctrine,
being guided though not with Caleb and Joshua, yet with the Prophets and
Apostles, and even led by the hand of our Savior Christ: who all by their
teaching and preaching of this doctrine, have chalked out the way unto us, how
we may enter into it, and take full possession of those joys, and comforts,
which are contained in the knowledge and meditation thereof.

In handling this doctrine of Election, I commend to your godly consideration
these three points, out of these words of the Apostle. The first, our Election
it self. The second, the certainty and assurance of our Election; both of them
set down in these words, Give all diligence to make your Election sure. The
third, the means of this assurance, one of which being sanctity, and
holiness of life, the Apostle expresses in these words: For if ye do these
things, ye shall never fall. Concerning Election it self, two things are to be
observed. First, the parties who are Elected: Secondly, the cause of their
Election.

Touching the parties elected, I shall not need to stay long in refuting that
no less impious, then senseless opinion of some who teach, Gods election
before the world, is general to all men. Confut. of the carel. by nec. Sect.
14. Co^cludi^ Pighius omnes si^e exceptione, ad vitam aeterna^ destinatos,
Calu. lib. de aeterna praed. pa. 969. Georgy Siculi commentum est, non fuisse
hunc vel illum proedestinatum ad salutem, sed Deum statuisse tempus, quo totum
mundum seruaret. Calu. l. eodem. p. 951. Sensit ita etiam Nich. Heming. qui l.
de gratia vniuer. pa. 34. dei electionem vni^ersalem vocat.
that Gods election before the world is general to all men, so that every one
is alike chosen by him unto eternal life: which conceit of theirs, as it is
directly controuled by the express words of the Scripture, wherein is mention
of some, who are vessels Romans 9. 22.
of wrath prepared to destruction; and as Saint Jude Verse 4.
says, ordained to condemnation: so is it repugnant even to common sense, and
reason. For who does not know, that to elect, or choose, implies a rejecting
and refusing of some others? This very word of Election signifying nothing
else, but a separating and culling out of some from the rest, as our Savior
says Ioh. 15. 19.
of his Disciples, that he chose them out of the world. Seeing then it is most
^leere, that some are chosen Ephesians. 1. 4. 2. These. 2. 13.
and elected by God unto salvation: certain it is, that God separated them for
a peculiar people unto himself, and picked them out from the rest, which he
refused, and left in their sin, to be led by their own lusts into that
destruction, which is ordained for them.

Now as Error never wants some color and show of truth; so these men, to
maintain this fancy, allege Confut. of the careless. Sect. 15.
the words of Saint Paul, Romans 8. 29. where he says, that whom God knew
before, them also be did predestinate to be made like to his Son. Seeing
th^n, say they, God knew all men without exception, before the beginning of the
world, it must needs follow, that he did also predestinate, and elect them all
unto eternal life. In which reason, as if it were insoluble, they boast and
triumph: but without all truth and substance of reason. For they might easily
have observed a double Est in Deo duplex cognitio: Scientia simplicis ^otitiae
quae est communis omnibus honis and malis: and Scientia approbationis, quae est
honorum tantum. Aquin. quaest. Disp. q. de libro vitae. art. 8.
knowledge of God mentioned in the holy Scripture. The one, of beholding and
seeing only, which is a knowledge of appre^ension; of which the Apostle says,
Heb. 4. 13. that every creature is manifest in his ^ight, and all things are
naked and open to his eyes: the other is a knowledge of loving and liking,
which the Schoolmen rightly term a knowledge of approbation; of which it is
said, Psalm. 1. 6. The Lord knows the ways of the righteous: not only the
seeing and beholding them, for so he does know the ways of the wicked also:
but he knows the ways of the righteous, by loving, allowing, and approving
their ways, in which sort he never knows the way of any wicked man, seeing
both himself, and his ways, are an abomination unto God. Now it is most
certain that all men, even the Reprobate, are foreknown of God, by his former
kind of knowledge; for all things are manifest and naked before his eyes. But
this knowledge of apprehension can not possibly be meant by the Apostle in the
8. to the Romans. For whom God knows in that place, them he both iustifyeth
in this, and gLorifieth in the life to come, as the Apostle expressly
witnesses in the same place. Now seeing he does not justify and glorify
all, but will say to some, Go into everlasting fire, who shall have their
portion in that Lake which burns with fire And brimstone; it remains
evident, that the Apostle speaks not of that former knowledge of
apprehension, but of the later of approbation, by which I may truly say unto
you, that God never knew any Reprobate, or ungodly person; our Savior teaching
in plain terms the same, Mat. 7. 23. Then will I profess to them, I never
knew you, Depart from me, ye workers of intquity. Wherefore to return their
own reason against themselves; Seeing God knows ( that is, loves and
approves) all those whom he electeth, as St Paul teaches, but never knows
in this sort any Reprobate, or ungodly man, as our Savior professes; it
remains true, and certain, even by that very Text whereon they most rely,
that not all men without exception, but only some are elected of God, and
ordained to everlasting life.

Concerning the number of which, the Massilians, Nec acquiescunt Praede^tinatum
electoum numerum, nec augeri posse nec minui. Prosp. Epist ad Aug. Eligendorum
a^ re^^ciendorum esse definitum numerum nolunt. Hilar. Ep. ad Aug.
and some other, Ambr. Catharinus putauit paucos a^^^uot praedestinatos ad
vitam, and eorum numerum certum esse ait. Reliquos ^mnes nec ad vitam nec ad
mortem proedestinatos sensit, sed pro suo arbitrio vel seruari posse* vel
perire, and quot ex his seruanai sunt, non esse determinatum in prouidentia Dei
asserit. Cathar. Com in c. 4. Ge. and in Tract. de praedest. ad Conc. Trid.
most ignorantly, and impiously taught, that it was not defined, nor set down
by God, but left so uncertain, and depending on the wills of men, that
according as they were either willing, or unwilling to embrace the grace of
God, the number of the Elect might be either augmented, or impaired. A conceit
so repugnant to the truth, that though their other error, touching men's wills,
were admitted, yet can it no way stand with the praescience of Almighty God,
who knowing Ioh. 21. 17.
all things; yea the very thoughts Psalm. 139. 2.
of men long before, even before all eternity, can not be ignorant either how
many will, or how many himself will have to embrace his grace, and to be saved.

Some others have fancied, that though the number of the Elect, (which the
Schoolmen call Numerum formalem) be certain, yet the persons who are to make
up this number, (called by them Numerus materialis) is uncertain Quidam
dix^runt praedestinatorum numerum certum esse formal^ter, sed non m^terialiter,
ac si dicas quod centum vel ^^ll^ salmentur, non autem quod hi vel illi. Aquin.
p. 1. q. 23. art. 7.
and not defined by God. A fancy indeed, seeing the Scriptures plainly teach,
that God in his secret Council has decreed, not only how many, but in
particular also, who those are, whom he has chosen to be heirs with Christ.
For when our Savior says, Luke. 10. 20
that even your names are written in Heaven, and that he being the good
Shepherd, calls John 10. 3.
his Sheep by name, and that he knows whom John. 13 18.
he has chosen: and when the Apostle 2. Tim. 2. 19.
says, The foundation of God stands sure, and has this Seal, The Lord
knows who are his: What else do, or can these import, but that God has most
certainly decreed and set down in writing, not only how many, but even
particularly who they be, yea, and what their names are, whom he has chosen,
and sealed unto eternal life? and this number, as Saint Austen Lib. de c^r.
and great. c. 13.
says, is so certainly set down with God, that neither any one of them can be
taken away, nor any other can be added unto them.

Now what this number in particular is, ^as to set down, is impossible for
mortal man, so to search it out, were most vain and fruitless curiosity.
Let this suffice us to know, that though this number, in respect of the wicked,
is but small; seeing Christ tells Math. 22. 14.
us, that many are called, and few chosen: and, that many Math. 7. 13.
going the br^ad way which leads to destruction, and few in the narrow, which
leads unto life: Few indeed in respect of those many ryet even those few,
considered in themselves, are an exceeding great number. For the seed Genesis 22.
17. etc. 32. 12.
of Abraham is like the Stars of heaven, or as the sand of the Sea shore,
such as can not be numbered. Genesis 16. 10.
And I may truly say of the Elect, they are a number, numberless; Saint John
himself warranting this saying; Reu. 7. 9. where besides those thousand
thousands that were sealed of the Jews, he saw a great multitute, which no man
could number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Languages, which
stood before the Throne, clothed with long white Robes, and having Palms in
their hands: in regard of which infinite number, our Savior tells John. 14. 2.
his Disciples, that in his Fathers house are many dwelling places. And let
this suffice to be spoken of the parties which are elected.

The next point to be considered in our election, is the cause thereof. Where
first it is undoubted, that the declaring and manifesting of Gods glory, is the
cause why God in general would elect some, and reject some other, when all
were alike before him in the same mass or lump of perdition. That one saying
of Solomon does sufficiently prove this, Pro. 16. 4. The Lord has made all
things for his own sake: that is, for his own glory and honor. For when we
were all included in the same mass of sin, (out of which Sola (...)
Catha^inus. Con^^^in c. 4. Genesis contendit quidem(...) c^natu, s^u (...) plane
vn^^^s electionem nen fieri ex massa (...), nam ex hac e^egi honun^s, and se.
iptura ^ocet, and Aug plus nailies ^leclarat. Vide Ench. c. 27. and 33. and
Epist. 106. and, Quid oderat in E^au, nisi originale peccatum? Epist. 105.
God elected some, and left others therein,) if God had then refused all, (as
in justice if it had pleased him he might have done,) never could those
glorious riches, of his mercy have been known unto us, which now are manifest
in saving his Elect by Christ. Again, if then by a general Pardon he had
released all, (as in mercy if it had pleased him, he might have done,) then
could we not have seen the glory of his justice, which now in the deserved
punishment of the wicked is mightly and manifestly declared unto us. So then,
to make known unto all, the glory and praise of his mercy in the one; and the
glory and praise of his Justice in the other: he framed of the same Iumpe and
mass of sin, some to be vessels of mercy by electing them unto life; and he
left others to be vessels of justice, letting them alone in that state of
damnation, into which all mankind had plunged it self.

But if we wade further into this doctrine, and search not only why in
general God elected some, and refused others, but why in particular these are
elected rather then the other: as namely Jacob, rather then Esau, and St Paul,
rather then Judas, seeing not only they both were in themselves alike, but
Gods glory had no less been seen in electing the one, then the other, if it
had so pleased him, as now the cafe is more difficult; so are there diverse men
of diverse judgments.

Most fond, of all others, is the dream of Origin, who thought Intelligamus
ammam egisse* antiquitus, propter quod in a^er^ (...), in altero odio habita
sit, vt aliae animae fierent in honorem, aliae in contum^liam materiar^^
causarumque mor^^ praecesserunt. Hoec ex Or^gine citat Hier. ^pist. ad Auitu^.
that men's souls were created long before their bodies, and according to their
good or ill deserts before their uniting to the bodies; God elected some men
unto life, and appointed others unto death, though none, as he Origines audet
dicere, d^abolum id ru^sum fut^rum, quod fuerat, and c^nscensurium regna
coelorum. Hier. Epist. ad Ioh. Hier.
supposed, to eternal death. Which error of Orig^ns, is not only by all
sound Philosophers rejected, who rightly teach that the souls are not created,
before, but in the very instant of their coupling to the bodies: so is it,
Omnes cos errores Catholiea fides a corpore suae vnitatis abscidit, constanter
praedicans, quod animae hominum, priusquam suis inspirentur corporibus, non
fuere. Leo Epist. 93. c. 10. and dicentibu^ Animas peccasse antequam corporibus
vnia^tur; A^athema denu^ciat Conc. Brach. 1. cap. 6.
together with Origin the Author of it, and with the Priscilian Heretics, who
after Origin revived the same, most justly condemned by the judgment of the
Church, truly and constantly teaching, that the souls were not, before their
inspiring into the bodies. For this time contenting my self with that one
clear testimony of the Prophet, Zech. 12. ^. that God forms the spirit of
man in him: I will pass from this error, as unworthy of any further expense
of time.

Others there are who have taught, Quid de nobi^ praescire ac praordinare
debeat Deus, quantum pertinet ad futurum, in profectu hominis defectuque
consis^it. Faust. l. 2. de lib. arb. cap. 2. Dicunt ambo ( Pigh. and Georg.
Sicul.) h^c ex Dei confilio non pe^dere, quinam electi sint vel rep^obi, sed
singulos sibi vtramvis fortunam, suo arbitri^ statuere. Calu. lib. de atern.
praedest. page 950. constat qu^mvis ^ieri posse reprobum sua malitia, and
reprobationem non manare a voluntate Dei reijciente homines, sed a v^luntate
hominum reijciente Deum. Auth. lib. de chri. seruat. ^f^icac. Rat. 77. and
Constat neminem reprobatum esse a Deo, qui prior diuinum numen salutaria ipsi
proponens ac suggerens non contempserit. Idem Rat. 67. and pessime huc sonant
ista Hemingij lib. de great. vniuer. Efficimur hic electi, quando credimus, pa.
20. and, Abusus denorum Dei sunt causae abiectionis, and non consilium Dei, p.
22. and, Non est volentis aut currentis, sc^licet secundum carnem, sed est
volentis and currentis secundum fidem. Idem page 31. God reprobated no man
before he was: Author. Confut. of the errors of the careless. S^ot. 4. He
reprobated none before the foundation of the world. Idem Sect. 8. Nulla est ab
aeterna vit^ reprobatio, ni^^^quam sibi quisque ob propria p^ccata ac flagitia
acquisincrit. Ambr. Cathol. tract de praedest. ad Conc. Trid.
that Gods electing of these, and rejecting the other, depends wholly on the
will of men themselves, and not of the Decree or will of God: and that there is
none rejected of God, ^^ll by their own contempt, themselves d^^ first reject
God, and by their wilful obstinacy refus^ his grace when it is offered unto
them. How evidently do these men oppugn the Scriptures of God? For if election
and reiection depend on the actions of men after they be borne, how can it be
true, which the Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 1. 4.
that we are elected before the foundation of the world? and that God Romans 9.
11, 12
elected Jacob, ad hated Esau before they were borne, when as yet they had done
neither good nor evil? Is not here a rejecting of Esau, before he by his own
actual contempt rejected God, or despised his grace? Or did Esau, more then
Jacob, reject God before he was borne? Or if we seem to any to straiten their
opinion (though their books and writings do testify this to be their sense
and meaning,) seeing our works committed actually in time, can no way be the
cause of that Decree which is eternal, and before all time: Let us proceed,
and see, if the same works, being from everlasting foreseen and foreknown by
God, as if they had been done, may truly be said, (as some Graecipatres, nec
pauc^ Latinorum arbitrati sunt causam praedestinationis h^minum ad vitam
aeternam esse praescientiom bono^um operum quae facturi erant, vel fidei. Sic
Chrysostomus, Theodoretus, Theophylactus, O^cumenius, Origines, Ambrosius,
Hieronymus, Sedulius, Perer. in Epist. ad Romans ca. 8. d sp. 22. and idem docet
Sixth. Senens. in Bibl. sua sanct. l. 6. Annot. 251. and 252. ^n eidem opinione
Heming. Est inquit praes^ien^a, regula electionis and praedes^ina^ionis. l. de
great. vniu^rs. page 21. and quia credimus, praesciti and electi censemur: nam
quos praesciuit Deus credituros, eos ex gr^tia elegit. R. 27. and, Nos ^a^sam
reprobationis contumaciam hominis praeuisam facimus. ibid. page 77.
of better note have taught,) to be the cause of our election to eternal life.

Now, if we will herein hearken to the Apostles doctrine; we shall clearly
perceive, that our faith, sanctity, and all our good works, are so far from
being the cause of our election, that they are in truth, the very effects
thereof. For we are elected that we should be holy and without blame, Ephesians. 1.
4. And the Apostle says of himself, 1. Cor. 7. 25. that he obtained mercy,
that he might be faithful. Whence it is manifest, that God did not first
foresee us good and faithful, and therefore elected us; but first he elected
us, and for this cause decreed to make us faithful, good and holy in his
sight. And therefore Saint Austen having sometimes taught August. exposit.
propos. in Epist. ad Romans nu. 60. and 62.
that God did choose us because he foresaw that we would believe; afterward
retracteth, August. lib. 1. Retrac. ca. 23. and lib. de Praedest. sanct. cap.
3. and 19.
and recalleth this sentence as erroneous, and delivers a truer lesson, that
faith is the effect of Predestination, not the cause: seeing the Apostle faith
not, that he obtained mercy because he was faithful, but he obtained mercy,
that he might be faithful. For we are not called, says he, Lib. de Praed.
sanct. cap. 19.
because we did believe, but that we should believe. Again, when the Apostle
demands, 1. Cor. 4. 7* Who separated thee? (which was an other and principal
motive to Saint Austen, to retract Lib eodem c. 3. quo praecipu^tessimonio
^^uictus sum, cum ^^^rem.
his former error) had the cause of our election been either our faith, or
good works foreseen: it would have been easily answered, My own faith, my
own works, my own good will to embrace Gods grace: these being foreseen by
God, separated me, and moved God to elect me rather then others: but the
Apostle knowing all these to be the gifts of God, and effects of his free
love, and election, referres wholly our separating from the rest, to the grace
and good pleasure of him who says, Luke 12. 32. It is your Fathers pleasure,
to give you the Kingdom: that so no man might boast of himself, but he that
gloryeth, might glory in the Lord.

In the 9. to the Romans, the Apostle disputing this matter of set purpose and
at large; shows, that though Jacob and Esau were in themselves alike before
God, not having done either good or evil, the one more then the other; borne
at the same time, and of the same parents: yet for all this equality, God
loved Jacob, and hated Esau. And because this might seem vniustin the eyes of
man, that of two being altogether equal and alike, the one should be loved,
and the other hated of God: the Apostle proposes to himself this great
difficulty, as S. Austen Diffici^^ma^^ quaeti^ne^ v^cat. Tract. 53. in Johan.
and Ep. 105. vbs hoc ^^piose tractat. and in Ench. c. 98.
rightly calls it; What shall we say then, is there unrighteousness with
God? Now if God had loved and elected Jacob for his good works, or faith
foreseen; or hated Esau for his profaneness, which from all etern^tie he
did foreknow; surely this question not only might easily be answered, Eo modo
sol^er^t istam quaesti^nem Apostolus, (...) nullam quam solui opus esset,
saceret. Aug. ^nch. c^. 9.
but there were no difficulty nor doubt at all therein. For what
unrighteousness can this s^eme to any, that God should love Jacob, who, he
knew would love and obey him? or why should he not hate Esau, of whom he
foreknew, that he would be a wicked, a profane person, and one that would
hate the Lord? But the Apostle answers not in such wise; but knowing right
well, that God, without all respect to the good or evil actions foreseen in
the one more then in the other, loved Jacob, and hated Esau; and knowing that
the good actions of the one, were not causes, but effects Quicquid est in
h^mine ora^nans i^sum ad salutem, est effectus Praedestmationis. Aquin. p^. 1.
q. 23. art. 5. Vere quia Praedestinatio est praeparatio beneficicr^m De^ quibus
certissi^e l^beramur. Aug. lib. de bono Pers. c. 14.
of that love of God and of his grace, which he in mercy gave unto him; and
that the evil actions of the other proceeded from the want of Gods love and of
his grace, which he in justice denied, or would not give unto the other: He, I
say, knowing all this, gives another and better answer, that howsoever this
may seem unjust to the eyes of man, yet it is in truth most righteous, because
it is the will and the good pleasure of God so to do: For I will have mercy,
says God, on whom, I will, and whom he will, he hardens. And that we might
plainly see, that there is nothing at all in any one, which did or could move
God to love and elect him rather then another; the Apostle adds this
Conclusion, as ensuing necessarily on that testimony of God: So then, it is not
in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy.
The true and certain cause then, why God in particular elected these, and
rei^cted the other, is no way in themselves, nor in their works, either
actually perf^rmed or foreseen and foreknowne by God, but it is wholly and
solely in God himself; It is even his good pleasure and will: who as he
elected us (that is, pulled us out of that mass of perdition from the rest)
according to the good Ephesians. 1. 5.
pleasure of his will; so by the same his good pleasure and will, did he leave
others in that mass of sin, whom he made vessels Romans 9. 21, 23
of wrath; and as Saint Jude says, ordained to condemnation. The reason of
both which, is that which the Apostle expresses, He shows mercy on whom he
will, and whom he will, he hardens.

With what reproachful speeches this doctrine, and the teachers therofare
reviled, you are not ignorant, and their books are too evident witnesses
thereof. And no maru^ll if they shoot their arrows of most venomous words
against men, seeing they fear not to open their mouths against heaven, and in
the insolent folly of their wits, plead against God, whose most holy will and
Justice, in this case they seek to ou^rthrow.

First, say they Dicit haereticus, pro voluntate Dei, tra^untur homines in
perditionem, etc. Faust. Rheg. l. 1. de liber. arb. c. 19. Their damnation
comes not by the counsel and will of God, for he is sorry for it. Auth.
Confut. of the careless. Sect. 24.
, It can not withstand the will of God, to ordain any to be vessels of wrath,
or to destruction; for God witnesses, and that also with an oath, Ezech. 33.
11. that he desires not, nor would the death of a sinner, but that the wicked
should turn from his evil way, and live: according as S. Paul teaches, 1.
Tim. 2 4. That God will have all to be saved: and S. Peter, 2. Epistle 3. 9.
that God would have no man to perish, but would have all to come to repentance.
If God, say they, He wills not their destruction, and that which he wills
not, he does not ordain. Confut. of the careless. Sect. 24.
would have none to perish, then can it not be his will to ordain any unto
death, who professes he would not their death: unless there be two diverse,
yea even contrary wills in God, which upon our doctrine they Can you prove that
God has two wills? Is that which is not revealed contrary to that which is
revealed? Then shall there be contrariety in God, which is false. Was there
ever any such monstrous doctrine? Ide^ Sect. 37. similia habet sect. 35. 36.
and 45.
suppose most necessarily to follow.

Which reason of theirs might have some force with Epicures, and all such as
make God an idle spectator of the events in this world: For then perhaps he
might see their death, and either not will it, or wink thereat. But far be
these conceits from us, who have learned out of the Word of God, that he not
only sees, but by his counsel orders and governs every thing in this
world, so that not so much as one Sparrow can fall to the ground, nor one hair
from our heads, without the providence and will of God. Nay, these most wicked
men, Herod, Pontius Pilat, and the other Jews, and Gentiles which put Christ
to death, neither did, not could do ought: but as Saint Peter says, Act. 4.
28. What thine hand, O God, and thy Council (...), had determined before, or
decreed to be done. Wherefore, if God would not at all have the death and
destruction of those vessels of wrath which are of old ordained to
condemnation, as Saint Jude speaks; then certainly, though all the armies
both in heaven and earth should band themselves together, yet could they not
all effect the death of the meanest or weakest of them: for who is able to
resist his will, who is Almighty? And who says of himself, Esaias 46. 10. My
counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I will. Unless then we will
deny the first Article of our Faith, which is the omnipotency of God; we must
needs confess, that the death and damnation of those vessels of wrath, comes
to pass by the will of the Almighty: for if he would it not, he could; nay,
he would have hindered it ten thousand ways: and as St Aust^n Non fit aliquid
nisi Omnipotens ficri velit, vel sinendo vt fiat, vel ipse faciendo. Ench. cap.
95.
truly and excellently says; There is not, there can not be done ought,
either in heaven or earth, unless God will have it to be done, either doing it
himself, or suffering it to be done; and he suffers Nec vtique nolens sinit,
sed volens l. eodem. cap. 100.
it, not against his will, but with his will.

Now this will of God, though in it self it be but one and most simple, yet in
respect of us, it consists of two Priorem, voluntatem signi, alteram,
voluntatem beneplaciti vocat Magist. sent. l. 1. did. 45. 46. and Aqui. p. 1.
q. 19. art. 11. Et prior^m, voluntatem antecedentem, alteram voluntatem
co^sequent^m vocat. Aqui. q. eadem art. 6. Et priorem voluntatem conditionatam,
alteram voluntatem abs^lu a^ esse declarat. ib.
parts; the one opened and revealed in his Word; the other hid and secret from
our eyes, never known unto any, until himself either by the event of things,
or some other way make it manifest unto us. Both which, are clearly expressed
in that true and memorable saying of Saint Austen, Non fit praeter e^us
v^luntatem, quod etiam fit contra eius voluntatem. Ench. cap. 100.
where speaking of the sins of men and Angels, he says, It comes to pass by
a wonderful and ineffable manner, that those things are not done besides or
without the will of God (not without his secret and permissi^e will) which are
done against, and even contrary to the will of God (contrary to his revealed
and preceptiue will.) All which will easily appear, if we rightly observe the
difference of the one will from the other.

In his revealed will, is set down, as our duties toward God, and whatsoever
he wills, Praeceptum Dei, signum est Deum id velle, etsi (absolute) fieri non
vult. Magist. sent. l. 1. did. 4^.
that is, requires or commands to be done by us, according whereunto our
lives and actions are to be framed; so also is set down therein, the publishing
and free offering of salvation unto every creature, but still with this
condition, in regard whereof it is called his conditional will, that whosoever
believes in Christ, and leads a sanctified life, shall be saved; but
whosoever believes not, but abides in sin, he is condemned already. His
secret will is far otherwise: For therein he has absolutely set down
whatsoever Voluntas beneplaciti consonat rerum eff^ct^bus, and ipsi effectus
(...) ah illo non discordant. Fit en^m omne quod beneplacito vult fieri, and
omne quod non vult fieri, equaquam fit. Mag. sent. ibid.
event does fall out in the whole world: and concerning the salvation of men,
he therein has particularly, and without any condition decreed, whom in mercy
he will have to be saved; and therefore in his due time will, by his effectual
grace, work faith and sanctity in their hearts that they may be saved:
again, he has therein absolutely set down, whom in justice he will leave in
that mass of perdition, into which they had cast themselves, and therefore
will not give his grace unto them, but leave them to their own hearts lust,
that they may willingly run forward in sin, and so most deservedly fall
into that pit of perdition which is provided for them. Hereof we may have some
resemblance in this manner: Put case a King, after the just senten^e of death
passed against sundry offenders, should proclaim and publish in one writing,
that he would freely pardon and save all those that did bring unto him his own
Signet; and in another writing kept secret to himself, should set down which
of those offenders in particular he would save, and therefore would send unto
them his own Signet, that they might bring (...) unto him, and so be saved.
The former of these writings may well be called his open and revealed will,
the later his hid or secret. Even so it is in the will of God; the conditional
part whereof, is ever since the fall of Adam, revealed and published unto men,
that he will in mercy pardon and save all those, and only those who do bring
unto him his own Seal or Signet, which is engraven with the image of his
Son, the print whereof is a lively Faith, working by charity: but in another
part of his will, as it were in an other book which is not, not can be seen
by man, he has absolutely set down, whom in particular he will save, and
therefore will give his own Signet unto them, imprinting in their hearts both
faith and holiness, by which they are sealed unto eternal life.

These two wills, or rather Non est Dei voluntas diuersa, sed loqu^tio diuersa
est de v^luntate, Mag. sent. loc. c^t.
two several parts of Gods one and most simple will, are so far from being
repugnant or contrary the one unto the other, as they ignorantly and impiously
affirm, that they do most fitly, and even subordinately agree one with the
other, which that we may perceive; The whole will of God, concerning men's
salvation and damnation, may be fitly set down in a reason, or demonstration,
drawn from the effect, to the cause. The proposition whereof is this,
Whosoever shall believe in Christ, and live in piety, them has God elected,
and them will be have to be saved; but whosoever do not believe, nor live in
piety, them has he rejected, and will in the end condemn. And all this is
revealed unto us, and it is the sum, or effect, of his whole revealed will.
The Assumption which God makes, is this; But these and these men will believe,
for I will work faith and sanctity in their hearts: those and the other do
not, nor will they believe, nor live in piety; for I will harden them, as I
hardened Pharaoh, not giving my grace, nor working faith and sanctity in them:
And this is part of the secret will of God, not revealed unto us, but only in
the elect themselves, and some few whom God has witnessed in his Word, either
to be heirs of life, or to be partakers of eternal death. Of these two
premises, which are parts, the one of the revealed, the other of the secret
will, this conclusion is inferred, which is the absolute decree of God:
Therefore these and these have I elected, and will in mercy save: Those and the
other have I refused, and will at the last day in justice condemn, and cast
into everlasting fire. Thus you see, that the one will does no way contrary the
other; but with a sweet harmony they both concur in one Demonstration,
wherein from the effect of Gods will, which in giving his grace is our
believing, and in not giving his grace, is our not believing, we proceed unto
the cause of both, which is the absolute will of God in electing these; and the
absolute will of God, in rejecting, or leaving the others.

Nor is that in any sort to be allowed, which some of later times, following
the fancy of Iulianus Iulianus exis^inabat De^m non velle absolut^ vl^um
s^luare, se^ omnes sub condition, si and ipsi vel^ni. bell. l. 2. de great. and
l. arb. c. 8. H^cque eum sensisse colligitur ex Aug. l. 4. cont. Julian. c. 8.
the Pelagi^ Heretic, do affirm, Qui dicunt no^ sine hac fidei and
perseuerant^ae condition electos esse ad vitam, Euangelium prorsus abolent.
Heming. ib. de vniuer. great. p. 63. God uses not his absolute will in the
matter of our salvation. (...) verba.
and teach, that God uses not his absolute, but only his conditional will in
this case of men's salvation; so that if men do believe, and repent, they shall
then be saved, leaving it to men's own will, and choice, whether they will
believe, and repent, or no: For then would our Savior never have said, It is
your Fathers will to gliue you the Kingdom; but rather he would have said, Luke
12. 32.
It is your own will, in that ye believe, for which God does, and will give the
Kingdom unto you. Nor could that be true, which again he says, John 15. 16.
Electionem illam nec fides ipsa praecedit, ne priores illum eligisse dicanu^r,
falsumque sit quod absit. Non vos me elegistis, sed ego vos elegi. Aug. I. de
Praed. sanct. cap. 19.
You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you; seeing if his will were in
this case only conditional, he should never choose man, before man had first
chosen God, by choosing to believe in God; yea, the salvation of each man
should by this means depend wholly on him that runs, and him that wills;
and the Apostles words so clearly and certainly set down, should be untrue: It
is not in him that runs, nor in him that wills, but in God that shows
mercy. By which words is clearly signified, that the only cause why this man
rather then another is chosen unto life, stands not in the will of man, but of
God, who by his absolute will decrees to give his grace unto one, and thereby
make him to believe and run the race of piety, and so be saved: and by his
like absolute will decrees to harden; that is, Obduratio Dei, est nulle
misere^i, non vt non a Deo i^rogetur aliquid, quo ^it homo deter^or, sed tantum
quo sit (...) non erogetur. Aug. I. 1. ad Simpl. q. 2.
not to give his grace to another, and so leave him to run on the race of his
own wickedness, unto eternal perdition.

This being observed, it is not hard to answer those places of Scripture:
Where it is said, that God 1. Tim. 2 4.
would have all men to come to repentance, and be saved. For if these, and the
like speeches be understood, not of all sorts, or degrees of men, as besides
others, St Austen O^^es homines, id est, omne genas hominum, Reges, pri^atos,
nobiles, ignobiles, etc. Aug. Ench. c. 103. and Epist. 107. Potest intell^g^^t
fiat dis^ribu^io pro generi^us s^. guloru^, and non pro singulis gene^^^.
Aquin. P. 1. q. 19. art. 6.
often expounds them; but as they take them, of all men, without exception of
any, then can they no way be meant of the absolute will of God; seeing then it
were impossible Mulis a veritate deuiaru^t, dicentes Deum multa velle fieri,
quae non fiunt. Quis enim (...) desipiat, etc? Mag. sent. I. 1. did. 46. ^x
August.
that any at all should perish: for if they did, the will or wickedness of man
should make frustrate the will and Counsel of God. And who is able to resist
his will? Of which himself says, Isay
46. 10. I will do whatsoever I will: and of which S. Austen Aug. Epist. 107.
Vbi de Infantibus loquitur, and in Enchir. c. 95. De populo Bethsaidae a^t,
Deus noluit selu^s fieri.
says, that many are not saved: non quia ipfi, sed quia Deus non vult, and,
quia nolit saluos fieri: not because they would not, but because God will not
that they shall be saved: or he had absolutely willed that every one without
exception should be saved: how could Saint Paul have said of those vessels of
wrath, that they are prepared? or Saint Jude, that they are ordained? or as
Saint Austen, Quos i^st^prae destinauit ad poenam. Aug. Ench. c. 100.
and after him, Fulgentius Praedestinauit Deus quosdam ad gloriam, quosdam ad
poenam. Fulg. I. 1. ad Mouim. Qui totus liber est de duplici praedestinatione,
vn^ bonorum ad g^oriam, altera malorum ad poenam.
and others often speak, predestinate to destruction and coudemnation. For
none can Pertinet ad fidem, vt Praedestinationem Dei in vtramque partem (tam ad
mortem quam ad vitam) esse credamus, and si vtrumvisnegetur sacrilegum est.
Ecel Lugdun. l. cont. Io. Scot. qui praedestinationem ad poenam negauit.
doubt, but what God prepares, ordains, and predestinateth, that also he
wills, seeing predestination Quid est aliud Praedestinatio, quam aeterna Dei
voluntas? Eccl. Lugd, lib. cit.
is his very will? Hence it is, that some, Nich. Heming. l. cit. p. 16. 19. and
saepius.
considering that those testimonies could not be meant (as they suppose) of the
absolute will of God, seeing by it he will Voluntate consequenti (quae absoluta
est) Deus vult quosda^ damnari. Aquin. p. 1. q. 19. art. 6.
have many to perish, do expound them of his revealed, which is called his
conditional will; for by it God will have his Gospel preached, and salvation
conditionally offered unto all, and so all conditionally to be saved: to wit,
all who perform that condition of faith and sanctity which is required of all.

But I rather assent to the judgment of others, and specially of Saint Austen:
who by those general speeches of all, and none; understand not all men without
exception, but all Gods Elect and chosen children: expounding the places in
this manner, that God would have all to come to repentance and be saved;
namely, all his Ita dictum est omnes homines vult saluos fieri, vt
intelligantur omnes praedestinati. Aug. l. de Correp. and great. c. 14. and idem
docet l. 4: cont, Julian c. 8. Sic etiam de solis praedestinatis ad vitam
explicat haec verba. Eccl. Lugdun. in l. contra Ioh. Scotum.
chosen, of what degree or condition soever they be; and again, he would have
none to perish; to wit, none that believe in him, none of his elected servants,
of what degree soever. Which restriction is the more agreeable, seeing Christ
himself seems of set purpose to set it down, Math. 18. 14 saying; It is not
your Fathers will, that any of these little ones should perish. He said not, It
is not Gods will that any should perish; but granting this of some, he says,
It is not Gods will that any of these little ones, of these chosen ones, who
are little, mean, and contemptible in the eyes of the world, that any of these
should perish. And the very circumstances in Saint Peter (Who is an expositor
of Exechiel) do enforce the same limitation. For besides that h^ writes this
to the elect of God, who had obtained like precious faith with himself, he
gives this as a reason of the long patience of God, and his slacknesse in
coming unto ludgement, because God would have no man to perish, but would have
all to come to repentance. Now the reason of Gods slacknesse, is not the
repentance and salvation of all men without exception, (for if he stayed for
that, he should never come unto ludgement) but the reason thereof is the
expecting and waiting till the elect be all effectually converted, and their
number fulfilled, as it is most manifest, Reu. 6. 10, 11. where those blessed.
souls under the Altar, crying unto God, How long, Lord, holy and true, do
thou not judge and avenge our blood! receive this very answer that here S.
Peter gives, that they must rest and stay yet for a little season, till the
number of their fellow^ servants and brethren were accomplished. Wherefore
though God will have none of these his chosen children, and of their fellow
servants to perish (for whose sake he slacketh his coming,) yet, as before we
have proved, it is the absolute will and decree of God, concerning the
reprobate and refuse of the world, that they shall perish in their sins, and
run headlong of their own accord into the pit of destruction provided and
ordained for them.

O but, say they, Siptucos seruaret, relictis caeteris, suiss^t non solum
iratus and in^lemens, sed iniquus, etc. Auth. l. de Christ. seru. effic. Rat.
23. Those men are more to be abhorred then Atheis^s. What greater cruelty and
tyranny, then to create the most part of the world to cue^lasting damnation,
and that only because it was his pleasure and will? Then is God worse then the
devil. Auth. conf. of the carel. Sect. 6. and 7. ye cruelly affirm Gods
ordinance to be the cause of damnation. Idem. Sect. 23.
this can not stand with the Justice of God, that he should ordain any, or
create them unto everlasting death, and that for no other cause, but that it is
his will and pleasure. For death is the reward of sin, and not of Gods
ordinance or decree.

Wretched men, who being besotted with a spirit of blindness, and daring to
reprehend that which they do not comprehend, do most ignorantly confound those
two ^ Innuit hos v^rosq, actus, Caiet. comment. in part. 1. Tho. q. 23. art. 5.
S^d, non recte effectus vocat. Reprobati^ inquit, quo^d prim^um effectu^,
N^gtionem actus mise^ is ordiae seu gratiae exercet: quoad alterum e^^^ctum,
qui est (...), Ius^^^^ act^^n exercet.
acts of Gods decree, which in this cause of the Reprobation of men are
diligently and necessarily, to be distinguished. The former is Negative, and
that is, the eternal purpose and decree of God not to show mercy, nor give his
grace unto them, nor to pull them out, as we does the elect, but leave them in
that mass of sin, and most woeful state, whereinto both they and the elect
were now together fallen. The other is Positive, and that is, the eternal
purpose and decree of God to inflict that everlasting punishment upon them,
which is most instly deserved by that sin, into which they wilfully fall, and
in which they still abide, pursuing sin with all greediness. We never say,
nor so much as once think, that God either condemns any, or appoints them
unto death, without their own most just deserts. God himself teaches us this
lesson, Hos. 13. 9. Thyperdition, O Israel, is of thy self; and the Apostle,
saying, Romans 6. 23. that the wages of sin, is death, clearly witnesses unto
all, that eternal death is as duly earned by the wicked, and paid unto them
for their just recompense, and hire, as is the wages by any master to his
labourer, or servant. And herein is that true which S. Austen Lib. 3. contr^
Iul. cap. 18.
says, God is both good, and just. He may without our good deserts free us,
because he is good; but he cannot without our ill deserts condemn us, because
he is just. Yea, in that last and great Day, when God shall sit in his Throne
of judgment, the wicked and reprobate, forced to confess their faults written
in their conscience, as in a large book, shall then acknowledge both their
own deserts, and the Justice of God, in rewarding them with the due wages of
their sins. It is not then the will and pleasure of God, as they maliciously
slander, but their own great and heinous transgressions, for which they are
punished, and for which God from all eternity decreed to punish them: sin
only is the cause of this later and positive act in Gods decree.

But for the former and Negative act in their reiection, whereby God ordained,
that when all mankind was alike guilty before him, all included in that one
and the selfsame mass of perdition, into which by their own voluntary
transgression all mankind had plunged it self (for in ^Adam Romans 5. 12.
Ephesians. 2. 3.
all men sinned, and so death and Gods wrath went over all) that he would not
then in mercy pull these out of that mass, and make of them vessels of glory,
but in justice leave them in that their sinful and woeful estate to be vessels
of wrath, leave them to their own lusts, destitute of his grace, that so they
might run out the race of their sins, and be as it were fatted for the day
of slaughter: the cause of this act, I say, is the very will of God; which
though we may not doubt, but that being his will, who is most wise, it is also
most reasonable, Cauendum est, ne du^ voluntate^ Dei magnificare volumus,
voluntati eius derogemus. Si enim non esset alia ratio, quare istum elegit and
illum non, nisi quia placet, certe ^am non occulta dicerentur diuina iudicia,
sed manifesta, cum qu^^bet ha^c rationem capiat: nec dicerentur mirabilia, sed
potius voluntaria, quare dicendum est, qu^d voluntas illa Dei, est
rati^nabiliss^^a, and rationem habet, and ab aeterno habuit. Bonau. in lib. 1.
sent. did. 41. q. 2.
and grounded both upon most just, wise, and divine reasons, such, as perhaps,
in the life to come shall be made euiden^ unto us; yet hereof no other reason
can possibly be given by us, nor ought to be sought for in this mortal life,
but only this, I will have mercy on whom I will: and whom he will, he
hardneth, that is, he will not show mercy unto them. Tunc non latebit, qu^d nunc
latet, cur ille potius quam iste fuerit assumptus, cum causa vna esset ambobus.
Aug. Ench. cap. 95.


Now why should this seem unjust unto thee, O thou disputer against God? It
is, as the Apostle tells thee, the will of God; whose will, seeing he is
infinitely wise, is ever most just; yea, it is the very rule Dei valuntas, non
tantum est recta, sed etiam regula. Bonau. loc. cit.
of all perfect justice. Again, in that thou art a creature, thou art none of
thine own, but thou art wholly Gods. Is it not lawful for me to do with my
own what I will? says the hous-holder in the Gospel: and shall it not be
lawful for God, to do, and to dispose of his own, as it best pleases him?
Shall the Potter without controulement frame of the same lump of clay, one
vessel to honor, another to dishonor, only because it so pleases him? and
will thou, which art but dust and ashes, ask a reason of God, why of that one
lump Si artifex ex vil^ materia, faciat vas pulchrum and nobilibus vsibus
accommodatum, totum ascribitur bonitati artificis: sed si ex vili materia, vt
ex lut^, faciat vas ^ccommodatum vitibus vsibus, non potest vas (si rationem
haberet) conqueri, sed si ex pretiosa materia, vt ex auro, aut gemmis, vas
faciat ad vili^ officia, tu^ conqueri posset. Humana aut^ nature a vi^itatem
habet, non solum ex materia, quia est lutum and limus t^^ae, sed quia est
cor^^^a peccato: vnde quicquid boni habet, debet bonitati figult. Aquin.
comment. in c. 9. ad Romans Et idem omnin^ docet Aug. Epist. 106. Vbi massam
^llam ex qua Deus h^e^ diuersa vasa finxit, nec integram aut mediam idest, nec
bonam, nec malam) sed plane corrupt^ fuiss^ docet.
of sin, fit for nothing at all but to make vessels of dishonor, he made
thee, rather then another, a vessel of dishonor, which of a silly Potter thou
would blush and be ashamed to ask? Nay, the Apostle says of the Potter,
that he has not only power, but even authority and a rightful power; (for so
the word (...) imports) to frame the clay as he lists, and of what part
thereof he will, to make a vessel either for honor, or dishonor. How much more
is there authority and a rightful power in God over all men? For the Potter
made not the clay, but God made, yea created us of nothing: and the Potter,
though by much and many degrees he excel the clay, yet still the odds and
difference is finite. But God infinitely excels all mankind; and therefore
his authority is infinitely more over us all, then is the Potter over the
least parcel of Clay. Yea, thou thy self wilt, for thy own pleasure, sport,
or glory, kill and slay of thy Dear, and fat of thy beasts, which thou will,
for slaughter: and yet because thou think they are thy own, death it were
for any of thy servants, to say to thee, no less then to the man of sin,
Domine, Non Rex, non Synodus, non tota Ecclesia (Papae) dicere potest, Cur ita
facis? Clau. Esp. com. in c. 1. ad Titum. page 77.
cur ita facis? yet thy beasts had no way offended thee, but been good and
serviceable unto thee, so that thou had only the power of a Lord over them,
but thou had no cause of wrath and anger against them: How much more may the
Almighty, for his glory, design or leave which of all mankind he pleases,
for the day of slaughter; seeing both, they all had by their rebellion against
God, incensed his wrath, and provoked his just indignation against them; and
he being the Lord of all Lords, and Creator of heaven and earth, has
infinitely more authority over them all, then thou have, or can have, over
the least and meanest thing that thou do possess?

Lastly, if God had been indebted unto thee, or bound to show thee mercy and
favor, then might thou have had some cause to complain of his wrong. But
the Almighty did owe thee nothing, nor was he obliged to show thee the least
favor. And though he was not, yet, to leave thee without all excuse, he
enriched thee with his free bounty, and thou had greatly tasted of his
favors, in that he gave thee thy being, when he might have suffered thee to
continue in Nothing: in that he made thee a man, when, if it had pleased him,
he might have made thee a beast; yea, have made thee a Toad: and especially in
that he created thee after his own image, decking thee with righteousness
and true bolinesse, setting thee in a most glorious and happy estate, and
giving unto thee free will, power and ability to have continued so for ever,
if thou would thy self. Now feeing thou, and all mankind by their own will
and wilful disobedience, did deprive thy self of all that glory; and
pulledst down his just wrath and vengeance upon thee: Why do thou now
repine against so good and gracious a God? or how can thou imagine any color
of injustice in his doings, though he show not to thee that undeserved mercy
which he does unto others, to whom he gives both grace and glory? As one of
those malefactors before mentioned, caunot justly complain, that the King does
wrong him, because he did not pardon him, as he did some other in the like
offense, and condemnation: So though God deal in justice with thee, and not in
mercy, as he does with others, yet he does no wrong unto thee, seeing he ought
thee nothing: and to show undeserved In his quae ey gratia dantur, and non ex
debito, potest aliquis, abs^, praeiudicio iustitiae, pro libito suo, plus dare
cui vult, and cui vult, minus, dummod^ nulli subtrahat debitum. Aquin. p. 1. q.
23. art. 5.
favor, is mercy and love; but not to show it, is no injustice, no wrong at
all. Whence also may fully be cleared the justice of God, in his rejecting of
the transgressing angels. There is, I confess, great odds and difference in
the reiection of them, and of men. All mankind was included in one common
root, whence all the rest should be propagated: so were not the angels. All
mankind in that common root had sinned, Romans 5. 12. Ephesians. 2. 3.
and willingly deprived themselves of blessedness, and made themselves subject
to the eternal hatred of God: so had not the angels. In electing men, God used
an act of mercy; I will have mercy on whom I will. Now mercy presupposes sin
and misery: so in electing of them, God in mercy pulled them out of sin and
misery, and in mercy gave both grace and glory unto them. In electing the
Angels, he cannot be said to have used this Act of mercy, seeing they were then
neither sinful, nor miserable. His act in electing them, was only an act of
free love and bounty, in giving such grace unto them, as that they should never
sin, never ^e willing to sin, nor ever fall from that most blessed estate,
wherein they were created. In rejecting men, God used an act of justice: and
that act was both Negative, decreeing not to give such grace unto them, as
should free them from sin and misery, as he did to the elect; and positive,
decreeing, for that sin into which they wilfully now had run, to inflict
eternal punishment upon them. All which, God himself expresses, saying of
that rejected person, I have hated Esau: that is, I have both in justice
decreed not to show Dicitur Deus reprobos odrsse, quia non vult eis hoc bonum,
qu^d est vita ae^^rna. Aquin. p. 1. q. 23. art. 3. Quod verum est respectu
actus primi seunegatiui.
such love and mercy to him, as I do to Jacob; and in justice also decreed to
inflict that punishment on him, which his sin most justly has deserved. In
rejecting the Angels, God can not be said to have used this Act of Justice,
seeing he could not decree to leave them either in sin, or misery, into
neither of which as yet they were fallen. His act of rejecting them, was only
Negative, decreeing not to give that grace unto them, which he gave to the
elect Angels, such as would preserve them from sinning, but to leave them
wholly to themselves, and permit Deus bona omnia vult volun, t^te effectiua^,
quia ipse eorum author est and approbator: Mal^ vero seu peccata nunqua^ v^lt
voluntate essectiua^, sed tantum permissiua^, quia volens permittit ea fieri,
cum non impediat ne fiant: ipse autem nec author little est, aut causa, nec
praecipit fieri, ne^ facta approbat. Haec innuit Mag. sent. did. 46, lib. 1.
and alij Scholastici in eam did. and Aug. in Ench. cap. 96.
them of their own accord to fall into sin: and his decreeing to punish
their sin, was an act of his justice on the parties rejected, rather then an
act of his reiection of them. In all which, Gods dealing to have been most
just, if we rightly consider thereof, will be clear and manifest. For had God
at the Creation either made mankind or Angels sinful, or having made them
just, had he left them impotent, Si hoc adiutorium (quo possent stare si
vellent) vel Angelo, vel homini, quando primum ^acti sunt, defuisset, non vtiq,
sua^ culpa^ cecidissent, adiuterium quippe defuisset, sieve quo ma^ere non
possent. Aug. l. de. Cor. and great. c. 11.
or unable to stand in that blessed estate if they would, or had he himself
thrust them forward into sin, compelling or causing them to transgress, then
might they have justly complained indeed of God: Complained first of want of
goodness in God, who had either made them evil, or forced them to be evil;
and then complained of his injustice, who would punish them for doing that
evil, whereof himself had been the cause and author unto them. But Gods
proceeding herein was far otherwise. It was every way most just, and most
equal. For he not only created mankind and all Angels in perfect
righteousness Genesis 1. 27, 31.
and innocence, exceeding good, and complete in all goodness, which was N^^
habere voluntalem immutab^at^r bonum, soli Deo conuenit Creaturae autem Natura
exigit, vt quia non est sum bon^^^, id^o volunias cius non sit sum, id est,
incom mutabi^^ter bona. Sed talis, quae possit de^^cere, vel non defice^e.
Aquin. in q. d^p. q. de P^^ou. art. 4.
sit for their natures, but withal, he gave unto them (that which was
requisite to reasonable creatures) such a freedom of will, and so great
assistance and abundance of his grace, that by these, they might Dederat Deus
primo h^mini adintorium, per quod posset perman^re si vellet, vt autem vellet,
in ^iu^ reliqu^t arbitriv. Aug. l. de Cor. and great. c. 11. Quod idem (...)
Angelis peccantibus dicendum est.
for ever have perseuered in piety, and continued in blessedness, if
themselves had been willing. And although God might further have given, both
to the wicked angels, and to all mankind, such an overplus of grace, (as he
gave to the elected Angels, and daily gives to the elect Sanctis per gratiam
prades^inatis non s^lum ta^e ad^utorium dati^ (vt possirt sta^e siv^l. nt) sed
tale, vt perseuerantia ipsa d^n^tur, si^ vt per hoe donum non nisi
perseu^rantes siat. Aug. ibid. cap.
which are regenerate and sanctified) that they should not only be able to
persevere, if they would; but that they should also be willing so to persevere:
yet seeing he was no way bound to give this grace unto them, seeing that grace
was merely his own, to give it, or not give it, unto whom he would; neither
can mankind, nor any of the rejected angels, complain of injustice in God,
for not giving such grace unto them. May not I do with my own what I will?
May not I give my grace to whom I will? and withhold it from whom I will? Is
thy eye evil, because I am good? For seeing that grace was due to none of them
all, if he give it to any, that is his bounty and a surplusage of his love; but
in not giving it to others, seeing he ought it not to any, he does no wrong at
all unto them. In the very like sort, when first the wicked angels, and after
them all mankind, had by their own wills, and most voluntary transgression,
cast off the love of God, and so not only deprived themselves of that glory,
which if they had been willing, they might for ever have enjoyed, but made
themselves liable to Gods wrath, and eternal condemnation: what wrong or
injustice can this seem to any, not to pull them out of that pit of perdition,
into which, with open contempt of God, both those angels, and all mankind, of
their own accord, and most willingly had now cast themselves? If he had for
ever left all mankind, as he did all the transgressing angels, in that woeful
and wretched state, he had done no wrong to any, seeing he was not bound to
show his mercy or favor unto any. In that he pulls out some, it is a
superaboundance of his love and mercy toward them. In that he leaves the rest
to destruction, it is truly justice on Gods part, and on theirs most deserved
punishment; for to give undeserved favor, is mercy, but not to give it, or to
render deserved punishment, is no wrong.

Now, whereas in the last place, they accuse If your saying were true, then
were his works full of cruelty, misery, damnation and destiuction. Auth. co^
fu^ of the careless. Sect. 23. He had then been worse then the d^uell. Idem
Sect. 7. Nulla est tam immanis bestia, quae velit creare pu^lum ad mise^i^m.
Auth. confut. Artic. ex Calu. dece^p. art. 1. Quare creauit cos, si ad (...)
non praedestinauit? Ob^^^^o impiorum, in Dialogo Honorij Aug. de P^aedest.
God not only of inuistice, but for tyranny and cruelty for creating so many,
whom he would permit to fall into sin, and then inflict endless and
insupportable torments upon them; whereas, if it had pleased him, he might have
given unto them all such grace, as would have prevented not only their
destruction, but their sin also which was the cause thereof; they do herein
bewray themselves, not only to be besotted in error; but such as Gyant-like
do maliciously fight against God. Art thou wiser then the Almighty? or will thou prescribe a Law unto God, whom, or how many he should create? or what
measure of grace he should give unto them? Art thou able to answer him one for
a thousand? Was It not sufficient to give both to all mankind, and to all
angels, so much grace and power, as that thereby they might for ever have stood
in integrity, and have inherited eternal felicity if they would themselves?
In which one gift, consists the effect of all that, which the oppugners of this
truth, either do, or can say, to clear the justice of God^, or free hish from
that cruelty, which against us they object: Or had God intended their death, or
destruction, before he foresaw their most wilful rebellion; then might they
have had some color for their impious and blasphemous declaiming against the
Lord. But seeing no thought of punishing either men or Angels, ever entered into
the heart of God, but in order, Etsi in Dei ^oluntat^ non sit ve^prius, vel
pos^e^us (^^mpore) quia quaecunque vult, ab aeterno volu^t, ordine tamen
naturae, and pro nostro captu, non possismus al^ter cogitare, qua hoc ordine
Deum voluisse, and velle: sic vt resco ordine volucrit, quo inter sepositae
sunt. Ita ordine natura, (...) voluit causas, deinde affecta, etc. Hie^. Zanch
l. 3. de Attrib. Dei, c. 4. q. 11. These. 3.
though not of time, yet of nature and reason, after his foresight of their
voluntary disobedience and rebellion against him: why should they count it
either injustice or cruelty, to inflict that deserved punishment on them, which
they wilfully pulled down upon themselves. Or was God bound to give them such an
antidote of his preuenient grace, as would have preserved them from sin?
Besides, that he was not so obliged to any, in the infinitenesle of his
wisdom, he saw it was not fit he should give that unto them: for by giving
such grace unto all, it would have been thought, that it had been their own,
and their natural power, which now, by not giving it to some, is declared to
be due unto none; and by bestowing it on others, is known to be his free and
supernatural gift and grace unto them. Nay, by giving such grace unto all, he
had for ever both damm'd up all passage to his justice and mercy; and the
greatness of his love, wisdom, and goodness, had for ever been obscured.
And therefore first Sic ordinauit Angelerum and l^minum vitam, vt in ea prius
^stenderet quid posset little liberum arbitrium, deinde quid posset suae
grattiae beneficium, institiaeque indi^^um. Aug. l. de corr. and great. cap. 10.
he^ would let them know what of themselves, and by their own will they would
do, even run into destruction, that afterward he might make evident and
known all the exceeding riches of his glory. The riches of his mercy; which
could never have been seen if he had suffered none to fall into misery,
whence afterward himself would deliver them by mercy. The riches of his
justice; who is now seen to be so infinitely just, as that he has an infinite
hatred against all injustice, and therefore justly inflicteth an infinite
punishment upon it; and who therefore would not in mercy pardon all, as he
might have done, lest it might seem, that he who is Righteousness it self,
had not in a just and perfect manner hated unrighteousness. The riches of his
wisdom; who is now seen to be so infinitely wise, as that he could find a
most blessed means, both fully, even to the utmost farthing, to punish the
offenses, and so to satisfy his infinite justice, and yet wholly to pardon the
offenders, and so to manifest his infinite mercy; that every one might with the
Prophet Psalm. 101. 1.
say unto God, Mercy and judgment will I sing unto thee. The riches of his
power and goodness; which both are now seen to be so infinite, that he is
able to turn the greatest evil, to our greatest good, and even out of sin,
to work salvation; and out of death, to effect eternal life. The riches of
his lone to the elect: the infinite greatness whereof could never have been
conceived, if they had not seen in the just punishment of others, from what
infinite and endless torments they are freed themselves, and freed by his
only love, either most lovingly preventing them with his grace, that they
should not fall into sin, as he did the elected Angels: or most lovingly
delivering them by his grace, when they were fallen into sin, as he did all
the elect of mankind. In regard of all which, it may truly be faid with
Saint Austen, Omnipotens Deus, cum sum bonus sit, nullo mod^ smeret malt al^
quid esse, nisi vsque ade^ esset omnipotens and bunus, vt benefacit etiam de
^alo. Ench. cap. 11. Nec ^ubitandum est Deum facere been, etiam sin^nd^ fieri,
quicunque fiunt mal^. Qui^ etsi mala, in quantum smala sunt, non sint bona,
tamen vt nonsolu^m bona, sed etiam sint and mala, bon^m est. Lib. eod. c. 96.
that God being both most powerful and most good, would never have suffered
evil to have been, unless he had been so infinitely good and powerful,
that he was able even out of evil, to bring good: and unless Melius iudicauit
de malis beneface^e, quam mala nulla esse permittere. Aug. in Ench. cap. 27.
Rectissime credimus qu^d Deus, qui creauit omnia bona valde, and mala ex boms
exoritura praesciuit, sciuit magis ad suam omnipotentissim^m bonitatem
pertinere, de malis benefacere, quam mala esse non sinere. Idem lib. de Cor.
and great. cap. 10.
he had known that it was a far more glorious work, and would turn to his
far greater glory, when some had sinned, even out of sin to work
salvation, then not to suffer them to sin at all. But what though we in the
shallowness of our understanding either cannot give, or cannot comprehend the
reason of Gods will herein? Shall we therefore presume to exclaim against the
Lord, or accuse him for thus doing? Does not the Apostle put to silence the
insolency of this folly, when he says, Romans 9. 20.
O man, who art thou that disputest with God? Who art thou that dare ask a
reason of his will, whose very will is the rule Dei voluntas est Ratiorationum,
nec tantum recta, s^d regula. Bon. in l. 1. sent. did. 41. q. 2.
of al reason? Much rather ought thou here even with amazement and
admiration, cry out with the same Apostle; Romans 11. 33.
O the depth of the riches^ both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Yet even by
this little, which we have now said, you do clearly see, both the will of God
to be most holy, and his justice most upright, and both his will and justice
to be without all blame, in that his whole Decree, whereby he elected some, to
give freely unto them both grace and glory, and left others in their own
sin, to be led thereby into everlasting perdition.

Howsoever then blasphemous mouths do bark against Heaven, and against their
Creator; yet let us, and all Gods servants, not only acknowledge, but
magnify, as in those whom he refuses, his Justice; so in our selves, his
exceeding and vnexpresseable mercy: let us cast all our crowns before his
footstool, and sing an hymn of praise unto him, who not only has made us of
nothing, but which is the most happy blessing that we can wish or desire, has
made us vessels of love, vessels of mercy, and glory; whereas if it ha^ pleas^d
him* he might have left us to have been vessels of wrath and vengeance, as
he left the rest: for there was no odds at a^l ^etwixt them and us, in our
selves: the only odd, was in his mercy and will; Even so, O Lord, it was thy
holy will, who have said it, and it shall stand for ever, Thou will have mercy
on whom thou will, and whom thou will thou hardenest. And thus much be spoken
of the first general point: namely, our Election it self, as well of the
parties who, as of the cause why they are elected.

The second general point proposed, was the certainty of our election;
expressed in this, that the Apostle says, Make your election sure. Now our
election is said to be sure or certain, two manner of waves. First, it is sure
and certain, in it self: secondly, it is called sure and certain in respect
of us, and of our persuasion or knowledge. Concerning the former certainty,
being not so proper to this place, I would not have at all entreated, if some
malicious men had not with most venomous tongues oppugned, and eagerly sought
to disgrace this truth: teaching that Si quis defecerit a fide, des^^it esse
electus. and reprobus efficitur. Heming. lib. de great universe. page 26. Here
you see, that they divide all men into two forts; the one elected, which by no
means can perish; the other reprobate, so that by no means they can be saved.
What can the Devil wish his members to teach more for the advancement of his
Kingdom then this? Auth. confut. of the carelisse by necessity. Sect. 27. By
this you see, that the elect become reprobates by their wickedness. Ibid.
Sect. 30. and simi^^a illic passim. Idem sensit Alphon. a Castre, ^^i neque,
Praedestinatos si^ n^ces^^tari ad bonum, ait, vt peri^e neque^^t, ne^; reprobos
sic cog^ ad gebeanam, v^ vitam promcue^^ri non valean:. Lib. de haeres. vit.
Predestinatio.
Gods election is so uncertain, and changeable, as that the elect may become
reprobates, and the reprobate elect; the elect be quite blotted out of Gods
favor, and fall from their election; the other receive the cr^wne of glory,
which was prepared for the elect.

But we are taught a far more comfortable doctrine in the Word of God, That
Gods election is most firm, certain, and unchangeable. For it it the
Ordinance, Counsel, and Decree of God, who has chosen us, Ephesians. 1. 4. who
has predestinate, that is, foreordained us unto glory, Romans 8. 29. Now if the
ordinances and Laws of the Medes and Persians, were such as might not be
altered; how much more shall the Decree of God be immutable, of which himself
faith, Isay 46. 10. My Counsel shall stand? The firmness of this election
our Savior teaches, John 6. 37. where speaking of his chosen servants which
his Father has given him; he says, They shall all come unto me, and those
that come unto me, I cast not away. And lest we should imagine, (as they do,)
that though Christ would not put them away, yet either themselves, or some
other, might take them from him; he adds further, John 10. 28. of the same
chosen sheep, I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of mine hand. If not any, then not the World,
nor the Flesh, nor Satan with all the powers of darkness, no nor they
themselves, shall be able to pluck themselves from Christ, or take them out
of his Fathers hand. And lest we should think that though they cannot be
plucked, or by force drawn from Christ, yet by some subtlety, or craft of
Satan, they might be ensnared, and, as it were, stolen from him, our Savior
preuenteth even this doubt also, Math. 24. 24. telling us, that the wonders and
lying signs of Satan shall be such, and so great, that if it were possible,
they should deceive the very elect. Manifestly implying thus much, that not all
the sleights, deceits, and lying wonders of Satan, shall be able to deceive
any one of his Elect; because it is impossible by any means whatsoever, to
take or steal them away from Christ, who being the Watchman and good Shepherd
of Israel, can neither slumber nor sleep. Seeing then Christ promises to
receive all the elect, and being once received and come unto him, neither
himself will cast them away, neither any force or violence shall be able to
pull them out of his hand, nor any deceit or sleight of Satan shall steal them
from him, that remains as undoubtedly true, which Saint Paul teaches, Romans
8. 29. that salvation and eternal glory; is by a golden chain most infallibly
and inseparably linked unto election; for whom God predestinateth, them also he
(effectually) calls; and whom he so calls, them also he justifies; and
whom he justifies, them also he glorifieth.

Here again they open their mouths wide against God. abusing their wits,
perverting the Sacred Scriptures, and in the insolency of their folly, even in
most reproachful manner slandering this holy truth of the certainty of Gods
election; yea, and the whole doctrine of Predestination also, as a dangerous,
pernicious, and pestilent doctrine, making men, as they teach, Obijciunt nomen
gratiae vt abommandum sensum operiant blasphemi^. Subsidia enim orationis
excludunt, and operandi laborem. Quid enim vltra speret quem iam gratia
(electionis) suum fecit? In quo etiam non desperet, quem praefinitio violenta
damnauit? In illo culp^, in hoc gratia locum non habet. In vtroque periclitatur
iustitia. Salus illic ingerenda est, non quaerenti, huic auferend^ etiam
labora^ti. Faust. Rheg. (bomo hareticus,) quisub specie oppugnandi,
Pelagianismum fortiter propugnat.) lib. 1. de libero a^b. cap. 4. By your
poisoned doctrine ye infect the people of God, and draw them to a secure, idle,
and careless life. Auth. consut. of the careless. Sect. 27. Why, Mas^ers,
have ye no conscience thus to cause the people to sin? Ibid. If your opinion
be true, the preaching of repentance is vain; for if the elect cannot perish,
what need they repent? and if the reprobate cannot attain salvation, to what
purpose should they repent? Ibid. Sect. 30. It is no matter what we do, if your
doctrine be true. Ibid. Sect. 28. and huc ^lane spectabat haer^sis ^^a quae
Praedestinatorum dicta est. Omnia sic ex predestinati^ne suspendende, vt reque
bona opera prodesse, neque m^la ^pera obesse cuiquam possent. De qua Sigeb. in
Chron. an. 415. Sed opinor eum non satis recte exposuisse istam haeresin.
secure and careless of well doing, and of their salvation. For if I be, say
they, predestinate to life; what need I repent, believe, serve or love God,
let me wallow in sin, yet seeing the elect cannot perish, nor fall out of
Gods favor, I am certain I shall be saved: But if I be rejected of God, to
what purpose should I repent or amend my life; for though I walk in all the
statutes of God, yet can I not attain to life, but must unavoidably be
condemned?

See how rightly the Apostles doom is verified of these men, When they
profess themselves to be wise, they become fools, God making the wisdom of
the flesh mere foolishness. For know they not, that this dispute of theirs is
every way as effectual against the Praescience and foreknowledge (which yet
themselves confess Auth. confut. of the careless Sect. 15. and 18.
) as it is or can be against the Decree and Predestination of God? his
Praes^ience being as certainly infallible, as his Decree is immutable. If God
then foreknow that I shall be saved, let me live as I list, and pass my time
in sin, yet I shall be sure to be an heir of Gods Kingdom: But if God
foreknow that I shall be damned, to what end should I fear or serve the Lord:
for seeing God foreknoweth this, and what he foreknoweth must unavoidably come
to pass, though I should wholly deuote both my soul and body to Gods service;
yet of necessirie I must at the last eternally perish? Let them now either in
plain terms profess Atheism, and deny Proescience in God, and so deny Quid
aliud est negare in Deo praescientiam futuroru^ omnium, qu^m dicere, Deum non
esse Deum? Quomodo e^^m Deus est qui futuro^ um praescientiam non habet? Eccl.
Lugdun. in lib. cont. Ioh. Scot.
him to be God, or let them cease with such vain disputes, to oppugn the
Ordinance, Decree, and Predestination of God, the selfsame difficulty as
forcibly overthrowing the infallibility of the one, which themselves confess,
as it does, or can, the Immutabilitie of the other, which we defend.

See again how Satan has bewitched these men: they seem witty to themselves
in pleading thus against their own salvation; but this their reason is with
them of no force at all, to make them secure and careless in their bodily
estate, or worldly affairs. God does not only foresee, but foreordaine also
concerning every man, whether he shall be rich or poor, sick or whole, live
or dye; for none of these come from the earth, nor spring out of the dust, as
holy Job Job 5. 6.
speaks, that is, they come not by chance or fortune unto any; but as the
Prophet says, Lament. 3. 38. Out of the mouth of God, (from his appointment
and Decree) proceeds both good and evil. And yet when will these disputers
either persuade others, or resolve themselves upon this their reason, to set
Cock on hoope, as themselves speak, Let us set cock on hoop, and let the world
(...), let us eat and drink, and rise up to play, etc. Auther. confut. of the
carel. Sect. 27.
that is, to sit careless and secure, to sleep and sl^mber, nor once trouble
their minds or bodies in the eager pursuit of the wealth and pelf of this
world? because it God has decreed, or do foresee, that they shall have
wealth; let them do what they will, sit still, or riot, waste and lavish all
they have, yet shall they sure abound, seeing what God foreknoweth, or
fore-ordaineth, shall most infallibly come to pass: and if God decrees or
foreseeth that they shall be poo^e and miserable, though they compass Sea and
Land, and load themselves with all, both the East and West Indian treasures,
yet by that irresistable Decree of GOD they shall be put all into bottomless
bags, and live and dye in a poor estate. Or would not these men think that
he did scoff and deride them, who would in serious manner persuade them,
never to eat or drink, but rather to starve or stab themselves; because, if
God (who has numbered Job 14. 5.
all our days) has decreed, or does but foreknow, that they shall yet live
twenty, thirty, or forty years more, do whatsoever they will or can, yet
shall they attain to that period prefixed or foreknowne of God: and if God
have ^rdained or foreknoweth that they shall dye within a month or a year,
though they should eat nothing but the fruit of the Tree of Life, and fill
themselves with Nectar and Ambrosia, yet could not all this immortal food
prolong their lives one hour, or minute; seeing the foreknowledge of God is
without all error, and his ordinance without all change? When they can by this
their reason, wherein they infinitely please themselves, persuade either
themselves, or others, to this careless, nay, frantic courses, then may they
with some color persuade, that our doctrine of the Prescience and
Predestination of God will make men careles^e of their eternal salvation.

But if laying aside the pride and wantonness of their own wits, they could
be content to submit their reason to the wisdom of God, they should easily
discern, how their whole dispute in this, and all like cases, relyeth on no
other stay, then a broken staff of Reed. For did God either foreknow or
fore-ordaine any of these ends, without respect unto the means, which do
infallibly lead thereunto, then had they some show for their pretended reason.
But seeing it is most certain, that God neither de^reeth, nor foreknoweth of
any, that the shall be saved, but withal he both foreknoweth and decrees,
that himself will make him to embrace those means, and walk in those ways
which will bring him unto life: and seeing he neither decrees nor foreknoweth
the damnation of any, but of the same he decrees, and foreknoweth, that he
will leave them destitute of his grace, to be led by their own lusts into
sin and impenitency, which is the infallible means to bring them unto death:
(...) most clearly hence follows, that as none do neglect or omit the
means, but the same also do miss of the end, so neither do any ever fail
to attain the end, who do embrace the means that lead thereunto. Whence it
comes to pass, that though none of the Elect can either miss of the end, or
neglect the means of salvation, God by his grace directing them in the one,
and thereby leading them unto the other; yet upon that suposall which they
make, if they should not believe, nor use the means of life, it may, yea, it
must be said, that they should never attain to to the end, but eternally
perish. Even as Saint Paul, though he knew that God had decreed and foretold
Act. 27. 30, 3^
him also, that all who were with him in that dangerous tempest, should come
safe to Land, and not so much as an hair fall from the head of any: all which
himself certainly believed; yet when the Mariners, who were to be the means
of their safety, were ready to fly away, and leave the rest to the rage of the
sea, he conditionally and truly said, that if the Mariners abode not in the
ship: that is, if they used not the means of their ^afety appointed by God,
there could none of them be safe: notwithstanding both the Decree, Praescience,
and Prediction of GOD for their safety. Again, though in respect of Gods
immutable Decree and Praescience, it be simply impossible, that any of the
Reprobate should either believe, repent, and lead a sanctified life, or be
saved; yet even of such it may and must be said, that if they perform those
duties, which are the means of life, they shall asluredly attain unto the end
to which those means do lead, which is eternal salvation. Even as our
Savior, though he knew that God had decreed concerning Tyrus and Sydon, two
heathenish, proud, and profane Cities, that neither himself would work those
singes among them, whereby they would have been converted and repent; nor that
they should either repent or be saved ^ yet conditionally and truely^ said
Math. 11. 21.
of those Cities, that if those works had been done amongst them, which were
done in Chorazin and Bethsaida, they would have repented, and so should have
have been saved. The reason of all which, and of all the like is, that which
the Logicians rightly teach, that a conditional proposition Propositio
conditionalis (...) po^t ^esse.
puts nothing in being, that is, requires not the being or being true of either
part thereof, but it only shows what must follow and be granted, if such a
condition be admitted, whether it be true, or false.

But leaving their disputes; let now every man's conscience judge, how unjustly
they slander us and this holy Doctine, as an inticement Ye would entice the
pecple by this doctirine, to fi^^ ne. Auth. Censes. of the car^les. Sect. 28.
Ye draw them to a lecu^e, and careless, life. Idem Sect. 27.
unto sin, and persuasion of security. For seeing the Scriptures and the
Spirit of God teach, both that Predestination which we have delivered, and the
immutabilitie thereof; let them take heed, lest in reuiling the teachers of
this doctrine, they do not blaspheme the Spirit of God himself. For our
selves, we will not desist: first, in general, to exhort all men, to cease
from doing evil, and learn to do well, telling them with the Apostle, Romans
8. 13. If they live after the flesh, they shall dye: but if they mortify the
deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, they shall live: and with the same Apostle,
Galathians 6. 7. Whatsoever they s^we, that shall they reap; If they sow unto
the flesh, they shall reap corruption and death: but if they sow to the
Spirit, they shall reap life everlasting. Then for the Elect in particular;
We exhort them with Saint Paul, 1. Tim. 1. 19.
to fight the good fight, having faith and a good conscience: with Saint Peter,
2. P^t. 1. 10.
to g^ue all diligence to make their election sure; and with John Baptist,
Mctb. 3 8.
to bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life; For if they do not this, if
they keep not faith and sanctity, which are the Mariners to guide them to the
celestial Haven, they will certainly make shipwreck of their salvation, the
Spirit of GOD assuring them, that be John 3. 18.
that believes not is condemned already, and that Math. 3. 10.
every Tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be ^ewne down and cast
into the fire. As for the rest, we cannot speak to any one in particular, as
one retected of God: for neither can any knew of another, no nor of himself
neither, that he is a Reprobate, seeing at the last watch, yea, even at the
last gasp, God may effectually call and convert him: and we in charity are
both to judge and hope the best of all: Yet even them also (if we know any to
be such) we would not cease to stir up unto all the duties of a Christian
life; assuring them, that if they will believe and live in fanctitie and
holiness, they shall be crowned with glory: God himself saying Genesis 4. 7.
to Cain, whom he knew to be a Reprobate; If thou do well, shall thou not
be accepted? and Christ proclaiming, John 3. 15.
that whosoever beleoueth, shall baue everlasting life.

Besides which, unto them both, whether they be Elect or reprobate, it may be
further said, that as by their refraining from sin, and doing that which is
good, in either of both estates, they shall be sure to gain; so by their
pursuing of sin, and heaping up iniquity, they shall, in either estate, be
sure to lose thereby. For if they be elect, though by reason of Gods
ordinance, they be sure to obtain remission of sins, and eternal life, and
to be in the number of those heavenly stars; yet because even in that
eternal life, there are many Io^n 14. 2. proqualitate mentorum (i. bo^orum
operum) diuersae sunt mansiones. Hier. l. 2. contra Iouin. and Aug. tract. 67.
in Johan.
and diverse mansions, and one Star 1. Cor. 15. 41, 42. Q^^d (...) Aug. and
Hier. Io^^s (...).
differs from another in glory; the more, and the more heinous sins that
they do commit, the less portion Qui suturi sint pro meritis, (i. benis
operibus) praemiorum etiam gradus, honorum atq, gloriarum, quis est idoneus
cogitare? Quod tamen (gradus) futuri sint, non est ambigendun^^ August. lib.
22. de ciuit. dei, cap. 30. Denarius quidem ille est communis omnibus, quo
vtique denario, significatur vita ^terna. Sed multe mansiones diuersus
meritorum (i. operum) in vna vita aeterna significant dignitates. Sancti, sicu^
Stell^ diuersas mansiones, diuersas claritates in cocle sortientur. Nec erit
aliqua inuidia impanis claritatis, quoniam regnabit in omnibus vnitas
charitatis. August. tract. 67. in Ioh. and idem iterum habet, l. de virg. cap.
26. Sic erit in resurrectione mortuorum, vt iusti in claritate solis luceant,
and qui in sequents grad^ sunt, lune splendore rutilent, vt alius Lucifer sit
al^s A^cturus, and qui parce seminat, parce and metet, and in coelis erit
maximus and minimus. Hier. lib. 2. cont. Iouin. vbi Iouiniani err^rem resutat,
qui docuit, Nullam esse diuer sitatem, nullos gradus in praemys Sanctorum,
sicut ne^ vollos agnouit in poenis damnatorum. Hinc etiam recte a Scholasticis
dicitur, Praemtum essentiale Sanctorum esseaequale, nempe visionem Dei, sed
praemium accidental^ esse inaequale, quia c^arits alter altero Deum videt. Mag.
sent. lib. 4. did. 49. and Aquin. in distinct. 49. q 5. art. 1.
and weight of that eternal glory shall be given unto them, as there is less
light and glory in those which they call obscure or cloudy stars, and those
of the fifth or sixth magnitude; whereas if their lives had here shined in
sanctity, in innocence, in faith, in purity, and in sincerity, then
themselves also should have shined like those prime and fairest Dan. 12. 3. Vbi
iustos ait fulgere vt coelum, cos vero qui and i^sfisunt, and altos ad
institian conuertu^, splendere vt Stellas, etsi Hier. verba illa aliter exponit.
stars, or like the Sun in his strength and glory. In like sort, If they be
rejected of God, though by reason of their own perverse wills being hardened
in sin, they are sure to run into etnerall death and perdition; yet because
even in that eternal death, there are diversities and degrees of punishments,
for some fewer, Luke 12. 47, 48. and Toler^bilius cri^ Tyro ac Sidoni, quam
vobis, Mat. 11. 22, 24.
for others more and more bellish stripes, the more they restrain themselves
from sin, and the more they practice those works of justice and temperance,
which for the substance Potest seruart praeceptum Dei, quoad substantiam operis
etiam cum peccato. Bell ^5. de great. and lib. a^b. cap. 9.
of the work are good, and such as Heathen men and Reprobates may perform,
even by this they shall gain thus much, that their stripes and punishments
shall be far more easy, then if by their wallowing in sin, and letting
loose the reins to impiety, they had treasured up wrath against the day of
wrath. Seeing then, whether soever they be Sheep or Goats, they are sure by
impiety to lose, and by good works to gain, both of them in Tanto, though
neither of both in Toto; even in this respect, if there were no other, it
behoues them both to labor and strive to represle sin, and do that which is
good; that if they be elect, their reward may be more glorious; and if they
be not elect, their punishment may be less grievous.

Lastly, in whom, I pray you, does or can this holy doctrine breed security
and carelessness? Not in them who know or think themselves to be elect. For
this very persuasion of Gods love, in whomsoever it is, does cause a more
fervent love, and more earnest serving of the Lord, who has vouchsafed them so
great and inexpressible mercy: even as the Apostles, who knew that their names
were written in heaven, were most ready and desirous to do and suffer all
things, for the love they had unto God, the love 2. Cor. 5. 14.
of Christ constraining them thereunto. For as Saint Austen says, Deum si
amare pigebit, saltem redamare non pigeat; Nulla enim mayor est inuitatio ad
amorem, quam praeuenire amando: and ^imis durus est animus, qui amor c^, etc.
August. de Catech. rudibus, cap. 4.
He is too churlish and ^nkinde, qui amorem si nolit impendere, nolit
rependere, who if he will not bestow love upon God, will not yet requite the
love of God freely bestowed on him. Not in them, who think themselves
Reprobates: For seeing they do not, nor can know themselves to be such; why
should they deiect their minds, and not rather hope, by repentance, faith and
and sanctity, to obtain favor with God, and be found in the number of
those, of whom the Apostle faith, 2. Tim. 2. 21. If any man purge himself from
these, he shall be a vessel unto honor? Even as in their bodily sickness,
and worldly estate, they labor and toil, neglecting no means to attain
health, wealth, and welfare, because they know no other but that God has
decreed an happy success, and to give a blessing to those means which are
commanded and ordained by himself: So because they know no other, but that God
has decreed to give salvation and eternal glory unto them: why should they
not labor by faith, sanctity, and all holy means, to attain unto life, and
leave the success unto him, who has said and assured them, Ezekiel 18. 31.
Return and cast away all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your
destruction? So many ways is that their cavil of security clearly refuted:
by which, as by the chiefest engine, which their wits could devise, they seek
to overthrow both the whole doctrine of Gods Predestination, and that certainty
or assurance of our election: of which we now entreat.

But they further oppose the Scriptures against us, and against that assurance,
which we before declared; seeing David, Psalm. 69. 28 desires of God, that he
would wipe Judas (of who^ among others that Psalm is meant) was wiped out of
the Book of Life; and as Saint Peter says, was found unworthy of his
election. He was before chosen, etc. Auth. conf. of the careless. Sect. 32.
his enemies out of the Book of Life. Now if any may be wiped out, whom God
has once enrolled among his elect; then is not our election so sure and
immutable as we have taught.

For answer whereunto, I say with Saint Austen, In Psalm. 69.
God never wipes out any, whom he writ in that Book: for if a wretched man
was so constant, that he would not alter his writing, but said, John 19. 22.
What I have written, I have written; what indignity were it to Almighty God,
to think him so wavering, that he will write and blot out again, which a
sinful man, Pontius Pilate, was ashamed to do? Those enemies then of God, of
whom David speaks, who under the color of an outward profession, cloaked
their inward hatred to God and his Prophets, were written in the Book of God,
or seemed so to be, only by the judgment of men, who saw no more then their
outside and fained profession; they were never written there in truth, nor
according to his knowledge, who tries the hearts and reins. And David, to
whom Gods Spirit had revealed their hypocrisy, and deep dissimulation, among
other curses, prays that this also may befall unto them; that whereas
themselves or other men thought them to be written among his chosen children,
and to be of their number, God would in his justice, pull off that vizor of
hypocrisy, and make it known Quomode inde delentur, vbi nunquam scripti sunt?
Hoc dictum est, secundum spem ipsorum, qui^ ibi se scriptes putabant, vt ipsis
constet, non se esse ibi scriptes. Aug. in illum Psalm.
to all, by brauding them with some mark of his hatred, as he branded Cain,
that they neither are, nor ever were of that flock of his chosen servants.
Which the Prophet expresses, by two several phrases, the latter whereof does
expound the former; saying, Let them, be wiped out of the Book of the
living, and not be written among the righteous: wiped out, according to men's
judgment, who thought they were writ therein, but in truth declared, not to
be, nor ever to have been written among his rightcous servants. Which to be
the Prophets meaning, is most clear by that of Saint John, Renel. 17. 8. where
speaking of all the wicked, who shall go into everlasting perdition, (of which
sort none may doubt but these cursed enemies of God were) he faith, that their
names are not written in the Book of Life from the foundation of the world:
that is, were never written in that Book. And if they were never truly, but
only in the Quidam phrenatici hoc practextu (precationem Mosis and Pauli) fidei
nostrae caput de aeternae Dei Praedestinatione labefactant. Calu. in Exodus cap.
32. ver. 31.
judgment of men written in that book, neither were they, nor could they be in
truth, but only according to the judgment of men (charitable I confess in
this point, but yet erroneous) wiped out of the same Book.

That seems of greater difficulty, which they object from the prayers of
Moses, and Saint Paul, who being without all doubt written in the Book of
Life, (the Spirit of God witnessing of the one, that he was Heb. 3. 2.
faithful in all the house of God: and of the other, that he was a chosen Act.
9. 15.
vessel, for whom was laid 2. Tim. 4. 8.
up the crown of glory,) desired of God that rather then his name should be
blasphemed, or his glory impaired, he would even blot Exud. 32. 32.
them out of that Book of Life, and make them a curse Romans 9. 3.
for ever to be separated from Christ. Which thing, if Gods election were
immutable, had been simply impossible, and such as those holy men would never,
as it seems, have requested, and so earnestly prayed for at the hands of God.

I can no way here assent to the judgment of Saint Jerome, Perict ^upit, non
in perpeluii, sed in praesentiarum, and perire in carne. Hier. Epist. ad Algas.
quaest. 9.
who expounds these prayers to be meant of a temporal and bodily death only,
but not of the eternal. For such a death could not have made them accursed, or
an Anathema; nor have separated them from Christ; nay, by it they should have
attained blessedness, and have been eternally united unto Christ. By which,
and some other reasons, Chrysosteme Chrysostom. hom. 16. in Romans
does not only refute, but even deride that opinion.

Much less may we consent to some other learned men, who rightly
understanding in these prayers a total and eternal separation from God, do
think Moses non satis reputal quid Deo conueniat, and longius progressus
Paulus, etc. Sic confusum fuit votum, vt repugnantiam in ardoris venementia non
videvint, ac si extra se essent. Calu. com. in c. 32. in Exodus v. 31. and tanta
vehementia abreptus fuit, ot lvquatur quasi ecstaticus, ibid. affectus
praecipitanter ^ernontur, hve votum confuso animo erupit. Calu. in cap. 9 ad
Romans
them to have been somewhat rash, ouer-heady, and less considerate positious,
proceeding indeed from a mind full of zeal, but so astonished, amazed, and
carrted away with the abundance of love unto God, and to his people, that they
considered not, neither that it was unfit for themselves to have, or for God to
yield to these requests, nor yet how impossible it was which they now desired.
Such confusion and inconsiderate zeal, we may not admit in these holy men,
seeing Saint Paul did not speak, but write this, with most serious and advised
premeditation, yea, by the inspiration and guiding of Gods holy Spirit,
protesting also and calling God to witness of his hearts desire in this
matter: and Moses Perspicimus and Mosts and Pauli eundem fuisse affectum. Hier.
loc. cio.
in his prayer was moved for the same cause, and directed by the same Spirit,
to request the same thing of God: yea, and the prayers of them both are such,
if they be rightly considered, as every true Christian and child of God may,
in the zeal of their hearts, present before the Throne of God.

For whereas they suppose it in no wise allowable, to pray for that which
either in it self, or in regard of Gods Decree and Praescience is impossible,
and cannot be granted, our Saviors own prayer Math. 26. 39.
does undeniably teach the contrary, when he conditionally desired of God,
that if it were possible that cup of death might passc from, him: And yet he
knew it, to be no less impossible for him to escape that Cup, then it was
impossible that Moses, or Saint Paul, or any elect vessel of God should
eternally perish. Now, that Moses and Paul did in their prayers imply the like
condition, is not to be doubted: For seeing their Petitions proceeded from a
true faith, and aimed at, nothing else but Gods glory, they could not choose but
be accepted of God, and granted by him, in like sort as our Saviors was:
Christ himself assuring us, that whatsoever John 16. 23.
we ask in his name, and with Mar. 11. 24.
a belecuing heart, shall be granted unto us: now they could no way be
granted, if simply and without condition they had been asked of God; for then
they had been actually wiped out of Gods Book, and separated from Christ, who
by his eternal and immutable Decree were elected and ordained to be partakers
with him in glory. Their prayers then were conditional, and in effect thus
much, that seeing the glory and honor of God seemed much to be increased by
preserving his people of Israel, whom he threatened to destroy and cast away,
these men inflamed with the desire of Gods glory, request, Haec dicit, Si
possibile esset vt per meam perditionem glorsficaretur Christus, and yudaei
salui fierent, neque hoc detractare: siquide optarim, inqua^t, si possibile
esset, si liceret. si mihi haec optio daretur. Oecum. in illum locwn: Optabam
si fieri posset, esse Anat^ema. Aq. in c. 9. ad Romans
that if it were possible, and if it might stand with Gods holy will, b^ee
would rather destroy them, then so great a Nation, and rather blot them out of
his Book, and make them an Anathema, for ever to be separated frem God, then
by casting away those whom he had chosen for his inheritance and peculiar
people, suffer any part of his glory and honor to be impaired.

Great love I confess unto God, but such, as if any think them too prodigal
of their souls, he therein bewrays himself to be of the mind and
affection of Judas: who, when the box of Spikenard was powered on Christ's feet,
moved John 12. 4. Math, 26. 8.
the Disciples to grudge and say, What needed all this waste? Such men are too
rife in this last and worst age of the world, who if any thing be bestowed on
Christ, or upon his Church for the furtherance of his glory, straightway they
murmr and repine, and cry out with Judas, What needs all this waste? But
when they themselves have spent many boxes; nay, barrels and Butts of
Spikenard, to wallow in the lusts and pleasures of their sins, yea, when they
have spent not only their Lands and goods, but their bodies and souls ^lso in
the service of the Devil; yet in all this, there is no was^e at all. Now if
such vile and wretched miscreants think nothing too much, nor too dear, for
the honor and service of Satan; why should Moses, Saint Paul, or any of Gods
children think any thing, though it be their very bodies and souls, too dear
or precious to be bestowed on God, or for his honor? I am verily persuaded,
that if the true Child of God, after serious meditation of these two examples,
should come unto this strait, that on the one side were proposed his own
salvation, with the loss of Gods glory, on the other the glory of GOD with his
own destruction, when he should remember that he were made of God, and made
only for the honor of God, that he, and every one are in duty bound, as Saint
Austen An plius quisque debct Deum cil gere qu^m suiplum. Aug. 1. r. de doct.
Chr. c. 27. and incempvabiliter plus charitatis Dco debcmus, quam nobis: nam
Deum propter se, nos vero, and proximos prop^er Deum dil^gcre debemus. Aug. 1.
8. de Trin. cap. 8.
truly teaches, to love God more then themselves; and that his glory, as
another says, is more to be regarded Vna Dei gloria praesuri merctur cantums
mund^s. Calu. in Exodus 23.
then an hundredth worlds, and therefore certainly more then one sally worm of
the world, of which the Prophet Isa. 40. 17.
says, All Nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him or
in comparison of (...) less then Nothing: When he should, I say, consider all
these, howsoever flesh and blood would wrestle and resistawhile, yet in the end
he would with Moses and Saint Paul, much preserre the glory of his God, before
the good and salvation of his own soul. To conclude this point* that which C.
Blassius answered, Cic. lib. de Amicit.
but very ill, concerning his love toward his friend Gracchus, that most fitly
beseems our love toward God: When he once said, that he so much esteemed
his friend Graochus, that whatsoever Gracchus would command him, he would
perform and dee it. What, quoth Lelius, and would you even burn the Capitol
for his sake? Truly, quoth Blassius, Gracchus would never will or wish me to
do that, but if he should, I would not refuse to do it. Such should be our
love to God, and zeal to his glory, that for his ^ake, we should suffer and
undergo anything whatsoever he would have us. What, will you say, should we,
being vessels of honor, suffer our selves to be even a Curse, an Anathema,
and to be separated for ever from God? I may here assuredly answer unto you,
that neither can this possibly be effected, nor can God ever wish that hurt or
(...) unto us; but if he should require it, and if it were possible, thereby
to gain him honor and glory, we should not refuse, no not to become an
Anathema from GOD, as you see Moses and Saint P^ul are so far from refusing
it, that in the burning zeal of their hearts, they desire it of Almighty God.
And thus much be spoken of the former certainty of our election, which is the
firmness and certainty thereof in it self.

When first this Scripture did offer it self unto my mind, it was my special
purpose and desire to have entreated of that which has not yet been once
touched; namely, of that other assurance of election which is in respect of our
selves, wherein is contained the greatest treasures of our spiritual comfort.
But God, you see, has so disposed of my labors, that I have only at this
time, passed, as it were, over the Red Sea, and through the wilderdernesse, and
but entered or taken possession in the common and general right of Gods
children, of that good land, fighting by the way with diverse sons of Anak;
all which, by the power and strength of our God we have put to flight this
day. When God shall grant me opportunity, I shall be desirous, according as
God shall enable me, to perform also that best and most blessed act of
Joshua, which is, to divide this good Land among Gods Children, and by assuring
every one of them in particular of their own election, set each of them, as it
were, in the blessed and peaceable possession of his own portion in this
heavenly inheritance: mean time and ever, I commend us all to the grace,
favor, and mercy of our God; to whom be ascribed by all, and in all places,
all honor, praise, and thanksgiving, both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

