A PREPARAtiue for the new Passover.

Very profitable to be perused and read of all those who are called to the holy
Table of our Lord.

By Master William Cowper, Minister of Gods word.

Wisdoms Proclamation.

Come, eat of my meat, and drink of the wine that I have drawn. Pro. 9.5. My
fruit is better then gold, even then fine gold, and my reuennues better then
fine silver. Prou. 8. Riches and honor are with me, durable riches and
righteousness: verse. 18. He that finds me finds life, and shall obtain
favor of the Lord. 34.

LONDON Printed for William Ferebrand, and are to be sold in the
Popeshead-Pallace, nere the Royal Exchange. 1607

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Sir David Murray, special Gentleman of the Prince
his bedchamber, multiplication of mercy, grace, and Peace.
RIght Worshipful, albeit no distance of place can disioin them in affeccion,
who^e God has conjoined by the band of one spirit: yet is it no small stop of
that Christian conference, whereby either of them might happily edify, and be
edified of others. I have therefore taken me to the next remedy, since I
cannot reach toward you with my tongue, I have endeavored by writing to bestow
upon you some spiritual gift, Romans 1,
according to my line or measure: for recompense of that comfort, which I have
reaped of that grace of God, which is in you.

I know these colder parts of the I Will, wherein we soiourne, do not usually
render such ripe fruits as those on which the Sun beats more hotly; yet are
they also profitable in their kind for nourishment, specially of such, who from
their youth have been accustomed to feed upon them. Neither has the Lord our
God debarred us from Communion of that which is the greatest glory of the I Will:
the Sun of righteousness has shined upon us also. The Lord has made our
darkness to be light, Es, 42 16:
and led us who were blind, a way we knew not. The Lord has set his standerd
amongst us. Esa: 49:22
He has not only said to the South, keep not back, but he has also
commanded the North to give, and to bring unto him his Sons from far,
Esaias. 43, 6
and his Daughters from the ends of the earth. As the going forth of the
Sun is from the one end of heaven to the other, rising in the East, Psalm. 19:6
and running on like a mighty man, his race toward the West; so has the Law
gone forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: the light of the
Gospel through many nations has come from them of the East toward us in the
West, Esai. 2:3.
where now it stands more maruellously, the^ the sun stood in Gibeo^ in the
dais of Joshua, Josh. 10 1^. To. 11:25
tilthe fullness of the Gentiles in these parts, the remnants of Iaphets house
be brought into the Tents of Sem. Gen 9, 27
How long it will so continue the lord knows.

Now the shadows of the evening are stretched over them of the East: the Sun
is gone down over their Prophets. Mich, 3, 6
Darkness is unto them in stead of divination. If our unthankfulness provoke the
Lord to withdraw it from us, woe in like manner shall be to this land, Hos. 9.12
when God departs from it. There was never people before us had any more but
their day of grace, some longer, some shorter: but as they had a morning, so
has an evening also overtaken them. While therefore we have the light, Io. 12,
35
let us walk in the light: Blessed shall we be, Luke 19 42
if we know those things which belong to our peace: for in our days, that
promise which the Lord made 2000. six hundred years ago, is abundantly
performed; that he would give the ends of the earth to his Son for a
possession: Psalm. 2.
Happy are they among us, who shall be found of that number, sought out by the
candle of the Gospel, Luke 15:8
as pieces of lost money, and like wandering Sheep taken out of the mouth of the
Lyo^, and given in a gift to Christ, that he may save them: these are the
redeemed of the Lord, let them praise the Lord; and among them come ye in
also, and give glory to God: take in your heart and mouth with David, Psalm.
16:6
that Song of thanksgiving: The lines* are fa^^en unto me in pleasant places:
and I have a fair heritage.

It is written of Theodosius, that he thanked God more, for that he was a
Christian, then for that he was an Emperor; because the glory he had by the
one would vanish, but the benefits he enjoyed by the other, he knew wereto
continue for ever: and though it may be most justly great matter of your joy,
that by the fatherly care of our Gracious Sovereign, ye have been placed a
domestique attendant on his Majesty's most princely Son, even from his very
Cradle (wherein hitherto you have been praised for fidelity, and I hope shall
be so to the end) yet let this be your greatest glory, that the Lord has
made you partaker of that blessing which comes by the gospel, and given you
the earnest of that inheritance prepared for the^, who are sanctified by Faith
in Christ Jesus, for increase whereof in you, Act. 20:32.
as I daily send up my weak prayers unto the Lord, so shall I be abundantly
contented to know that these small fruits of my husbandry, which have grown this
last Summer in the pleasant valley of Perth, not far from your native soil,
m ay be any way profitable to confirm and establish that which GOD has
wrought in you. Let them therefore (Right worshipful) come toward you, As
those fruits which Jacob sent to Joseph from Canaan Southward, to more
plentiful Egypt; Gene. 43, 11
though not as supplements of your need, yet as testimonies of that love which
I bear toward you in the Lord, to whose mercy I comme^d you for ever in Jesus
Christ.

Your W. in the Lord Jesus, M. William Cowper, Minister of Christ his Euangel
at Perth.

Go conquest credit from a heavenly heart,
Thou little volumne of a larger light:
Thy worthy Patron, soon will take thy part,
For Sympathy, fore thou come in his sight,
The Eagle mounts by other Fowls in flight,
So does this Preacher in his subject soar:
His spirit transported, runs the race aright,
Unto that feast that lasts for evermore.
Get up, good Reader, follow him therefore,
That thou may meet with th y Bridegroom above,
Address thee here, with duty to adore,
Thy King, thy crown, thy light, thy life, thy love,
Read and reuolue, reuolue again and reed,
Here let thy soul on heavenly Manna feed.
M. W. Buchanan.

IF any Icare in this earthly Crete,
Imprisoned in the Labyrinth of sin:
Lies famished for hunger, at the feet
Ofspirituall Minos, that has locked him in:
Come, here is a Dedall that will make him meet,
With heavenly wings, sins deadly clouds to twin
And set him at Gods Table there to dine,
On God with God, by souls repast Divine.
John Stewart.

The Principal points of Doctrine, contained in this Treatise.
WHat a fervent desire christians have to be united with Christ. s^ct. 1 Death
is desired by them in so far as it is a mean of this Union. 1 Inexcusable
then are they who neglect this holy sacrament. sect. 2 How shall it be thought
they will suffer with him on mount Caluarie, who refuse to banquet with him in
his Parlour. 2 Penitent sinners should wait for this Table with such
affection, as these sick persons waited on the wate rs of Bethesda. sect. 3 At
Siloam poole, only he was healed, who first stepped down, not so at Shiloh
his Table. 3 Yet there is great danger in coming without preparation. sect. 4.
Two parts of the precept, first that we try, secondly that we eat, last part
first handled, and why. sect. 5 We are bound by the Lords command to
communicate. sect. 6 But an apostate man will eat where God forbids him, and
will not eat where God commands him. sect. 7 Believing the Seducer and not the
savior. 7 Ignorance is the mother of all recusancie to communicate. sect. 8
Some refuse, because they know not the excellency of this Sacrament. sect. 9
These are foolish like Naaman, reckoning the Rivers of Damascus better then the
waters of Israel. 9 Worldlings refuse not a good gift, although given by small
means. sect. 10 Far less should Christians refuse this heavenly gift,
because it is propined by earthly means. 10 The less we see in this Table,
the more we are bound to believe. sect. 10 Others refuse upon pretended
reasons, sect. 11 Their reasons refuted: first if it be want of preparation,
the fault is their own. 11 Secondly if it be variance with their neighbor,
they excuse one sin by an other. 11 Better excuses the^ these rejected by
christ. sect 12 They who excuse their recusancie, because of variance, are yet
further convinced. sect. 13 In effect they prefer Barrabas to christ, sect.
14 who will rather renounce their communion with christ, then renounce their
wicked will. 14 They consent not to the marriage of the Lamb who refuse the
smallest token of his love. 14 They love not christ, who refuse to communicate:
sect. 15. Ignorance of both the sorts of Recusants discovered. sect. 16 They
refuse to eat of that bread which christ calls his body. 16 In this
sacrament are things of sundry kinds, which must be distinguished. sect. 17
Yet are they so to be distinguished, that we destroy not their Union. sect. 18
Three rules to be observed in the right discerning of the Lords body. sect.
19 First rule is, that every thing in this sacrament be taken up in the own
kind. sect. 20 Against this rule fail Papists; and how. 20 Against it fail
also bastard professors; sect. 21 Not considering that here the bread and wine
are changed. 21 The second rule is, that this sacrament be used according to
Christ's institution. sect. 22 Papists fail against this rule also. 22
Sacrilegiouslie they abstract the use of the cup from the people. sect. 23 The
Pope and Council contrary. 23 The third rule is, that this sacrament be used
to the right ends. sect. 24 The first end of this sacrament, is a thankful
commemoration of Christ's death. sect. 24 Error of Concomitance disprooued.
sect. 25 Concomitance destroys the first end of this sacrament. 25 The
second end of this sacrament, is the communication of Christ, to them who are
his. sect. 26 In this sacrament, christ is truly exhibited and given. sect. 27
Yet is not he received of every one, who receives the bread. sect. 28 For
there is a d^fference between exhibition and acceptance. 28 The wicked eat
not Christ in the sacrament. 28 Conclusion of the first part of the praecept
is, they refuse a great gift, who refuse to communicate. sect. 29 The second
part of the precept commaundes trial before communion. sect. 30 For the Lord
will not that this table be a snare to us, as was Absaloms to Ammon. 30 Yet
many so make it, not considering who they are themselves. sect. 31 Banquetters
at this Table should be holy persons. sect 32 Vnreuerent handling of holy
things, has never been left unpunished. 32 Neither will the Lord show us his
presence without our preparation. 32 Excellency of this sacrament. sect. 33 An
exhortation to come unto it with reverence. sect. 34 That we putnot new wine
into old vessels. 34 Comfort for the tender conscience, cast down with the
sight of sin after trial. sect. 35 Two sorts of trial, one of things
perfect, another of things imperfect. 35 The trial here commanded is a
searching out of our imperfections. 35 And therefore should we not be
discouraged, although after trial we find them to be many sect. 36. This
comfort confirmed by consideri^g those who were bidden to the banquet: sect. 37
Banquetters there, were the poor, the maimed, the hault and the blinde^ 37
This trial is not that daily and ordinary trial required in all our actions.
sect. 38 Daily trial most necessary. 38 Miserable is their state, who live
without daily trial, they die like Achitophel, putting their house in order,
not their soul in order. sect. 39 But a singular and extraordinary trial is
required before communion. sect: 40 Every new sight of our self discovers a
new corruption. 40 What a l^borious work is enjoined to man, when he is
commanded to try himself. sect. 41 Man being well tried, shall appear a new
found world of wickedness. sect. 42 Four bands of cogitations, which oppress
the mind. 42 Two things necessary for this trial. sect. 43 First the spirit
of God. 43 Next the word of God. sect. 44 For every i^perfect thing must be
tried by an other then it self. 44 Many try themselves by wrong rules, and
are deceived. 44 How we may profit by comparing our selves with others. sect,
45 It is not enough that Pastors and Elders t^y us, we must try our selves.
sect 46 For others cannot know whether thou come to the Table as a John, or as
a Judas. 46 Let every man therefore ask for himself, is it I Lord* 46 We
should try our selves and not other men. sect. 47 This reprooueth them, who
before communion tries faults done to them, more then sins done by them. 47
But it takes not away brotherly admonition, s. 48 The chief points of
preparation before communion, are two. sect. 49 First that we lay aside our
old sins. 49 Otherways no communion with the Lord. 49 How Esther was
purified, ereshe was presented to Ahasuerus. 49 Without diuorcementfrom our
old sins, no marriage with the Lamb. sect. 50 Not a general confession, but
a particular inquisition should be made of our sins. sect 51 The second point
ofpreparation is, that we put on the new christian disposition, consisting in
these three; sect. 52 First that toward God we be holy, and heavenly minded.
sect. 53 So that we become weary of our earthlye pilgrimage; 53 And never rest
til we return to the Lord, sect. 54 For our souls cannot rest but in him. 54
Two things profitable to help us to this heavenly disposition. sect. 55
Consideration of the place wherein this Sacrament was instituted. 55
Consideration of the time. 55 The time warns us to celebrate this supper like
a Passover. 55 But most of all, the meditation of the love of God is
profitable to work in us this heavenly disposition. sect. 56 It is not a light
Meditation of this love, that will raise up our hearts. 56 Never such love
showed in the world, as Christ Jesus has showed unto us. sect. 57 Stronger
then the love of Jonathan to David. 57 Or the love of any mother to her
children. 57 A proof of Christ his wonderful love toward us. sect. 58 Christ
on the cross prepared as a food in the sacrament, is exhibited unto us. 58
What a notable comfort we have here, that this banquet begun on earth, shall be
fulfilled in heaven sect. 59 Worldlings if they were touched with a sense of
this love would forsake all and follow christ. sect. 60 Sinful women would
change their life like Marie Magdalen. 60 And sinful men would change their
life like Matthew the publican. 60 The second part of our new christian
disposition, is that toward our neighbors we be loving. sect. 61 Without love
we cannot be of the communion of saints. 61 By what effects is our love to be
tried. sect. 62 Readiness to forgive a rare virtue. 62 Christians live now
like Jews and Samaritans ofolde. 62 As men are mortal, so should their anger
be. 62 Readiness to do good unto others is as rare a virtue. sect. 63
Professors now live like the sons of Anak, churlish Na^all, or the rich
Glutton. 63 The third point of our new Christian disposition is, that webe
sober and little in our own eyes. sect. 64 With Mephibosheth, Jacob, the
Centurion, the woman of Canaan, and Elizabeth. 64 How necessary our
humiliation is, for our union with God. 64 With this inward humili^ie, we
should also, have an hungring for the Lords salvation, sect, 65 For the Lord
will fill the hungry, 65 None meet banquetters here, who are not hungry: 66
The comfortable fruit arising to them, who after prescribed preparation
communicate at this holy table: 66
A PREPARATIVE for the new Passover.
1. COR. 11.28. Let a man therefore try himself, and so let him eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup.

My help is in the name of the Lord.


TS the soul of a Christi^an longs for nothing more, The fervent desire of a
Christian to be united with Christ. Phil. 3.8
then to be fully united with the Lord Jesus; so does he greatly account of
every mean, whereby t^is Union is advanced. The Aposte S. Paul was so inflamed
with the love of christ, that in comparison of him, he esteemed all other
things to be but doung, and every thing an advantage that might serve to
conioyne him with Christ: for albeit the nature of man abhors nothing more
then death (yea even the soul of the godly desires not to lay aside the body,
Death should be desired so far* as it is a mean of this union. 2. Cor. 5.4.
if it might stand with the Lords dispensation, which the Apostle is not
ashamed to protest of himself: We would no^ (says he) be unclothed, but would
be clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life) Yet did the
love of Christ so far overcome him, that he was content through the valley of
death to follow his Lord, yea most desirous to be dissolved by death, Phil.
1.23
in so much as he knew it to be a mean to co^ioyne him nearer with Christ.

And herin he stands up to witness unto us, Sect. 2 Inexcusable the^ are the
neglecters of this holy sacrament
that unless we have a most fervent desire to participate of this holy
Sacrament, which the Lord has instituted to seal up, and increase our
spiritual Communion with him; we are manifestly convinced to b^e such, as in
whom there is no love of the Lord Jesus: If we will not go with him to eat
and drink in his Parlour at Jerusalem, it is not likely that we will follow him
out of the City* They will not suffer with him on mount Caluarie, who refuse
to ba^quet with him in his parlour. He. 13.13 Eusebius. ^^: 3 Cap: 36
bearing his reproach to be crucified with him on mount Caluerie. The Apostle
is desirous to go through death, that he might come to Christ: and it was the
notable word of that ancient Ignatius, the scholar of Christ's best beloved
Disciple Saint John. Nihil visibilium moror, nihil inuisibilium modo Christum
acquiram. I stand (said he) upon nothing visible, nor invisible: I care not
what torments come upon me, so that I enjoy Christ Jesus: and will not we then
(casting away all impediments) come joyfully forward to this holy Table,
wherein our blessed Savior communicates himself unto us, and whereunto this
day so lovingly he inuites us? Now he stands at the door, an^ he knocks,
offering to come in, and suppe with them w^o will open unto him. Reu. 3.20
Now the master shall say to his Disciples: Ma. 26.16
Take ye and eat, this is my body. Now says the bridegroom to his friends:
Eat, O my friends, Cant. 5.1
and m^ke you merry my well-beloved. Now does the Angel intimate that
proclamation, which hereafter will be resounded with greater joy from heaven:
Reu. 19.7.
Let us be glad and rejoice, for the marriage of the Lamb is come. And now the
Savior calls upon sinners with outstretched arms: Math. 11.28.
Come to me all ye who are weary, and laden, and I will refr^sh you.

These diseased creatures who lay at the poole of Bethesda, Sect. 3
waited diligently on the occasion, We should com tothis holy table more
ferue^tly, then those diseased persons hasted to the waters of Siloam. John. 5,
^. John. 9, 7. Gene. 49 10.

Ioh. 1, 14 At S^^oam poole, only he was healed, who first stepped down: not
so at ^h^o^ his Table.


when they should step down into the water: for he that first stepped in,
after the Angel had troubled the water, was made whole, whatsoever his disease
was: Praised be God, though we have not now these waters of Siloam, wherein
with that blind man we may cure our bodily diseases; we have the waters of
that Shiloh, of the which, who soever drinks shall not thirst any more: these
are the waters of life, that are able to cure all our spiritual infirmities,
the benefit is not restrained to one, that first sits down at his Table, but
is extended to all those who make themselves ready to come unto him. Let us
not therefore neglect so fair an occasion of grace, but let us up and arise,
let the Bride make herself ready, and go forth to meet the Bridegroom.
Let us begin in this Wilderness to eat the fruits of our promised Canaan,
which is above: Let us open to the King of glory that knocks: let us go to our
Savior that cries Come, and joyfully communicate with our Lord, who commands
Take and eat^, This is my body. For here is given the greatest gift, and that
in the most excellent manner, that God has to give on earth unto the sons of
men: for here he gives it, as it were with both his hands, that is, not only
by his word, but also by his Sacrament only; take heed to this warning, Let
a man try himself, and so let him eat

There is danger in hearing of the word, Sect. 4 But there is a danger in
coming without preparation Luke ^.18
and therefore our Savior forewarnes us: Take heed how you hear. There is
danger also in communicating: in the preceding verse the Apostle forewarned us
of it; He that eats of this bread, and drinks of this cup of the Lord
unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. In the subsequent
verse he forewarnes us also of the danger. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation. And in this interiected
verse, which now by the grace of God we have to handle, he shows us the way
how to eschew them both, and therefore let us hearken the more attentively unto
it.

Sect. 5. Two parts of this precept.
This precept has two parts: in the first we are commanded to try before we
eat; in the second we are commanded to eat after trial. Before we
communicate, 1. That we try.
he requires trial; and after trial he commaundes to communicate: and so he
encounters with two sorts of men, 2 That we eat.
whereof the one eats of this bread, and tries not; and these fail against the
first: the other tries themselves, but eats not of this bread, and these fail
against the second; both of them are here corrected by the Apostles precept. In
handling whereof, Last part of the precept first handled, and why:
we begin first at the last part, that such as are resolved to bide away, if
it please God, may be made willing to come; and then by God his grace, we
shall return to the first, that such as are willing to come, may be
instructed how they should communicate.

Sect. 6 We are bound by Gods command to eat at this ^able.
And so let him eat. It is not then as ye may perceive, left free unto men to
communicate or abstain from the communion, as they please; but we are bound
by a commandment to eat and drink at this Table. Do this (said our Savior)
in remembrance of me. Our first father Adam failed in eating of that tree of
knowledge of good and evil, whereof God forbade him to eat; but many of his
sonnesfailes in refusing to eat of that tree oflife, whereof God commaundes
them to eat. In their word they condemn the fact of their fathers, because
they were, Sicut omnium parents, ita omnium peremtores, Bern. super Euan.
missus: hom. 2.
and prius peremptores quam parents: perishers of their posterity ere ever
they were parents; and in their deed they are daily imitators of their folly.
It was a punishment unto Adam to be debarred from the tree of life, and it is
but a pastime to many of his foolish posterity to debar themselves from it.
sect. 7. The Apostate man will eat where God forbids him, and will not eat,
where god commands him. Mat. 24.^^.


Thus stands the corrupt nature of man still in contrary terms with the Lord,
And the children fulfilles the measure of their fathers iniquity: where God
forbids man to eat, there will he eat, and where the Lord commands him to
eat there will he not eat. The Serpent spoke from the earth: alb^it ye eat
of that tree (which God has forbidden) ye shall not dye, and man harkned unto
it. The Lord Jesus speaks from heaven, come and eat of the tree of life, and
ye shall live; bu^ man will not hear him. O sillye and fearful Rebellion,
Because the seducer is believed, and not the savior. Prou. 9.5
the seducer is believed and the Savior is not believed. This day wisdom has
prepared his Table, he calls upon you all: Come and eat of my meat, and
drink of the wine that I have drawn: he that finds me finds life, and
shall obtain the favor of the Lord; Pro. 8.34
but he that sins against me, hurts his own soul, and all that hate me
love death. Thus are we louinglye called, and fairly forewarned, and all
these are made inexcusable that will none of his counsel, they will not eat
of this bread, but shall eat of a worse: For they shall eat the fruit of
their own way, and be^ filled with their own devises, their paths shall tend
unto death, Pro. 1.30 and 31.
because they refuse to lay hold on the tree of life.

What ever be the pretended excuse of these Recusants, sect. 8. Ignorance is
the mother of recu^ancie.
ignorance is the mother of their sin, and therefore may I say that unto
them, which the Lord Jesus said unto that Samaritane Woman: If thou knew the
gift of God, Ioh. 4.10
and who it is that says to thee, give me a drink, thou would have asked
of him, and he would have given thee the water of life. This sweet gradation
of our Savior his words: If ^hou knew thou would ask, if thou asked I
would give, evidently points out the sin of these men to b^e (as I have
said) the Daughter of ignorance; whereas out of doubt, if they knew the gift
that is given them here by god, they would answer with those Jews, Lord
evermore give us this bread, Ioh. 6.34
and with that Samaritane woman, when she was better informed, Ioh. 4.15
Lord evermore give me of that water to drink, that I thirst no more.

But that we may deal particularlye with such as refuse, sect. 9. some refuse
to communicate because they know not the excellency of this sacrament.
we are to know, that albeit, this their rebellion proceeds of ignorance;
yet they who refuse, are ofsundrie rancks, some knows not the vtilitye and
excellency of this Sacrament: these think they may be Christians good
enough, although no Communicants: they look to this table with natural eyes,
they judge of it by things which they see, and so despise it, because after
their reckoning, they have better replenished tables at home. These are
foolishlike Naaman the Syrian ^. King. 5.10.12
These are like Naaman the Syrian, who came to Elisha to be cured of his
leprosy; he was commanded to go and wash himself seven times in Jordan,
which at the first he disdayned to do: are not (said he) Aabanah and Pharpar
rivers of Damascus better then all the waters of Israel? ^e contemned the
means commanded by the Prophet; he went away in displeasure, and his
leprosy went with him: but after ward, when he reverently used the means
prescribed unto him: he was made clean of his leprosy. Wherein we are taught,
not to despise the ordinance of God, although it seem never so base unto
natural judgment: It pleases God by the foolishness of preaching, 1. Cor. 1
^1^
to save them who believe, and he has in like manner appointed this Sacrament
for communication of his Christ to them who are his. sect. 10. Worldlings will
not refuse a good gift ^lthough given by small means.


Let a man therefore be content to take salvation out of the hand of God, by
such means as he in his wisdom has concluded to give it: No worldling will
refuse treasure of gold, although it were given him in a Box of Wood; nor a
pre^ious Pearl propined to him in a purse of Leather: and we see that noble
personages disdain not to take infeftments of stately buildings, and fair
inheritances, by acceptance of a contemptible little piece of earth and stone:
and shall a Christian refuse so excellent a gift, because it is given by so
small a mean? far be it from us, that we should examine the ordinance of God,
Farrelesse should christians refuse this heavenly gift, because it is propined
by earthly means.
but rather that we prepare our selves in faith and fear to obey it: let us
not look to the means, but to the blessing by Gods promise annexed to the
means; to the gift more then to the manner of giving. In this banquet we must
learn to exercise our faith, not to satisfy our senses, it is no banquet for
our body: if so the Lord had intended it, he could have furnished his Table
with delicate things, and made thee a banquet far exceeding that which
Ahasuerus made to the Princes and governors of his provinces: Est. 1.3.
For all the Fowls of the air and beasts that feed on mountains and f^eldes
are hi^. Psalm. 50.10.
He may command as his own, all the creatures of his three store houses, The
less we see in this table, the more we are bound to believe*
the Air, the Earth and the Sea, but herethe less we see, the more we are
bound to believe. Say with unbelieving Naaman, what better is this Bread and
Wine then other Bread and Wine? such blasphemies sometime has fallen out of
the mouths of ignorants, whose darkness we shall (God willing) discover by the
light ofGods word hereafter: for the present, my conclusion to the Recusant is,
that if as thou pretend, thou be a Lover ofChrist; then will thou esteem
every new token of his love, a new benefit unto thee; and what ever he puts
in thine hand as a pledge of himself, in that respect it shall be deerer unto
thee, then all the world beside.

sect. 11. Others refuse on pretended reasons.
Others again there are, who knows both the utility, and excellency of this
Sacrament, and yet refuse to communicate (but as they think) with a reason,
pretending that it is not contempt but reverence of the Sacrament, which makes
them to abstain. To whom I answer, that there is no excuse in the world can
warrant a man to bide back from Christ Jesus, when he calls upon him: for
what art thou able to allege? Their reasons refuted.
want of preparation? the fault is thine own: for since the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and thou art warned thereunto, 1 If it be want of preparation,
the fault is their own
why do thou not make thy self ready, and remove the impediments? And yet
if thou allege that common excuse of the ignorant multitude, that thou art at
variance with thy neighbor, by reason of some injuries done to thee, not as
yet repaired by him, nor to be borne withal and disgested by thee; 2 If it be
variance with their neighbor they excuse one sin by another.
what do thou, but by a singular subtlety of Satan, excuse one sin by
another, as who would teach thee to wash away the spots of thy face with
puddle water: were not that in stead of cleansing, to make thy self more
unclean, and thou while as thou will justify thy contempt ofGod his calling,
by alleging thy unsanctified affection and heart that cannot forgive; do no
other thing, but make thy self guilty ofa double rebellion, as one that will
not discharge thy Christian duty, neither to God nor man. sect. 12. Better
excuses then these rejected by christ


Consider I pray thee, the excuses pretended by these who were bidden to the
marriage of the great King, and com^pare them with thine: one of them said, I
have bought a farm and will go see it; Another said, I have bought five yoke
of Oxen, Mat. 22.4
and must go prove them: And the third said, I have married a wife, and may
not come. The worst of their excuses is better the^ thine, and yet were they
all repelled: the use ofhusbandrie and marchandice and the duty that a man
owes unto his wife, are sometime lawful, albeit not to be preferred unto that
duty we owe unto Jesus Christ: but that thou should live at varia^ce with
thy neighbor, and carry within thee a heart that cannot forgive, is never
lawful. If that which sometime is lawful, sect^ 13. They who excuse their
recusancie, because of variance, are further convinced
cannot excuse thy delaying to come unto Christ when he calls upon thee, what
mockery of God is it to allege that which never is lawful?

And here also beside the offense done against thy God, consider what prejudice
thou do unto thy self; what folly is this, that because thy neighbor has
sinned against thee, thou will also sin against thine own soul? I suppose as
thou have said, he has wounded thee and hurt thee in thy body, goods, or
name, is that a reason why thou sholdest contemn the calling of Christ, who
offers to cure thy wounds, and heal all the infirmities of thy soul: yea to
pacify all those passions and perturbations of mind, wherewith thy impacience
disquiets thee? he forewarned his own, that in the world, John 16 33
they should find trouble, but in him they should have peace: Ifthou find (as
he forespake) trouble in the world, why will thou not go and seek that peace
in him, which he has promised? As to thy right, I require not thou should
lose it; neither yet forbid I, that by ordinary means ^hou sholdst seek a
redress of these wrongs, which against order are done unto thee: for the law
is the stay of confusion, and the Synewe of the Commonwealth; without which,
no fellowship can be entertained amongst men* and God has appointed the
Magistrate, that unto good men he should be like the Rain unto Fields new
mowen, Psalm. 726.
under whom they may flourish; but should be to the wicked like that Westerly
wind, which drove those Locusts into the red Sea, Exodus 10.13
that troubled the land: but as to g^udge, rancour, hatred, malice, and such
like. What have they to do in the heart of the child of God? Since we are
commanded to forgive one another, even as God for Christ's sake forgave us: and
plainly foretold, that if we do not forgive me^ their trespasses, Mat. 6.15
no more will our father forgive us our trespasses. A fearful recompense that
we should possess our own sins, because we will not forgive the sins of others:
Certainly thou that do so, give out a hard sentence against thy self: for
in steed of mercy thou criest for judgment, as often as thou praiest, forgive me
my sins as I forgive them that have sinned against me: for that is, Lord
forgive me not at all

sect. 14. They who do so, prefer Barrabas unto christ
It was a horrible sin of the Jews that they preferred Barrabas a wicked
malefactor to the Lord; but I pray thee consider, how nere thy sin draws to
theirs, if thou judge rightly of it: for when thou refusest to come to this
holy table, unless thou have amends of such wrongs as are don unto thee,
Renouncing their communion with christ, befo re they ren ounce their own wicked
will.
thou say in effect, rather the^ I Will renou^cemy will, I will renounce my part
of christ, and communion with him; for here is the very question: whether will thou forsake thy communion with christ or thine own corrupted will say not now
to me these are hard speches, God forbid that every one who is no partaker of
this sacrament, should in so doing, forfet his part of communion with Christ. I
grant indeed they are hard speeches, but true speeches, and no harder the^ thy
sin deserves: for I pray thee, to what end did our Savior institute this
sacrament? was it not that in it he might co^municat himself to thee? how can
thou then excuse thy self, and say thou have not rejected him, seeing thou
reiects the means whereby he is given to thee? When Eli^zer the servant of
Abra. Gen 2^ ^3 We co^sen^ not to the marriage of the Lamb, unless we r^ceue
the smallest token of his love. Genesis 24 53 2. cor. 5 20
sought Rebecca in marriage unto Isaac, what way did she testify her consent?
surely not only by word, but by acceptatio^ of those jewels of silver and
gold, which he gave her as love tokens in the name of Isaac. Now we are sent
forth to you as the Ambassadors of the living God to win you in marriage unto
his son and to prepare you, that ye may be presented a chaste spouse unto him:
and we are commanded to minister unto you this holy sacrament as a pledge of
his love toward you. I^ ye agree to the marriage, and be content to forsake
your fathers house, and go with us to the house of Abraham: then testify your
consent by receiving these h^lye tokens of his love, which in his name we exh
bit unto you: but if ye will not, then shall we stand up as witnesses against
you, that we have called you, and ye refused to come.

Sect. 15 They love not Christ who wilfully refuse to communicate.
O man! what will thou do for thy Christ, that wilt not come and banquet with
him at his Table? how can thou say thou love him, when so small an
impediment keep^s thee back from going unto him? have thou not cause to hang
down thy head for shame, when thou art convinced to have less love to thy
Savior then Esau had to Jacobs pottage; Genesis 25.30
for love of them he sold his birthright, which he should have kept: but
thou for love of Christ, wilt not forsake thy corrupted will, which thou art
bound to abandon. Genesis 22 10
Abraham for the love of God, was content with his own hands to slay his only
lawful Son; and thou for the love of God, wilt not slay thy unlawful bastard
affections, nor do the holy will of God, except thy wicked will be first
fulfilled. This evidently proves that ^hou have not Abraham for thy father, 1.
John. 3
but art of the race of wicked Cain, that hated his Brother unto the death
Assuredly, except thou repent, that merciles judgment abides thee,
presignified in that merciless servant, who having gotten mercy from his
King, could show none to his Companion: Ought not thou to have had pity on
thy fellow, as I had pity on thee? Thy former sins shall be imputed unto
thee, and thou shall be delivered to the Iaylor, til thou pay all that is due
unto thy Lord, which thou shall never be able to do.

But that the pitiful ignorance of both these sorts of Recusants may the
better appear, sect. 16. Ignorance of both the sorts of recusa^ts discovered
and farther light may arise to such as are willing to communicate; we are to
consider what a banquet this is, and what are the delicates, unto the
participation whereof, we are here called. The Apostle says not, let a man
eat bread and drink wine, but let him eat of This bread and drink of this
Cup. The particle (This) tells us it is no common bread and wine: no surely, the
comfort is great* that we are commanded to eat of that bread, whereof our
Savior says, They refuse to eat of this bread which Christ calls his (...)
This is my body, and to drink of that Cup which he calls His blood of the
New Testament shed for the remission of the sins of many. He that eats of my
bread, and drinks of any cup vnwor^hily becomes guilty of the abuse of Gods
creatures: but he that eats of this Bread, and drinks of this cup unworthily,
becomes guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and eats his own
damnation* beca^se he discerns not the lords body.

And therefore that we fall not into this f^arfull sin, sect. 17 In this
sacrament are things of sundry kinds, which must be distinguis^ed.
we are to know that this Sacrament is not a simple thing, but a compound,
wherein are things of sundry kinds which must be distinguished; and so the word
of discerning, imports that secret. There are here things o^ sund^ie sorts, we
must discern every thing in the own kind: so our Savior taught us, and
after him his Apostles: and this truth from them the ancient Fathers have
delivered unto us: Eucharistia (said Irenaeus) ex ^uabus r^bu^ constat, ^erren^
et caelesti The Eucharist co^sists of two kind of things, Iren. lib. 4 con.
Vale^t cap. 34.
the one earthly* the other heavenly; And Augustine, calls it v^sibile st^num
inu^fibilis gratiae: the visible sign of invisible grace. Mac. hom
And Macarius calls this bread and wine (...) Exem^l^r^^ figurae seut^p^
carnis et sauguinis Christ's. Resemblances, figures and types of the body and
blood of Christ Jesus. Now it is ^u^e that a type, pattern, or figure must
ever be distinguished from that, whereof it is a figure. This sacrament then
being a compound thing must be considered, not as a simple, but as a compound
thing: If it be asked whether a man be earthly or heaue^nly, because he is a
compound creature? It must be answered by a distinction. If it be asked how a
Christian, being on the earth, the Apostle says, that he has his
c^nconuersation in the Heavens? it must be answered by a distinction; And if
also it be asked whether this Sacrament be an earthlye or an heavenly thing,
how the sign is given, and how the thing signified: how Christ Jesus is in the
heaven, and yet present in this Sacrament? All these I say must be answered by
a distinction: Aug. in 10 cap. 7. Tract. 29.
Sursum est dominus (said Augustine) sedetiam hic est veritas dominus: corpus
enim domini in quo resurrexit vno loco esse potest, veri^as eius vbique diffusa
est. Our Lord is above in heaven, yet here also is our Lord, as he is the
truth; for the body of our lord, in which he arose from death, can be but in
one place, but his truth is diffused into every place. And again, Ibat per id
quod hom^ erat, and manebat per id quod deus: ibat per id quod vno loco erat,
and manebat per id quod vbique erat: He went hence by that which was Man, he
stayed by that which was God: he went away by that which was but in one place,
he stayed by that which was in all places. And again: Ascendit super omnes
coelos corpore no^ recessit maiestate: He ascended above all the heavens in
his body, but he departed not hence in his Majesty. And Cyrill in like manner:
Non enim quia nunc non adest in carne ex eo outes, Cyril. catech. 14.
quo^ spiritu medio hic no^ ad^it: Think not that with his spirit he is not
here amongst us, because he is not now amongst us with his body. Thus ye see
we must use a distinction.

Sect. 18 Yet are they so to be distinguished, that we destroy not their union.
And yet albeit we are forced here to acknowledge the sundry natures of things
compound, and consider them in their own kinds: we must for all that take
heed to the wonderful union, and s^cramentall conjunction that is bet^eene
them, which is so strait, that unto the right receiver, they are inseparable,
for the which also the earthly thing receyues the name of the heavenly. And
this must also be considered, least on the other hand separating those things
which God has conjoined, we make this Bread, and this Wine, but naked and bare
signs; and so justly incur that blame, which our adversaries unjustly would
lay upon us: and in like manner this punishment which here the Lord threatens
against them, who are evil discerners.

We are therefore to consider, sect. 19 Three rules to be observed in the right
disc^rning of the Lords body.
that for the right discerning of the Lords body, these three rules are to be
observed: First, that in this Sacrament we take up every thing in the own
nature, and kind. Next that we use every one of the^ in the manner appointed by
Christ, and with reverence that is due unto them. And thirdly, that this
Sacrament be celebrated unto the right ends, for which our Savior appointed
it. sect. 20. 1. Rule, That every thing in this sacrament be tak en up in the
own kind. Act. 412


Against the first* fails both Papists and bastard professors: Papists are
evil discerners, because they take the sign for the thing signified; the
earthly thing for the heavenly: The men of Lystr^ were evil discerners, when
they took Paul and Barnabas for Jupiter and Mercurius, Gods in their account;
and therefore would have worshipp^d them as Gods: but (in this light) far
blinderarethey, who will adore a creature in steed of the creator, and that
with the same kind of worship (...) which by their own confession is due to
God only. They allege for their error the word of truth: Papists are evil
discerners and why?
Jesus Christ speaking (say they) of the bread, called it his body; we say in
like manner, that this bread is Christ's body, but sacramental^ye: but deny
that the bread i^ transubstantiate into the very natural body of Christ, as
they against the principles of faith and nature, falsely affirm. It is strange
to see what backward perverse handlers of holy scripture, these men be: where
they should stick to the letter, they enforce an allegory to serve their
purpose. What plainer History then that which Moses has: Genesis 1.16
God made two great lights: the greater ^o rule the day, the lesser (...) rule
the night: yet is this place violently wrested, when out of it they will
gather, that the Papal digni^ie, which (as they say) God has appointed to
rul^ over the spirituality, is greater then the regal; and that the Pope by as
many degrees excels the Emperor, as the Sun excells the Moon. And
again, where the Spirit of God uses a figure, there they stick to the Leter,
These words according to the Letter: M^ndant fla^^ium, command an impiety:
And therefore by Augustines rule, should be esteemed figurative: Si pracepti^a
loquutio est, aut flagitium, Aug. de doct. christiana. lib. 3, cap. ^6.
aut facinus vetans, aut vtilitatem and beneficentiam ^^bens, non est figurata
loqu^tio: si aute^ flagitium vel facinus videtur i^bere, au* vtilitatem aut
beneficentiam vetare, figurata loquutio est (nisi manduca^eritis (inquit
Christus) carnem filij hominis, facinus iubere videtur) figura est ergo
praecipiens passion^ domini esse communicandum et suaniter and vt^liter
reco^dendum in memoria, quod pro nobis car^ eius crucifixa sit. If a speech of
precept, either forbid some sin, or heinous deed, or else command a
profitable or good deed, then is it no figurative speech; but if it seem to
command a sin or heinous deed, or forbid a profitable and honest actio^,
then it is a figurative speech: unless thou eat of the flesh of the son of
Man (says Christ) here he seems to command a heinous ^ction and therefore ^t
is a figure commanding us to communicate with Christ's passion, and sweetly and
profitably to lay this up in our memory that his flesh was crucified for us.
And after this manner also the perpetual phrase of the holy spirit does teach
us to interpret them, when he calls Circumcision, the Covenant; the Lamb, the
Passover; Baptism, the Lauer of regeneration: the Wine, the cup of the new
Testament: In all these they are forced to acknowledge a figure: Only here, This
is my body, they will adhere to the letter. The learned and godly fathers,
have with us also acknowledged this for a Sacramental speech: so Tertul.
expou^ds, Tert li. 4. cont. Mar. Aug. in P^al. ^.
Hoc est corpus meum, id est figura corporis mei: This is my body: that is, the
figure of my body. And again: Dominus pane corpus suu^ r^prae^^ntat: God
represents or resembles his body by bread. And Augustine said in like manner:
Non dubitauit dicere hoc est corpus meum, cum fignum daret corporis sui. He
doubted not to say. This is my body, when he gave only a sign of his body.
And again, Iudam adhibuit ad conuiu^um, in quo corporis and sanguinis sui
figuram co^mendauit discipulis. Christ admitted Judas to his supper, in which
he co^m^nded to his disciples the figure of his body and blood. As Jesus
Christis called a stone, and called bread: so is this bread called his body,
and that says Ber. is Per significatione^ non proprietate^ by signification,
not that properly it is so. Ber. in ass. Mariae. sermon. 5.

sect. 21. Bastard professors esteeming less of this bread and wine then they
should, are also evil discerners. Iren. cont. Valent. lib. 4. ca. 34.




And as for carnal professors, they are also evil discerners, because they
esteem less of this Bread and Wine then they ought, putting no difference
between it and comm^n bread and wine, whereas it is not so indeed; for in all
the world there is not the like of This bread and this wine, except in the
like action: it is changed by the ordinance of Christ, and virtue of his
institution: not changed in the substance, but in the use and end: Panis (enim)
^^rrenu^ percipiens vocationem de^, iam non communis panis est, sed
Eucharistia: for that earthly receiving Gods appointment, is now no common
bread, but the Eucharist. The Lord who calls things that are not, and makes
them to be, does here appoint this bread and this wine to a far more
ex^ellent use, How the Bread and Wine are changed.
then that whereunto they serve by nature. As wax stamped with the seal of a
King, in substance differs not from other wax; and yetfor value is much more
excellent, and may not b evnreuerently handled, without contempt of the King;
so this bread though in substance it differ not from other bread, yet
concern^ng the use, it is seper^te, and much more precious then any other
Bread in the world: being now appointed by God to be a sign and a seal, and
an exhibiting instrument of Christ his body, and therefore cannot be profaned,
nor abused without contempt of Christ Jesus.

Sect. 22 2. Rule. That this Sacrament be celebrated according to the
institution of Christ. Cyp lib. 2 Epist. 3. Ambrose. 1. Cor. 11 ^6
Against the second condition required in the right discerning of the Lords
body, Papists fail in like manner, because they pervert Christ's institution,
and use not this sacrament as he commanded: for, seeing our Savior is the
orde^n^r of this Sacrament (says Cyprian) V^ique id nos face^e oportet quod
Christus fecit, e^ quod faciendum manda^i^. Of truth, we ought to do that
which Christ did, and which he commanded us to do. And Ambrose writing upon
this same place, says plainly: Indignum est domino, mysterium hoc aliter
celebrare, Papists fail against this rule, because they pervert Christ's
institution.
quam ab cotraditum est. It is an indignity to our Lord, to celebrate this
mystery otherwise then he delivered it. Christ ordained it a sacrament for the
communication of himself to the faithful at the table; they have turned it
into a sacrifice for the oblation of Christ to his Father on an altar. Jesus
brak the bread and gave it: but they, if they break the bread, they give it
not, and if they give it, they break it not. In their daily Mass, the priest
breaks the bread, he abuses the words of Christ secretly; whispering the^,
accip^te, comedite: he bids others take and eat, but gives the^ nothing, and
when he gives he stoppes it whole in the mouths of the people and breaks it
not. Thus most sacrilegiously they alter our Savior his sacred institution, as
though of purpose they had concluded to be contrary to him. Besides this* sect.
23 sacr^legiously they abstract the use of the cup (...) people.
they withdraw from the people the use of the cup, and so mutilate the holy
s^crament: a horrible sacrilege in like manner, yet ratified by ye decree of ye
haeretical counsel of Trent. Si quis dixer^ ex dei praecepto, Con. Tri.
vel de necessitate salutis esse, omnes et singulos Christi fideles, viramque
specie^ Eucharistae, sumere debere Anat^ema sit. If any man avouch that it is
by Gods commandment, or upon nece^sitie of our Salvation, that all Christ's
faithful people should receive the Eucharist under both kinds, let him be
accu^sed: To whom it contents at us this time to oppose the decree of their
own Pope: Gelasius: Comper^mus, quod quid^m sumpta tantu^modo cor^oris sacri
portione, D^ conse. did. 2. ca. Comperimus.
a calice sacrati cruoris ^bst meant: qui proculdubio, quoniam n^so^o qua
superstitione docentur, astricti aut integra sacramenta percipi^nt, aut ab
integris, ^reeantur; quod diuisio vnius eiusdemque mystery sine grandi non sit
sacrilegio. We understand, that certain receiving only the portion of
Christ's body, abstain from the cup of his sacred blood: which men (because
undoubtedly they are trained up in some kind of superstition) let them be
enforced either to receive the whole sacrament, or to be restayned from the
whole, because this dividing of one and the same mystery, cannot be without
great Sacrilege. In this contrariety among themselves, which way I pray you
shall the poor people turn them? The coun^ell curses all them, The pope and
the counsel contrary the one to the other.
who affirm this Sacrament should be ministered with bread and wine. The Pope
says plainly it is superstition, and sacrilege, to give the one without the
other, and commands that either we abstain from both, or retain them both
together. If ye follow the counsel, the Pope shall condemn you; if you follow
the Pope, the Council shall accurse you: but, curse as they will, the Lord
shall bless them, who in faith communicate at his holy Table according to his
institution; and the curse of God shall not fail to cleave unto the, surer the^
the leprosy of Naaman to G^^^sa* yea their part shall be taken out of the
book of life, Reave. 22 19
who dare presume to change the ordinance of God. The Apostle has delivered
unto us, that which he received from the Lord, how not only he took the bread,
blessed it, and brake it, and gave it: but that in like manner he took the cup,
and gave also to his Disciples: What boldness is it then to take from the
people, that which Christ by his Apostles has delivered unto them? and thus
while they boast of antiquity, they are found fathers of Novelty.

And against the third, they fail who use not this sacrament to the right
ends; Sect. ^4 3. Rule. That this sacrament be used to the right end^s.
which are especially two. The first is the commemoration of Christ's death and
passion, with thanksegiuing* f^r the which also the Grecians called it (...)
the second is the communication of Christ to them who are his; And for this the
Apostle calls it (...) The first I take out of our Sau^our his words, The
first end of this sacrament is ^ thankful commemo^^tion of christ's death.
Do this in r^membrance of me. And from the Apostle: So ^ft as ye eat of thi^
bread, and drink of this cup, show foo^th the Lords death, till his ^omming
again. And in very deed, this holy Sacrament being v^ed according to
Christ's institution, is a lively representation of Christ crucified; while as
the signs of his blessed body and blood, being sundred one of them from the
other, the one is broken, the other poured out; rem^mbring us how his blessed
body was broken with the Crown of Thorns, the Scourge, the Nails, and the
Sp^are; and his blood shed for the remission of our sins; which should work
in us, so often as we behold it, an inward contri^ion, and godly sorrow for our
sins, wherewith we pierced and wounded our blessed Savior unto the death;
and inde^de, if we be of the number of those upon whom God has powered out
the spirit of grace and compassion, so often as we look upon him, whom we
have pierced as (here in this sacrament we may see him crucified before our
eyes) as often shall we lament for this, Zach. 12.^0.
as one mourns for his only Son, or is sorrowful for his first borne: but
of this we shall speak God willing hereafter.

Now here is also discovered the vanity of that error of concomitance, Sect 25
Error of concomitance disprooued
wherewith the adversaries would excuse their disme^bring of this holy
Sacrament: for (say they) by concomitance where the body of Christ is, there
is his bl^od and therefore the bread which is his bo^die, being given: there is
no need ^o give the cup. But as the Lord asked the King of Tyrus in derision.
E^ech. 28 3.
Art thou wiser then Daniell; So ^ay we ask of them, are ye wiser then
Christ? will ye amend his institution? This assertion takes away one of the
principal ends of this Sacrament, Co^comitance destroi^s the first end of this
Sacrament.
to wit, the commemoration of Christ's death and passion: for to have the blood
within the body* is no declaration of a crucified man: nor a showing forth of
the Lords death: whereas our blessed Savior ordained them to be exhibited
and received sundry, that it might not only be preached to our ears, but
represented also to our eyes, how his blessed body and blood were sundred for
our sins.

sect. 26 The second end of this Sacrament is the communication of Christ to
them who are his.
The second end for which this Sacrament was ordained, is: that it might be a
mean of the communication of Christ to all them who are his; for the sealing up
of our spiritual union with him: ideo en^m Sacramentum il^ud hominibu^ datur,
v^ Caput in terris corporicoadune^ur. And this (as I said) I take out of the
words of the Apostle: The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the
body of Christ? And in this respect, this holy bread and wine are not only
signs representing Christ crucified; nor seals confirming our faith in him,
but also effectual instruments of exhibition, whereby the holy spirit makes an
inward applycation of Christ crucified to all that are his.

And herein stands our greatest comfort; sect. 27. In this sacrament christ
is truly ex^ibit and given.
for if we had no more a do in the celebration of this holy Sacrament, but
to remember Christ's death and passion: then certainel ye looking to it only
were sufficient to put us in remembrance thereof; but when we hear and see,
that this bread, which is his body is given us, and we are commanded to take
and eat it* what shall we think; but that we^ are called to this high mercy,
as to be partakers of Christ and all the benefits that flow from his death?
The Lord does neither deceive us with words, to bid us take when he gives
nothing: neither calls he us only to a communion of naked bread and wine:
far be it from us to think so baselye of this holy Sacrament. Certainly, he
that with any measure of light and grace, will ponder these words of our
Savior, Take and eat, this is my body: Shall perceive that there is here a
real and eff^ctual exbition made of the Lord Jesus, to the penitent and
believing receauer.

Sect. 2^* Yet Christ is no^ received o^ every one who receiu^s the bread.

For there is a great ^ifference between communication and acceptance.


And yet let no man think, that albeit the breaking and giving of the bread be
the communication of Christ's body, that therefore the bread is transubstantiate
into his body, or that every one receives the body of Christ who receives the
bread: for there is great difference between communication and acceptance, on
the part of God. In this sacrament, there is indeed a communication and
exhibitio^ of christ, but on ye part of the unbelieving receiver, it fails for
fault of acceptatio^; because they have no faith, whereby to receive him, nor a
purified heart, wherein to lodge him. It is therefore a vile error also of the
Papists, who affirm that the wicked in this Sacrament eat Christ, but to
their damnation: It is contrary to the word of God and reformed antiquity:
The wicked ^ate not christ in the sacrament ^oh. 6 54. Aug. in ^o^n. cap. 6.
Tract. 26.
for whosoever (says christ) eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has
eternal life: and I will raise him up at the last day. Sacrame^num quibusdam ad
vitam, quibusdam ad exitium* ^es vero ipsa cuius est sacramentum, omni homini
ad vitam, nulli ad exitium. Item, Qui non manet in Christo, et in quo non manet
Christus, proculdub^o non manducat spiri^ualiter carnem, nec bibit sanguinem
eius, licet visibiliter premat dentibus sacramentum sanguinis, et corporis
e^us. The wicked who believes not, may with Judas eat: Panem Dommini, non
panem Dominum The bread of the Lord, but not the bread which the Lord
himself is, to his worthy receauers.

Of all this, then it is evident, Sect. 29 They refuse a great gift, who refuse
to communicate.
that this banquet is most heavenly and excellent, wherein as there is no
less offered then* CHRIST JESUS, so no less is refused by them, who refuse to
communicate: they proclaim by their deed (if they continue in it) that they
have No Portion in David, 2. Sam. 20.1
neither inheritance in the son of Ishai.

But no^ we leave them, and return to speak as we promised of that trial,
which they whominde to communicate, Sect. 3^. The second part o^ the precept
commau^d^s t^yall before commu^io^
are to take it of themselves.

Let a man therefore try himself. This Particle (therefore) is relative to
that which went before: since there is a danger (will he say) and many ea^es
and drinks unworthily: therefore take ye heed how ye come: he says not
simply, let a man eat, but let a man try himself, and so let him eat. This
warning then of the Apostle, stands in the ent^ie to t^is holy action, Genesis 3.24
like that Cherubin armed a with sword in the entry of Paradise: yet not to
hold out the Sons of Adam, but only to terrify us, that we presume not to
draw nere without sanctification. And herein does our Lord Jesus discover his
wonderful love toward us; who before he inuit us to eat and drink at his
table, does first of all instruct us how we should do it* 2. Sam. 13 For the
Lord will not that this table be a snare unto us.
Absalom c^lled his younger Brother Ammon to a banquet, only of purpose to
slay him: he prepared delicate meat and drink abundantly for him, but
concealed the danger. It is not so with our elder Bro^^er, he calls us here to
a banquet* not of purpose to slay us, but to save us; he is no way willing, we
should make this Table a snare to trappe our selves to damanation, which he
has ordained as a mean of our Salvation: and therefore before hand forewarnes
us of the danger, that we may eschew it.

It is pity to see how the great multitude run to this holy Sacrament
without trial and examination of themselves, sect. 31. Many make it a snare,
that consider not, who they them selves are.
and all because they hear of a bread of life, which here is exhibited to
the Communicants at this holy Table: it is very true, that great things are
exhibited here indeed, but thou should first of all enquire of thy self,
who art thou? what interest thou have in this Communion? and whether or no thou
be one of those to whom these holy things do appertain? Hag. 2.14
for if thou in thy person be a profane and unsanctified creature, thy touching
of these holy things may defile them, and make thee guilty of the contempt of
them, but shall not benefit thee; yea a greater curse then that which Elisha
pronounced on the vnb^leeuing Samaritane Prince, 2. kin. 7.2*
shall light upon thee: thou shall see* the Table of the Lord, and hear of
the plenty of the bread of life therein communicate, but shall not eat of
it: let a man therefore try himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and
drink of this cup.

For as this Sacrament is a holy and excellent thing, Sect. 32.
so should they who celebrate it, be holy, and separate persons. Banquetters
at this holy table should be holy persons. Lu. 11.38
It should not be received with common hands, that is, with e^rthlye hearts,
and unsanctified affections. The Pharisees would not eat their common meat
with unwashed hands, and that was but superstition; but here to wash before
we^ eat, both our hands and our head with Peter, Ioh. 13.9. Ierem. 4 14.
yea, to wash as Jeremy exhorts us, Our hearts from our wickedness, is
devotion, and good Religion both commended and commanded by the word of God:
Otherwise fearful is that* warning of our Savior. If I wash thee not, thou
shall have no part with me. Vnreuerent handling of holy things has never been
left unpunished. 1 samuel 6.
To the unclean all things are unclean, for even their consciences are
defiled. The Lord has never suffered unpunished the vnreuerent looking to, or
handling of the holy signs of his presence. Them of Bethshemeshe looked
irreverently into the Ark, and the Lord slew fifty thousand of them. 1 samuel 21
Vzza touched irreverently the Arc, and the Lord in like manner struck him
instantly to death; Ahim^l^ch would not give to David the hallowed bread of
proposition, but conditionallye, that the young men, who were with him, were
sanctified. No uncircumcised man might eat of the pascall Lamb, Ex. 12.48
under pain of death, and such as were circumcised, being unclean, behooued
to abstain till they were cleansed, according to the law; yea, such of them,
as were clean, did not eat without four days preparation, for the Lord
commanded them, to take the Lamb the tenth day, Exo. 12.6
and not to slay it til the foureteenth day at night, that all the space
between, they might the better prepare themselves to that holy action. Neither
will the lord show us his presence without our preparation.
Neither will the Lord any other way be familiar with us* except we be
sanctified. Before the Lord came down on Mount Sinai to give his law to
Israel, he appointed them three days of preparation, wherein ^o sanctify
themselves. The Lord appeared to Moses in the fiery bush, Exodus 19.9.
but revealed not his will unto him, til he put off his shoes: I will be
sanctified (says the Lord) in all that draw nere unto me. The Lord will not
take a wicked man by the hand, Exodus 3.5
nor have fellowship with the Throne of iniquity: his eye is so pure, that he
can behold no iniquity, Abac. 1.13
unless we put off our worldly thoughts and sinful affections, whereby we
have troad in the unclean ways of sin: it is not possible that the Lord can
be familiar with us.

All these stand up as examples, warning us to draw near to this holy action
in assurance of faith, sect. 33. Excellency of this sacrament
sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience: Here is a Sacrament more
excellent the^ the passover; here is bread more holy then that Shewbread;
here are the tokens of Gods presence, more glorious the^ the Arc; here the
Lord comes down, and salvation under his wings: not to sound by Angel^ the
precepts of his law on Sin^i, but to seal up by his Spirit the promises of
his Gospel to the inhabitants of Sion; shall we then presume to come to this
holy Table without sanctification? Or if we will, may we not look assuredly
for judgment? The Corinthians were stricken with death and sundry diseases,
1. cor. 11
because they discerned not the Lords body; and which is most fearful of
all, he that came to the marriage, wanting his wedding Garment, Math. 22.13
was he not taken from the banquet Table, and cast into the place of utter
darkness? and shall we look to escape the like judgment, if we fall into the
like contempt of God?

Prepare thy self, oh Israel, sect. 34. An exhortation to come to this holy
table with reverence. Lam. 3.40 1. sam. 7.3 Genesis 33.
to meet thy God: let us search and try our ways: let us lift up our hands
with our hearts unto God in the heavens. If we be this day come to the Lord
with all our heart, let us put away our strange Gods (which are our sins)
from among us: let us with Joseph's Brethren, make ready our presents, since we
have no better thing then our heart: le^ us ^acrifice our hearts to the Lord,
and that in the best estate that pos^ible we can get it; for the Lord our God
is a great King. Mal. 1.14
Cursed is he that has a male in his Flock and voweth, and sacrifices a
corrupt thing to the Lord. Beware therefore, we offer not that, which is lam^
and torn to the Lord a divided heart, a ^alting heart between two an
unpenitent heart, is neither a meet Sacrifice to offer unto the Lord, nor a
meet vessel wherein to receive that holy thing, which here the Lord offers
unto thee.

The Apostle says, that the breaking of this bread is the Communion of the
body of Jesus; 1 cor. 10.16.
Since Christ is that holy thing which here is communicated, take heed how we
make ready the heart, wherein to receive him: Ioh. 19.40.
Joseph of Arim^thea, and the rest of those goly ones, who took down Jesus
from the Cross, wrapped his dead body in pure and fine linen; what shall
we then do with the living body of Jesus? shall not we receive it into
pure, That we put not new wine into old vess^ls. Mat. 9.17.
fine, and well prepared hearts? No man (says our Savior) puts new Wine into
old V^ssels, far less will any man put the ordin^r^ food of his body into
unclean unseasoned, and unsavory vessels; but least ^ of all should men
presume with unholy hearts and hands, to meddle with things saccred and
h^auenly: Here is new wine indeed, let us not put it into old vessels; Here
is heavenly Manna, let us not receive it with earthlye hearts: Any man that is
in Christ should become a new creature: 2. Cor. 5.17 Revel. ^9.9.
If we be these blessed ones, who are called to the participation of the Lambs
supper, then shall it be granted to us, to be arrayed with pure, fine linen,
and shining; which is the righteousness of the Saints. The Lord vouchsafe this
grace upon us, that since he has made us partakers of the heavenly vocation,
and called us to the marriage of his Son, that we receive not so excellent a
grace in vain, but it may be unto us his servants, according to his word.

And now before we enter to speak of this trial, sect. 35. Comfort to the
tender conscience casten do wne after trial with the sight of sin
least the tender consciences of the Godly, by reason of that which I have
spoken should be discouraged, and cast down with the sense of their own
unworthiness; which at all times is great in their eyes, but greatest when by
trial* they look most narrowly unto themselves: We have therefore to
consider, that there be two sorts of trials; One whereby a thing perfect is
tried in such sort, Two sorts of trial: one of things perfect another of
things im^e^f^ct Malach. 3.
that it is not made better, but found to be that which it is* and with this
kind of try^ll man is said to try the Lord and his word, so speaks the Lord
by Malachie: Prove me and try me now, if I will not pour you ou^ ^ blessing
without measure. By this trial* if a man fall too, to try the Lord, he shall
find him such as he is; true, constant and faithful to perform that which
he has spoken; or if again man will enter, and try the word of the Lord; he
shall find that the law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19.7
Psalm. 12.
no dross in it, but like silver fined seven times in the fire. There is
again another trial, whereby things imperfect are so tried, that they are
made better* and at the length perfected; and hereby God tries man, for so he
speaks by the same Malachie: Mala. 3.3. The trial here commanded, is a
searching out of our imperfections.
The Lord will fine the sons of Leui, and purify them as gold and silver that
they bring offerings to him in righteousness: And with this trial also man
tries himself, searching out his iniquities that he may forsake them: and this
trial tendes indeed to a perfection at the last, but stands rather, in a
finding out, and forsaking of our imperfections, then in any present
perfection: And of this trial the Apostle means here; so that this precept
does command us to search out our iniquities, and to depart from them, but
does no way import that we should not communicate at this Table, because that
new trial discouers to us new transgressions; for we come not he^e as men
without sin, but as poor* and miserable sinners, seeking the Savior of the
world, Luke ^.32
knowing that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners unto repentance.

Thou then, who after examination, Sect. 36 Therefore we must not be
discouraged, suppose after t^yall we find them to be many. Luke. 5.^ Psalm.
51.1 1. Tim. 1.15
shall find the self a miserable, and yet a penitent sinner; say not with
Peter, Lord depart from me, for I am a sinful man: but so much the rather go
to him and cry with David, Have mercy on me O God, and according to the
multitude of thy co^passions, put away mine iniqu^ti^s: for it is a true
saying: Christ came into the world to save sinners. Stay not thou therefore
back from him, because ^hou art sinful; only try if thou be weary of thy
sins; for we are sure, that a sin discovered by trial, and cast out by
repentance, will never condemn us: Wash you (says the Lord) make you c^^an,
take away the euil^ of your works from before my eyes: Esai. 1.16
and then though your sinn^s were as crimson, they shall be made while as
snow, though they were red lik^ Sva^^^, they shall be as Wool. Ber. in c^t
Ser. 23.
Omne quod ipse mimihi non imputare aecr^uerit, S^c est quasi ^on fuerit;
every sin says the ancient, which God has concluded not to impute unto me,
is as if it had never been: If therefore in thy conscience thou feel thy sins
an hea^y burden unto thee, under the which thou sigh^st and gronest, and whereof
thou earnestly desir^st to be rele^ued, crying with that holy Apostle: O
miserable man, who shall deliver me from ^his bo^^e of sin? Romans 7.
then go thou to the Lord Jesus, for surely thou art one of those whom he is
seeking; he^ came into the world to save thee, and the like of thee: lay thy
burden upon the back of CHRIST, and he shall be^re it, and take thou up his
yoke which is ^asie, and his bu^den which is light: So sh lt thou find r^st
to thy soul. O happy exchange* Mat. 11.29
when we are taken from the se^uitude of sin, and entered into the service of
Christ, when the burden of sin that presse^h us down is taken from our back,
and the sweet yoke of Christ that lifts us up, is laid upon us: for albeit
it be called a burden* yet is it such a burden as eases us, and makes us
lighter like the wings of a Bird: Q^^d ^nim leu^^^ eo onere, quod non solum
o^erat, B^r. Epist. 72.
sed port a^ ^mnem c^i portandum ^mpo^i ur.

Where for our farther comfort, let us con^ider what manner of Guestes these
were, Sect. 37 This comfort confirmed by considering them who were bidden to
the banquet. Math. 22
whom the great* King commanded to bring into his banqueting house, even
the poor, the maimed, the halt and the blind. Take h^ede unto this, O thou
that art disquieted in mind, and wounded in spiri^^, with the sense of thy
infirmities; the Lord is gracious and ready to show mercy: Math. 12 20
He will not break the b^used reed^, ^^r qu^nch the smoking Flax, he will
not despise thee, E^ay. 42.3 B^nque^ters there were the poor, the m^imed, the
blind. 2, Cor. 8, 9. Luke 5.3^
because thou art weak, but bids thee come to him, that he may heal all thy
infirmi^ie^, Art thou then poor and destitute of spiritual grace in thy
feeling? turn thee to Christ, who being rich, became poor for thy sake, that
thou in him mights be made rich. Art thou weak and d^seas^d? remember, they who
a^e whole need no phisi^^an, but the sick: and that it is the glory ofthis
excellent physician, to cure diseases, otherwise incurable: quid e^^m tam ad
mortem quod Christi morte non sanetur. Art thou lame, and complainest that thou
can not, with David run the way of the commandments of God: Psalm. 119.
yet endeavor to halt forward with Iaacob unto Canaan, and to creep to the Lord
Jesus, As one of his little Babes praying unto him: O Lord that raisest-vp the
crooked, Ps. 146.8
I beseech thee to order my goings aright, and to stay my steps in thy paths,
that I slide not any more, as I have done. And thou who laments thy
blindness, and the weak measure of thy knowledge, now in this time of light
(alas) as we have all more then cause to complain, that by our own default,
the eyes of our understanding are not lightened, and we have so little insight
into the riches of that glorious inheritance, and rich mercies manifested to
us by the gospel, in comparison of that we might have had, 1. Pet. 1.12. Heb.
5.12
If wi^h the Angels we had be^ne desirous to behold them: surely in regard of
time, we should have been teachers, yea, the meanest inhabitant of Jerusalem
should have been as David, Zach. 12.
and David as the Angel of God. But we are become such* as have need that the
principles of God should be taught again unto us, yet must we not despair,
but go to Jesus, who gi^eth sight to the blind, psalm. 146. p^a. 119.
and pray to him; Lord open ou^ eyes that we may see the wonders of thy law.
Let us go to this Table, stand and ^rie with th ^e two blind men: Jesus the
Son of David have mercy on me, O Lord enli^hten mine eyes that I sleep not
in death: psalm. 13.
Comfortable ^he^ is that message sent by the Lord Jesus to the Church of
Laodicea, I know tho^ art miserable and poor, and blind, and naked, ^et I
council thee come to me: Reu. 3.18
I have the fi^e go^de tha^ will mak^ thee rich; I have the white raiment to
cover thy filthy nakedness; I have the eye salve, that will open thy ^ies; let us
no^ therefore he^rke^ to the voice of our infidelity against so clear
testimonies of the word of God; neither so look on our miseries, that we turn
our back upon Gods mercies, Ephesians..3.20
but rather let our ^iseries chase us to him, who of his abundant mercy, is
a^le to fulf^ll all our nenecess^ties, above all that we can ask or think.

But now to return, and speak of the trial here required* sect. 38 This
trial is not that daili^ and ordinary trial required in all our actions
we must consider that as this acti^n is not a daily action, so i^ requir^s a
trial abo^e our dayl^ trial: a^ to our daily and ordina^ie trial, in it, we
are bound to examine all our actions in the court of conscience, that we may
call our selves to account: Not co^cealing the iniquity of our bosom, as Adam
did, but judging our s^lues that we may not be judged of the Lord. And this
trial without a daily los^e cannot be neglected; for since we are subject to so
many cha^ges, that even the just man falleth^^euen times in the day, pasal. 19
12.
and no man knows the errors of his life; we have great need by daily
conside^ati^n to view the state of our c^nscienc^s, and to look into the
course of our life, whither or not, it be such as will lead us unto that end,
whereat we would be. Such profit found godly David by the ex^mination of his
ways, Psas. 16.7, Ho^ nec^ss^ry the daily trial is.
that he^ praised the Lord. Who gave ^im counsel, and made h^^ reyn^s to ^e^ch
him in the night. And he acknowledges it a specia^ mean, whereby many times he
was reduced into the way of life, when he had wandered from it. I have
considere^ (says he) my w^ies, Psalm. 119.59
and ^urned m^ feet unto thy ^estimon^es. As David learned this from God, so
does he recommend it unto us, that morning and eueni^g we should examine our
selves, as a most profitable mean, to nourish that holy fear in us, where by
we keep ou^ sin, when we are tempted to it, or cast ou^ sin, when we
have once conceived it: for this holy fear is Innocen^iae c^st^s: Cyp. lib 2
^pist. 2, ^^al, 4, 4.
Tremble therefore (says he) and sin not, examine your hearts upon your
b^ds, and be ye still: Again, he protests that eueri^ day he was punished,
and chastised ^uerie morning: that he daily cleansed hi^ heart, and washed his
hands in innocence. Every day of our life we contract some new debt of sin*
and wisdom ^rau^^, psalm, 73.13.
that every day we should seek a discharge thereof. As we cannot live without
daily food, far less can we live without daily mercy; and therefore our
Savior who in the one Petition taught us to pray* give us this day our daily
bread; in the next he taught us also to pray, and forgive us our sins, that no
day should go by us, without examinination of our selves, and crying of God
mercy for our sins.

But he^re comes to be lamented the senseless s^upidity of this generation:
in all their affai^es, Sect. 39. Miserable is their estate, who live without
daily tri^ll.
they use consideration and b^^ng to account and re^koning their whole
business with men; but as touching their conversation toward God, and the
state of their consciences, and whether or not, they be translated from nature
into grace: there are they so carried away by presumption, that they lea^e no
place to the examination of themselves, but proclaim peace to themselves,
though there be no peace; blessing th^mselues in their hearts, albeit, God (in
their hearing) pronounce them, and their actions accursed in his word. They are
like Achito^^el w^^ ^ut his hou^e in order, but not his ^oule. 2. sam. 7.^ 33.
They are wise like Achitophel: he put his house in order, but not his soul
in order, w^se in things perishing, concerning this life: there they ouersee
nothing; wise enough in the^r generation, but fools concerning things
perteining to li^e eternal for they suffer a daily debt run on upon their
souls, which at length shall ouer-charge them. A count that is long
ouerpassed, in the end becomes difficult to be finished; and he who long has
lived in darkness, if ye bring him to the light, cannot hold up his eyes to
look upon it, but is forced to cast them down toward the ground: even so
shall it be with him, who suffers his debt of sin to multiply, and the
reckoning of his transgressions to run on; in the end, His own wickedness
shall reprove him, Iere. 2.19
The Lord shall draw him out of his lurking holes, and bring him out of the
dark chambers of his imagination: and as now, psalm. 90.8 psa. 50.21
his secret sins are set in the light of Gods countenance, so then shall the
Lord set them in order before him, that did them. He shall manifest his inward
thoughts to the light, and present him naked unto judgment: and then, with
what confusion and astonishment, with what trembling and blackness of face,
shall he that was prodigal of the time of grace, living in his sins a
contemner of God* come forward unto judgment? And this to awake us to the
daily trial and ordinary examination of our hearts. Sect. 40. But a singular
and extraordinary trial, is required before communion:


As to this action, it is not ordinary, and therefore requires a singular and
extraordinarye trial, far above that which every day we are to take of our
selves: for if (as I said) the Ie^es had assigned to them the space of four
days for preparation, before they eat their Passover, wha^ shall we do
that have to celebrate a more excellent mystery? they searched diligently
every corner of their house, to see that no leaven were in it; but more
diligently should we search every corner of our hearts, that no known
leaven of wickedness and maliciousness be left in it, which we have not
purged and cast out by repentance: Every new sight of our selves discouers new
coruption.
Then shall we find that eueri^ new sight of our selves shall discover a new
corruption; for the heart of man is a great deep, and deceitful above all
things; many Chambers of corruption are in it. If we have entered into one, and
seen the abominations which are there, think not for that we have entered in
all. No doubt the prophet Esaias, knew before that he was a sinful man, but a
new vision of the Majesty of God brought him to a deeper insight of his own
uncleanness, and made him to cry out, woe is me, for I am undone: Because I
am a man of p^lluted lipp^s, Esa. 6.5.
and mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts: I have seen (says
Job) The Lord, Job. 42.6.
therefore do I now ab^o^re m^ self. And this I mark, that none of us think a
new trial unnecessary, but that euenye, who through grace have been accustomed
every morning to chastise your selves, and every evening to examine your
hearts in your beds, may be warned: to you also belongs this precept, let a
man try himself, and so let him eat.

Which shall appear more evidently, sect 41. What a labourous work is in
joined to man when he is commanded to try himself.
if thou ponder this precept, Try thy self: it is a r^stlesse and laborious
work, that here is enjoined to thee, tho^ art set to a task which may hold
thee exercised all the days of thy life. The Lord by this precept will have
every thing that is in man, brough^ under examination; Man as he is the
workmanship of God, is every way so maruailous, that no marvel the
Philosophers called him a little world! Augustine in his Estima^ion, ac^counted
man a greater miracle then all the miracles that ever were wrought amongst men
but as he is peru r^ed by sin, and become the workma^ship of s^than, he is so
fraughted with iniquit^, ye S. James calls one member of his body, Iam, 3, 6
A world of wickednes^ and if in the tongue only, which is but a small member of
the body, there is so much wickedn^sse, that the Spirit of God, who gives
names to things as they are, calls it a world of wickedness what shall we
think of the rest? what bottomless depth of iniquity must there be in the
fountaire, when there is so much in the stream: and therefore I say ^e has
n^ede to be full of eyes, within and without, that will practice this precept
of the Apostle, let a man try him self.

For if ye shall begin to take a view of your mind, sect. 42. Man being well
tried shall appear a new found world of wickedness
and consider how far it is enlightened, and what natural darkness yet
remains in it* how many bands of strange cogitations at s^uerall times
soiourne in it? some flowing from the love of the world and her deceitful
pleasures, intending to steal our hearts after them; some from the ro^te of
concupisence, Four bands of cogit^tio^s which oppress the mind.
and her inordinate lusts, that of^entimes violently oppress us: and some from
the root of bitt^rnesse, raising wonderful c^mmotions, and perturbations
within us, reeling too and fro by courses, in our swelling and restless
minds, raging like waves of the Sea, carried with furious winds, besides
infinite armies of other vain, and idle cogitations, whereof we cannot tell from
whence they come nor whither they go: and if from the mind they proceed to
the heart, which is the seat of the affections: and take a particular view of
them, how our love and our hatred, our fear and our confidence, our joy and
our grief, our care and our contentment are renewed, and framed, according to
that word, which is the rule of righteousness. And if again, ye go to try the
affections, and see how the members of your bodies are employed as weapons of
righteousness in the service of God, Romans 6,
if ye have made a covenant with your eyes or not, Job. 31.1
that they regard not vanity, or if negligently ye let them stand open as
windows, at the which death enters every moment into your souls; and if ye
have learned to take heed to your lips, psa. 39.1
that ye sin no^ with your tongue; if ye shall also take a time to consid^r
the ignorances of your youth* and sins of your old age: if I say ye look
unto all these* which yet are few in regard of many more we have to look
unto; what shall appear, but a new found world of wickedness discovered unto
thee? which mo^te justly may make th^e ashamed, and compel thee to cry out
with David; psa 19.12
O Lord, who knows the errors of his life: Lord cleanse me from my secret
sinn^s, and k epe me from presumptuous sins, that so I may be made clean
from much wickedness: yea, thou shall wish with Jeremy; Ierem 9.1
O that my head were full of water, and m ne eyes fountains of tears, that
all the whole day long I might with Ezekiah recount my sins, Es 38.15 Psalm, 6
i^ the bitterness of my heart; and all the night cause my bed to swim, and
water my Couch with ^eares, for the manifold transgressions, wherewith I have
offended the Lord my God.

And now because this trial of our selves is so necess^rie, sect 43 Without
these two things we can do no thing in this work o^ trial.
let us here remember that there are two things, without which we cannot
profit in this work^ of trial. The one is the spirit of God, the other is the
word of God. As to the first, man by nature is so blinded with self-love, that
he accounts his own deformity, 1. The first is the spirit of God.
beauty, and his bondag^ liberty: what vyler bondage then the servitude of
Sin? O quam multos domi^os hab^t qui v^um non habet (said Ambrose?) and yet
man (unregenerate) cou^teth it his liberty to live uncontrolled in the service
of his lusts, to do what he will: what liberty again so ^xcellent as to be
the freeman of God; Seru^re deo est regnare: and yet foolish man, accounts the
obedience of Gods law (which is the law of liberty) a servitude, and the
commandments of God, he esteems as bonds, wherewith he will not be bound,
walking the footsteps of other Rebels before him: he cries out; Let us break
their bonds and cast their cords from us. Psalm. 2.3
It was not the disease of the Laodiceans only to account themselves happy,
when indeed they were miserable; Revel, 3,
it is the natural disease of all the Sons of Adam: for every man's way seems
good in his own eyes. pro. 16.2
A pitiful blindness that death should reign over man, and man not feel it;
yt strange Lords who can claim no right unto him, should tiranise over him, and
he not endeavor to withstand it; and that satan should lead him away in
captivity, bound with cheines, even the cords of his own sin, blinder the^
Zedekiah, having his eyes pulled out, and man should not lament for it: But
where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty and freedom, there is a
knowledge and detestation of sin, and a sighing to God for deliverance from
the bondage. Ezec. 8.9,
The Prophet Ezechiel could not see the abominable idalitries of the house of
Israel, till the Lord taught him to dig through the wall: but we shall be
far less able to see the vile abominations that are in our own hearts,
until the spirit of the Lord dig through and demolish that thick and hard
wall of induration, that naturally hides us from the sight of our sins, and
keeps us in blindness under Satan's bondage.

The other thing whereby we are to proceed in this trial, sect. 44 The next
is the word of God.
is the word of God; for every thing that is imperfect, must betryed by
another not by it self: gold is tried by the fire and touchstone; the weight
of a thing is tried by the balance, and the spots of the face are tried by the
glass. For every imperfect thing must be tried by another the^ it self.
Thus every imperfect thing that is tried, is tried by another not by it self.
As to the law of God, it is a most perfect rule, by which God will have men
and their actions tried; but it is to be tried by no other then it self. If
any man will try scripture, he must with the Nobles of Beraea, Act. 17, 11:
try it by the scripture so then the word serves unto us as a touchstone for
our trial, as a glass for discovery of our spots; and as the balance of the
sanctuary, wherein we must be weighed in the last day the secrets of all
hearts will be judged by the Gospel, Rom, 16 Many try themselves by wrong
rules, and therefore are deceived:
and therefore it were good that in time we did judge our selves by it; some
try themselves by it; some try themselves by themselves, supposing they are
such indeed, as they have conceived themselves to be: some again measure
themselves by others, specially with such as in their opinion, are behind
them, not with such as in light and grace do far excel them; like that
Pharisie; Luke, 18.11.
who when he came to examine himself before God, thought he was good enough,
because he was not like the Publican wherein he was also miserably deceived;
for suppose he spoke the truth, yet spoke it ignorantly, as Caiaphas said,
that one behooued to die for the people: he was not like the Publican* indeed
the Publican was much better then he: for he came to the temple, humble, and
penitent, and went home to his house justified, whereas the Pharisee puffed up
with a conceit of his own righteousness, and justifying himself, went away
out of the Temple* more (...) then he came. In the trial therefore of thy
self make not thy neighbors disposition thy rule, least thou in like manner be
deceived.

Sect. 45. How we may profit by comparing our selves with others.
And yet if thou would proffit by the example of others, remember it is a great
folly to think that thou art religious enough, because in religion some are
behind thee, and not rather to be displeased with thy wants, when thou see
so many before thee, enriched above thee in all spiritual grace, and have
profited more th n thou in the mo^tification of their sinful lusts: having
out run thee farther in the way of Gods commandments, then that other
Disciple ouer-ran Peter unto Christ's Sepulcher, Ioh. 20.
to learn his resurrection. It is pity that the Sons of men in worldly
things can look to those who are above the^, thinking they have little,
because they have not so much as others, yet in spiritual things* they should
look to others, that are inferior to them, and so easily stand content with
the little beginning of religion they have, because there be many, who in their
judgment have not so much; whereas certainly if we could try our selves by the
right rule, we should find that as yet we are far from that which we should
be, and therefore have more need then that holy Apostle: To forget that which
is behind, Phil. 3.4
and endeavor our selus to that which is before: following hard toward the mark
for the prise of the hie calling of Go^ in Christ Jesus.

We have therefore here, sect. 46. It is not enough that pastors and ^lders try
us, we must try our selves,
yet farther to observe, that seeing the Apostle commands us to try our
selves, we think it not enough that others try us, and give us their
approbation; we must also try our selves. The Pastors may try thy knowledge,
and think it good enough, thy superiors may try thy co^uersatio^, and find it
unreprovable of man: 1. cor, 2, 11, ecclesiast, 37, 14
But thou must ^ry thy own conscience, for no man knows the things of a man
save the spirit of man; the mind of a man will show him more sometime then
seven watchmen that are in a tower. When this sacrament was first instituted,
there were twelve who communicated with the Lord Jesus, and one of them was a
Devil and a traitorous hypocrite: the remnant knew him not, and therefore could
not reprove him, but that made not Judas the better man; yet the fault which
man could not find out, the Lord discovered it: one of you (said he) will
betray me. Think it not therefore enough, albeit vnchallenged of man, thou
may sit down at the Lords table. Remember the king will come, and take a view
of the Guests, even he who is the God of the Spirits of all flesh, and to whom
the secrets of the heart are manifest. Iosapha^s garment cannot hide Achab from
him, Other me^ cannot know whether thou come to the Table as a John or as a
Judas.
he is not blind like Isaac, that he should be deceived to take one for
another; therefore try thou thy self, how thou come to this holy table,
whether John loving Jesus, and beloved of him, or as a Judas betraying Christ,
and accursed of him* for as Christ foretold them, that one of them was a
devil, so the Apostle has foretold us, that many will eat and drink
unworthily at this holy table; who they are, we know not, yet are they known
to the Lord; let every one of us strive to purge one; every man try
himself, and wash his heart from his wickedness, and so shall we be all clean;
let every man ask for himself with the Disciples, Let every man therefore
ask for himself: is it I Lord?
Is it I Lord, is it I? am I one of them that comes to betray thee? to crucify
thee again, and to tread the blood of the new Testament under my feet? let us
never rest till we have gotten the Lords certificate in our consciences, and
tha^ after due trial of our selves, we come not as Hypocrites, unpenitent and
unbelieving Atheists, but as diseased and poor sinners, to seek the Lord
Jesus, the Savior of the world: for, if we do so, then shall we get that
answer, which the Angel gave to the two Mary's; fear not ye, because ye seek
Jesus, who was crucified: we shall eat at this Table and be satisfied, and
shall go away, not without feareindeed, but having our fear tempered with
great joy, because we found the Lord. Sect. 47 We should try our selves, and not
other men.


And lastly, let us take heed that the Apostle commands us to try our
selves, and not to try other men. It is a corrupt custom of men at those
times ofholy communion, to fifth the conversation of their neighbor; Gene. 31.
and brethren more narrowly, then ever Laban searched the stuff of Jacob, to
see ifhe could find any thing wherewith to charge him; and this they do not of
a heart to forgive, which were commendable, but of purpose to seek the
uttermost recompense and satisfaction for smallest offenses done against them,
and so where they should cast open the door of their hearts, The reprooues them
who before communion try faults done to them, more then sins don by them.
Esa, 40, 3
to the King of glory, and prepare in the desert a path for our God, by making
low that which is high within the^, and making straight that which is crooked,
and plain that which is rough, by the contrary they stop all the passages
and ways of God his access unto them: for now their affections are exalted so
high by pride against God, that they despise the council of his word: crooked
were they before, but more crooked now; they lived without love before, and
dissembled it, but now are not ashamed: when God calls them to the table
ofloue, plainly to profess with rough and fierce speeches, the hatred of
their hearts, they put off that which the Apostle commands the^ to put on; as
the elect of God, namely tender mercy, humbleness of mind, meekness and
long suffering: they insist to search out the sins done aagainst them by men;
and ouerpasse the sins by themselves done against God; Lovers of themselus
more th^n l^uers of God.

I grant indeed it is a point of christian duty to admonish our brethren of
their sins, if it be done in love: sect* 4^. But takes not away brotherly
admonition. Leu t 19 17,
for so we are commanded, Thou shall no^ hate thy Brother in thy heart, but
shall reprove him. It is hatred and not love, for the father to spare
correction, or the brother to spare admonition of his Brother in his sins. I
conf^sse in like manner that he who has offended is bound to reconcile
himself with thee before ^e^ offer his Sacrifice to the Lord; but in case that
he neglect to do it, yet stand thou bound and obliged to forgive him, and
to take heed that thou despis^ not so great a salvation offered by the Lord,
because an other discharges not that brotherly duty, which he ought unto
thee. As another man's faith will not justify thee, so another man's sin will
not condemn thee; And th^rfore* mourning for that which we cannot amend in
others, let us chiefly attend to our selves, as we are here commanded.

^^ct. 49. (...) of (...) before (...) are (...) 3.
But now leaving to speak any more of this trial in general, we enter to
speak of the particular points of this trial. The whole trial and examination
required in those who are to be banquetters at this holy table, I reduce to
these two: the first is, that we try our selves, whether or not with Joshua
we have cast away our filthy garments, that is, if we have cast off the old
man, which is corrupt through deceivable lusts. (...). 4
And next, if we have put on our marriage garment, that is, put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness, 1 (...) first that we aside (...)
old (...).
and true holiness. First of all therefore, we must take pains to remove the
impediments that may hinder our Union with Christ, that we come not to this
Table (as Judas did) with our old sins, having that lodged in our hearts,
which we dare not present unto God: for since no man will sit down at the table
of his enemy, what great persumption is it in us to sit down at the Lords
Table, as long as our sin, which is the cause ofenimitie is not removed:
There can be no Commu^ion between light and darkness. ^, Cor. 6, 14. ^om.
13.2.
Let us therefore be changed from that which we are, let us cast away the
works of darkness, and be renewed in the spirit of our mind, if so be we
desire to be united with the Lord: he is the holy one of Israel, God blessed
for ever, in whom there can be no shadow of alteration, Iam, 1.17
so that of necessity the change must be upon our part. Otherwise no communion
with the Lord.
It is written of the Lioness, that having had commixtion with the Leopard,
she washes herself in water before she company again with the Lion, that so
he should not by sent discern her adultery. And Basile in his Hexameron
writes, Basil Hexam. hom. 7
that the viper a most pernicious kind of Serpent, before his copulation with
that Seasish called Muraena, does first vomit, and cast out his venomous
poison: thus the beasts in their kind (so far as they can) do reverence one
to another, to teach man, that he is worse then a beast indeed, except he cast
off the filthy slime of his old sins, that he may beioyned with the Lord:
for by nature we are more adulterous then the Lioness (for what is the vanity
after which we have not gonawhoring) more venomous also we are the^ y^ viper,
full of hatred, malice, envy, debate, and therefore have need to vomit out our
iniquities by repentance, and to wash our selves in that fou^tain opened to the
house of David. Before that Ester was presented to Abasuerus, she was purified
by the space of twelve mo^thes, How Esther was Purified, ere she was presented
to Ahasuerus.
6. months with oil of myrrh, and 6. months with sweet odours: shall such
reverence be done to mortal flesh, whose carcass was shortly to be made a
pray to the worms and shall we carry no reverence to our immortal husband the
Lord Jesus? shall we take no pains to purify our heart, Esh. 2.12 2, cor. 11
2.
that we may be presented as a chaste spouse unto him?

sect. 50 Without diuorceme^t from our old sins, no marriage with the Lamb.
psalm. 45.
Let us not deceive our selves* except we forsake our fathers house and our own
people, y^ is, except we be deuorced from our old sins, wherein we were born and
brought up: it is not possible that the king shall have ^leasure in our beau^ie.
Let us call our deeds to examination before the tribunal of our conscience:
let us cast out the Canaanites and not pity the^, that the peace of God may
dwell with us: let us deliver Barrabas to be crucified, y^ christ Jesus may live
in us; why shall these Serpents (I mean our crooked affections) be nourished
any longer in our bosom, which live upon our blood, and cannot live except we
die? Oh that we could make this day a day of new division between us and our
old sins.

Neither must we here think it enough to fight against our sins, sect, 51 Not
a general confession, but a particular inquisition should be made of our
sins
but we must every one of our selves make a particular inquisition of these
domestique sins, and predominate evil affections, yt has most of all
oppressed us: for there is none of us al but we have in us our own Idol,
whereunto many times we do service, to the great offense of God. And albeit,
this narrow trial of our sins shall discover to us a wonderful discordance
between our nature and the most holy law of the Lord, yet let us not be
discouraged, considering that we are best in the eyes of God, when we are
worst in our own eyes, and most acceptable to him, when we are most displeased
with our selves. The Lord was moved even with Achab his temporal humiliation:
2. King 21.29.
see thou not (said he to Eliah) how Achab is humbled before me? because he
submiteth himself before me, I will not bring that evil which thou have
spoken in his days: and will not then the Lord much more be moved with the
true humiliation of his own Servants? No doubt, if we cast down our selves
before the Lord, he shall lift us up, 1. pet. 4.
if we humble ourselves, he shall exalt us. 1. cor. 11 31. psalm 34.18.
If we judge of ourselves, we shall not be judged of the Lord: for the Lord
is near to them that are contrite, and will save such as are afflicted in
spirit. But if we come before the Lord in the presumption of our minds* and not
touched with the sense of our sins, then shall he execute that fearful
threatening upon us: I will enter into judgment with thee, Ierem. 2.35. Esa.
2.12
because thou say I have not sinned: though thou were high* and exalted like
the Caedars of Bebanon, and the Oaks of Bashan, proud and hautie in thy
conceit: the Lord shall abase thee, and bring thee low: for he is the Lord
that resists the proud, 1. pet. 5.5 Sect. 52.
and gives grace to the humble.

2 The other point is, that we put on the new christian disposition consisting
in these three.
The other point of our trial and preparation, stands in putting on that three
fold Christian disposition; that toward our God we be holy and heavenly
minded; toward our neighbor loving, righteous, and merciful; and as
concerning our selves, that we be sober and lowelie: for so the grace of God,
which has appeared, teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, Tit. 2.11 Revel, 19.8,
and should li^e godly, righteously, and soberlie in this present world. This
is our wedding Garment, even that pure, fine and shining linen, Gen* 37, 23,
colos, 3, 12,
which is the righte^usnesse of the Saints. A garmment not partiecoloured like
Joseph's, but compact ofmanie virtues and graces of Christ Jesus. These be his
badges and cognisances, whereby we are known to be his* the putting on of
these, is the putting on of Christ; for his grace translateth us out of nature,
and transformeth us into his image by his own spirit.

And first as concerning our disposition toward God, Sect, 53, First that
toward god, we be holy and heavenly minded.
it should not only be holy (as I have said) but also heavenly: for since we
call him our Father which is in heaven, we must see what heavenly disposition
we have to go after him: and whether we be weary of our absence from the Lord,
like David weary of his dwelling in the Tents of Kedar, psalm, 120, phil, 1, 23
and desire with the Apostle to remove out of the body, that we may dwell with
the Lord: for here is not the place of our rest. The best of our life upon
earth, (except it be the little taste of that hid Manna, where with the Lord*
now and then comfort our souls in this barre^ wilderness) it is but like
the life of that forlorn son, In such sort that we become weary of our
earthly pilgrimage.
who having banished himself from his fathers house, was driven to fill his
belly with the husks, that was given to the Swine, and often times could not
get them. We have experience enough of the vanity of worldly comforts,
wherein there is no contentment; would to God we could also learn with that
prodigal son to bethink our selves, and conclude to make home again to our
fa^hers house, I^ whose face ^s the fullness of ^oy: surely the least of them
that dwelles in our fathers house has bread enough, Psa. 16.11
they are filled with the ^atnesse of his house, and receive drink out of the
rivers of his pleasures: what pleasure then should it be to us to live here in
this strange land* where our souls are almost dead for hunger?

sect, 54, And never rest till we return to the Lord.
There is no greater thankfulness that man can show to the Lord, then to
declare in his affection, that he cannot live without the Lord, nor rest
content, so long as he is absent from him. The Lord in the work of creation
never rested till he had made man, Gene. 1
and man can do no less of duty then passing by all Gods creatures, to
resolve with himself; I will never rest till I enjoy the Lord. The soul of
man should be like that Dove of Noah, which being sent forth from the arc,
found no rest to the sole of her foot, until she returned again to him that
sent her: and indeed without the Lord where can we rest? Go thy way with
Solomon, Our souls cannot rest but in him
and prove all the goodness of the children ofmen, which they enjoy under the
Sun, Eccl, 2, 3
thou shall find it is but vanity and vexation of Spirit, whatsoever man
cleaves to, beside Jehovah the true subsisting Lord: it is but a lying
vanity, which has not in it that substance, and certainty, which man
imagines; yea, psalm. 39, 5,
man (without God) in his best estate is altogether vanity, and his wisest
actions are but a disquieting of himse^fe in vain. August:
It is a godly saying of August^ne, which the word of God and experience
taught him; Fecist^ nos domine ad te, et semperinquietum est cor nostru^, don^^
requiescat in te; thou made us o lord unto thy self, and our heart is ever
unquiet till it rest in thee. The wicked who are strangers from the womb,
pretend in their countenan^e what they will, yet even in laughter their heart is
sade for there is no joy nor peace to the wicked, pr. 14, 13 Esaias 48.22,
(says my God) their heart is moved as the trees of the Forest shaken with
the wind: Esaias. 7, 2
as the point of the Mariners compass, so long as it is not direct to the
North, trembles continually; so the spirit of the wicked (not set upon the
Lord) is never quiet, but tossed too and fro with restless perturbations,
which in a part presently he feels, but shall better perceive it, when he
goes out of the body. Rom, 2,
For tribulation and anguish shall be on the soul of every man that does
wickedlye: this is the portion of them that forsake God, and wander after
vanity. It is good therefore for us to draw nere unto God, saying with David,
psalm, 73,
whom have I in the heaven but thee? and I have desired none in the earth with
thee. The Lord work this heavenly disposition in us.

Sect, 55*
And now to help forward our earthly minds unto it, we have to consider both
the time and place* Two things profitable to help us to this heavenly
disposition.
when and where our Savior did institute this sacrament. The place is recorded
by Saint Luke, to have been an upper Parlour: the consideration of the place
(says Naz^a^zin) does some way warn us that we should celebrate this holy
sacrament with high and heavenly affections. 1 Consideration of the place
wherein this Sacrament was first instituted.
When God gave the law, he came down from heaven to the top of Sinai, and
Moses went up from the plain to it, and so (says he) had familiar
conversation with the Lord: and here as the Lord comes down as low as he
can in this Sacrament for our capacity, it becomes us to mount up as high as
possible we can in our affections, if so be we be desirous to meet the Lord,
otherwise if the Lord shall abide in his glory* and in acces^ible light, and
if man shall lie still in the dark dungeon of hi^ base and earthly mind, what
familiar meeting can there be, between God and man? And as to the time, 2
Consideration of the time. August. in Joan.
Saint John witnesses that our Savior ordained this sacrament when he was to
go out of the world to his father; wherein said Augustine: Spes membris in
Capi^e data, quod essent in illo transeunte sine dubi^ seq^^tura. Yea, not
only should it nourish our hope, that where he is there once we shall be, but
should waken our affection and desire to go after him: we should eat and
drink at this holy table, not as if we were here to remain, but should
celebrate this supper like a passover, standing as pilgrims and our loins
girded up, The time warns us to celebrate this supper like a Passover.
having our staves in our hand ready to follow our Lord, who is gone into
heaven before us: and every day of our communion should be a new departing of
our hearts out of this world, unto our heavenly Father; yea, we should receive
this meat from the Lord, with that warning which the Angel gave to Eliah, in
the wilderness: 1, Kin, 19 7.
up and eat, for thou have yet a great journey to go. This bread is given us,
that in the strength thereof, we may walk forward in the way, which is before
us, not that we should lie down and rest us in this wilderness, as if we had
now attained to the end of our journey. The Angel wakened Eliah twice sleeping
under the Juniper, twice he touched him, and twice he bad him, up, eat and
walk; at length he arose and walked in the strength of that bread forty
days: But alas, our security is greater then his. Many a time has the Lord
warned us of the journey that is before us: many a time has he proposed
heavenly food unto us, and now against this day, Sect, 56 But most of all the
meditation of the love of God is profitable to work in us this heavenly
disposition.
the Lord renews his mercy toward us. The Lord waken us, and grant at the
length, that we may rise and walk, following the Lord, till we appear before
the face of our God in S^on.

But of all other means, the most forceable to ravish our hearts afte^ ye
Lord, is a deep meditation of the love of god toward us. The apostle
protests it is a love that passes knowledge; the height and breadth, the
length and depth whereof, none is able to comprehend; ^phe. 3, 18
he that at one time cried out; psalm. 66 16
Come and I will tell you what God has done to my soul, is compelled another
time to confess: O Lord my God, psalm. 139.
thou have made thy wonderful works so many, that none can cou^^ in order to
thee the thoghts toward us; I would declare and speak of them, but they are
more then I am able to express. And yet although we be less able, Job. 40.18
then the Elephant at one draught to drink up the river of Iordane, let us be
content with the wearied passenger, willingly to take in so much as may
refresh us; we cannot measure the waters of the sea in our fist, nor number
the stars of heaven; and how then shall we number his mercies which are above
all his works? shall we therefore not look to them, Psalm. 145.9
nor behold that glory of God which shines in them? Though we cannot
comprehend his incomprehensible love (yea blessed are we if it shall comprepend
us: It is not a light meditation of this love, that will raise up our hearts
) let us notwithstanding earnestly and frequentlie meditate upon it, not by
starts and vanishing motions: for as A Candle does not at the first receive
light from the fire, were it never so bold, but if for a time it be holden
constantly to the fire, it is at the length enlightened: so is it not
vanishing meditations that will warm our hearts with the love of God; but if we
shall continue without wearying to exercise our thoughts upon this great love,
that the Lord has borne toward us; it shall happily fall out at length, that
the powers of our soul shall be inflamed with his love, and we shall find
the savor of death in every thing that smells not of his love. sect. 57
Never such a love shown as Jesus h^th showed unto us.


No greater love then this (says our Savior) can be showed among men then
that a man should bestow his life for his friends: but that which man is not
able to show, John. 15, 13
our Lord Jesus God and man has showed to the Children his good will: for the
love he bore to us, he gave himself in a sacrifice for our sins on the Cross,
eue^ when we were his enemies; and has here in this Sacrament given himself
a food, and nourishment unto us: for so that disciple belooued of him does
testify; Ioh. 13, 1
When Jesus knew that his hour was come, that he should go out of the world
unto his Father, forasmuch as he loved his own, unto the end he loved them:
therefore did he institute this sacrament, that therein he might communicate
himself to them. O wonderful love, stronger then the love of Jonathan to
David! When Jonathan and David behooued to part company because of Saules
tyranny, stronger then the love of Jonathan to David. 1. sam. ^0
Jonathan gave David his Garment, his Girdle, and his Armor: he had no better,
and could give no better, and so with many tears and mutual imbracings,
departed from him: but our blessed Savior, before he removed his corporal
presence from us, gave his life to redeem our life from the death: he sent out
bloody sweat abou^dantly, as the witnesses of his burning love toward us, he
prowred out an everlasting prayer to his father for us, he has left behind
him, John. 17
in his last will, his peace for our portion* he has given us his spirit for
a comforter, his word for a warner, and this sacrament for a spiritual food,
until his second coming again. Cant. 5.9 Or the love of a mother to her
children.
No marvel his spouse in the Canticle praised his love to be far above the
love of women: for though in some of the^ ye strength natural of affection be
so great, that it makes them endure the painful bearing and bringing up of
their children with the milk of their breasts; yet what is that comparable to
this? nothing indeed. Such a love as here our Savior has discovered toward
us, is not to be found again in the world: for whereas Mothers (says
C^risostome) either commit their children to Nurses, Chrisost. ser. de corpore
christ
or else brings them up upon the milk of their own breasts: Jesus Christ
feeds us not with the milk of another, but with his own flesh, and his own
blood. Necessity sometime has compelled the Mother to eat her own Children,
but we never read that compassion has moved the Mother to give her own
flesh to preserve her Children, that they should not die in famine. But our
Lord Jesus is that kind Pelican, that sends out his own blood to nourish
his young; and all this has our Lord Jesus done not grudgingly, but willingly,
provoked hereunto, by that fervent love he bare to the glory of God his
Father, and to our salvation.

Sect. 58 A proof of Christ's wonderful love toward us. Luke. 22
Which shall yet appear more evidently out of his own comfortable saying to
his Disciples: I have greatly desired to eat this Passou^^ with you. O word
full of consolation! sundry Passeouers had he eaten before with them, but he
protests this was his desired Passover: See ye not here his unquenchable
love? he knew it was the last he was to eat upon the earth; he knew he was to
drink no more with them of the fruit of the vine, till it was fulfilled in
his Fathers kingdom. He knew that the same night they would betray him, and
that after Supper a bitter cup of passion was abiding for him; yet his love
overcame all these impediments, and made him think long to eat of this
Passover: And which is much more; before ever he gave himself to be crucified
for us on the Cross, he provided this Sacrament as a means of the
communication of himself unto us, thereby assuring us, that his subsequent
passion should not defraude us, but rather afford unto us, and make ready for
us that righteousness and life by Christ purchased on the Cross, and
communicate in his holy table to them who are his. In the one he was prepared,
and made ready as the only food of our souls to eternal life, in the other
he is applied, communicated and given unto us; both of these necessarily
behooved to be done for the work of our salvation. Cyp. lib. 2. epist 3.
Sicut enim ad potandum vinum venire ne^^ potest, nisi botrus calcetur ante, et
prematur: sic nos sanguinem Christi bibere non potuimus, nisi Christus prius
fuisset calcatus et pr^ssus. It was a great love which made our Savior,
content that his blood should be shed out on the cross, and so should be made
both a ransom, and a convenient food for us, Ber. in Epiph. ser. 1
for the father sent him. Quasi saccu^plenu^ misericordia, in passione
co^scindendu^ vt effundatur quod in eo latet pretium nostru^. So is this also a
new declaration of his love, that before his body was broken and his blood was
shed, he first ordained the means whereby it should be communicated unto us.

sect. 59
These and many more spiritual meditations, should be unto us as the breathings
of the mouth of God, What a notable comfort we have here, that this banquet
begu^ in earth, and shall be fulfilled in heaven.
to kindle in our souls that little spark of the love of God, which alas,
for fault of entertainme^t, is almost ouer-gone and extinguished with the ashes
of our corruption: for seeing our Savior lo^ged to eat with us, shall not we
long to eat with him? he greatly desired to give himselfto us in this table,
and for us on the cross; and shall not we earnestly desire to receive him? he
knew it was the last he should eat upon earth, and that after it, heavy
sufferings abode him: we know that our banqueting here, is the ba^quet that
shall be accomplished in heaven; it is begun here, it shall not end here.
Comfortable is ye word of our savior: Luke. 22.16.
it shall be fulfilled in my kingdo^^; and will not we then joyfully begin this
banquet? shall we be so foolish as to wait upon lying vanities, and forsake our
own mercies? Iona. 2.8 Iere. 2.13
shall we turn our back upon ye fountain of living waters* and dig to our
selves Cisterns yt can hold no water? crtain^ly our darkene; is grosser the^
the darkness of Egypt, and our hearts harder then the Adamant, except this
burning love of the Lord Jesus ravish upward our hearts after him. The spouse
in the Canticle, Cant. 5.8
professes she was sick of the love of her glorious husband the Lord Jesus,
but alas we are not touched with the like love, we feel not the smell of his
ointments, and therefore with the rest of the Virgins we run not after him.
cant. 1.
Eliah touched Elisha with his Mantle, and therwithall the Lord joined his
inward calling, 1. Kin. 19 19
and suddenly Elisha left his plough of Oxen, and of a husba^dma^ became a
prophet. Now the lord calls upon us by his word and sacrament, Let us also pray,
Romans 5.
that the Lord would shed abroad in our hearts by his holy spirit the sense of
that love of God; then should we neglecting all things run after the Lord,
seeking only to enjoy him.

Sect. 60
The men of this world marvel to behold the sudden change of life, which is
made in the children of God by his effectual calling; Worldlings, who tarry
from christ, if they were touched with the sense of this love, would forsake all
and follow him.
they marvel to see them running so fervently after Christ, seeking him by
continuance in prayer, by hearing of his word, by participation of his
Sacrament, and that with such an insatiable desire, that in this life they can
never be satisfied with hearing, reading, praying, and communicating: but if
the Lord should in like manner touch their hearts, and let them feel the power
of an inward calling then would they marvel no more, far less disdain,
yea, they would make haste, and join themselves to the company of the godly:
And Saul also should become amongst the Prophets. The woman, 1. sam. 19 ^4
Sinful women would be changed like Marie Magdalen Luk^. 7
who had lived before a licentious life, would now change it with Marie
Magdalen: she had been a great sinner in the City, but became an example of
repentance to all the sinners in the City: she prostrates no more her body to
her carnal Lovers, but falls down at the feet of Christ, to crave his
mercy; in steed of her wanton looks, her eyes pour out tears, and her
beautiful hair, which before she set out as a proclaimer of her lust, now
she pulls down to wash the feet of Christ. Thus all the former means of
her sin, she makes new witnesses of her repentance; the man in like manner,
And sinful men should be chainged like M^thew the Publicane.
who had sat al his days with Matthew at the receipt of custom, that is, who
had lived in ye sinful trade of unlawful gain, would now in like manner forsake
it: but where the Lord by effectual calling works not in the heart an earnest
love of God; no marvel they lie still in the grave of their sins, and rise not
to walk after the Lord. We are therefore so much the more to use all the
ordinary means, which may entertain in us y^ little spark of the love of god,
til it grow up unto a great flame, for the farther union and conjunction of our
souls with Jesus Christ; and this for our disposition toward God.

As concerning our Christian disposition to our neighbor, sect. 61. The second
part of our new christian disposition is that toward our neighbor we be loving
it is usual to the spirit of God, to comprise it under love. Our Savior
says that love is the cognizance of his Disciples, and the Apostle calls it
the band of perfection and fulfilling of the law; and no marvel, for love
speaks with the tongue of every virtue. All the sundry precepts, we are
commanded to do unto our neighbor, are summarily comprehended under this one,
Love one another, As this sacrament seals up the communion of the members
with the head, so it seals up the communion of the members amongst themselves:
for this bread whereof we eat, is of many grains of wheat made up into one
bread; and the wine is the juice of many berries collected and united into one,
to teach us that all the communica^ts at this holy table, how many soever they
be, ought to agree together in one, like members of one body, as having one
Father, one faith, one Baptism, one inheritance, as Brethren quickened al by
one and the self same spirit, (which is not to be found again in all the
world, except in this excellent brotherhood:) as we cannot be joined to the
head without faith, Without love we cannot be of the communion of saints.
so can we not be knit to the member without love. Stones and timber cannot
make up a building till they be joined, and sundry pieces of metal cannot be
melted in one work without fire; no more can Christians be united in one
mistycall body without love, and therefore our Savior at the celebration of
this Sacrament, recommended lou^ to his Disciples by a new commandment, John.
13, 3^.
which he so called, because it should never wax old: yea, so much does he
account of it, that he will accept no service we owe to himself, without that
duty of love we owe to our brethren. Math. 5.
If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave thy offering, go thy way, and ^^rst be
reconciled to thy Brother, then come and offer thy gift: of this it is evident,
that without love to our brethren, we can do no acceptable service to the
Lord.

In this therefore, let us try and examine our selves, Sect. 62. Of the eff^cts
by which our love should be tried.
what compassion find we in our hearts, toward our brethren: what willingness
to do them the good we can, what love to bear one another burden: what
readiness^ to forgive when we are offended: what humbleness of mind to ask
them forgiveness against whom we have sinned, practicing these precepts:
While ye have time to do good to all men: Gal. 6.10 Ephe. 4
And again, for bear one another, forgive one another, even as God for
Christ's sake fo^gaue you. The Majesty of God (suppose first offended) did
first seek man to be reconciled with him; and shall man that has offended
think evil to seek his brother, Readiness to forgive rare ^o be foun^.
to be reconciled with him? but alas^e, are these fruits of godliness now to
be found amongst men? it thou seek them thou shall find th em as the Summer
gatherings, or as the grapes of a vintage cut down; Mich. 7.1
though thy soul desire to eat the frui^ thereof, thou shall not find it: for
the good man is perished out ofthe earth, such as are Christians by name, Psalm.
12 Christians live now like Jews and Samaritans of old.
they live like Jews and the Samaritans, of whom it is written, that they
might not converse together: to forbear and forgive one another, to them are
precepts of an uncouth language, which they understand not: as a sparckle of
fire easily kindles a heap of powder, so a small offense remooueth all their
affections: they are not slow unto wrath like the Lord, and far less like
him in readiness to forgive. As men (says Lactantius) are mortal, As men are
mortal, so should their anger be.
so should their anger be mortal: our Savior says, the sun should not go
down upon our wrath: the Apostle co^maunds us to be children concerning anger
and maliciousness, who as they do not deeply conceive it, so they do not
long retain it, but are shortly familiar with them, with whom they were a
little before offended: but as it was doubted of Sylla, Syllane prio^, an
Syllae iracundia sit extincta, so is it out of all doubt, that in many vipers
of this age, anger dies not, til^ they die themselves.

And as for doing of good to their neighbors and brethren, Sect. 63 Readiness to
do good to others is as rare.
they live in the world like mo^sters, or like these Giants, The sons of
Anak: they alone will be Lords of the earth, as ifthe world were made for
the^ only, or they at the least were born for the^ selves, churchlish like
Nabal: shall I take (said he) my bread and my flesh, and give unto David? all that they have, they account so to be theirs as ifthey had not received it, or
were not the Lords stewards bound to distribute to the necessities of his
saints; Professors lives like the sons of Anak, churlish Nabal, or the rich
glutton.
the rich glutto^s, they use it as a morsel for their own mouth: Now my soul
thou have enough for many days, let Lazarus find as he may: they think with
Caine, they are no keepers of their Brethren; Zac. 11.9
That which dies let it die. These and many more are the common and s^ene
corruptions of this age: wherein we are to examine our selves, how far the
renewing grace of the Lord has made us to depart from them, and what holy love
we have put on: 1. John. 4.8
For he that loves not, knows not God, because God is love; and he that
loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has
not seen? hereby we know that we are translated from death to life, because
we love the Br^thren. And thus much we are content to have touched of our
disposition toward our neighbor. Sect. 46 The third point of our christian new
disposition is, that we be sober and little in our own eyes.


Now last of all concerning our disposition in our selves, let us be sober
esteeming basely of our selves, highly of the Lords mercy, hungring and
thirsting for his salvation: and in very deed, the more we shall consider how
God has magnifie^ his holy name by his maruelou^mercies toward us; the more
shall we be compelled to cast down our selves before him in all humility and
submission of our spirits. When David promised to Mephiboseth, 2. ^am. 9. With
Mephibosheth.
that he would show him kindness for Ienathan his fa^hers sake; Meph^boshe^h
humbled himself to the ground and said, what is thy servant that thou should
look to such a dog as I am? but here the Lord o^r God, not only promises
unto us kindness for his Son Christ Jesus sake, but presently performs it,
and inuesteth us again with our Fathers inheritance, which we forfeited in
Adam: and where we were of our own nature* but dead dogs unclean creatures,
dead in sin and trespasses* Ephe. 2. 1. Ioh. 3.1
Now behold what love the Father has shown us: He has made us partaker^
ofthis heavenly voc^tion, as to be his sons and his heirs; and shall not we
then in our very hearts be humbled before him, acknowledge our great
unworthiness and his excellent mercies. Let us confess with God lie Jacob, I
am not worthy (O Lord) ofthe least of all thy mercies, With Jacob and the
Centurion the woman of Canaan and Elizab^th.
and let every one of us say with the Ce^turion, I am not worthy Lord, that
thou should enter within my roof. Let us with the woman of Canaan,
acknowledge our own room, if the Lord should give us but the benefit of
whelps and dogs, that is, should suffer us to go under our masters Table, and
eat of the crummes that fall from it, yet were (...) it more then any way we
have deserved: and how then are we bound to have our hearts and our mouths
filled continually with the praises of our God, who has bestowed upon us his
greatest mercies, when we were not worthy of the least; and has set us down as
Sons and daughters and heirs at the table of his children, that were not
worthy as dogs and whelps to creep under it? have we not cause to cry out
with David: O Lord what is man that this manner of wa^ thou art mind^ful ^f him?
Psalm. ^ Luke. 1
Elizabeth maruailed yt Mary came to vis^^e her, and in the humility of her
heart cried out: W^e^c^ comes this that the mother of my Lord sh^ld come unto
me? Our humiliation necessarily required for effecting our union with God
but we have more cause to marvel at the maruaillous mercies of the Lord: for
what are we, that the fairest among the Children of men should be d^lighted with
our love, and our Lord should come to visit the base estate of his Servants,
and communicate himself, his light and his life, and his grace unto us? Let no
man think that I have multiplied these places of scripture without a cause. The
beginning of the division between us and the Lord, flowed from the pride of our
nature; and unless we humble our selves, and be content in our mind to sit
lower then dust and ashes, by reason of our sin, it is not possible, we can be
united with the Lord. This is the council that in few words, Mich. 6.8
Michah gives unto us, He has showed thee O man what ^s good, and what ^he
Lord requires of thee; surely to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble
^hy self to walk with thy G^d. The Lord is indeed a most high God, yet he
is nearest unto them, and they go soonest up unto him, who are least in their
own eyes, and trem^le at his words.

And beside this inward humiliation ^rising of the sense of our own
unworthiness and weakness, Sect. 65. With this humili^tion we should have
also an hungring for the Lords s^luation* Luk* 1.53
let us come with a hunger and thirst of the Lord his righteousness and
salvation: For he will sati^fie the hungry, but the full he s^^deth away
empty: only they that have the spiritull appetite, hunger and thirst, are
meet to be communicants ^t this holy table. As that oil multiplied by El^sha,
ceased not so long as the widow had any vessel wher^in to receive it: so
shall never that oil of grace decay, but be multiplied and increased unto
all, that with open and enlarged hearts are ready to receive it. Thou
therefore, who art more ready to faint for spiritual hunger then was Jonathan,
come hither, put out ye hand offaith, For the Lord fills the hungry, and
strengthe^s them, who are ready ^o faint.
eat of this honey and make thee full; and thou that art sick (with the Spouse
in the Canticle) for the love of Ies^s, come either and the Lord shall stay
thee with the flagons of his wine. Art thou almost dead like that Aegiptian,
the servant of an Amalekite who^ David found in the fields, take and eat of
this bread, and thy spirit shall return again unto thee. But alas, where is
this spiritual appetite to be found amongst us? the deadness of our heart is
lamentable: we see not our wants: we see not his beauty: we smell not his
ointments: we taste little of his goodness, and therefore ^e make not* haste
to run after him. ^. sam. 3.33.
David mourned over the dead body of Ab^er, but alas (if we could) we have
much more cause to mourn over our dead souls. Oh that there were in us ye holy
desire which David protests to have been was in him: Psalm. 42
My soul fayn^eth for the salvation of God: A^ the heart brayeth for y^ rivers
of waters, and thirsty ground desires rain, so my soul pa^teth aft^r the
living God; blessed are they who hunger and thirste for his righteousness;
Math. 5.
for they shall be satisfied.

sect. 66 None meet banketters at this holy Table, but they who are hungry.
Exo. 34.35
These only are the guests and banketters that shall eat of the delicates
which here he has prepared, and whose soul shall be delighted with his
fatness. These shall go from this Table, as Moses came down from Mount Sinai,
and his countenance changed, they shall arise with Eliah, and walk on in the
strength of this bread all the whole days of their pilgrimage; they shall go on
in their way with S^mpson, The comfortable fruit arising to the^, who after
this prescribed preparation communicate* Luke 18.4 2, Kin. 7.
eating of the honey which they have found. They shall depart from this Table,
as the two Mary's did from the Sepulchree with great joy. These shall go home
to their own houses justified with the Publicane; rejoicing because they have
found a treasure, and has felt the sweetness of this Manna: they shall shall not
be able to conceal this great joy from Israel, but shall be forced to tell
every Nathana^l whom they meet: We have found the Messiah. John. 1
And in all time to come, their souls shall cleave to the Lord without
separation more straightly the^ the me^ of Judah and Jerusalem cleaued unto
David their King: 1. Cor. 7.35. 2. sam. 5.
they shall say to the Lord as Elizeus said to Eliah; 2, King, 2 2.
as the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee, and with
Peter whither O Lord, shall I go from thee, Ioh* 6.68.
seeing thou have the words of eternal life? The Lord work this spiritu all
disposition in us for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the Father and the holy
spirit, be all honor, praise and glory for ever.

Psalm. 36.7. How excellent is thy mercy O Lord? therefore the children of men
trust under the shadow of thy wings: they shall be satisfied with the fatness
of thine house, and thou shall give them drink out of the rivers of thy
pleasures.

Psalm. 6^.4 Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to come to
thee; he shall dwell in thy courts, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures
of thine house.

Let glory be given to the Lord, and his blessing be upon his people.


FINIS.

