A short treatise declaringe the detestable wickedness, of magical sciences,
as Necromancie. Coniurations of spirits, Curiouse Astrology and such like.
(:)

Made by Francis Coxe,

Esaia. ^. Babell is fallen, it is fallen, and all: images of her has he
broken unto y^ groi
Esaia. ^. Thy filthiness shall be discovered, and t(...) shame shall be seen.
Stand now amon thine enchaunters, and in the multitu(...) of thy sothsayers,
etc. Let now the Astr^logers, the star gasers, and Prognosticatours, stand
up, end save thee from these things, etc.
I. C.
FLe from the wrath that is to come
You filthye adders brood,
I cast that you perish in your sins
As guilty of your blood.
The wrath of God is kind lid
All such to consume quite,
That in the filthye soppes or dregs
Of Egypt do delight
Repent therefore I say to you
For mercy call betyme
And learn to hate the stinkinge mud
Uvhere wallow nune but swyne.
Here may you read the woeful end
Of such as wont to use
Those wicked arts that God abhorres
In time such then refuse.
Finis.
I. P.
YOu wicked rout of sorcerers
For shame, your lives amend
Lest god does pour such plages on you
As never shall have end
All such he does right sore abhor
As scripture telth us plain
Repent therefore, and learns to hate
These wicked arts, most vain.
Let his sweet rod example be
Of late, you saw did fall
Into such as professed the like
Whom God now home does call.
Bring forth new fruit, and sob your sins
Lest dubble, ire does light
On you that do refuse Gods grace
When have the same you might.
Finis.
To the good and gentle Reader.
ALthough, I lack such eloquence and learning, as is to be required in him,
which should compile any work to y^ praise, or dispraise of a thig, yet for y^
I have my self ben an offender in these most detestable sciences, against
whom I have compiled this work, as Astrology, Netroniancie, and such like:
I thought it my part, for. ij. causes principal, the same to do. Whereof the
one is, y^ I would it should openly be known, how wicked an offender I have been, both toward God, and the laws of my prince, y^ thereby I might give an
occasion too all men, too laud and praise God for his bountiful gifts of
grace, that when I deserved his eternal ire: yet he by his gentle and sweet
rod of correction, would call me again too y^ state of salvation, from which
I was fallen. And also, to bless this God of merci, which has appointed such a
merciful governor to rule and rain over us. Who as she is severe to punish
the obstinate and stubburne male factors, so uses she clementie too the
penitent trangresiors: whereof I of late sufficiently tasted, at what time I
stood before her graces most honorable counsayll to receive determinate
sentence for my wicked offenses. The second cause of this my labor is: that I
would deter and fear away, all such as yet do, or hereafter may by the
craftines of Satan be procured to the like. Wherefore gentle reader, I most
haretly beseech thee to take it in good part which thing, if thou shall do: I
have my desire, who wissheth thee the eternal peace of God.

Francis Coxe.

In honor sanctissime Trinitatis.
Amongst other the Godly, wholesome and profitable sayings of the divine
Philosopher Plato: I call too my remembrance this one, as most necessary for
all Christians to be had in memory, which is this. Non solum nobinati sumus,
sed ortus nostri partim patria sibi vendicat, partim parents, partim amici
(that is to say) we are not born only for our selves, like brute beasts, to
seek y^ satisfiinge of our own desire or lust: but of our birth (says he)
our contrye chale^geth a part, our parents likewise, yea, and our friends
also. Wherefore to enjoy any good, godly, or profitable things, or to reserve
any benefit or gift, by the means of other, or through our own travels and
diligent labor (if the same by any means may seem to sound to the glory of
God, the profit of our co^try, parents and friends) in withholdinge or keeping
back the same, we shall not only tra^sgresse y^ co^mau^dme^ts of almighty God,
which comau^deth us to do as we would be don unto: but also, if it shall be well
perceived and diligently marked of such as are wise and learned: we shall be
found manifest robbers and spoilers of y^ high may stie of God, which has
imparted his benefits so liberalli unto us for y^ setting forth of his glory
and finally show our selves unnatural, both to our co^try, parents and
fre^des, hewraieng our great ingratitude, not only toward God: but also
toward our co^tries. Amongst (therefore) y^ inestimable heaps of wickedness,
sin and damnation, foreseinge y^ proclinitie or redines of me^, how apt and
prone they are to euel, and also saying very many to err and go astray,
especially by one means, whereby they detrude the^ selves, even down to y^
boto^les lake of unspeakable offenses, and for so much as I my self have beit,
in y^ like disceiued, yea and had almost vtterli perished, had not y^ almighty
power of god by his o^nipote^tie and gifts of grace called me back through most
sweet and gentle chastiseme^t. And also seeing and well perceiving y^ craftines
of wicked Satan, who (as S. Peter testefieth) goes about like a rorig Lio^,
seking whom he may devour. To cause all tou^ges to land his eternal majesty,
which has so renouated or regenerated me from y^ state of endless death, into
the which I was almost slipped, to show my self myndful therefore of my love and
duty toward my co^try and friends, to whom next God and my prince I am
most chiefly bounden, and to aduoyde the filthy vice of ingratitude, then the
which nothing ca^ well be more odious: I thought it my part manifestly to
declare and open the wickedness of those arts and sciences, which has of late
time to y^ provocation of Gods wrath and almighty displeasure, ben had in
such estimation, yea, rather veneration, that without it y^ whole state of men
(except a few) would do in manner nothing, yea, it grew into such credit with
men, that not only they judged the course of natural things thereby to be
governed, but also that part which god has and does reserve to him self, and
his determination, as the mind of man, and such like. Nay they seassed not
here, but so blinded and bewytched the wits of men, that scant durst they
credit God him self, if it seemed that their blinded prophesies any time would
make contradiction. How well this appeared in the year of our Lord God, 1559.
at what time our most noble souerain began her Imperial government and reign
over us, all men may judge, and easelye perceive. For although it was well
known unto all me^, what love and godly zeal, her most royal majesty had and
did bear to the true prophets of God, his afflicted flock and word of the
cross, yet did the people so waver, the whole realm was so troubled and so
moved with the blind enigmatical and deuelish prophestes of that heaven gaser
Nostravamus, in such sort, that even those which in their hearts could have
wisshed the glory of God and his word most flourishing to be established: were
brought into such an extreme coldenes of faith, y^ they doubted God had
forgotten his promise, yea, they hong so choysly between the heavenly fountain
of hope, and the bottomless pytte of utter desperation: that in doubt it was
to which they would adhere or stick, so great was thinfectio^ of this
pestile^ciall poisoned lying prophesies. Of all poisons most difficulte to
avoid by mea nes of the sweet and pleasant myxture thereof, wherefore it may
be called dulce venenu^. Aswete and delicious poison: but as the proverb
says, sweet meats haths sower sauce, so is this sweetness tempered, with an
everlasting bitterness or gall:

For in these sciences Arologie, Geoma^cis, Necromancie and such like infinite,
contained under the general name of Magic but especially Necromancy, of which
here chiefly I purpose to speak, is one thing promised: but an other
performed, for why lest they seek riches: they find beggerye, for hope of good
report: they have euel fame and open shame, for health: diseases and grief,
for quiet minds: wandering wits. Of Christians: they becomme infideles,
^urninge the temple of y^ holy Ghost into ^^agoge of Satan. Therefore dear
co^trymen, flee from these most wicked and damnable sciences of divination,
manifestly prohibited, by the sacred Scriptures and eternal word of God,
let the love of him, which for thy sake sweat both water and bloudde, and
had his flesh rent upon a cross, cause thee to withdraw thy mind from the
snares of utter despair. But if that may not prevail with thee: let the
fear of revenge, at least wise abate thy courage therein, and learn this
lesson. Felix que^ faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Happy and fortunate are
they, whom other men's harms, do cause to be ware.

The God of Godds who suffers no good deed tobe unrewarded, no wicked offense
unpunished (which has said heaven and earth shall perish, but his word
shall endure) has not only manifestly in diverse and sundry places of the
scriptures forbide^ the use and exercise of such curious sciences: but also
has appointed sharp punishment to the users thereof, that is no less then
death.

This godly and wholesome law was in time past executed within this realm, by
the terror whereof, many were feared from these practices, But now whilst
this law for lack of execution has lain a sleep, and thoffendors nothing
punished: it was in such sort increased, that it was made a berye
handycrafte, so that many lived thereby, yea, and thought they did as honestly
get and gather their substance: as he, which daily swet for the same.

The people were grown unto such a folly, that scant would they ride or go
any journey: onelesse they co^sultide, either with these blind prophets, or
at the least with their prophecies, which yearly to no little hurt, both in
the faith of Christ, and wealth of the realm, were without all shame deuulgid.

What hurt it did in the faith before I have showed, what damage it procurid to
y^ commun wealth, may easly be judged, for what with their comminacions of
wars, and dearth, they so tickled the minds of insatiable niggards, that
without al need, eue^ a midst the plentye: we lived yet in pen^urie. Well, to
my purpose, I promised to open the wicked and blasphemous secrets of these
deuelish sciences. And although I bend my self wholly to write against y^
superstitious and hellishe practices of Necromancie, I do not exempte the
curious part of Astrology, from the number of them: whose utter deuastation
and co^fou^ding before God, I most earnestly desire and wish, for this I am
able to justify, and have the like in my self experimented, that of a truth
it is Malorum esca, the very bayte or train to fer greater mischeues. Never
was there any that could yet hold him self content with the simple knowledge
of Astrology: but would wade further in those sciences of prediction, having
this as ^ ground work to ser higher matters. I need not here to speak any
more of it, for who list to read the commendable work of fulce, uttered too
the same intent, shall find of what force it is. But this I know that what
ever is contained within their books, which they esteem, as principal rules
and pillars of their knowledge to be nothing else but meare fables, and toys,
and that in them there is no truth at all. Experience therein have I had diverse
and sundry kinds, not by the judgment of one or.ij. but a number, yea, even
of the chefest and most expert, amongst whom I shall recyte the judgment
of one, and form of his calculation. The question was moved for stolen gods,
the hour was by an instrument exactly taken, the Astrologer draws the form
of y^.xij. houses, and so calculateth for the time, which had, he domineth, now
in his forsayde calculation moved with talk, and forgetting him self (as he
afterward confessed) where he should have subtracted: he added, and by that
means placed y^ sign that should have been ascendinge: in the.vii. house, and
so contrarely, that sign which should have been in the.vij. house placed he
in the first, whereby all his work was turned vpsidedoun, and as we properly
term it, the carte set before the horse, yet he not finding this his great
error, gave judgment, that it should be had again, so fell it out, that it
was recovered. Whervppon may easly be gathered, that if he had calculated
right, according to the rules of art, he should have quite missed the
cusshion.

O how certain a science is this trow ye, and of how good a ground? Yet will
they presume to enter in judgments of the secret motions of men, which God
has reserved to his own proper knowledge. I would such did remember this
disticon of wise Cato.

Mitto arcana dei celu^qque inquirere quid fit?

Cu^ sis mortalis que sunt mortalia cures. He teaches them wherein to be
accupied, and not to meddle with y^ mysteries of God. Yea, this he says more
unto them, eue^ in the same book following thus.

Quid deus intendat, noli perquirere sort

Quid statuat de te, sine te deliberet ipse; These are the presumptious imps of
Satan, which ca^ not yet be co^te^t here to seek out according to y^ hardness
of their hearts, (as Paul to the Romans the.ij. Chapter testifies) sease not
to heap unto them selves; wrath, against the day of wrath. For y^ stars and
skies are not sufficient for their future prediction: but they must adioyne
thereunto most detestable parts or societye with spirits. Which thing, when
they go about, and would have any thing brought to effect, they do it by one
of these.ij. means: either besides the horrible and grievous blasphemies, they
commit in their co^iuratio^s, they must fall to some co^positio^ with y^ deuell,
that is too promise him for his service, he will abstayn from wynes, or some
certain meats, or drinks. As I my self knew a Priest, not far from a town,
called Bridgewater, whcih as it is well known in the contrye, was a great
magicia^, in all his life time, after he once began these practices, he never
would eat bread, but instead thereof did eat always chese, which thing as he
confessed diverse times, he did because it was so concluded between him and the
spirit, which served hi^, for at what time he did eat bread: he should no
longer live. Yea, he would not blusshe to say y^ after a few years he should
dye, and that the deuel for his payns y^ he took with him, should have in
reco^pe^ce his soul. O most miserable man and wretched creatur that would in
hope of any earthly treasure: forsake his Lord, and God, which had so tenderly
bought him. These are they, of whom Paul speaks in his.vi. and.x. chapters to
the Hebrews, these are they y^ crucify Christ's again unto them selves, and
therefore it is impossible, they should be reuewed again by repentance.

The second way, which is as euel as the first, or rather worse: is thus.
For when the spirit is once come before the circle, he forth with demands
the exsorciste a sacrifice, which most commenlye is a piece of wax
consecrated, or hallowed after their own order (For they have certain books,
called books of consecration) or else it is a chicke^, a lapwing, or some
living creatur, which when he has received: then does he fulfill the mind
of the exsorcist, for oneles he has it, he will neither do, neither speak
any thing. Of this testefieth bacon in his book of Necromancie, where he
tells also this story. After so long time traueled in these sciences, at
last joined him self with a Turk, which was most excelle^tly seen therein,
and long conferring together: they went about too call a certain she deuell,
named Egippia, which spirit would by no means make them answer to any their
demands, whereupon Bacon, which knew that nothing could be done without
sacrifice: cruseth the Turk to be baptized, and after the baptism, they both
entered the circle and called the spirit, which when she came: for all their
conuirations she would not

(...) God of his justice ca^ neither leave y^ workmaister, neither yet him
that seeks to any such for help, unpunished. For as well deserves he
execution that seeks to them: as they them selves.

Example of this: we have in the first book of Samuel. called communly the
first book of the Kings, in the.xxviij. Chapter. For after y^ Saul went once
to wytches and sorcerers to learn his state: God gave him up quite into utter
ruin. If then he were so precise with his own peculier people, that the spared
not their king and anointed: what will he do unto us? How much more think
ye will he execute his righteous judgments on us, that are but the branches
of the wild Olyue tree, grafted in by his mercy and grace?

I can not se how they may excuse them selves of crime by Gods word, that
either seek too them or procure them too work, for both, by the scripture
deserve like pain, and punishment. Yea, the Deuell him self is of that
condition, that he will not suffer them long to reyg^^ that use him as an
instrument for their necessities. I remember a very notable history written in
Frosarte; but the time is so long since I read it, I well remember not the
place, but who so lists to look in y^ tables of his book: may easly find
it, where he writes of Ortho^ a spirit. Theffect is this, a priest and a
certain gentleman, falling at variau^ce, and the gentleman seming still too
persevere in his purpose: the priest to abate his courage, and to make him
yield: sends unto him the foresaid spirit Orthon, to molest and trouble
him, which coming about the quiet time of the night, when all things are
most styllest: he clappeth the wyndowes and doors, as though he would have
toren them to pieces. The gentleman, regards it not, the next night he does
likewise, but a great deal more fearsly, in so much that it seemed he would
have entered the gentleman's bed chaumbre, wherwithall his spirits moved:
soddenly asked who was there. The spirit answers, and tells his name, and
shows him from whom he was sent, and to what end as is aforesaid. Well
says the gentle man, will thou be conte^tid to serve me, and leave thy
master the priest? He answers yea, and so they concluded. The office of
this spirit was to bring him news out of all places of the world what was
done, within the space of.xxiiij. hours, which thing he did.

After a while, this gentleman being very desirouse to se his new man (for as
yet though he heard him, he never saw him) requested him earnestly that he
might see him, which thing at the last he granted (and says) when ye
arise in the morninge, the first strange thing you se, after you be up: the
same is I, so he departed. In the morninge the gentleman arisinge and casting
on his night goune, he might se three russhes stand vprighte, and move
inform, as though they daunced the hay, but this pleased him not, wherefore at
night when he came to him again, he chalengeth the spirit with the breach of
his promise, which he could in no wise a bide, for though he be never so
untrue, and deceitful: yet may ye not charge him therewith. And therefore
asks his master what strange thing he saw? he au^swered nothing but.ij.
or.iij. russhes driven up and down with a wind.

The same quod Orthen was I. Nay says his master, I would se the more
near thy shappe, which after earnest request he granted, and says, the
first living thing that ye se out of your gallery in the morninge in your
court: the same am I.

The morninge coming he goes unto his gallery, which looks into his
court, and behold, there he saw the mo^steroust sow and lean, that could
be, whereupon moved with the sight, caused dogs to be set at her, and so he
bayted her, but immediately he falls sick, and so from time to time, pyneth
away.

A worthy servant too serve a noble man, full well he rewarded his master in
the end. Neither was it any otherwais but as they are wont all to do.

For this is no new or rare thing amongst those that use society with
Deuelles, for all have the like end, though not after one form, yet to one
effect. Bakons end was much after the like sort, for having a greadye
desire unto meat: he could cause nothing to enter the stomach, wherefore
thus miserablye he sterued to death.

Cornelius Agrippa, of whom all the world speaks, whose works remain
unto this day, of whose end are diverse opinions, some rumors have been, that
wha^ he rode abroad, he had always a black dog, waytinge upon him, which
dog one day in iourneinge: carried him away body and soul, some say that the
sword separate his headde from the body, so that his end is uncertain and
most like it is that he endid after some strange sort, that the truth
thereof is no more manifest.

Fabiane in his Cronicles, the seventh part. and where he writes of Carolus
the eyghte, speaks of a certain maid, expert in these sciences, called La
pucelle de dieu, that is too say: the maid of God, who by her knowledge
caused the Frenchmen marueylouslye too prevail in their marciall affairs, as
more copiously does in the alleged place appear.

But almightye God, which for^ ^^^son suffers such sorcerye and devilish
ways too prospere and raygne, too the correction of sinners: lastely too show
his power, and that no good Christen men should fall intoo any error: he
shows the clearnes of such mystical things, and so he did in this, for she
by a knight Burgonion was taken, and after sent to Roane in Normandye, too the
duke of Somerset, and there burnt, for her de merits.

Saint Dunstane (of whom Bale in his book entitled the acts of the English
votaries writes sufficiently, being one of this sort and faculty, after
diverse and sundry prodigeous signs in the element seen: departed this life, a
swarm of deuels co^uaying away his corpse.

Ihon Grecian, that coniuringe Pope, after he had done many deuelish things,
as testifies Martinus Carsulanus and Platina in vitis Pontificum: was of the
deuell (as he was dooinge his feats in a forest) strangled to death.

What may we say of Stansholde of late time, which was expert in these
sciences, which for robbinge of a college, in the university of Oxforde, was
hanged at the towns end for his demerites. Many have ended their lives after
these and such like sorts, of whom if I should write: it would conteyne an
infinite volume, and that is most horrible, where thou see one repent: a
number are so soddenly taken, that they have no time of repentance.

Wherefore I say to such of that sort, repent and amend your lives, you
Adders broad, and learn by him that has felt the smarte, to fle from greater
mischeues too come, for even now is the axe put unto the rote of the tree,
therefore defer no time. And now(...) th^^e that hereafter shall be moved by
the provocation of the deuell, either to practice the like, or to seek for
counsayll or advice of them that do use and practice these blasphemous
sciences: know ye, that even as the good corn is with the fan purged from the
chafe: so all those be separated from the elect and chosen of God, as in the
former part of my treatice, I showed by thexample of king Saul.

God him self has promised in his most holy and sacred scriptures no less to
do, and also for the punishment of such, has by his own decre, in the.xx.
of Leuiticus appointed sharp correction, saying. And if a man or woman have a
spirit of divination or sothsaying in them: they shall dye the death, they
shall stone them to death, their bloudde shall be upon them.

A most worthy punishemente for such rebellious traitors. For if we judge
him worthy of death that euel reports of an earthely prince: what shall we
say by him that blasphemeth the king of all kings, his Lord and only
savior? They can not say that ignorance is y cause of their euel disposed
life, for God has manifestly forbidden the use thereof, not in one, or two
places: but in sondrye.

Thus he says Deuteronomie the.xviii. when thou shall come into the land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee: thou shalt not learn to do after the
abominations of those nations, let none be found among you that makes his
son or his daughter to go through the fire, or that uses wytheraft, or a
regarder of times, or marker of the fleinge of fowls, or a sorcerer, or a
charmer, or y^ counsayleth with spirits, or a soothsayer, or that asks
counsayll at the dead. For all that do such things, are abominatio^ unto the
Lord. etc.

Lo, here he not only forbids the use: but commands that those, which
will be his people, and of his flock: shall not seek help at the sorcerers
hands. Read the. xxx of the prophet Isaiah, and there shall ye find, how he
reproves the children of Israel for sekinge too the Egiptians for help, who
were counted expert in deuelishe arts. Jeremiah in his.x. Chapter says:
Hear the word of the Lord that he speaks unto you: O house of Israel.

Thus says the Lord, learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not a fearde
for the signs of heaven, thought the Heathen be afraid of such, for the
customs of the people are vanity. O how direct are the laws of the Lord?
how plain are his paths? how sweet are they to them that fulfille them, for
it preserves them from endless death and pain.

If we do embrace and follow them, we shall not only be sure here in this
world to live without dredde or fear, safe from our enemies, both boddely,
and ghostely: but after this life, we shall be crouned with the croune of
everlasting joy, and felicity.

Where as the contrary, and such as will take no admonission, but live
inordinately, shall be condemned to everlasting terror, whose torments, no
tongue is able to express.

This God of mercy has offered his grace, wherefore refuse it not, but with
all humble hearts embrace it, beseching him so to strengthen you with his holy
spirit, that this life endid, we may hear this confortable saying of our
Savior: Come ye blessed children of my Father, possess ye the kyngedome,
prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. Too the which Father,
Son, and holy Spirit, be eternal lauds, praises, empire, and glory,
worlds without end.

AMEN.
Finis.

