INSTITVTIONES PIAE or Directions to Pray also A short exposition of The Lords
Prayer The Creed The 10 Com^andements Seven Penitential Psalms and Seven
Psalms of thanksgiving. by HI.

O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness

And declare ye wonders which he does for ye children of men

Ps: 107:8. LONDON Printed for Henry Seile 1630

To the Christian Reader.
COurteous and Christian Reader, accept I pray thee, these few observations and
collections, of Meditations and Devotions; which at the first, I intended for
my own private use: but since, considering with my self, that Bonum quo
communius eo melius, Every good thing is the better for being communicated. I
thought to publish it for the public use of them, who shall afford
themselves so much time, as to perform those Duties, which are contained in
it. The Heathen man could say, A Jove principium: to the shame of many (I will
not say) of those, who profess themselves, and would be called Christians: who
are so far from beginning all their actions with Gods service, as that it is
a rare thing, to see them attend it at all.

It is no marvel then, if God withold his hand of goodness from our Land,
or if (according to the Prophet) He hide his face from us. Psalm. 88 14.
when we are so remiss, so dull, either in serving him with the Duty of Praise
and Thanksgiving for his Benefits past, or with the Service of Prayer, for his
Providence and Goodness to come.

We can talk of Comets and apparitions in the air, and be stricken with
wonder: we can speak of unseasonable and tempestuous times, and bethink our
selves of what diseases, famine, and the like judgments, may ensue thereupon,
with grief: we can discourse of wars, rumors of wars, and mighty
preparations abroad, with fear: and yet we are so stupid, and senseless,
that we cannot see or discern, the true cause of all these occasions of
wonder, grief, and fear, namely our sins: at least if we do, yet we set
not our selves, to take away the cause, by that wholesome remedy, which God
himself has prescribed to remove it, if we would but apply and use it. We
think it enough, if we can talk of the medicine (and it is somewhat if we
do that) and have the speculation how to rid our selves of the disease: but
for the practice of it, it fares with us, as with those, who have an infirmity
growing upon them, and know the remedy; but either for want of leisure, or for
the queasinesse of the stomach, or the bitter or unpleasing taste of the
medicine, they forbear the taking of it, till the disease grow incurable.

We are content to hear, what the Phisician of our souls prescribes us, but
we neglect the Diet, which he enioyneth us. All our Religion depends on the
Ear: and (so it had pleased God to have given us but an Ear to hear) he
might have spared the tongue and lips to praise him, and all the other parts
to worship, and reverence him: we could have been well enough contented, with
that member alone.

But (beloved) let us not deceive our selves: for he that has made the Ear
to hear, what good he has done unto us, has made the tongue also, to
confess, his due praises, for that which he has so done. And if we neglect
to give him due thanks for his Mercy; it will come to pass, and that (to be
feared) very speedily, that we shall be forced, in bitterness of soul, to
confess his Justice, when we shall find, that he justly turns his
Blessings into Curses and plagues, and be compelled to acknowledge and say,
Just art thou O Lord, and righteous, and just are thy Judgments.

And therefore in time, let every one of us recollect himself, and in his
private closset or chamber with himself, and in the Church with the
Congregation humbly confess his sins to God, desire pardon for them, praise
him for his blessings, pray him to continue them, and deprecate his just anger
from us: and then no doubt, but he will be graciously pleased, to be merciful
to us, and hear us, and auert those Judgments from us, which we most justly
have deserved. Which let us all, again and again, beseech him to do, for the
merits and intercession of his Blessed Son, and our alone Savior, Jesus
Christ.

Institutiones piae: OR DIRECTIONS to Pray, etc.
A general exhortation to Prayer.
FOr as much, as the best of Gods Children, are subject to many infirmities:
and even the just man, falls seven times a day; Pro. 24.16.
and that man's life (by reason of sin) is exposed to many dangers, troubles,
and afflictions: Therefore it stands us much upon, and concerns us nearly,
to seek out some remedy, as well to strengthen out selves, against the
assaults of our spiritual enemies, that (as near as may be) we fall not: as
to raise us again, when we are cast down and dejected, either by the sight of
our sins, or by the crosses and afflictions of this life. And in this
distress, what course shall we think upon to relieve us, or what means shall
we find out to aid and succor us? Certainly no other, then that, which God
himself, of his goodness, has prescribed, and commended to us, In regard of
Gods Precept.
yea, and has commanded us to have recourse unto, whenever we shall be thus
afflicted, namely Prayer to him. Call upon me (says he) in the day of trouble.
Psalm. 50.15.
Come unto me (says Christ) all ye that labor and are heavy laden. Mat. 11.28.
Seek ye the Lord (says he by the Prophet) and call upon him. Esa. 55.6.
And is any afflicted? Ia 5.13.
(by the Apostle) Let him pray. And the better to stir us up to this duty, God
has added to this Precept of his, a promise also: His promise.
that we shall not loose our labors, or pray to him in vain. For no sooner
shall we ask, but he will give, Mat. 7.7. Io. 16.23. Psalm. 91.15.
no sooner call, but he will answer and deliver: Nay more, for if God perceive
our inclination to pray unto him, he will prevent us: and before we call, he
will answer, Esa. 65.24.
and while we are speaking, he will hear. Christ's example.
And as we have Gods precept and promise, to provoke us to Pray unto him, so
also have we the Example, (not only of all the Saints of God, but) of Christ
Jesus himself, Mat. 14.23. 26.39. Io. 11.47. Mar. 1.35.
who while he was co^uersant in the flesh upon Earth, (though he were wholly
without spot or blemish, wholly innocent, and immaculate, yet) often, and
earnestly prayed.

The Necessity.
Among all the Evangelical Precepts or Counsels, there is not any one Duty,
upon which our Savior more earnestly beats, or to which, he, with more
feruency inciteth his Apostles and Disciples, then to this, of Prayer. The
necessity whereof, he enforces (amongst other places of Scripture) in the
parable of the unjust Judge, Luc. 18.
and the poor importunate widow: intimating thereby unto us, that of necessity
(if we hope to receive any good, or avoid any evil) we must keep our
selves, to this holy Duty, of earnest Prayer. The Dignity.
And if there were no necessity imposed on us to pray, yet the Dignity and
Honor we receive by prayer, is sufficient to incite us to it. For Prayer, (as
a father well says) is a familiar conference with God. Ep^.
By it, we talk with him (as it were) face to face. By other of his Graces,
(as in the Word and Sacraments) he vouchsafes to speak to us, by this, we
have access, and speak to him, for what we stand in need of. And what
greater Dignity, what greater privilege, can be affoorded, to poor sinful
creatures ( Dust and Ashes as we are) then familiarly to talk with so great
and powerful a God; and to have daily, so free, and easy admittance to his
presence, to manifest our necessities to him, and to crave his supply and
succor. Then, The Benefit.
if we consider the profit, which arises by the due performance of this Duty,
we shall be the easilier drawn to perform it: for if nothing else quicken us,
yet matter of Benefit does usually work with us. And assuredly, the benefit
which arises by it, is, and ever has been, great. For by prayer, we do not
only obtain of God, all good things pertaining to this life, as the
necessaries thereof; and to the life to come, as the gifts and graces of his
Holy Spirit: but also we avoid, prevent, and remove by it, all the dangers and
evils of both lives; as the losses and dangers incident to this life, and the
punishment due to our sins hereafter.

If you please, you may take a short view of the wonderful effects which have
been wrought, and the benefits, which have been obtained; and the punishments,
which have been auerted, in former times, when recourse was had to God, by
Prayer.

By it The Jews overcame The Amalekites. Exo. 17.
Samuel overcame The Philistims. 1. Sam. 7.
Judith overcame Holofernes. Iudeth 13.
The Reubenites overcame The Agarens. 1. Chr. 5.20.
Asa overcame The Ethiopians. 2. Chro. 14.
Iosaphat overcame The Ammonites. 2. Chro. 20.
Ezechias overcame Se^nacherib. 2. King. 19.15.
Manasses was restored to his kingdom. 2. Chr. 33.15.



By it Hanna became fruitful. 1. Sam. 1.9.
Elias obtained fire from Heaven, 1. King. 18.
as also rain and fair weather. James 5.



By it The rebellious Jews escaped Punishment. Exodus 32. Number. 21.7.
The Ninevites escaped Destruction. Ion. 3.
Ezechias escaped Death. 2. Kings 20.
The 3 Children escaped The fiery Furnace. Dan. 3.
Daniel escaped The Lions. Daniel 6.
Jonas escaped The Whale. Ion. 2.
The Disciples escaped Drowning. Mat. 8.25.
Peter escaped Bonds. Acts 12.
Paul and Silas escaped Imprisonment. Acts 16.
David stayed the Pestilence. 2. Sam. 24.
The Lepers were cleansed. Luc. 12.
The Centurions servant was healed. Mat. 8.
The blind received sight. Mat. 9.20. Luc. 18.
The womans daughter. The man's son.
were deliuerd from the devil. Mat. 15.17.



By it The sick were made whole. Act. 28.
The widow of Sarepthas son 1. King. 18.
The Shunamites son 2. King. 14.
The Rulers daughter Mat. 9.
Dorcas. Act. 7.

were revived. The Publican obtained Remission of sins. Luc. 18.
The Theife obtained Paradise. Luc. 23.
St. Stephen obtained Heaven. Act. 7.



Directions how to pray.
Now seeing, that for these respects Pray we must, in the next place we are to
consider, How prayer is to be made, that it turn not to sin.

1. To God only.
First, prayer must be made to God, and to none other. 1. Because God has so
commanded. Deuteronomy. 6.13.
For prayer is a part of his Service and Worship: And his Service and Glory he
will impart to none else. Mat. 4.10.
Him only shall thou serve. And Io. 19.23, Io. 4.21.
whatsoever you shall ask of my Father, not of Angels, Saints or the like. 2
In regard of his Glory and Majesty, Psalm. 24.8. 96,6. 99,2, 104.1.
wherein he excels all others, and ought therefore above all, to be prayed
unto. 3 In regard of his Singular Knowledge; Lue. 11.13.
for he knows our necessities, better then we our selves. 4 In regard of his
Power and Ability to help us. Esa. 40.10.12. Psalm 66.2. Psalm. 17.6, 18,6. 103.
Esa. 46.4.
5 In regard of his willingness and readiness to relieve us. 6 In respect of
the practice of all the Saints, and of Christ himself. Of 1. Sam. 1 15.
Hanna. Psalm. 25,1. 73,25 5.1, 77,1.
David. Psalm. 22.4.
of the Saints. Mat. 14.23
of Christ.

7 In regard of the absurdity in praying to those, which cannot help
themselves, much less us. For to which of the Saints or Angels can be properly
said, Our Father which art in Heaven, or hallowed be thy Name etc. But to God
alone, Esa. 43.11, 45.5.
is this service to be done; for he only saves us, and besides him is no
Savior.


2. In Faith.
Secondly, our prayers ought to be made in Faith: for whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin: and whosoever desires to have good success in his prayers,
ought to believe, and not to pray waueringly. Our Savior said to the
petitioner for his deaf and dumb son, If thou can believe, al things are
possible to him that believes. Mat. 9.23.
And to his Disciples. 21.22.
All things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer believing, ye shall receive:
which lesson also Saint James teaches in his first Chapter. Ia. 1.5.6.
If any man lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, etc. But let him ask in faith.

3. In Hope.
Thirdly, as faith is the foundation, and first virtue required in prayer. So
Hope, certain and assured, is to be fixed and settled in us ( when we Pray)
that God will perform the promises which he has made, Psalm. 22.4.121.
and that he will hear and grant those things, which we shall desire,
according to his Will.

4. In Charity.
And that our prayers may the better ascend, they are to put on the wings of
Charity, which is one of the fruits of the holy Spirit: Gal. 5.21.
For without this quality, our prayers will prove cold, heavy, and lumpish; and
will return empty unto us. This Charity is two fold. First, toward God.
Secondly, toward our Neighbor. 1. Toward God, in keeping his commandments:
for our Savior says, Io. 14.21,23.
He that keeps my commandments, is he that loves me: and the Apostle
says, 1. Ioh. 3.22.
We receive of him, because we keep his commandments: that is, we love him
so, that we are loath to offend him. 2. Toward our Neighbor: which Charity,
is also manifested two ways. 1. In forgiving all injuries received from him,
or by his means after our Saviors rule. Mat. 11.25.
When you stand praying, forgive, if you have ought against any: that your
Father also, which is in Heaven, may forgive you your trespasses. And again,
Mat. 6.14.15.
if you forgive men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive
you: But if you forgive not men their trespasses: neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses. 2 Secondly, in praying for his wants, and supplying
them to our powers, according to Saint James direction. Ia. 5.16. 1. Tim. 2.1.
Pray for one another. And to Saint Paul, I exhort, that first Prayers etc. be
made for all men. And to encourage us to relieve them, our Savior pronounces
a blessing to all that are charitable in that kind. Blessed are the merciful,
Mat. 5.7.
for they shall obtain mercy.



So that by this, we may plainly see, that if we be uncharitable; our prayers
will be barren, and unfruitful.

5. Humility.
Fifthly, with these, Humility must go along: for by it, we acknowledge with
the Publican, Luc. 18.
(whom our Savior commended to us for a pattern) our own unworthiness to
deserve any favor; which Humility (as appears by that story or parable) made
his prayer more acceptable to God, then the vaunting and boasting of the proud
Pharise. And David says, Psalm. 51.17.
A broken and contrite heart, O God thou will not despise. And the Son of
Sirach. The prayer of the Humble pierces the Clouds. Ecclus. 35.17.
And the Virgin Mary, he has exalted the humble and meek. Luc. 1.52.


And this Humility, is likewise two fold. First of the Spirit. Secondly, of the
Body. 1. For by the Humility of the Spirit, we acknowledge the impurity of our
souls, and confess our selves wicked, miserable and wretched in our own
sight, and that our strength is not worth the boasting of: which kind or
manner of praying, has ever wrought effectually with God: as by the Prophet
Esaias he confesses. To this man I look, Esa. 66.2.
even to him, that is poor and of a contrite Spirit. And the Psalmist
testifies how propense, and propitious God is to such kind of petitioners.
The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart, Psalm. 34.17.
and will save such as be of an humble Spirit: and the Blessed Virgin
acknowledges that she found the fruits of her Humility. Luc. 1.48.
He has regarded the lowliness of his Handmayden. 2 Secondly, we must show
our Humility, by a reverend posture of the Body too. For it was ever the
ancient and usual custom in prayers and supplications, to use the most humble
and decent gesture of body, that might be, thereby to testify the Sympathy of
the Body with the Soul. 1. King. 8.22.
Solomon, at the dedication of the Temple, stood before the Lord, and spread
forth his hands to Heaven. Luc. 18.13.
The Publican stood and smote his breast. Exo. 17.11.
Moses held up his hands to Heaven. Dan. 6.10.
Daniel. Act. 7.60.
Stephen. Act. 9.40.
Peter. g Paul kneeled. Psalm. 95.6.
David kneeled and lifted up his eyes. Matthew. 26.39.
Lastly our Savior Christ, (every one of whose actions ought to be a rule to
us) sometimes fell on his face, sometimes Lue. 22.41.
kneeled, and sometimes 10.11.41.
lifted up his eyes when he Prayed. And to this reverend gesture of the Body,
must be added the vnconering of the head. 1. Cor. 11.4.
Our heads must be bare, and not pray so familiarly, as if we were speaking to
our equals: for the higher and more eminent the person is, whom we petition;
the more reverend, and submisse, ought our behavior to be to him.


6. In Perseverance.
In the next place: we must resolve with our selves, not to be impatient of
delays, (as we call it) if God seem not to hear us presently. But we must
Pray with perseverance. Our Savior himself (immediately after he had
prescribed unto his Disciples that absolute form of prayer) taught them also
(and us in them) the effects of this perseverance, by the Example of the friend
that came in the night to borrow loanes. Luc. 11.8.
Which effects also, Psalm. 40.1.
David and the woman of Canan felt. Matthew. 15.28.
Wherefore not without good reason, did Saint Paul so often consaile this
assiduity, Colloss. 4.2.
and instancie in prayer. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.


If therefore our prayers be not heard (as we conceive) at the first, second,
or third time, shall we then give over? Surely no, we must not leave so. For
no doubt, but he which said, Luc. 11.9.
Ask and ye shall have, will also give what he has promised; when he
thinks expedient, that we should receive it. O tarry thou the Lords leisure,
says David. And let not us prescribe to God, Psalm. 27.14.
either time, place, or manner; but let us in all modesty, willingly and
patiently attend his good pleasure. For he many times de^yeth us, and puts
us off, either to prove our faith, perseverance, and patience, and so to
reward us the more plentifully; or else, least we should loath, or little
esteem his Blessings, by obtaining them too easily.

Feruency and ottention.
Two other qualities there are which seem to depend upon this virtue of
perseverance, namely feruency of the Spirit, for what we crave: and Attention
and regard, to what we crave. For it is not a chill and cold Perseverance, or
expectation, that will serve our turns, to prevail with God, but a fervent
Spirit to pursue, the same. For God hears not, at least regards not, cold,
faint, and drowzie prayers, nor loud crying, long babbling, or many tautologies
or repetitions; (not intending or minding what we pray for) which proceed
only from the lips: but it is the affection, and zealous desires of the
devout, mixed with sighs, tears, To. 8.26.
and groans, not to be uttered, which move, and prevail with him. For God
(being a Spirit) looks to be worshipped in Spirit. To which purpose it is,
that our Savior Christ advises us, when we pray, to enter into our Clossets,
and to s^ut the door: intimating to us thereby, Mat. 6.6.
that (we being alone, and private) should cast away all public, wandering, and
worldly thoughts, which trouble our devotions; and hinder us from lifting up
our hearts unto God: and wholly, fervently, and considerately, bend our
thoughts and desires unto him. And these retired Soliloquies, and private
meditations and conferences, between God and our souls, and between our
selves and our souls, have ever been much approved by the Ancients. Our
prayer (says an ancient Father) ought to be in such manner, Ephr. Sir. 1. Sam.
1.
as Hannas was. She wept and praid, and her lips only were perceived to
move. Let every one hear this, and imitate it; especially they, who with
extreme babbling, without all modesty, yet with lowdnesse of voice, make their
prayers. Let us therefore pray with sighs and groans: But withal taking heed
(as much as we can, with Gods assistance and our own endeauours) that in the
time of our prayers, no extrauagant thought steal upon us, least happily we
have one thing in our hearts, and another in our tongues. And to this purpose
also speaks Saint Basile. Basil Sermon. in Martyr. Iulittam.
All our prayers ought to be made, not in sillables, but in the hearty
affection of the Soul. For how do, or can we think, that God will give us
that, for which we pray, when by our behavior and gesture, our faint and
weak solicitation, we seem to him, that either we do not want, what we pray
for, or, that he will upon every slight and cold motion, be persuaded to give
us, what we desire? Or how can we expect, to be heard of God, when we our
selves (not being serious in our devotions, but diuerted with other
fantasies:) hear not, nor know what we do petition for? The wise man
therefore, gives us good, and wholesome counsel in this matter; Before thou
prayest, Ecclus. 18.23.
prepare thy self, and be not as one that tempts the Lord.

Of the Time and Place for Prayer.
1. The Time.
TAke a little taste of the Time when, and the Place where, our prayers are to
be offered up to God.

For the Time in general, the places before named, do, and may direct us. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
Pray without ceasing. Colloss. 4.3.
Continue in Prayer. And Ephesians. 6.18. Luc. 11.18.
Pray always. More particularly, Number. 28.3.
Twice a day (that is, Morning and Evening) The sacrifices were to be made.
David prayed thrice. Psalm. 55.18.
In the Evening, Morning, and at noone day: And 119.164.
Seven times in a day. Dan. 6.10.
Daniel prayed thrice. In the morning before day Mar. 1.35.
Christ prayed. David prayed Psalm. 63.1.
early. Act. 2.15.
The Apostles at the third hour of the day. 10.9.
At the Sixth hour. 3.1.
The ninth hour. And David at Psalm. 119.62.
midnight.

2. The Place
For the Place. In all places says Exo. 20.24.
God. Every where says 1. Tim. 2.8.
Saint Paul. Christ prayed in Mat. 1.35.35.
the desert. On a Matthew. 14.23.
mountain. Matthew. 26.36.
In the Garden. Genesis 24.63.
Isaac in the field. Act. 10.9.
Peter prayed on the house top or tarris. Psalm. 111.1.
In the congregation says David. To the Temple went Act. 3.1.
Saint Peter Saint John, and Saint 22.17.
Paul. And Christ bids us, when we would be private in prayer, and not be
molested, to go to our Matthew. 6.6.
Clossets. So that it appears, that there is no Time, nor Place unseasonable,
to offer up our Prayers unto God, as occasion shall be offered, though the chief
place for public prayer, is the Temple, and for Private our Clossets.

How to pray aright.
To pray aright
But it may come to pass, (though we be prepared and fitted with all the former
circumstances) that we may pray, and not be heard) if (in the last place) we
do not carefully consider to pray for those things, which are fit and
requisite for God to give, and for us to receive. For as Saint James says,
many times we ask and receive not, Ia. 4.3.
because we ask amiss. For our better instruction therefore, we are to
consider, that there be two sorts of blessings, to be required of God. First
Spiritual. Secondly Temporal.

Spiritual Blessings.
1. The first part, pertain to Gods own honor, and the good of our own
souls: as Faith, Hope, Charity, Thankful hearts, Remission of sins, and
other of the same kind, which are merely, Spiritual, and Heavenly. And these
Blessings we may (without doubt) safely and confidently beg at Gods hands, and
he will not deny them.

Temporal.
2 The Second, are Temporal and Indifferent; as Riches, Honor, Health, Peace,
Seasonable times, Children, and the like. And these are not to be prayed for,
but (according to Christ's pattern of prayer) with thy Will be done, Matthew.
6.10.
or according to Christ's practice) with a not as I will, 26.39.
but as thou will: or with the Leaper in the Gospel, Mat. 8.2.
Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean.

Bern. Sermon. 5. in quadrag.
Saint Bernard disposes these into three heads. Two, for blessings of this
life, for the Body, and Soul, and the third, for the life to come: and in
praying for these, he gives three Cautions, with his Reasons. First, that our
prayer for Temporal blessings, which the Body wants, be restrained to
things needful: because many times we pray for things superfluous, to satisfy
our pleasures. Secondly, that our petition for the Graces of the soul, be
free from impuritie, because we oftentimes desire to have them for Ostentation.
Thirdly, that our request for the blessing of eternal Life, be in all
Humility: because many require it at Gods hands, as presuming upon their own
merits.

Our Prayers being thus qualified, being preferred only to God, in Faith, Hope,
Charity with God and our Neighbor, Humilitiy of body and soul, perseverance,
feruency of Spirit, our souls and bodies attending to what we pray for, and in
due time and place, praying aright, both for temporal and Spiritual
blessings, we shall (no doubt) by the mercy of God, through the mediation,
intercession, and merits of Jesus Christ, obtain (in his good time) all things
which shall be needful, and expedient for us.

Prayer divided into Parts.
Devotions and Prayers are either Private or Public.

1. Private Prayers are, whereby every particular man prays to God, for those
things, which he wants. In which kind of devotion, we ought at all times to
exercise our selves, because at all times, we stand in need of Gods particular
assistance: and therefore, we are tied or limited herein, neither to time, nor
place; for whether it be in the night, or morning, midday or evening, at home
or abroad, in the City or Country, in our beds or at our work, if we call
upon him faith-fully, he will hear us.

2. Public prayers are, whereby the whole Congregation meet in a place,
dedicated to Gods honor, as well to praise his Name, as to pray for those
things, which shall be needful. For although Christians ought to pray
privately, yet ought they not in the mean time, to neglect the public worship
and service of God in the Church. For from the beginning it was held and
observed, as a Duty required: and therefore, before the erection and dedication
of Temples and Churches, the Patriarchs, and holy men, erected Altars in
certain places, where at set times of the day, they might offer Sacrifices,
Exo. 29.39.
and Public Prayer, to God. In the 2. Joel 2.
of Joel, you shall find a set and prescribed form of prayer, for the Minister
to use, together with the place and the Congregation, that were to assist. In
the New Testament also, Mar. 18.10.
our savior Christ himself (to encourage this holy duty of public prayer)
has promised his presence, amongst those, that shall be assembled and
gathered together after this manner. Therefore, whosoever shall neglect these
public assemblies, shows and discovers thereby, how little he regards
Christ's company, or presence.

These prayers are also distinguished into these parts. 1. Invocation. 2.
Confession. 3. Thanksgiving.


Invocation consists of. 1. Petitions, for the good of our own Souls in
Spiritual things Bodies in Temporal things
2. Intercessions, either in praying for the good or against the evil of
others. 3. Deprecations, against evil, Spiritual. Temporal.



Confession is threefold. 1. Of our Faith. 2. Of the Glory of God. 3. Of our
own sins.


Thanksgiving is either 1. For deliverance from evil. 2. For Benefits
received.


To these may be added.

Imprecation either. 1. Against the enemies of God 2. against the enemies of
our souls
incorrigible and irreco^cileable.

So that these rules be observed. 1. That it be not used for private hate or
revenge: 2. That we rejoice not in any man's destruction. 3. That we aim at
their correction.


The use of the Lords Prayer.
BEcause that our SAVIOVR CHRIST has taught us how to pray, and has put the
very words (as it were) into our mouths, which we should use in praying. I
think it necessary to begin with the same, which he has so left unto us. 1.
In respect of the Excellency of the Author of it, who, was no less then God.
2. In respect of the perfection of the work it self, (the prayer) for it
comprehends in it petitions for all things, which we stand in need of. 3. In
respect of the Efficacy of this prayer in working: for it cannot choose, but
prevail and work much with God, for none knew the mind and disposition of
God, better then he which composed it, which was God.


And let it not loose any part of the due praise which belongs to it, in
regard of the compendiousnesse or shortness of it, for it deserves the more
henour, because though it be short, yet is also copious, and plentiful in
matter, and therefore the more absolute and perfect.

It is not therefore without cause that the Ancients have given so many
excellent Attributes to it.

As the Abridgement of the Gospel and our Faith.

The Interpretation of our desires and hope.

The very Bond of Charity.

And an inexhaustible Treasury.

Yet let not any man think, that our Savior prescribed us this prayer, as
that we should use no other, but be tied to the very words contained in it: but
this we must conceive, that he made it, to bridle our desires; that though we
make our petitions, and frame them according to our several necessities; yet,
to keep us in compass: that we exceed not the limits, nor vary from the
extent and bounds of this prayer.

The use of it is two fold.

1. That we might be instructed by it, what is necessary in general to require
of God, and not without need, seeing we (being naturally blind in spiritual
things) know not what is fit to ask: and many times, we crave those things (as
Zebedees children did) which are unworthy both of God and our selves, Mat.
20.21.
and might prove hurtful also to us, if they should be granted. And therefore
(under certain general heads) he has bounded the desires of the flesh, and
taught us, after what man^ and rule, we should square all our petitions. For
whatsoever we shall desire against the directions therein contained,
disagreeth from the will of God, and therefore is neither good, holy, not
profitable.

2. That we may be able thereby, to conceive, frame, and make all our prayers
according to our several necessities, and after that petition, which fitteth
us, as our occasions shall alter.

The Lords Prayer analyzed.
Our father. 1. Chr. 29.10.
A Father, not a Judge.

One, being a name of goodness. Comfortable.

The other, of Power. Terrible.

Who durst be so bold, as to call thee Father, but that Christ did command
it? For exceeding great is thy Majesty. And exceeding great is our Poverty.


But we are bold to do it: for we come not of our selves, thy Son Christ
has taught us the Form. Take notice of the words, they are thy Sons. Father
Luc. 3.38.
1. Of all Creatures. In Creation. Preservation. Governing.
2. Of Mankind: which he formed after his own Image. Genesis 1.26. 9.6.
3. Of Christians more especially, by Grace, Regeneration, Ephesians. 1.4,5. Iam.
1.18. 1. Pet. 1.23.
and adoption by Jesus Christ who was the Son of God by Nature.


Father.
There is no Father like unto thee.

When my Father and mother forsake me, Psa. 27.10.
then the Lord will take me up. Thou art our Father, Esa. 63.16.
though Abraham be ignorant of us. 49.15.
Though a woman forget the Fraite of her womb, yet will not I forget thee. A
most indulgent Father: To whom the prodigal son arose and went, Luc. 15.18.
whom the insoluant servant besought. Mat. 18.27.


Though thou be an angry Father, yet, a Father thou art. Though I be a
wastfull and disobedient son, yet a son I am. Though I have lost the duty
of a son, yet have not Thou lost the compassion and Love of a Father.

Father.
Whom we find so to be, By his inciting us to good. Confirming us in it.
Delivering us from tentations. Reclaiming us from sin. Crowning us with
blessings.


1. If thou our Father. Then are we sons.

How great, what manner of Love have thou bestowed upon us, 1. Ioh. 3.1.
that we should be called the sons of God?

2. If thou our Father, and we the sons of God. How great is the Honor, that
we are, as it were Gods.

3. If thou our Father.

Then are we brethren to Angels, as also to Men. Heb. 2.12.
Saints, as also to Mean men. Christ himself. as also to Poor men.


How great ought our Charity be? Let no man therefore extol himself above his
Brethren, nor be ashamed to call any man Brother, whom God has vouchsafed to
call son.

4 If thou our Father: How great is our Hope?

What are we to expect from thee?

Even all things which a Father gives to his Children. Mat. 7.11.


What are we to render unto thee?

Even all Duty and Obedience belonging to Children. Malach. 1.6. 1. Pet. 1.17.


Our father.
In no part of this prayer is found either the word Mine, or J.

Our, is a word of Charity and Unity. Let every one therefore, not only pray
for himself, but for others also; considering, that in so doing, he prays
for him, whom Charity has made as himself.

Christ bore us all in his body, let us do the like to one another, in word and
deed.

For our selves, Necessity compels us to pray, My Father.

For our brethren, Charity inuiteth us to pray, Our Father.

In these two words, Our and Father, is comprehended the Law and Prophets.

In Father, the Love of God.

In Our, the Love of our Neighbor.

And in these two words, is the Sum of the Gospel contained. In Father, our
Faith. In Our, our Charity.


Which art in Heaven.
There are Earthly Fathers.

These leave and forsake us: Their hands be shortened. We call not to them,
but to thee, which art in Heaven:

Esa. 66.1. Mat. 5.34. Psalm. 19.1
Heaven is thy Throne.

The Heavens declare the Glory of God.

Not, that thou art only included in the Heavens: for (as Solomon said) the
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee: 1. King. 8.27
but, as if that were thy Royal Palace, where the Elect shall enjoy thy Blessed
presence.

Thou art every where By thy presence. Ier. 23.23. Esa. 66.1.
In Heaven By thy excellence.


Jn Heaven.
A word of Hope.

For if thou be our Father, and Lord, and King of Heaven, then our hope is,
that our Inheritance is there also: That thou will not deny us an Inheritance,
that have vouchsafed to us the Title of Sons.

Let us therefore take the wings of the Eagle, and be lifted up in our
meditations to Heaven, being made heirs thereof.

Let us look up to Heaven while we are on Earth. By Hope By Meditation
Psalm. 25.1.
Unto thee O Lord do I lift up my Soul. Psalm. 121.1. 123.1.
I will lift up mine Eyes to the hills, whence comes my help. Psalm. 130.1.
Out of the deep have I called to thee O Lord.

A word of Power.

Jn Heaven.
For thou art in that place, from whence, at all times, Thou can send us help
in danger good things in our need. plagues for our offenses.


Let us therefore be respective of his awful Majesty, and make our petitions
to him, in fear and trembling, in all humility and reverence. And let us not
beerash with our mouths, Eccles. 5.
nor our hearts hasty to utter any thing before him: for God is in Heaven, and
we (poor creatures) upon earth: which is but his footestoole.

Hollowed be thy Name.
Being thus entitled and dignified with the Honor of Sons, we ought
presently to consider our Duties, what we should render back. And what can a
Son desire more, then the Honor of his Father.

Blessed be thou our Lord, who have given this power to men To Hallow To
Magnify To Glorify
Thy Name, which in it self is Holy.

Which all thy works in general do sanctify. Psalm. 103.22. 104.31. 145.10.
Esa. 43.20. Psalm. 97,5,6.


Which all the unreasonable Creatures do hallow and praise.

Which all reasonable Creatures as Angels and Men do glorify.

The Angels and hosts of heaven. Esa 6.2,3. Psa. 103.20,21.


Men. In Heaven already: In Earth, By their works. Mat. 5.16.
In the Congregations. In Afflictions. Job 1.20.



Let us therefore do it. And that not contemptibly or slightly: but Holily
and Carefully, in Thought, Word, and Profession.

Thine
And Lord, Ezech. 36.23
let thy Name be sanctified by others beside us, dilate this Power of
Sanctifying thee: communicate thy Name more and more to the Gentiles; Exodus
9.16.
make thy Gospel to spread to the ends of the earth; from the rising of the
Sun, to the going down of the same, let thy Name be great among the
Gentiles. Psalm. 115.1.
Not to us Lord, not to us, but to thy Name be the Glory. Thou art worthy O
Lord to receive Honor and Glory. Revel. 4.11.


And thy Name ought to be sanctified by us above all things, for all other
things are for us, and we for thy Glory only. Not that God shall get any thing
thereby, or that he has need of our sanctifying. But in regard of the
Benefit, which will accrue to us by it: for this honor, will be an honor, to
him that gives it.

Them that honor me I will honor, 1. Sam. 2.30.
says God. 2. These. 1.12.


Thy Kingdom come.
In this Petition we pray, First, for the coming of Gods Kingdom. That he
only may rule over us. Secondly, for the destruction and euersion of the
kingdom of Satan.

The Kingdom of God is threefold. First, of Glory, Secondly, of Grace.
Thirdly, of Power.

1. Of Glory (hereafter) which indeed should be the scope of our desires, for
we ought so to live here, that we may desire (without fear) the coming of
this Kingdom.

So to be affected at our death, that we may say; Lord now let thou thy
Servant depart in peace. Luc. 2.29.


So to be affected in our life, that we may often say, when shall I appear
before the Lord? I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Phil. 1.23.
Come Lord Jesus come quickly. Revel. 22.20.


2. Of Grace, in this life in us. Luc. 19.11.
That we be not of their minds who said, we will not have this man reign
over us. But subject us O Lord to this Kingdom (that easy yoke of thine)
that in all things we may be obedient to thee. Govern us, and reign in us,
that Satan or sin reign not in our members. If thou be pleased so to rule
in us here, we shall reign with thee hereafter.

3. Of Power, for there are many Rulers in this world, which oppose thy
Kingdom. Arise O Lord, and take the Rule into thine own hand. Reign thou
over us. Govern us within and without.

Let thy Kingdom come, and that it may come in us, let it come into our
Rulers. Make them like to thee in their government. Let them rule to thee, not
to themselves. Let thy Kingdom be in them.

And because, when this earthly Government is at the best, it is laborious and
imperfect: Hasten thy Kingdom of Glory we beseech thee, in which will be no
cause of complaint, but all things will be absolute and perfect. To which all
the Creatures together with us, Romans 8.18.
earnestly wait even with groans.

For all the votes and desires of the Esa. 64.1. Luc. 10.24.2.19.
Old Testament, were pitched upon the first coming of Christ: and all of the
2. Tit. 13.
New: upon the second looking for that blessed Hope, 2. Tim. 4.8.
and Glorious appearing of the great God, Revel. 22.20.
and our Saniour Jesus Christ.

Come.
Come to us, but not upon us.

Certainly it will come, will we, nill we.

Let it come to us, not against us.

Let us feel the happiness of it, O Father, in coming, not the violence of
it, in rushing upon us. In the mean time let it come to us here, though not in
the full fruition: yet in the certain hope and expectation, say unto each of
our souls, Psalm. 35.3.
I am thy salvation.

Thy will be done.
Thy absolute and Eternal Will, which none can oppose or withstand. Esa.
14.24,27.


Thy revealed Will, which we may contradict.

Let both be done.

Let us show our obedience to thee here, Psalm. 103.20.
as the Angels do in Heaven.

All other Creatures obey thy Will, Mat. 18.10.
only Man is disobedient to it.

Thy Revealed Will, which commands us to be humble in conversation, firm in
faith, just and charitable in works: true in words; to love thee with all our
hearts as a Father, to fear thee as a God: to prefer nothing before Christ,
(who preferred us before all things) and the like.

Thy Will, and all thy Will, without exception.

Thy Will, and not our Will. Act. 21.14.
The Lords Will be done. Iam. 4.15.
If the Lord will.

Thy Will be done, in all things, as well in things pleasing, as displeasing to
us: but especially, let it be done in us. That our blind and perverse will may
be led, by thy most holy Will. If our wills be refractory to thine, root out,
dissipate ours, and establish thine. Turn our Nill, into thy Will.

Jn earth as it is in heaven.
In earth as in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. In earth as in Heaven, Thy
Kingdom come. In earth as in Heaven, Thy Will be done.


Let Heaven be the pattern and Rule, to Earth, in all things.

Let us begin to be on Earth, as we would be in Heaven hereafter.

In earth.
In Earth, in all the Earth. But especially in this part of the earth, where we
live. We are of this Earth, let thy Will be done in us.

As in heaven.
As in Heaven, not as much, or as well: But let us imitate, though we cannot
equal.

We beg thy grace, to do thy Will, as thy Angels and Saints do it. But because
many things hinder us, we say with Saint Aug. Aug.
Give us power and ability to do thy commands, and then command us what thou
please. And if our condition in this life, will not admit so much, yet Lord
accept our desires, which cry to thee, Thy Will be done. And if our desires be
also imperfect, yet hear our cry, in the Prophets words. Our souls have
longed to desire thy Laws and Commandments always. Psalm. 119.


Give us this day our daily Bread.
Here we may consider the excellent Order of this Prayer, for what ought a Son
before all things with more feruency desire, then the Honor of his Father, the
prosperity of his Kingdom, and obedience to his Will? And in the next place,
what is more proper to children, then to ask Bread of their Father?

There is in us a double nature or substance, which requires two sorts of Bread.

1. The Soul has her viands to be provided. Esa. 55.2.
The Bread of Angels. Ier. 15.16. Psalm. 65.4. Heb. 5.13.14.
The Bread of heaven, the Word. Ioh. 6.33.35.48.
The Bread of Life, Christ Jesus in the flesh.

Lord give us of this Bread evermore. Ioh. 6.3.4.

2. The Body, also cries for her sustenance, her Bread, that is, all the
necessaries of this life: Psalm. 132.15.
for except it be satisfied likewise, it draws our minds from thee.

Thou have promised O Father, to add all other things to us; Mat. 6.33.
if we first seek thy Kingdom. Behold we have sought it, give us therefore
Bread either fine, middlesort, or course, which of them shall seem good to
thee.

And which may feed, and not choke us, either with the care of them, or
neglect of thee.

With Bread, give us O Lord, Leuit. 26.26 1. King. 19.8.
The staff of Bread. Psalm. 6.2.91.16.
Health of Body. Wholesome Air. Pro. 15.
Content in mind. Convenient dwelling. Peace in our days, and the like.


Our Bread.
Ours: gotten, either by Mat. 7.7.
Prayer, or Genesis 3.19.
Labor.

Ours: 2. These. 3.8.
as first Thine: Thine, by Gift, Ours, by Use. Not due to us, but of thy mercy
and bounty, given to us.

Ours: 1. These. 5.14
So, as if we have more then we need, we are to communicate it, to those which
want.

Ours: that being contented with our own, we covet not other men's.

Daily Bread
That we daily wanting, might daily pray for it, and that we daily receiving,
might daily praise thee for it.

To put us also in mind of the the uncertainty and shortness of this life,
that begging Bread, but for a day, it may be perhaps enough, for the time we
have to live.

Bread.
For our necessity, not for superfluity.

Which may profit the Soul, and not hurt the Body.

Which may nourish the Soul, and not destroy the Body.

If the Lord will be with me, Genesis 28.20.
and will keep me in the way that I shall go, and will give me bread to eat,
and raiment to put on, so that I return in peace, then the Lord shall be my
God.

Two things have I required of thee, Pro. 30.7,8,9
deny me not them before I dye; Remove far from me vanity and lies: give me
neither poverty, nor riches, feed me with food connenient for me: lest I be
full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor and steal,
and take the Name of my God in vain.

Give.
Give it thou. Bless the labors of our hands. Break it thou, and give it:
Let not us take it: for if thou give it, thou will give it in time, place, and
measure. Whereas, if we take it our selves, we observe none of these rules,
but take it, to the destruction of our own souls, and bodies.

To us.
Not only to me, and my family, but to all thy servants that need it.

This day.
That is this day of our life. This time. For we being uncertain of our Days,
Heb. 3^
why should we beg bread for uncertain times? For we are not assured of an
age, a year, or a day. Our life is but a day; and a day is the resemblance of
our life.

Yet for all this, Providence is not hereby forbidden, or that none should lay
up with Genesis 41.
Joseph, or with the Pro. 6.6.
Ant.

Give us O Lord, Bread convenient and meet, to serve us to day, and to morrow
also.

And forgive us our trespasses.
Esa. 27.9.
This is all the fruit, to take away sin.

Esa. 59.2.
Our iniquities have separated between us and our God, and our sins have hid
his face from us, that he will not hear us.

Ier. 5.25.
Our iniquities have withheld good things from us.

Lam. 3.44.
Thou have set our sins as a Cloud, that our prayers might not pass through.

Ioh. 9.31.
We know that God hears not sinners.

As long as our sins stand up against us, and are not forgiven, we are out of
hope, of receiving any good at Gods hands.

Forgive.
Therefore O Lord, not only give, but forgive also.

The Guilt. The Punishment.

And in this, thy mercy is manifested, that thou give to those, who, after
they have received, must crave forgiveness.

Give unto us, who are thine enemies, and when thou have given, forgive us also.

Thou have not dealt so with Angels. Their sins are not, Jude 6.
will not be forgiven: ours may, in thy good pleasure.

We are unworthy: Let us not be unthankful.

Our trespasses or debts.
We become debtors or trespassers, as often as we omit, and leave undone, those
things which thou command us to do: and commit those things which thou
forbiddest.

And of these, some are done Ignorantly others Of our own knowledge.
Unwillingly others Wittingly and greedily. Before our calling others Being
called. Against God others Against our neighbors and our selves. In heart
others In word and deed. By our selves others By others as authors or prouokers
Of Commission others Omission. Secretly. others Of which our heart reprooueth
us.


Forgive them O Lord, retain not the offense, exact not the punishment. Be
reconciled unto us, By laying aside thy displeasure: By receiving us to Grace.

Forgive.
Acts 7.60. 2. Tim. 4.16.
And as thou forgiuest us. So also forgive our enemies

As we forgive them that trespass against us.
Not to prescribe an example to God, to imitate us, nor, that we merit in
forgiving others, but to testify, how great a matter, it seems to us, to
forgive offenses.

Blessed be thou O Lord, for propounding to us, so easy a condition.

To forgive a mite, and be forgiven a Talent.

Oh happy exchange, to receive gold for dross.

Herein O Lord, thou dealest wonderfully and mercifully with us, that we daily
praying thus, are daily to forgive, and to be forgiven. And thou do bind us,
by this condition of mutual forgiveness. For he that forgiueth not, does pray
against himself, and in effect does pray thus. Lord forgive not me, for I do
not forgive.

Grant us therefore grace, to follow thy Example; fully and freely to forgive
the offense, and not retain the punishment, or any malice, against those, whom
we seem to forgive.

As we.
Not so much in quantity: but the like in quality. For we forgive
imperfectly, thou absolutely, and perfectly.

And lead us not into temptation.
There are two sorts of Tentation. 1. Of Trial. 2. Of Deceit, or Seducing.


1. That of Trial is, when God does any thing to prove the constancy, and
affections of his Servants, and this is good. As of Genesis 22.1.
Abraham, of Job 1.
Job, of his Exo. 15.25.16.4.20.20.
people.

2. That of seducing, is, when we are tempted by the Devil, his ministers, or
our own flesh, Deuteronomy. 8.2.16.13.3
to forsake God, and his Commandments, and this temptation, we pray against.

For what Benefit will redound to us, in forgiving our old sins, if we
contract new. O Lord, not only pardon that which is past, but prevent us from
committing the like. Let us not be encouraged to sin, because of thy bounty,
in blotting out our former offenses, but rather to Thankfulness, and care to
offend thee no more.

Deliver us from that which is past. Subuention. Keep us from that which is to
come. Prevention.
Let us not turn with the dog to the vomit, or the Sow to the mire. 2. Pet.
2.22.


It is enough, 1. Pet. 4.3.
that we have spent the time past in the works of the flesh. For the enemy is
never readier, or nearer to us, then when the house is clean swept. Mat. 12.44.
Therefore, the danger being so near us, give us grace, to be the more wary of
him.

For behold O Lord, he is at hand to ensnare us, either with his own Malice,
the delights of the World, or the pleasures of the flesh.

If he cannot prevail by fair means, yet by force to compel us. If he
cannot puff us up with delight, yet to deiect us with sorrow. Wherefore O Lord
forsake us not: and by forsaking us, Lead us into tentation. For of our selves
without thee, we have no power to resist Satan: neither has Satan without
thee, any power to Tempt us.

Let no Tentation, but such as is common to man, 1. Cor. 10.13.
take hold on us. Give us a happy issue with our Tentation: let it be to the
Trial of our faith, and the Confusion of Satan. Lead us no further in, then
thou will bring us out again.

Thou O Lord leadest none in, but who first leads in himself, nor hardnest
any, but those, who first harden themselves.

Ecclus. 3.26.
Let not us be rebellious, and provoke the Tempter, nor love danger, lest we
perish therein.

It is a dangerous thing to be tempted for the uncertainty of the victory.

It is Presumption, to desire it: but Humility, to decline it.

It is joyfully to be endured, but by no means, to be desired.

But deliver us from evil
Not only Lead us not: That is not sufficient, except thou deliver us also.

If we cannot be free from Tentation, yet deliver us from the Evil of it.

From Tentation that is Evil.

From evil.
All things are Evil, which divert us from Thee, but especially, That Evil
enemy of thine, and for Thy sake, our Enemy: for he is not our enemy, in
respect of our selves: for we are not of such strength, as that he should
desire to oppose us, but he is our Enemy, because we are thy children, and
belong to Thee.

Deliver us O Lord, from his bondage.

Psalm. 68.1.
Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered.

Psalm. 89.23.
Let not the enemy be able to do us violence, nor the son of wickedness,
hurt us.

Psalm. 86.13.
Deliver our Souls O Lord:

From the nethermost Hell.

Psalm. 22.20.
From the power of the dog.

Psalm. 22.21.
From the Lions mouth, and the horns of the Unicorns.

Psalm. 69.15.
Out of the mire, that we sink not.

Psalm. 69.16.
From the deep, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon us.

And not only deliver us from Him, but from his Malice also.

From whatsoever poysou, he has breathed on the Creatures.

From the Enmity of the World.

From whatsoever is ill in our flesh.

Deliver us also O Lord, from the Evil of Punishment, from the Evils, and
miseries of this life:

Especially of the life to come.

Amen.
Behold O Father, we have (according to thy Sons Directions, and form)
presumed, to crave those things, which we want: we have made our need known
unto thee.

We desire of thee O Father, that thou would grant us those things, which
we have craved of thee.

We sigh and groan to thee, and pray thee to confirm our votes and wishes,
with thy Seal, So be it.

Grant us our petitions for his sake, that is a true and faithful witness,
and in whom all thy promises are Yea, and Amen.

Honor him in us, who deserve of our selves (without him) no good, but much
evil at thy hands. And say to our petitions,

Amen. So be it.

Our Father which art in heaven.
O Almighty Lord and our Heavenly Father, whose Fatherly power and goodness,
is seen, in the Creation, preservation, and governing of all things, and upon
whom, as a Father, we wait and depend for all that is good: who art in all
places, by thy presence, but especially in Heaven by thy Excellence. We thy
poor children, whom thou have preferred before the rest of thy creatures,
Psalm. 8.
do, from the bottom of our hearts, Hallowed be thy Name.
wish and desire, that thy Name may be Hallowed, glorified, and magnified, from
the rising of the Sun, to the going down thereof, even through all parts of
the world: and that it may the better spread, from one Nation to another, give
us grace (who have received the adoption of Children) so to walk before thee,
Ephesians. 1.4.
in holiness and righteousness, that the Heathen, Mat. 5.16.
who have not known thy Name, seeing our good works, may glorify thy Name
together with us. Thou see O Lord, Thy Kingdom come.
that we have many Tyrants amongst us in this life, as the Devil malicious and
cruel: the World vain and curious: the flesh frail and deceiptfull: and our
own Will vile and corrupt, all which do impetuously tyrannize over us, and
oppose themselves against thy Kingdom. Arise therefore O Lord, and suppress
these Tyrants, and rule over thine and our enemies, by thy power, and in us by
thy Grace, that we may hereafter be subjects in thy Kingdom of Glory. Let thy
Kingdom come, and govern us by thy Providence, defend us by thy Might, lead
us by thy Spirit, and teach us by thy Word Drive far from us, the Prince of
this World, and do thou only Rule in us. Thy Will be done in earth as it is in
heaven
Give us grace, to follow the example of thy Blessed Angels, and all other thy
Creatures, who readily, and joyfully do thy Will. Let our wills follow thine
in all things, and let nothing be displeasing to us, which thy Will has
decreed, either for our prosperity, or adversity. Let us do nothing contrary
to thy Will, but let the performance and execution of thy Will, be the whole
scope and aim of our thoughts, words, and actions. And to this end, give unto
us thy holy Spirit, which may direct our Wills, enlighten our understandings,
mollify our hearts, and make them obedient to thy Will. Give us this day our
daily Bread.
We further cry unto thee O Lord (who give food to every living Creature,
and feedest the young Ravens that call upon thee) and pray thee, Psalm.
145.15.147.9.
that thou would likewise, give unto us this day our daily bread. First, and
above all, the Bread of Life, which may nourish us spiritually: and after that,
Bread for our bodies, to sustain nature. Give us we beseech thee, all things
necessary (not superfluous) for this life: and grant, that we, using thy
blessings as becomes us, may be strengthened and enabled, to pass this life
quietly, and soberly, and at the end of these our days, by the merits, and
intercession of our Savior Jesus Christ, obtain life eternal. And forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And for as much O Lord as we know, that thou hear not unrepentant sinners,
and that our sins have (long since) prevented our prayers, and ascended into
thy presence, to stop the current of thy mercies, and to call for vengeance
against us: O Lord behold, that we earnestly repent us of them, and are
heartily sorrowful for them. Wherefore we humbly pray thee, for thy great
mercies to mankind, in thy Son Christ Jesus, that thou would be pleased, to
be reconciled unto us, and to forgive us our trespasses. Enter not into
Judgment with us, Psalm. 130.
for if thou do, no man is able to abide the mildness of thy Justice, much
less the severity of it. Give us also grace, to follow the Example of our
blessed Savior, who forgave his enemies, and prayed for them, that we may
forgive them that trespass against us. Lest, when thou come to Judgment,
thou dealest as severely with us, as thou did with him, Mat. 18.
who had much forgiven, and would not forgive a little. And lead us not into
temptation.
Thou know O Father, how unapt we are of our selves to think a good
thought, much less, to resist so great enemies, as are hourly ready to
assail us: suffer us not therefore to be tempted above our abilities; Neither
(by forsaking us, or withdrawing thy hand of protection from us) Lead thou us
into tentation: but Lord so strengthen us, (that although it be not good for
us, to be altogther free from tentation, yet) by thy aid and Grace, we may
have a happy issue, and joyful deliverance from it. But deliver us from evil.
And as, we have humbly prayed thee, not to lead us in: So we further desire
thee to deliver us out, of all evil. For as long as we remain in this flesh,
we shall have continual striuings and wrestlings, with diverse evils, but
especially, with the Evil spirit, the enemy to Mankind, who omitteth no
opportunity to bring us into his bondage. But we are comforted O Lord, with
the assurance of thy mercy, which can effect, and work more to our Salvation,
then his Malice to our Destruction. Grant therefore O Lord, that we may be
delivered from all evil, and from all our enemies spiritual and temporal,
that so, we may serve thee ever hereafter, in holiness, and righteousness,
Luc. 1.15.
all the days of our life.

Amen.
Having thus discovered, and laid open our necessities to thee O Lord, in that
form and manner, which thy Son directed us, we humbly pray thee, to say
Amen, to all our petitions. In his Name, and for his merits sake, we pray thee,
to grant them. For, though we have no deserts to challenge them, yet his
Merits are numberless, by which we plead for them. And with this Sacrifice,
and Oblation, we are bold to come unto thee, not only craving pardon for our
sins, but supply of our necessities. We come not to thee of our selves,
presuming of any thing in us, but we are sent by thy Son Jesus Christ, who
has commanded us, with confidence to press unto thy Throne, and in his Name
to ask, whatsoever we shall need, either for this life, or the life to come.
And as he has sent us, so has he also, put into our mouths, words, meet
for our requests. O Lord take notice of the Style, it is his own, and for his
sake, say to what we have required, Amen. So be it.

And thou O Blessed Savior, God and Man, intercead (we beseech thee) for us:
for thou only art our Advocate, Mediator, and Intercessor, to the Father. Cover
our imperfections, and nakedness, with the Robes of thy Righteousness, and
supply our poverty, with the Riches of thy Merits: and cast not those from thy
favor and grace, whom by Nature, thou of thy goodness, have vouchsafed to
make thy Brethren. Who live and raignest, with the Father and Holy Spirit,
now and for ever Amen.

Petitions for Spiritual Graces.
Psalm. 119.5.
OH that my ways were directed, to keep thy Statutes O Lord.

Psalm. 94.12.
Blessed is the man, whom thou teach, out of thy Law.

Psalm. 119.18.
Open mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law.

Psalm. 143.10.
Teach me to do thy Will, for thou art my God, let thy good spirit lead me,
into the land of Righteousness.

Give me grace O Lord.

Romans 7.18.
To know, that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing.

To abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the Soul.

To keep in mind always, that the world passes away, and the desires
thereof, and that, the benefit which a man gets by the world, is nothing but
destruction.

Truly to say, Psalm. 119.52.
I have remembered thy everlasting Judgments, and my Soul receives comfort
thereby.

O Thou that 1. Pet. 5.5.
give grace to the humble, give me grace to be humble.

Give me a good heart, which, Luc. 8.15.
hearing thy Word, may keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

O Lord, Genesis 6.8.
let me find grace in thine eyes.

Heb. 12.17.
Let me find a place, and time of Repentance.

Let me not receive thy Grace in vain. 2. Cor. 6.1.


Let Heb. 12.15.
me not fail, or fall from it.

But Act. 13.43.
let me continue in it.

And 2. Pet. 3.18.
let me grow in it.

To the end of my days

2. Cor. 7.11.
Give me O Lord the works of Repentance. Carfulness. Defense or clearing my
self. Indignation. Fear. Vehement desire. Zeal. Revenge.
Phil. 4.8.
Give me Grace to think upon and do Whatsoever things are True, Venerable,
Honest, Just, Pure, Lovely, Of good report.

Give unto me o Lord Humility of heart, Charity to my Neighbor, Patience of
mind, Temperance of life, Chastity of body, Contentedness of mind, Alacrity
of Spirit.
Give unto me, good Lord. Perfect knowledge of my sins, Hearty sorrow for
them, Perfect hatred against them, Fervent love to all goodness, True
obedience to thy Will.
2. Pet. 1.5.
Give me grace O Lord to add. To faith, Virtue. To Virtue, Knowledge. To
Knowledge, Temperance. To Temperance, Patience. To Patience, Godliness. To
Godliness, Brotherly Kindness. To Brotherly kindness, Charity.
Gal. 5.22.
Give unto me o Lord the fruits of the spirit Love, Joy, Peace, Long suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance.
Give unto me good Lord. Contempt of the world, Hatred of sin, Loathing of
the flesh. Desire of Heaven.
Give unto me O Lord. A right Faith, to live well. A sure Hope, to persevere
well. A perfect Humility, to obey well A true Charity, Never to be divided
from thee.



Give me grace O Lord, To be content with that which ^s necessary: To despise
that which is superfluous.


Grant O Lord, That I may so live, that I repent not to have lived. That I may
so live, that no man may know, I have lived amiss. That I may so live, that I
may always live. Luc. 2.29.
That dying I may live, and living I may dye, and say with a cheerful Spirit,
Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace: Phil. 1.23.
I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.


Prayers for Spiritual Graces.
O Blessed LORD Jesus Christ, who art my only Tutor and instructor, and from
whom I have learned, whatsoever I know, I beseech thee, that thou would
further teach me those things, whereof I am ignorant, and which are necessary
for my Salvation: that thou would keep me in those things which I have
already learned, and rectify me in those matters, wherein, as a man, I err:
strengthen me, and make me firm, whereinsoeuer I waver, and am doubtful,
and keep me from that, which is erroneous and hurtful. Above all things O
Savior, strengthen my Faith, and give me grace daily to profit in the
knowledge and understanding of thy Holy Word, and so govern all my actions by
thy Holy Spirit, that my life may be answerable to my knowledge, and that I may
show the fruits of whatsoever I have learned, by my good and religious
conversation. Give me a firm and assured hope in thee, and thy gracious
promises, that in all my troubles and necessities, I may have an assured
confidence in thy mercy. Be unto me a strong tower of defense, against mine
enemies: that whether the world allure me, the Devil assail me, or the flesh
rebel; I may fly unto thee for refuge. And although thou presently put not
forth thy hand to help me, but defer thy comfort according to thy good
pleasure, yet keep me from doubting or despairing of thy aid, because thy
promises are sure. Give me a fervent love, and perfect charity to my neighbor,
that I may be as kind to him, and as careful of him, as of one, who is a
member with me, of the same body, whereof thou (O sweet Savior) art the
Head. Let my love to him, be sincere and unfeigned, which may charitably,
relieve him in his wants, patiently bear with his infirmities, and willingly
forgive him all his trespasses against me. Create in me I beseech thee, a
pure, mild, peaceable, and humble heart, which may think harm to no man; nor
recompense evil for evil, but good, for injuries. Cleanse me from all
unclean and earthly desires, and lift up my heart to thee, and Heavenly
things: and so write thy Laws in it, that I may wholly bend my self, to keep
them, and please thee, perseuering in the same, to my lives end. Give me O
Lord, true Compunction of heart, and so water it, with the dew of thy heavenly
Grace, that I may in the bitterness of my soul, with abundance of tears,
sighs, and groans, bewail and lament, all my heinous and grievous
transgressions against thee. Give me grace O Lord, that I may not boast in any
merits, or works of mine own, or have any confidence in them, but let me
glory in this alone, that I am a member of that Body of thine, which was
crucified for me, and did sufficiently satisfy, for all the sins of the
world. If thou O Lord look, or expect or any merits from me, behold I tender
unto thee thine own merits, the merits of thy death and Passion, which thou
have vouchsafed to make me partaker of; by virtue whereof alone, I dare boldly
appear before thy Tribunal. These merits, I set between my sins and thy
Justice, and otherwise, or in any other manner, I dare not, I will not, contend
with thee. O sweet Jesus, I desire thee, to offer them to the Father, as a
propitiatory Sacrifice, for all my great and grievous offenses: that when my
soul shall depart from this body, it may by the same, be freed and delivered,
from all the Judgments, and punishments, which are due unto it, for sin: and
be carried to that blessed Place, where there is no sorrow, but endless
felicity, where thou, together with the Father, and the blessed Spirit, live
and raignest for ever.

Before Prayer.
O Almighty and everliving God, Heavenly Father, to whom it is manifestly
known, how inconstant, and wandering, the minds of Men are, in any good
actions, and how easily we suffer our selves to be carried away, from the
contemplation of thee, by diversity of distractions, and unseasonable thoughts,
which take hold of us, in the time of our devotions and prayers unto thee: who
also (by thine only begotten Son Christ Jesus did prescribe unto his
Disciples, a form of Prayer, to be offered up to thee, and have derived the
same from them, to us. Behold me, most wretched sinner, wholly depraved and
corrupt, entreating thee, by the same Son, that for his sake, thou would
infuse thy holy Spirit into me, which may adopt me, into the number of thine
Elect: that it may teach me how I ought to pray, according to thy Holy Will:
that it may allay all troublesome and wandering thoughts in me, while I offer
up my prayers and praises unto thee: Suffer me not to serve thee with my
lips, and be absent in heart from thee: but create a right spirit within me,
that I being sensible of all thy graces, and comforts, may with joyful and
holy zeal, perform my duty to thee: that so, my prayers and desires may
appear before thee, and in thy Sons Name, I may effectually be heard, and my
petitions may be granted, to the glory and honor of thy most Holy Name, and
the endless comfort of mine own Soul, through the same our only Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Before a Sermon.
O Most loving SAVIOVR, I most humbly entreat thee that rhou would be
pleased, at this time, to enlighten my understanding, and to open my inward
ears, with the grace of thy holy Spirit, that I may hear the Sacred Word,
with an humble heart, and rejoice in it, in the obedience of the Spirit: that I
may be fully instructed thereby, how to do good, and avoid evil; and bring
forth the fruit thereof in my life and conversation: that thy Honor and Glory
may be thereby increased, the Devil, and all other the enemies of my soul,
may be vanquished, my Soul may be saved, and at the last, I may appear with
boldness, before thy Tribunal, and receive the reward of a good and faithful
servant, even his Masters joy, everlasting Blessedness, and that, by thy
merits only, O Blessed Savior.

Petitions for Temporal Blessings: In which we are to desire of God:
THat he would be pleased to continue unto us: The Blessing of a good King,
just, and religious. To give unto us: Magistrates and Justices upright, and
careful, to see good Laws duly executed. Teachers, to direct us in the Truth.



That he would bless us with Length and goodness of Days, Health of Body,
Contentedness of Mind, Competencie of Estate, Food and Raiment, Conueniencie
of Dwelling, Wholesomenesse of Air, Fruitefulnesse of Cattle,


That he would make us happy In Wedlock, In Children, In Faithful friends, In
Peaceable and loving neighbors In Honest Servants, In Skillful Phisicians.


That he would preserve Our Goods, Good Name, Our Senses and understanding.


That he would protect us, From Trouble, From Enemies, From Dangers, From
Losses, From Sicknesses.


That he would give Peace To all Nations, To our Land, In our private dwellings.


Rules to be observed in the Morning.
WHen thou awakest in the Morning, shut and close up the entrance to thy heart,
from all unclean, profane, and evil thoughts, and let the consideration of
God, and goodness enter in.

When thou art arisen, and art ready, retire thy self to thy Closet, or other
private place, and offer to God, the first fruits of the Day, and in praying to
him, and praising him, remember: 1. To give him thanks, for thy quiet rest
received, for delivering thee from all dangers, ghostly and bodily, and for all
other his benefits to thee. 2. Offer unto him thy self, and all things that
thou do possess, and desire him, to dispose of thee and them, according to
his good pleasure. 3. Crave his Grace to guide thee, and to strengthen thee
from, and against all Tentations, that so thou may do nothing, the day
following, contrary to his will. 4. And lastly, beg of him, (according to the
Rules before prescribed) all things needful for the Soul and Body.


To which purpose pray as follows.

Morning Prayer.
I Thank thee O Heavenly Father, LORD of Heaven and Earth, for all thy
Blessings, which I (undeservedly) have received from thee; that thou gave me
a being, from honest Parents, and in that part of the world, where thy Son
Christ Jesus, is purely professed: that thou did endue me with reason and
understanding, and did also give me perfect members and senses: that thou
have preserved me since my birth, and vouchsafed me health and liberty, and a
competencie of means, to maintain me, and those, whom thou have placed under
me: that thou have Elected me in thy Love, Redeemed me by thy Son, Sanctified
me by thy Spirit, and kept me this night past from all perils of body and
Soul, and given me a sweet and comfortable rest. O Lord, I commend into thy
hands, my soul and body, thoughts, words, and actions, and humbly beseech
thee, that thou would guide and order them all, to thy honor and glory, and
my endless and eternal happiness. Enlighten my mind, that (the Darkness
and cloudy mists of mine offenses being dispelled) I may walk before thee, in
my vocation, without offense, as in the day, clean, unspotted, and
unblameable. Give unto me thy Holy Spirit, which may bridle my vain
cogitations, and headstrong desires; and order thou (I beseech thee) my words,
and rectify all my actions. O Lord, as thou have of thy bounty, raised up my
body from sleep, so stir up my drowzie soul, from the sleep of sin, and
carnal security. Let my body be ever assistant to my soul, in all good
actions in this life, that they may both be partakers of life everlasting. Thou
O Lord have promised (to those which shall faithfully ask) all things
necessary for this life: give I beseech thee unto me (if it seem good unto
thee) such a competent estate, as shall be expedient, to support my life, in a
civil, modest, and religious manner. Give unto me that, which shall be
convenient, but especially O Lord, 1. Tim. 6.8.
a heart and mind contented, with whatsoever thou shall be pleased to allot
unto me. Grant O Lord, that in thy Name, I may cast forth my net, into the Sea
of this world, and diligently, carefully, and with an upright conscience,
follow that vocation, in which thou have placed me, that by thine aid and
assistance, I may prosper, and have good success, in all my affairs. Bless O
Lord, the Kings Majesty, govern his heart in thy fear, and guide his
understanding, to do those things, which shall be acceptable to thee, and
profitable to his kingdoms. Give him loving and loyal Subjects, and suppress
his open, and secret enemies. And (together with him) bless his Queen, make
her as the fruitful Vine on the house top. Psalm. 128.3.
Bless all the estate Ecclesiastical and Civil, from the highest to the
lowest. Comfort the comfortless and helpless. Bring all Travelers to their
own beings in safety, and direct all upon the Seas to their safe Ports. Show
the light of thy Truth to those which wander out of the right way. Give to all
sinners true and hearty repentance, strengthen those which have begun well, and
give them thy assisting grace, that they may persevere in goodness. To all my
friends, kindred, and enemies, and to those which pray for me, give all thy
good blessings: Keep us all, from all evil, and make us to continue in thy
Service, to our lives end; and after the course of this miserable life ended,
bring us to thine everlasting Kingdom through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Or thus.
ALmighty and Everlasting GOD I praise and bless thee, from the bottom of my
heart, that of thy infinite goodness, thou have preserved me this night past,
and have, with the impregnable defense of thy Providence, defended me, from
the power and malice of the Devil, and kept me, both in soul and body from
all his devices, and snares, and raised me from sleep (the Image of death) and
not left me, to be stifled in the darkness of my sins, but have given me a
longer space, to repent me of them. I humbly entreat thee that thou would
not withdraw thy hand of Protection from me, but take me into thy Tuition.
Watch over me with the eyes of thy mercy, and direct me in the way of thy
Commandments. Endue me with those graces of thy Holy Spirit, which may assist
me to pass this day, and the rest of my life, to the praise and glory of thy
holy Name, the benefit of my Neighbor, and the salvation of my sinful soul.
Keep me O Lord, from all sin, bridle and mortify my flesh, that I offend
not, nor fall into any transgressions, which may provoke thy wrath against me.
Direct my soul and body, my words and actions, according to the rule of thy
Will. Divert my heart, from fastening too much on transitory pleasures, and
convert it, to the delight of eternal joys. And because I am not worthy O
Lord, that thou should hear me, poor wretched sinner; behold I set before
thee, the merits of thy only Son, who is the propitiation of our sins:
look upon him, and for his Righteousness, pardon the offenses of thy Servant:
and grant to me Those things, by thy mercy, which by the strict Rule of thy
Justice, are not due to me. Defend me O Lord, from all mine enemies, Arm me
with thy Spiritual weapons, put on me the Clothing of wisdom and strength;
Ephesians. 6.
the Brestplate of Righteousness, the Helmet of Salvation, the Shield of Faith,
and the Sword of the Spirit, that in this earthly Pilgrimage, I may manfully
oppose the enemies of my Soul, the Concupiscence of the Flesh, Tentations of
the World, and Malice of the Devil; that so having finished valiantly, the
course of this Terrestrial warfare, I may hereafter praise thee in thy
Celestial Kingdom. And thou O Lord, who give food to every living Creature,
Psalm. 147.9.
and feedest the young Ravens which call upon thee, be merciful unto me, in
the supply of those necessaries, which I daily want. Preserve me in health, 1.
Tim. 6.8.
give me food and raiment, and sufficient to maintain me in that course of
life, to which it has pleased thee to call me: that having sufficient in all
things, I may abound in good works. And grant that I may lead a quiet life,
in all Godly conversation: that having and using thy blessings worthily, I may
pass this life, with joy and comfort till it please thee, to call me to a
better. Give thy blessings to the Kings Majesty, the Queen, and the whole
estate of this Kingdom, and grant that we all may bend our thoughts and
studies to please thee, that at the last, by the merits and intercession of
Jesus Christ, we may be received to thy Heavenly Kingdom, Amen.

Or thus.
O Almighty Lord God, which day after day, do minister to sinful man,
infinite occasions, whereby he may be stirred up, to praise thy holy Name, and
art most plentiful in pity, and favorable to those, which with pure hearts,
and unfeigned faith, call upon thee: behold me, thy poor unworthy servant, with
the eyes of compassion, that at this time a^ bold, to offer up unto thee, a
morning Sacrifice of praise and thanks, for all thy blessings: and amongst the
rest, for that thou have vouchsafed after a sufficient and quiet sleep, to
raise me safe from my bed again, which favor thou have not affoorded to many
others, who in far greater measure have deserved it, then my self; for which
mercy of thine, I am not able (through my insufficiency and weakness) to
give unto thee due praise, and thanksgiving. I pray thee therefore, in thy
dear Sounes Name, (In whom thou art well pleased) to accept these poor and
weak thanks, and for his sake also, to be further aiding and assisting unto
me, this day following, in whatsoever I shall take in hand. For thou know O
Lord, how feeble man's nature is, insomuch, that if he trust to his own
strength, of necessity he must fall into many miseries, errors and dangers.
Have mercy therefore upon mine infirmities, and be propitious and helping to
me; that by thine Illumination, I may discern and perceive, good from evil;
and by thy leading and direction, may follow the one, and avoid the other. Lord
so guide me with thy Holy Spirit, that I may neither do, speak, nor think,
any thing this day, contrary to thy holy Will. Behold O Lord, I offer my self,
a Living Sacrifice to thee, and humbly pray thee to aceept it. Good God, direct
my soul in the way of thy Commandments, increase my faith, strengthen my
Hope, enlarge my Charity, and infuse all the good graces of thy Holy Spirit
into me. Give me grace so to remember my sins, as that thou may forget
them; and so to forsake them, as that thou may forgive them. Instruct me in
all goodness, and give me the grace of Perseverance, that I fly not back,
from any good courses in this life; but that I may go forward, and continue in
them, to the end of my days. O Lord, who have promised, the necessaries of
this life, to those which shall first seek thy Kingdom. I humbly entreat
thee, to give unto me this day, all things necessary for my sustentation; as
food, raiment, health of body, joy of heart, peace of conscience, and a
blessing to all my endeauours: give me a mind contented with that which shall be
sufficient, and not desirous of that which is superfluous: that I may pass the
rest of my days on earth religiously, honestly, and soberly, as becomes thy
servant, to thy honor, and my endless comfort. Be gracious to the Kings most
excellent Majesty, his Royal Queen, the whole Estate, Clergy, Nobility,
Gentry, Magistrates, and Commons; give us all grace, in our several places, to
do our Duties, as in thy sight; that at the last (by the merits of Jesus
Christ our Savior) we may receive the reward thereof, in thy Eternal
Kingdom, where thou raignest together with the same our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the Holy Spirit, World without end.

Morning Prayer for a Family.
O Almighty Lord God, heavenly Father, we give thee most humble and hearty
thanks, in that thou have not only, of nothing created us after thine own
Image, Genesis 1.9.6.
but also have from time to time, most graciously preserved us, even to this
present Morning, from all dangers and terrors; and have given us, this night
past, sweet sleep and comfortable rest, whereby we are refreshed and fitted to
our bodily labor. We thank thee, O Lord, for all thy spiritual blessings,
for our Regeneration, Justification, Sanctification in some measure, and our
Redemption by Jesus Christ. We praise thy Name, for thy bountiful supply of
all things necessary for this life, as also, for thy patient and long
expectance of us, in our Conversion. O Lord, we confess, that we have been
so far from the serious consideration of thy favors to us, and from rendering
due thanks unto thee for them, that in stead thereof, we have continually
grievously offended thy Majesty, with most abominable and vile sins,
notwithstanding thou have sought to reduce us to thy obedience, by the good
motions of thy Holy Spirit. As often O Lord, as we look about us, either with
the eyes of our bodies or minds, so often do thy fatherly and innumerable
benefits appear unto us. For all which, we render again and again, from the
bottom of our hearts, infiuite thanks unto thee; and humbly desire thee, for
thy mercies sake in Christ Jesus, to pardon all our ingratitude and rebellions.
Englighten us, we pray thee, with thy holy Spirit, that we may see our
imperfections; kindle our zeal toward thee: rule and govern our minds,
wills, affections, and actions, that we may not willingly offend thee any more:
And give us Grace, that we may always think, speak, and do, whatsoever
shall be pleasing unto thee, and abstain from all things, which shall
displease or offend thee. It is more then enough, O Lord, that we have been
hitherto so rebellious against thee: It is too much, that we have been so
negligent to serve thee, and so ungrateful to thee, for all thy blessings. Let
all evil and wickedness now depart from us, and let new manners, new
affections, and new hearts be renewed in us. We commit our selves, O Lord,
wholly into thy protection, this day and the rest of our lives, and most humbly
desire thee of thy infinite goodness, that, as now thou have put good thoughts
into us, thou will be pleased to perfect them in us: so, that being led, by
thy holy Spirit, we may do that which is acceptable to thee, and love, serve,
honor and praise thy holy Name all the days of our lives. And for as much, O
Lord, as thou have promised to those that love thee, all things necessary for
this life, we call and cry to thee, O our Father which art in heaven, to Give
us this day our daily bread, even whatsoever is needful and expedient for our
sustentation. Give us, O Lord sufficient for our maintenance, lest we take
evil and indirect courses, or blaspheme, or murmr against thee: and not too
much, lest we forget from whose hands we receive it. Give not only that which
shall be necessary, but contented minds also with it. Bless, O Lord, the
labor and work of our hands, bless us at home and abroad, and grant, that
every one of us, may truly (as in thy sight) walk in our several vocations,
and diligently and carefully intend the same; making a conscience of all our
ways, that by thy gracious favor, and our own endeavors, we may have
prosperous success, in all things, which we shall undertake. Continue O Lord
thy Gospel among us. Bless our gracious King, with the Queen, the Prince
Palatine and the Lady Elizabeth, with their Princely Issue: the whole Land, and
all sorts and conditions of people in it. Bless all that travel by Sea or
Land, and take into thy protection, all Orphans, Widows, and all that suffer
wrong: Give health and strength to the sick and weak, and joy and comfort to
the sorrowful and afflicted. Bless us O Lord with healthful and sound
bodies, keep our good names unspotted, and unblemished. Bless the fruits of
the earth, and give us wholesome, peaceable and seasonable times. These and all
other thy blessings, which thou know better to give, then we to ask;
vouchsafe (if it seem good to thy Majesty) to give us, for the worthiness of
thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose blessed Name, and absolute prayer,
we close up our imperfect prayers, and say as he has taught us.

Our Father etc.

Rules for Evening and Night.
As we usually twice a day at the least, take our bodily sustenance, so should
we be no less careful, for the refreshing of our Souls; but twice a day
likewise (Morning and Evening, if not oftener) dispose our selves to Devotion
and Prayer. When thou therefore retirest thy self (as in the Morning)
remember. 1. To give God thanks, that he has delivered thee from the dangers
of the day past, prospered thee in thy affairs, and given thee necessaries for
thy sustentation. 2. Examine thy Conscience narrowly, and consider wherein thou
have (the day past) offended God, either in thought, word, or deed: and having
set thine offenses before thee, confess them to him, (and in the bitterenesse
of thy Soul) repent thee, be sorry for them, and crave Pardon for them, and
Grace, that thou offend no more in the like. 3. Pray to God, to continue his
care over thee, the night following, and to defend thee from all perils and
dangers.


So that going to thy rest, with these good actions, and thoughts, thou shall
do the like to those, which rake up fire in the Embers over night, that they
may the more readily find it in the morning.

In the Night.
WHen thou awakest in the night, call upon God likewise (for the night was not
made wholly for sleep) praise him, contemplate, and meditate upon his works.
Sometimes weep for thy sins, according to the practice of David. For as the
nightly Dew refreshes and tempereth the Earth, Psalm. 6.6.
so do our nightly tears, assuage our concupiscences. (And sometimes rejoice
in the Lord, according to that of the Psalmist) for the great benefits thou
have received from him. Psalm. 149.5.
By these means, keeping thy self to one holy exercise or other, thou shall be
sure, to avoid the Devils tentations, whose chief time of setting upon us,
fitteth best with his works, which are usually styled the works of Darkness.

Evening Prayer.
Psalm. 42.10.
The Lord has granted his loving kindness in the day, therefore in the Night
will I sing of him, and make my Prayer to the God of my Life.

O Lord God, Father everlasting, I yield thee most humble and hearty thanks,
that thou have not only auerted thy punishments from me, which my grievous
sins have deserved, but instead thereof, have preserved me from all dangers,
and supplied me with all necessaries of this life. O Lord I confess, that I
have so highly offended thee this day, that all the punishments which may be
inflicted, upon vile and miserable sinners, are due to me. I confess O Lord,
that I have offended thy Majesty in -- Repeat the sins thou can call to
mind.
And not only these do I acknowledge, but all the rest, which I have
committed from my Infancy, to this present hour, wittingly or ignorantly, in
thought, word, or deed, against Thee, my neighbor, and my self. O Lord, I
confess my weakness, I do not that which I should, Romans 7.19.
and would do: but that which I should not, and am unwilling to do, I do: not
regarding or fearing, thy incomprehensible glory, venerable presence, terrible
power, exquisite Justice, nor thy goodness unspeakable, for which, if thou
should enter into judgment, what would become of me? But O Lord, for as
much as thou art a Father of mercies, and do not desire the death of a
sinner, if he return unto thee by unfeigned repentance: I most humbly (in the
Name and Mediation of our blessed Savior Christ Jesus) crave pardon for them.
Lord I repent, help my impenitencie, and hear my request. Be merciful to me
a sinner, and pardon all my offenses, whereof thou, O Lord know me to be
guilty. And I beseech thee O Lord for the time to come, to mollify my heart,
water it with the dew of thy heavenly Grace, that I may not always bring forth
Thorns and Weeds, fit for nothing but the fire. Convert me O Lord, and I
shall be converted, open mine eyes, direct my heart and ways: Draw me after
thee, and being converted, suffer me not to return again with the Dog to
his vomit. 2. Pet. 2.22.
And for as much O Lord, as thou have appointed the Night to refresh our bodies,
I humbly pray thee, to defend me (as well sleeping as waking) from the snares
of the Devil. Psalm. 31.5.
O Lord into thy hands I commend my Spirit, which thou (by thy precious death
and passion) have redeemed. Suffer it not to sleep in sin, and in it to lie
languishing unto death, and so be buried in the grave of thy Judgments: but
watch over it I beseech thee, and defend it under the shadow of thy Wings. Let
me not be oppressed with unnecessary sleep, but raise me in due time, to thy
Service and Praise. Thou know O Lord, that of my self, I have no strength
waking, much less when I sleep: I humbly therefore pray thee to defend my
soul, body, goods, (and all things which thou have bestowed upon me) this
night, from all evil and damage, and so to dispose of me, that I be not
troubled with any terrors, terrified with any vain fantasies, weakened by any
sickness, or impouerished with any casualties or crosses. Keep me O Lord from
all evil dreams, and unclean thoughts, and compass me with a wall of thy
mercies, that the Tempter approach not to my Bed: so that being preserved by
thy protection, and refreshed with comfortable rest, I may arise, and offer
unto thee, my daily bounden duty and service, even praise and thanks to thy
most Holy Name.

Or thus.
O Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, to whose inexhaustible bounty, we owe all honor
and praise, I give thee all possible thanks, that thou have vouchsafed, to
keep me this day from all evil, so that none of thy fearful Judgments (to
which I was justly liable) have fallen upon me, but of thy unspeakable mercy,
thou have preserved me from them, and have also liberally, and with a
bountiful hand, supplied me with the necessaries of this life, notwithstanding
my great and manifold sins committed against thee. O Lord I confess, that I
have wasted the time, (which thou have given me for repentance) altogether
idely, vainly, and unprofitably, not so much as considering or taking notice,
that this day might have been the last of my life, but have added and heaped
up sin upon sin, in thy alseeing sight, as if I had stood in no fear of
thee at all, daily renewing (as much as in me lay) thy torments and passions:
for which, I have deserved, that the earth should open unto me, and hell
devour me: and which, that it is not come to pass, I ascribe (withal
thankful acknowledgement) to thy infinite mercy and goodness. O Lord I
acknowledge, that it is of thy goodness alone, that I am thus preserved from
al thy judgments, seeing that many calamities have befallen diverse others, who
have less deserved them, then my self. That therefore some have perished by
water, some by fire, some by sword, others by sudden and violent death, and
that I live: that some have been taken blind, some lame, some distracted in
their senses, that others have sustained much damage in their worldly estate,
and I have escaped, and not been punished in any of these kinds, to what shall
I ascribe and attribute the cause? surely to thy mercy alone, for which I
cannot give unto thee, sufficient thanks. But O Sweet Savior, as thy mercy
exceeds, so do our necessities increase, thou can not want matter for thy
mercy to work upon, by reason of our inabilities to help our selves:
wherefore, I further pray thee, that this night following, may be also safe and
prosperous unto me, that by a sweet sleep, and comfortable refreshing, I may
be fitted, when I awake, to serve thee, with a thankful, and cheerful
heart. And because O Lord, that this life has not one certain hour, Psalm.
13.4.
I beseech thee to enlighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death, and grant,
that after I have rested quietly, I may by thy grace and mercy arise, to serve
thee, in singleness of heart. Lighten (O Savior) my darkness, and
mercifully keep me from all dangers of this night. Save me waking, and keep
me sleeping, that I may watch in thee, and rest in peace. There is nothing that
more resembles our life, then the Day; nor Death, then the Night; nor the
Grave, then our Beds: O Lord therefore, when I am laid down, and by sleep
made unable to help my self, being like unto a dead man, defend me then, by
thy power, from the crafts and assaults of the enemy, that he do me no harm;
so that (though my body sleep) my soul may watch unto thee, and contemplate
of the life to come. And grant, that having passed the night quietly, I may
arise as well from the sleep of sin, as from my natural sleep; and with
all alacrity, pass the day following, in thy service, and in the end of my
pilgrimage (by thy merits) receive the Crown, which thou have promised to
those that love thee; in that day, which no night shall follow, and in that
heavenly Kingdom, where thou raignest, together with the Father, and the
Blessed Spirit, world without end.

Evening Prayer.
Psalm. 141.2.
LEt my prayer O Lord, be set forth in thy sight as the incense, and let the
lifting up of my hands, be an evening Sacrifice.

Psalm. 55.18
In the Evening, Morning, and at noone day, will I pray, and that instantly,
and thou Lord shall hear my prayer.

Psalm. 91.5.
Blessed be thou O Lord, who have preserved me from the arrow that flies by
day, and from the sickness that destroys in the noone day.

Esa. 38.12.
Who have not cut of my life like a weauer, nor made an end of me.

O Lord I confess, that as my days have increased, so has my sin
multiplied.

Pro. 24.16.
The just man falls seven times a day: But I miserable sinner, seventy seven
times seven times.

But I return to thee O Lord, and repent: Luc. 17.4.
Let not the Sun go down in thy wrath.

O Lord, whatsoever good I have done this day, I acknowledge, that thou have
wrought it in me, and desire thee graciously to accept of me for it, as thy
Instrument only.

O Lord, whatsoever evil I have committed this day, I confess it, to be the
work of mine own hands, and heartily pray thee to pardon it.

O Lord, which give the sleep of health, to them that love thee, and causest
those that fear thee, to sleep confidently. Psalm. 13.4.
Lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death. Keep me from the terrors of the
night, and from the works of darkness. Psalm. 91.5.


Lord though I sleep, yet let my heart watch to thee: and when I wake, let me
be presently before thee, let my thoughts ascend to thee.

Grant, that I may always remember, that the night is no night with thee, and
that the darkness and light, are to thee alike. Psalm. 139.12.


Grant, that I may always meditate upon the long and last sleep, the sleep
of death, the bed of my Grave, and the Covering of worms and dust.

Let my sleep be a cessation from sin, and let me not in my sleep, do or
think any thing, that may offend thee, or defile my self.

And grant, that after the sleep shall depart from mine eyes, I may remember
thee, search my reins, and try my heart.

O Lord, I commend my self, and all that (of thy bounty) is mine, to thee. In
thee, I put all my trust and confidence.

Thou see in what dangers we are, what snares the Devil lays for us.

I humbly therefore pray thee to defend me from him.

And grant me so to order and end my life, that I may sleep peace, and take my
rest with thee, for the merits of Jesus Christ, etc.

Psalm. 4.9.
I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only,
that make me dwell in safety,

Evening Prayer for a Family.
O Almighty and everlasting God, who has appointed all times and seasons to
succeed in their due course; and have ordained the day for the works of the
day, and bodily labor, and the night to take our quiet rest and refreshing: by
whose providence and mercy, we have been preserved this day from all dangers,
and have been furnished with all things necessary for this life: we humbly
pray and beseech thee, that now, in this time of night and darkness (wherein
we poor and miserable sinners stand in most need of thy help and aid) thou
would be pleased, to keep us from all dangers spiritual and temporal. O
Lord, we confess, that we have not deserved the least of thy favors; nay, if
thou should with strict eye, examine our actions, how we have spent this
day, and the rest of our days past, we should not be able to stand in thy
sight; much less beg any further blessings of thee. For (notwithstanding thy
manifold and daily favors) we have in all things been rebellious and
repugnant to thy blessed Will; and obedient and comformable to the command of
our enemies, the Flesh, the World, and the Devil: in so much, as we have lost
our liberties, and are become servants and slaves unto them. For we have wholly
given our selves to serve the pleasures of the Flesh, in concupiscences and
other carnal Acts: we have hearkened too much to the delights of the World; in
covetous desiring that, which is not our own, in abusing the Creatures
thereof, which were created for our necessary use, and not for our wanton and
insatiable desires: and we are become the servants of Satan, in not opposing
and resisting his unclean and wicked tentations. Our sins are infinite, and
our iniquities are numberless, so that we cannot, nor are any way able to
recount them unto thee. We have fled from thee, seeking us: neglected thee,
Loving us: stopped our ears to thee, speaking to us: turned our backs to
thee, reaching thy hand to us: forgotten thee doing good to us: and despised
thee correcting us. Yet O Lord, we humbly entreat thee, to show thy accustomed
mercy to us, poor and miserable sinners, who in grief and anguish of soul,
confess these our offenses, and earnestly and bitterly bewail them. Look
upon us with the eyes of compassion, not for any thing in us, but for the love
and respect which thou bear to thy Son Christ Jesus, in whom we verily
believe, that thou art fully reconciled unto us. Take away our sins, and the
punishment due unto us for them. Let thy wrath be turned from us, and destroy
us not together, with our manifold transgressions. Lord thou see our
wickedness, and withal, how, and in whose name, we crave thy mercy. Turn
thee O Lord, from thine anger, which thou might justly power upon us, and
be gracious unto us, according to thy wonted goodness, who abhorrest nothing
which thou have made. Create also, we beseech thee, in us, new hearts, hearts
fit to serve thee, and write thy Law in them, with the finger of thy Holy
Spirit, that all our desires and all our actions, may be conformable to thy
blessed Will. And now again O Lord, we desire thy Majesty, to take our souls
and bodies into thy protection this night following: suffer us not to sleep in
sin, but watch over us, and defend us under the shadow of thy wings: Let not
our sleep be excessive or immoderate, but raise us again in due time, that
after a quiet and moderate sleep, we may arise to serve and praise thee
joyfully; begin and perfect our works justly: labor in our vocations
truly: and seek thy Kingdom earnestly: that at the last, by thee, with thee,
and in thee, we may come unto the same Kingdom, by the merits of our Savior
Jesus Christ, in whose Name and Prayer, we are bold to call further upon thee
saying, Our Father etc,

Prayers for several Persons.
For a married man.
O Heavenly Father, Maker and Preserver of Heaven and Earth, who in the
beginning, did institute Matrimony, foretelling the mystical union of the
Church, with our Savior Christ: who also, in the time of his being upon earth,
did honor Marriage, with his first Miracle: Ioh. 2.
and have appointed it also for a means whereby mankind is propagated, Genesis 2.
for a remedy to avoid unlawful lust, and for the mutual comfort and
consolation of thy Children: I humbly entreat thee, to give me the assistance
of thy divine Grace, that I may live according to thy commandments, with my
wife, whom thou have given for my help and comfort, in this world. Mortify in
me all unclean, dishonest, and fleshly lusts, let not the heat of unlawful
concupiscene, take hold of me, but make me to be fully pleased, and satisfied
with her love, and to love her, as Christ loved his Church, to cherish and
comfort her, as mine own body, and to have as great a care of her health, as
of mine own. Grant, that we may live in peace, without debate; in unity
without discord, like the members of one body, equally desirous to praise thy
holy Name. And as thou have (O Lord) bestowed many children upon us, give us
discreet hearts, and understanding minds, to bring them up in thy Faith and
Fear, in a religious, honest, and civil manner. Give them obedient hearts to
thee, and to thy commandments, and to all that thou requirest of them, to be
performed in duty, toward us their Parents: Keep them from those, which are
ready to seduce them, and so lead them in thy Faith, Fear, and Knowledge, that
they prove not a curse, but a blessing unto us; and thereby attain to that
blessing, which thou have promised to those, which honor and obey their
Parents. Grant likewise O Lord, that I may guide and instruct the family which
is under me, in thy fear, and in honest and careful manner provide as well
for their bodies, as their souls. And give them the like Grace, O Lord, to
perform their duties, in fear and obedience, not as eye-seruers, but in
simplicity of heart, as in thy sight. And give us (O Lord) a competencie of
estate, to mainetaine our selves, children, and family, according to that rank
or calling, wherein, thou of thy goodness have placed us, without excess,
riot, or vainglory, and in singleness and pureness of heart, with all
humility, relying upon thy blessed will, who know better then we our
selves, what is needful for us, To thee be all Honor and Glory, now and for
ever.

For a married Woman.
O Merciful and loving Lord God, who in the beginning, for the propagation of
mankind, did take Eve out of the side of Adam, Genesis 2.22.
and gave her to him as an helper. Genesis 2.20.
I give thee humble thanks, that thou have vouchsafed to call me, to the
honorable estate of Matrimony. Give me grace O Lord, that I may lead a life,
worthy thereof, that I may love my husband, with a pure and chaste love,
acknowledge him for my Head, and truly reverence and obey him, in all good
things: that thereby, I may please him, and live quietly with him. Grant, that
I be not carried away, with the vain fashions of this World, but may put on
such habits, as shall be agreeable, and suitable, with the estate of my husband,
and may become a modest woman to wear. Help me O Lord, that I may, under him,
prudently and discreetly guide, and govern his household and family: and
carefully look, that nothing be either carelessly lost, or wickedly committed
in my house. Fit me with those good Graces, which the wise man described in a
good woman, Pro. 31.
and Saint Peter, in Holy and Sanctified Matrons. Give me such care, 1. Pet. 3.
concerning the education of my Children, as belongs to my part, that I may
live, to see them prosper in this life, and afterward we may all be received
to thy eternal Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For a Child.
O Almighty Lord God, to whom the obedience of Children to their Parents is
most acceptable, and all disobedience most displeasing, who have promised a
Blessing to the dutiful, and threatened a curse, Exodus 20.
to the disobedient children. I beseech thee, to put away from me, the
detestable sin of disobedience, and rebellion against my Parents, and give me
grace, to observe them, with all kind of duty, to obey them, in all their
just commands: and to be aiding and helpefull to them, at all time of their
need. Give me grace, to bear all their reproves, and errors patiently, and
not to grieve them, by stubborn and evil courses. Let me not be so far
deprived of thy Grace, that I scoff or deride them, though by age, or
infirmity, they shall fail in their Judgment or Reason: but cause me to
supply their wants, lest, that I having plenty, and (they being in any need or
distress) I not supplying it, nor succouring them, their lives, to whom I owe
mine, may be in danger to be shortened. Lord forgive all the offenses, which I
have heretofore committed against them. Increase the number of their days:
keep them safe, in body and mind: let them see their Childrens Children, to
their comfort, and thy Glory. Let them govern us, and the rest of their
family, with wholesome Discipline, and good example: that at the last, they may,
in their due time, depart this life in peace, and come to thy Kingdom
unspotted, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For a woman with Child.
O Blessed Lord God, who for the offense of the first woman, Genesis 3.16.
did denounce, and impose an inevitable curse, upon all her posterity, namely
that they should conceive in sin, and be subject to many grievous pains,
and should bring forth their children, with great danger. Assuage I beseech
thee of thy goodness, the sharpness of that decree, and preserve me, that I
may overcome and escape this great danger, and be delivered of the fruit of my
body, without peril of death; and that it may safely be brought, to the Sacred
Font of Baptism, and be regenerated and ingraffed into the mystical body of
Christ, and be made partaker of his death and passion. And as thou have of thy
bounty, given bodily life to it, and me: so grant to us both, life spiritual:
and so Sanctify our Bodies and Souls here, that hereafter we may live among
thy blessed Saints for ever, in the life to come.

For a young man, or Maid.
O Lord, forasmuch as I am (at these years) in the heat of the flesh, and in
the most dangerous time of my life, I beseech thee, take not thy mercy and
fatherly providence from me: but, by how much the greater danger of tentations
I am in, with so much the more care, let thy grace preserve me: lest happily, I
become a prey to mine enemies, who go about to load me with so many sins,
that if they prevail; I shall never of my self, to get from under the burden
of them. But O merciful Father, (distrusting in mine own strength) I betake
my self wholly to thy protection, and desire thee both now, and ever, to keep
me. Let me not get that habit of sinning, in my younger years, that I be
forced in my age (if I be not stifled before, in my offenses) to be wail the
sins of my youth, and to say with David. Remember not O Lord, Psalm. 25.6.
the offenses of my youth: but rather accustom me, from this time forward, to
all goodness, that I may daily more and more profit therein: and that (serving
thee with a pure heart now) I may in mine age say with good King Ezekias, O
Lord remember I beseech thee, Esa. 38.3.
how I have walked before thee in truth, with a perfect heart, and have done
that which is good in thy sight. Most loving Father, who take care of all
men, I commend unto thee, my soul, as a child, that can of himself do
nothing: defend me I pray thee, from all mine enemies, spiritual, and
temporal. keep my body and soul pure, chaste, and undefiled, that I offend
not, either in obscene speech, impure thought, or unclean act. My chastity, is
a more precious Jewel, then I can keep, without thy help. I therefore
beseech thee, who love the pure in heart, to keep my heart pure: be thou my
guide and preserver, lest in the heat of concupiscence, I forget thee. Give me
grace O Lord, to serve and obey my Parents, and those to whose government I am
committed, and that, in all humility. And grant, that if thou shall be pleased
to call me to the honorable estate of Wedlock, I may be matched with one,
with whom I may serve thee in peace, and holiness, all the days of my life,
and at the last, rest with thee, in thy heavenly Kingdom, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

For a Servant.
BLessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who, when thou were the Son of God, and
Lord of all the World, did take upon thee the form of a Servant, Phillip.
2.7.
that by thy obedience, thou might work the salvation of all people, as well
bond as free: I pray thee, that, since thou have bin pleased to call me to the
stare of a Servant, thou would give me an humble and obedient heart, and make
me contented with this condition of life; as allotted to me by thy providence.
Grant, that I may with gentleness of Spirit, and singleness of heart, and
willingness of mind, serve those, under whom I am placed: and that I may not
either murmr against them, or envy those that seated in a higher estate: that
I may obey them, in all their honest commands in all fear, and true respect,
not with eye-seruice, as men-pleasers, Col. 3.22.
but withal my heart, and the rather, because thy commandment binds me so to
do. Grant, that serving them diligently, faithfully, and carefully, I may
avoid their displeasure, and obtain thy favor and blessing, and at the end
of my days, come to that blessed place, where Thou, with the Father and
blessed Spirit do reign world without end.

Before a Journey.
ALmighty and everlasting God who art the Way, the Life, and the Truth, behold,
I beseech thee, amongst how many dangers of the World, Flesh, and Devil, I am
to pass, so that without thy aid, I cannot safely pass through this vale of
misery. Lead, guide, and direct me therefore (O Lord) in the high and right
Way, whither I would go, that I turn neither to the right hand, or the left,
nor become a pray to mine enemies. O Lord, thou have a general care over thy
creatures, I therefore (in this my Journey) commend unto thee, my soul and
body: defend me from all perils, I beseech thee. O Lord, which did send thy
Angel, as a Companion or Fellow-Traueller, with the Son of Tobias, Tob. 5.4.
and did preserve Abraham, and all other thy Servants, in their trauells,
vouchsafe thy blessed Angel, to guide and conduct me. Be thou my comfort in
the way, and a defense in all dangers. Prosper the business which I go about,
and make this enterprise successful to me. And grant, that my affairs being
dispatched, I may return home safe, in body and mind. Preserve (in my
absence) my family, and all I possess: that I, being returned in safety, and
they, securely preserved, we may all together, give thanks to thy glorious
Name, through Jesus, etc.

After a Journey.
I Give thee thanks, O gracious Lord, for thy great mercies to me all the
days of my Life. Thou art he, which created me, and thou art also he, that
preseruest that which thou have created. How often O Lord, have thou turned
thine eyes from my sins, and made as though thou did not see them? How
often (and that justly) might thou have withheld thy hand of preservation
from me, and yet thy patience has been so great toward me, that thou have
suffered no harm to befall me? And as I owe thee many thanks for thy former
preseruations, so now I am further obliged to thee, in that thou have at this
time, not only guided me to the place, whither I intended to go, but have
also brought me back in safety, and in my absence, have preserved all things
unto me. Good Lord give me grace, to be always mindful of these, and all
other thy benefits to me, and to be truly thankful to thee for them. And
grant, that as by thy mercy, I have well ended my affairs abroad, and am
safely returned to this temporal habitation, so my Spirit (after this
Pilgrimage) may return to thy Heavenly Mansion, and there abide with thee for
ever: and that, even for the merits of our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
Amen.

Intercession.
IN which we are to pray, For all Mankind. For the conversion of Jews,
Turks, Heathen
to the truth. For all Christians. That they may be strengthened, that stand.
That they may be converted, that are in error.
For the Churches throughout the World, that they may be united in Religion,
For our Church: that, whatsoever is amiss in it, may be amended. For the
Kings Majesty, and his prosperity. For all Kingdoms Christian. For Ours, and
each part of it, that it may flourish in peace. For the Clergy: That they may
Teach, Live,
well. For wisdom, in the Counsel. Integrity, in the Judges. Strength, in
our Armies. Discretion, in the Magistrates. Obedience, in the People.
For the prosperity and good success: Of Merchants. Husbandmen. Artificers.
Tradesmen.
And that they may live carefully, and honestly, in their vocations. For the
prosperous education of Youth, either in Universities. Schools, or Other parts
of the Kingdom.
For our Parents; Kindred; Friends; Neighbors; and Benefactors. For those, of
whom we have the charge committed to us. Either in Church. Common wealth, or,
Families.
For our Enemies, especially those, that hate us without cause; that God would
convert them. For those, that commend themselves to our prayers: and whose
affairs and troubles, will not suffer them to pray, as they ought. For those,
who are in affliction of Body, or Mind. Who are in danger, or want; in Prison;
or condemned to Death. For those, that Excel: In qualities of the mind.
Strength of Body. Abundance of Wealth.
That they exalt not themselves above their brethren. For those, who undertake
any notable Action, which may redound To the Glory of God. The Peace of the
Church. The Honor of the Kingdom.



Deprecation.
Psalm ^38.1
O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath.

Psalm 44.23.
Cast me not off for ever.

Psalm 51.11.
Cast me not away from thy presence.

Psalm 69.17.
Hide not thy face from me.

Psalm 40.11.
Withold not thy mercy from me.

Psalm 38.11.
Forsake me not, O Lord.

Psalm 119.31.
Put me not to shame.

Psalm 119.39.
Turn away reproach from me.

Psalm 25.2.
Let not mine enemies triumph over me,

Psalm 27.12.
Deliver me not over to their will,

Psalm 64.1.
Preserve my life from them.

Deliver me O Lord, From Ephesians. 4.19.
hardness of heart, to impenitence. Act. 28.27.
Grossness of heart. Prou 7.13.
Impudence of countenance. Esa 48.4.
Hardness of countenance.
From a seared conscience. Tit. 1.16.
A reprobate mind. 1. Ioh. 5.16.
Sin unto death, Viz. Mat. 12.32.
against the holy Ghost.
From Ia. 1.21.
all superfluity of naughtines. Heb. 12.1.
The weight of sin. 1. Ioh. 2.16.
The lusts of the flesh and eyes, and pride of life. All wicked and vain
desires. Hurtful and unclean thoghts Desire of Vainglory.
From a deceitful tongue, Mat. 6.2. Ecclus. 51.5.
Vnpure lips, Hands stretched out to covetousness. Feet swift to evil. Eyes
open to Vanity. Ears open to Toys.
From blindness of heart, Inconstancy of mind, Scurrilitie of speech,
Intemperance of the belly.
From desire of Riches, Reproach of my neighbors, Contempt of the poor,
Oppression of the weak, Rancor of mind.



Root out of me, O Lord. Profaneness and Superstition. Pride and Indecency.
Anger and Contention. Swearing and Cursing. Passion and Corruption. Fraud and
Rapine. Lying and Slander. Envy and Malice.


Take from me The sin of Gluttony.

Give to me The Virtue of Abstinence.

Take from me The spirit of uncleanness.

Give to me The Love of Chastity.

Take from me The Desire of the World.

Give to me Content of Mind.

Take from me The heat of Anger.

Give to me The spirit of meekness.

Take from me The Care of this Life.

Give to me Thy SPIRITVALL Joy.

Take from me Haughtiness of Mind.

Give to me Compunction of Heart.

Deliver me O Lord, From All evil and mischief, All noisome diseases, All
things hurtful to my Soul, Health, Estate, Quiet.

From all Scandal, Grief, Infamy.
From all enemies, Secret, Open, Crafty, Potent.
From Sudden death. Violent death.



In all my Prayers, and petitions. Distresses, and dangers. Infirmities, and
need. Tentations, and tribulations.
Good Lord deliver me, and help me.

From the Terrors of Hell. Eternal Damnation. Apo. 6.6.
The angry countenance of the Judge. The fearful sentence of Mat. 25.41. 8.12.
Depart from me into utter darkness. Jude. 6.
The chains of everlasting darkness. The Apo. 20.10.
Lake of Fire and Brimstone. The Apo. 14.11.
smoke of the torment which ascends for ever.
Good Lord of thy great mercy deliver me.

In Affliction.
MOst merciful Redeemer, always loving to us, whither thou sendest us
heaviness, or joy: for thy mercy is great, whilst by afflictions (as by
bitter pills) thou curest the inward diseased man, and by temporary troubles
thou preparest us, and make us fit, for Joys Eternal. Grant O Sweet
Savior, that I may drink of this cup of adversity, and all others, as
reached to me, by thy hand. Thou know O Lord, that they are bitter to flesh
and blood, yet withal I know, that thou did endure far greater things for
me, and that I have deserved, to suffer much more, then thou have laid upon
me. O Lord, thou know also the weakness and frailty of man's nature, and
therefore I do assuredly believe, that thou (the good Samaritan) wilt not only
cleanse the wounds of my sins, Luc. 10.33.
with the sharp Wine of thy Justice, but wilt also add, the oil, of thy
Mercy, and comfort, whereby I may be strengthened again. If thou think not
yet sufficient, or that enough, which thou have laid upon me, yet add
patience I beseech thee, to my further grief: and grant that these thy
punishments, may provoke me to true repentance, whereby I may (by thy merits)
obtain remission of my sins. But (if thy Fatherly clemency, shall be
contented with this gentle and mild chastisement) take off thy corrections,
and heavy hand from me: that so I may for both thy mercies to me, praise thy
holy Name: as well, that thou have so gently dealt with me, in amending me so
unprofitable a Servant, as, that thou have in time, taken of the bitterness of
affliction, and not utterly confounded me: in the first, of thy works of
mercy, respecting my Necessity, and in the last, not forgetting my Infirmity.
To thee O Savior, with the Father and Holy Spirit, be all Praise, Laud, and
Glory, now, and evermore. Amen.

In time of Pestilence.
O Lord God, who reiectest none, that trusting in thy goodness, and believing
in thy promises, come to thee for succor and help. Behold we beseech thee,
with the eyes of compassion and mercy, thy poor, sinful, and miserable
people; who now are much afflicted and visited, with the Plague of Pestilence,
with the scourge of thine angry hand. Our streets are full of grief, and our
houses are filled with heaviness; and all our joy, is turned into mourning; by
reason of thy heavy wrath, and hot displeasure which now is gone out, to
destroy and consume us from the face of the earth. We confess O Lord, it is
but just, that all thy Creatures should rebel against man, and oppose
themselves against him, who has so desperately rebelled against thee, his
Creator: for they are all obedient to thee, only Man, sinful and wretched Man,
is continually stubborn and rebellious, daily abusing thy Blessings, and
hourly transgressing thy Commandments, not leaving his evil ways for fear
of thy threats, nor being allured to goodness, with the hope of thy promises.
We daily hear by thy messengers, and read in thy Sacred Word, what thou have
threatened of old to thy rebellious people, and in them, to us. How, that if
they kept not thy Commandments, thou would send upon them the Sword, Leuit.
26.25.
to avenge the quarrel of thy covenant; and when they should be gathered in
their Cities, Ierem. 14.12.
thou would send the Pestilence among them, and they should be delivered
into the hands of the enemy: and yet we have hitherto been so senseless
thereof, that we fear not to add sin to sin, and to multiply iniquity
upon iniquity. And now O Lord, we reap the just reward of our impiety, and
feel (too soon) that we are justly plagued, for our disobedience. O Lord, we
confess, that thy Judgments are just, and withal, humbly acknowledge our
misdeeds, and heartily repent us of them: and earnestly beg and crave, that
thou would in mercy pardon them, and remit the punishment which, in Justice,
is due unto us for them. O Lord In thy just anger remember thy mercy, incline
thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and upon
our repentance and humiliation, remove this thy punishment, which in thy
displeasure, thou have begun to inflict upon us. Command thy destroying
Angel to spare us, Ezech. 9.
and not to strike us to utter desolation. Be merciful unto us, who are every
hour, in danger of thy heavy Judgments. Take away the vnwholsomnesse of the
air, and purify our dwellings unto health and safety. Keep those which are
well, and release those, upon whom, thou have laid the rod of thy afflictions.
Thou have promised O Lord, that if at any time thou sendest the Pestilence
among the people, 2. Chro. 7.13 14.
If that people do humble themselves, 1. Kings. 8.
and pray, and seek thy presence, and turn from their wicked ways, thou will
hear in Heaven, and be merciful to their sin, and heal their Land. we
humbly pray thee O Lord, to make good thy promise, and ease us of our
afflictions. For behold O Lord, we humble our selves under thy mighty hand; we
bewail, and lament our sinful lives past; and humbly beseech thee, to give us
thy assisting Grace, that we may henceforth order our ways, to please thee.
Then shall no Contagion hurt us, Dan. 9.18.
but we shall live to praise thy Name: and all the world shall know, that thou
art our God, and that thy Name is called upon by us. Hear us O Lord, and be
merciful to us, even for Jesus Christ's sake the Righteous. To whom with thee,
and the Blessed Spirit, be ascribed all honor and zpraise, now, and for ever
Amen.

Confession of Faith.
Mar. 9.24.
Lord I believe, Help thou my unbelief. In God, The father, Almighty, Maker
of heaven and earth, In which words I consider his natural affection. his
saving power. his Providence
in disposing preserving governing
all things. Ephesians. 1.10.
Who in the dispensation of the fullness of times, will gather together in one,
all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and earth. In Jesus Our Savior,
Christ, The Anointed, His only Son Even of God the Father, Our Lord, By
creating and redeeming us. 1. Who was conceived by the holy Ghost. To purge the
uncleanness of our conception. 2. Borne of the Virgin MARY. To purge the
uncleanness of our Birth. 3. Suffered under Pontius Pilate. Those things
which we should have suffered: that we might not suffer them. 4. Was
crucified, To take away the Curse of the Law. 5. Dead, To take away the
Sharpness of death. 6. Buried, To take away the corruption of the Grave. 7.
Descended into Hell. Whither we ought to have gone: that we might not go
thither at all. 8. The third day he rose again from the dead, That he might
raise with him our nature, being made the first fruits of them which sleep.
1. Cor. 15.20
9. He ascended into Heaven, To prepare us a place, whereto we had no right.
10. He sits at the right hand of the father, Incessantly to intercede for
us. 11. From thence he shall come, To receive us, 12. To judge both the quick
and the dead. Even to the consummation of all things. In the Holy Ghost. In
whom I consider a power, sanctifying from above, and quickening to
immortality, working powerfully, and inuisibly in us. By the Illumination of
knowledge. Luc. 12.12.
And Infusion of grace 1. Ioh. 2.27.
Io. 16.8.
In reprehending things evil in us, Io. 14.26.
Teaching us things we know not, Suffering and forbearing us. Genesis 20.6.
Preventing us from doing evil. To. 8.26.
Encouraging us us to do good. Assisting us in our Prayers. Striving for our
good. Ioh. 14.16.
Comforting us in our necessities.
All these being Graces and fruits of the Holy Spirit.

4. The Holy Catholic Church. Which is the mystical body of the head Christ
Jesus, composed of all people, throughout the World, which are called by the
Spirit, to the Belief of Divine Truth, and holiness of Conversation.

And of all these members of his body, there is a reciprocal participation to
the Communion of Saints and Forgiveness of Sins
For the present. To the hope of The resurrection of the body and Life
everlasting
hereafter.
Lord I believe. Help the defects of my faith.
Father. Reverence thee, as Almighty. Commend my self to thee, as to a
faithful Creator.
Thy only Son: As to the purger of our nature, In his Conception and Birth.
As to our deliverer, In his Passion, Cross, and Death, As to the triumpher
over Hell, In his Descension. Over death, In his Resurrection. As to our fore
runner, In his Ascension. As to our Advocate, In his Session. As to the
establisher of our faith, In his Second Coming.
That he may be fashioned in me. That I may be made conformable to him. To his
Conception, To his Nativity, In Works. In Faith. In Humility That for his
Passions. 1. I may Sympathize with him, as with one, that suffered for me, and
be ready to suffer of him, and for him, when it shall be his good pleasure. 2.
I may have an Antipathie with sin, as being the cause of his Sufferings, and
be Revenged of, Crucify, Mortify, Bury,
Sin in my self. 3 I may conform my self. 1. To his descension into Hell.
By often descending thither in meditation. 2 To his Resurrection. By rising to
newness of life. 3. To his Ascension. By sauouring and seeking those things
which are above and nearer to my Salvation. 4. To his Judgment. By Judging my
self, least I be condemned with the World.


That when I am cold in Prayer, and want any Spiritual grace or comfort, I may
remember thy Session, and Intercession. And when I am fervent in any evil
affection, or concupiscence, I may not forget, thy fearful and terrible
Judgment Seat, and the sound of the last Trump.
Christ's sake, I may also receive thy Unction, even thy saving grace; the
unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost, and never 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
extinguish, Ephesians. 4.30.
grieve, Act. 7.51.
resist, or Mat. 12.32.
reproach it. Catholic Church, where I may be partaker of the Persons,
Actions, prayers, and Examples of Saints. To the assured belief, of Remission
of sins. To the hope, of Resurrection, and Translation, to Life everlasting.
Lord increase my Faith, Luc. 17.6. Mat. 17.20.
as a grain of mustard seed. Not Dead, Temporary, or Hypocritical: But 1.
Tim. 1.5.
Pure and unfeigned, most b Holy, Ephesians. 3.11.
Lively, and Ia. 2.26.
working by Charity.



Confession of Faith.
O Almighty, and Eternal Lord God; I poor, unworthy, and wretched sinner, and
bold to renew that covenant of Faith, which in my Baptism, I made unto thee. I
believe, and confess, that all those things, which thy most beloved Son
Christ Jesus did, suffered, and taught, while he was conversant in the Flesh,
here upon the Earth, are most most true, and certain. I profess, that I
believe, all the Articles of the Apostles Creed, and the Holy Gospel of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which is preached through all the World. To this
Faith, I bind my self, and purpose (Gods grace assisting me) never to depart
from it, and acknowledge, that without believing thus, I cannot be saved. I am
heartily glad (O Heavenly Father) even in my soul, and give thee all possible
thanks, that into this Faith I was Baptized: and do most humbly pray thee O
Lord, that this Faith may not fail me, during this life, nor at the hour of
death. And if I shall at any time hereafter, either by the temptation of the
Devil, imperfection of my senses, pain of any disease, weakness, or any
other means, speak any thing, in any other manner, then shall be agreeable to
this Faith, I renounce all such words, as none of mine, and desire thee O
Lord, to forgive them, and pray all those, which shall hear them (if any such
shall be) to account them, as none of mine. This I protest, thy Grace aiding
me. To thee, be all Honor, and Praise, from this time forth, for evermore
Amen.

Confession of Gods Glory and Praise.
FOr his great and wonderful works. Of Genesis 1.
Creation. Ecclus. 43.
Preservation. Psalm. 145.
Governance.


Romans 1.20. Ioh. 17.5. Genesis 14.18.21.33. Luc. 1.37. Genesis 18 4. Ier. 23.24.
Psalm. 13 9. Ioh. 21.17. 2. King. 8.39 Romans 11.33. Psalm. 117.2. Mat. 24.35.
Psalm. 111.3.
For his Goodness. The excellency of his Glory. His Highness. His Eternity.
His Omnipotence. His Omnipresence. His Omniscience. The height of his Wisdom.
His Truth. His Exquisite Justice. His Psalm. 119.456. 130.4. 17.7. 13.6.
Great Plentiful Wonderful Everlasting
Mercy.


For his Genesis 3.15.
Promise of the Seed.

For performance of that Promise.

For sending his only Son out of his bosme, to work the great work of our
Redemption.

In being Luc. 2.7.
borne in poor and humble manner.

In being conversant on earth, in painful manner.

Matthew. Mar. Luc. Ioh.
In suffering Death, in grievous manner.

For all that he did or suffered For us on Earth.

For all his comfortable Parables of mercy. Of the Mat. 18.23.
Two Debtors. Luc. 18.10.
Publican and Pharisee. Luc. 15.4.
The lost Sheep. Luc. 8.
The lost Groat. Luc. 11.
The Prodigal Son. Mat. 20.9.
Those that were called at the eleventh hour.


For his comfortable sayings of Mercy. Ioh. 3.17.
God sent not his Son into the World to condemn it. 12.47.
I came not to Judge the World, but to save it. Luc. 9.56.
The Son of Man, came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them. Luc. 5.32.
Mat. 9.23.
I am not sent to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Mat. 18.11.
Luc. 19.10.
The Son of man came to save, and seek that which was lost. Mat. 11.8.
Come unto me all ye that labor etc. Ioh. 6.37.
Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Luc. 23.74.
Father forgive them, etc. Luc. 23.43.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.


For his examples of mercy. Mat. 15.28.
The Woman of Canaan. Ioh. 4.
Samaria. Luc. 8.48.
With the bloody issue. Ioh. 8.11.
Taken in Adultery. Luc. 7.48.
Mary Magdalen. Luc. 19.5.
Zacheus. Luc. 23.43.
The Thief. Luc. 22.62.
Peter. Act. 9.
Paul. Heb. 12.3.
Sinners contradicting Him. Luc. 4.29.
That would have destroyed him. Ioh. 8.59. 10.31
That stoned him. Mar. 27.39. Luc. 23.34.
That reviled and blasphemed him. Act. 2.23. 3.15.19.
That crucified him. Luc. 15.2.
This Man receives sinners.


For the Holy Spirit.
In the Old Testament.
Genesis 1.2.
By moving on the waters.

By sending it into living creatures.

By inspiring it into man.

By descending on the Prophets.

In the New Testament visibly.
Mat. 3.16.
In the shape of a Dove at Christ's Baptism.

Ioh. 20.22.
By the gift of Christ to the Apostles.

Act. 2.3.
In the shape of fiery tongues to them.

Inuisibly.
In Luc. 1.35.
the Virgins Conception of Christ.

Upon Act. 4.31.
the Congregation in prayer.

Acts 10.44.
Cornelius and others.

Acts 19.6.
The 12. Disciples at Ephesus.

Ioh. 14.26. 16.14. Luc. 12.12. ^. Ioh. 1.27.
For his care over us.

For the Illumination of understanding.

1. Cor. 6.11. Ioh. 3.5. Gal. 5.22. Psalm. 143.10. Act. 2.4. Romans 8.14. Ioh.
14.16.26. Ephesians. 13.13.14. Romans 5.5.8.26. Act. 9.31.
In our Justification. Our Regeneration. Governing our Actions. Comforting us in
tentations. Strengthening us in tentations.


Ephesians. 13.13.14. Romans 5.5. 8.26. Act. 9.31.
Bearing witness with us, and Romans 8.16.
Assuring us, that we are Gods Children. Ioh. 16.8.
Reproouing us in evil Actions. Romans 8.26.
Assisting us in good works. Ioh. 14.26.
Putting good things into our remembrance. Romans 6.26.
Interceding for us with groans unutterable.


Motives to Repentance.
FOr as much as it is beyond the compass and power, of the Natural man, not
to sin at all, but that we add daily, sin to sin, and iniquity to iniquity,
and that it has pleased God (of his mercy to mankind) to promise forgiveness
to those, which shall truly and faithfully repent them, of the same. Therefore
the duty of Repentance, of all other parts of Devotion, is most necessary for
us: seeing that by it, God in Christ Jesus, is reconciled to us, his anger
toward us is appeased, and we are restored to his favor. Certainly it is a
blessed thing to confess our own wretchedness; for whosoever humbles
himself, and penitently bewaileth his sins, shall be heard by God, and by
him be delivered from the punishment due for them: Origin.
for a contrite heart suffers no repulse. Saint August. says Aug.
that daily repentance, is necessary, for daily sinners: for in many things we
offend daily, which are also daily forgiven, if we continually repent us of
them. Greg.
To repent, is to bewail and grieve for our sins already committed, and not
to commit again the sins we bewail and grieve for. For he that mournes for
his sins, and leaves them not, incurres the greater punishment. For Aug.
Repentance, consists not, in the often repetition, and confession of sins,
without forsaking them: for that is but a simple profession of them, not a
repenting of them. But this is true Repentance, when that seems grievous and
bitter to our Souls, which in the evil act, was sweet and delightful: and
when that ill, which was formerly pleasing to us, does now grieve us at the
heart. And this is the fruit of Repentance (as the Baptist calls it Mat. 3.8.
) lamenting for sins past, and utterly forsaking them for the time to come.
For Confession of offenses, is never perfect and good, till absolute profession
and purpose to forsake them, be joined to it. And as Repentance in it self is
necessary to be thought upon, so is it also in time to be considered of. For
although the bounty of God, despises not a sinner Repenting, even in the
article or point of death, and that, true Repentance never comes too late in
this world, as appears by the Thief on the Cross: Luc. 23.
yet on the other side, the example of the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.
ought to diswade us from protraction, and putting it of. Saint August. says,
Psalm 110.
God has promised thee pardon: but no man can promise thee to live while to
morrow. If therefore thou have lived ill hitherto, begin to live well even to
day. Therefore we must have a special care, that we defer not our
Repentance from time to time, lest we be taken in a time, when we least expect,
and (with the Virgins) hear that bitter saying, I know you not. Mat. 25.12.
Yet many there are, and those too many, that so largely promise to themselves
Gods expectancy and patience, and thereupon so long continue in their evil
courses, that they are (by his indignation at their procrastination) so
prevented, that they neither find time to convert, nor the Benefit of
Remission. Wherefore the wise man gives good and safe counsel, Ecclus. 5.7.
Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not of from day to day, for
suddenly shall the wrath of God come forth, and in thy security, thou shall be
destroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance. Neither is it so acceptable to
God, if thou put of thy Repentance till thou art old, as if thou returnedst to
him in thy days of strength: for if thou repentest when thou can sin no
longer, thy sins leave thee, and not thou, them. Lastly, the most powerful
act of Repentance with God, is, unfeigned sorrow, with sighs, groans, and
weeping, accompanying it. For tears, are even as the blood of a wounded soul,
and ascend up to the nostrills of God, as the Odor of a sweet smelling
sacrifice: neither do Tears (which are shed without hypocrisy) fall to the
ground, but (as David says) Psalm. 56.8.
God tells and gathers them, and puts them into his bottle. The tears
of penitent sinners work much upon Gods mercy. Peter having denied our Savior
thrice, wept bitterly, but said nothing. We find that he wept, Luc. 22.
we find not what he said, yet we see, that he made choice to repent, rather
with tears, and no words, then with words, and no tears: Mary Magdalen said
nothing, but she wept, and Christ said unto her, Luc. 7.48.
Thy sins are forgiven thee. Ezechias wept sore, and the Lord said Esa. 38.5.
I have heard thy prayers,and seen thy tears, behold I will add to thy days
fifteen years. Of tears there are three sorts. 1. Natural, which in
themselves are neither good nor bad: such are those, which we spend for the
loss of goods, friends, or the like. 2. Evil, as the tears of the Hypocrite,
Harlot, and other the Devils Instruments. 3. Good, and they are of two kinds.
First, of Hatred or grief, such are the tears we spend in bewailing our
sins. 2, Of Joy or Love, either for that Comfort which we receive in our
Souls, by the Hope, that God in Christ Jesus, is reconciled to us: or for the
Love, and earnest desire we have, to see God in the Communion of Saints:
Otherwise, Tears in themselves, are nothing else, but plain water, flowing
from the Conduits of our heads, by the pipes of the eyes: a mere excrement.

The Duty of Repentance.
THis Duty of Repentance, consists of two parts. 1. Mortification of the old
man, which is the first degree of Regeneration. 2. Quickening of the New, which
is the second.


Mortification, is an act of the holy Spirit in us, Romans 6.4.5.6.
who does by little and little, quench, and abate in our souls and bodies the
natural strength of our corruption, which was crept into us, partly
originally, by Adams fall, Colos. 3.
(which is that we mean by the old man) and partly that Sin, which we have
actually increased, by our own frailty.

It consists, 1. In our acknowledgement of Sin. 2. In our Contrition and
Sorrow for it.


Both which, Psalm. 38.18.
are set down in one Verse of the Psalmist.

1. Our acknowledgement is either 1. Inward. 2. Outward.
1. Inward acknowledgement, is when we feel the burden of our sins, pressing
us down, our consciences accusing us, Psalm. 38.5. Romans 2.15.
and our thoughts testifying against us. 2. Outward, Psalm. 38.39.
is when we make Confession of them, by speech, or other outward actions.


And this Confession of Sin, is a Publication, or manifestation of our
unworthiness and guilt, whereby we testify and bewail, that we have sinned
against God, and have (withal) a settled resolution and purpose, to offend him
no more.

Confession is either Public Private.


Public Confession is, when upon the Sabbath day, or other days appointed
for Gods worship, we, in the open Congregation, together, or after the
Minister, do confess our sins to God.

Private is, either 1. To God in our Closets, or other private places, as Psalm.
32.5. 38.9.18. 41.4. 51. 2. Sam. 24.10. Dan. 9.

2. To men. Iam. 5.16.

2. Contrition, is a sorrow, and grief of the conscience, and mourning of the
Soul, because we have offended God, having also joined with it, a displeasure
against our selves, and a true humiliation both of souls and bodies, as, Iam.
4.9. Esa. 66.2. Ezec. 36.1. 41.10. Ion. 3.8. 2. King. 22.19. Mat. 5.4. 2. Cor.
7.9,10,11.

Quickening of the new man, is, when we, returning to God, live spiritually, and
have a desire (for the time to come) to please Him: this is also called a
Conversion to God.

And this we do, 1. By avoiding evil, 2. Following that which is good.


Both comprehended. Psalm. 34.14. Esa. 1.16,17.

The Benefits we receive by Repentace are: The deferring of Gods punishments
due for sin. Psalm. 95.10.
The mitigation of his displeasure. Psalm. 89.32.33. 2. Chr. 30.8. Ion. 3.
Ezech. 33. Ioh. 3.10. 1. King. 21.29. Dan. 4.27.
The auerting of his judgments, The escaping of eternal death. The prolonging
of our prosperity. The attaining of Eternal Life.


Confession of sins.
Ier. 9.
WHo will give Water to my Head, or Tears to mine Eyes, that I may, day and
night, bewail my sins, and ingratitude against thee, O GOD, my Creator? Many
things there are, which terrify men's consciences, and bring them to the true
sense of their sins, but nothing is so available thereunto, as the
contemplation of the greatness of thy goodness, and the multitude of thy
Benefits. That therefore O Lord, my poor wretched soul, may the better see,
and consider, in what state it stands, I will recount, thy manifold Blessings,
and (withal) the number of my sins, that thereby also, I may more clearly
understand, who thou art, and what I am: how gracious a God thou have been to
me, and how vile and rebellious a sinner, I have been to thee.

There was a time O Lord, (as thy divine Majesty best know) when I was not,
and thou tookest me out of the dust of the earth, and gave me a being;
creating in me, a soul after thine own similitude and likeness, and made it
capable of thy Glory. Thou did create my Body, with all the members and
senses thereof; Thou did create my Soul, with all the powers and faculties
thereof. And as thou did create me, so (of thy especial goodness) thou
did preserve me in my mothers womb, that I might come safe into this World,
and receive the Mark and Badge of all thine, even the Sacrament of Baptism,
whereby I was cleansed from the guilt of original sin. Amongst a multitude
of Infidels, dispersed over the face of the Earth, thou would have me in the
number of the faithful, even of those, to whom so happy a lot has fallen, to
be thine, regenerated, with the water of Baptism: from which time, I was taken
to be Thine, and that admirable and happy contract was made between us, that
thou should be my Lord, and I thy Servant: thou my Father, and I thy Son:
that thou should perform and show to me, the Love of a Father, and I to
thee, the Duty of a Son. Further O Lord, thou did descend from heaven to
earth, for my sake, seeking me, in all the ways, wherein I had lost my self.
With thy Humanity, thou did enoble my nature, and by thy bonds, did deliver
me from bondage. Thou did challenge me from the power of the Devil, by
delivering thy self into the hands of sinners, and did destroy sin, by
taking upon thee the form of a sinner. With what reverence shall I speak of,
that other Blessed Sacrament, which Thou also O Lord have instituted and
ordained, for a remedy of all the miseries which have befallen me, and the many
sins I have committed since my Baptism, and for a Salve and cure for all my
spiritual diseases, even the Sacrament of thy most precious Body and Blood?
And as thou have bestowed on me all these divine and heavenly blessings: so
likewise in plentiful manner, have thou heaped on me, temporal favors. Thou
have from my birth to this hour, preserved, nourished, clothed and fed me, in
most abundant manner, giving to me the use of all thy creatures, for my
sustentation. Nay, what could thou have done more for me, then thou have
done? Or what could thou have given me more, then thou have bestowed upon me,
either of Blessings of this World or of the World to come.

Now, having received, all these mercies and favors from thee, how have I, on
my part behaved my self in thankfulness to thee for them? Have I returned
due praise unto thy Majesty for them, or carried my self, and ordered my
life, like to one, that might any way deserve them? O Lord I confess that I
have not; for such has been the malice and corruption of my heart, that in
stead of showing my self conformable to thy will, I daily add sin to sin,
and iniquity to iniquity, Romans 2.5.
heaping up wrath for my self against the day wrath. How can I without tears
remember, how often thou might justly have slain me, and yet
(notwithstanding my sins, which call for vengeance) no evil has happened unto
me? How many souls burn in Hell fire, which have sinned far less then I,
and yet I remain alive? What had become of me, if thou had taken me away
with those, at the same time? How strict had my Judgment been, if thy Justice
had laid hold on me, laden with so many sins? Who then, O Lord, has bound
the hands of thy Justice, who has deprecated for me, when I lay thus lulled a
sleep, in the security of my sins? What has pleased thee in me, that thou
should deal more mercifully with me, then with those, who, in the midst of
their days, in the heat of their youth, are taken away from amongst us? My
sins cried out against me, and thou stoppedst thine ears; my offenses daily
increased against thee, yet thy mercy daily abounded toward me. I sinned, thou
did expect me, I fled from thee, and thou followedst me: I was weary in
offending thee, and thou not weary in expecting me. And in the midst of all my
sins, I ever received many good inspirations, and godly reproves, from thy
holy Spirit, which checked me, in the dissolute course of my life. How often
have thou called me with the voice of Love? How often have thou terrified me
with threats and fears, laying before me the peril of death, and the rigor
of thy divine Justice? How often have thou followed me with thy Word preached,
invited me with thy Blessings, chastened me with thy Scourges, compassing me
about, that I could by no means fly from thee? And lastly, (which is not the
least of thy mercies) with what patience have thou waited for my serious
repentance?

Psalm. 116.13.
What then O Lord shall I render back to thee, for all that thou have done
unto me? In that thou have created me, I owe thee all that I am created, In
that thou have preserved me, and thus long expected my return to thee, I owe
thee life, and all that I am. But, in that thou have regenerated, sanctified,
and redeemed me, and left those excellent pledges for my Salvation, I know not
what to render unto thee. For if the lives of all men and Angels, were in my
power, and that I could offer them unto thee for a Sacrifice of praise and
thanks; yet were it nothing, being compared to the least of all thy Spiritual
blessings, bestowed on me.

Who therefore will give a flood of tears to mine eyes, that I may lament my
great Ingratitude, and unjust retribution, for for all these thy manifold
blessings, heaped upon me? Help me thou O Lord, help me, and give me grace,
that I may heartily confess, and grievously bewail, my heinous offenses, and
transgressions, against thee; that thou may be reconciled to me, and in thy
abundant Mercies, show some pity to me for them. I am thy Creature O Lord,
made after after thine own Likeness and Image: acknowledge thy workmanship,
for it is thine own. In taking away the soil and filth, wherewith it is
defiled and stained, thou shall soon perceive it, to be thine own
handy-worke. Art not thou a Father of mercies, 2. Cor. 1.3.
which have neither number, end, nor measure? Although I have shaken off, the
duty and obedience of a child toward thee, yet cast not thou off, the Love
of a Father toward me, I beseech thee. Although I have done many things,
whereby thou might justly condemn me, yet thou have not lost the means,
whereby thou may mercifully save me. If thou forsake me, to whom shall I
fly? who is there to help me, besides thy self? Acknowledge O Lord, a
straying Sheep: Behold, I come to thee all wounded, thou can heal me:
blind, thou can enlighten me; full of leprosy, thou can cleanse me: and
am wholly dead, yet thou can revive me. Thy mercy is greater then my sin:
thy clemensie, more then my wickedness: and thou can remit, more then I can
commit. Do not then (O Lord) put me back from thee: look not so much upon my
sins, as upon thy infinite mercies, who live and raignest God of all
mercies, world without end.

Another.
O Almighty Lord God great in thy Power, Exo. 34.
and terrible in thy Judgments, who made the Heaven, the Earth, the Sea, and
all things in them, by thy Word, whose Power cannot be resisted, and whose
mercy is over all thy works. Psalm. 145.9.
All things are under thy Power and Rule, both in Heaven and Earth. Thou show
mercy on whom thou will, and art pitiful to whom thou please, and would
not the death of a sinner, neither delightest in the destruction of any. O God,
rich in mercy, who, Ephesians. 2.4.
out of thy extraordinary Love to mankind, even when we were thine enemies,
Romans 5.10.
did send thine only Son into the World, that every one that believed on
him, might not perish, but have life everlasting. Have mercy upon me, have
mercy upon me, according to thy mercy, and according to the multitude of thy
mercies, Psalm 51.
do away my offenses. Holy Father, I have sinned against heaven and before
thee; Luc. 15.18.
and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. I have turned from thee, and
have broken all thy Commandments. I have not walked aright, but have gone
after mine own lusts, Esa. 65.2.
choosing those ways, which thou have forbidden me, to tread in. Neither O
Lord, have I feared thine anger, but have been in all things disobedient unto
thee, and have hardened my heart against thee. I have hated Instruction, and
cast thy sayings behind me. Truth has found no place in me, and my hands
have been the workers of much wickedness. I have spoken vainly, idly, and
wickedly: have brought forth deceit, and meditated the way of untruth. I have
provoked thy wrath against me, by accustoming my self to do the works of the
flesh, and rejecting the good motions of the Spirit. Woe unto me rebellious
wretch, Esa. 30.1.
that I have committed these wicked acts, against thee, so loving, so good, so
gracious a God; to the utter destruction of my soul, without thy mercy in
Christ Jesus. In remembrance, and confidence whereof, O Lord, I come to thee,
and humbly entreat thee, that thou would not reject, a contrite, humble,
miserable, and repentant sinner, who at this time earnestly inuocateth thy
Name. Psalm. 7.9.
Return a little O Lord; and be entreated, for my manifold sins, do not
unto me, according to the multitude of them, neither reward me, according to my
transgressions. Let my humble prayers, sighs, and groans, come into thy
presence; and according to thy promises, receive me again into thy favor. For
O Father, I am one of those, whom thy only Son redeemed with his most
precious blood. O Lord, my soul does loath my life, by reason of my manifold
sins, and I humble my self under thy mighty hand, 1. Pet. 5.6.
because I know, that in thine anger, thou show mercy, Abac. 3.2.
and in time of trouble, thou do forgive offenses: And behold O Lord, that I
confess my sins, beseeching thee for thy goodness, to do unto me,
according to thy wonted mercy. I am confounded, and ashamed, to lift up mine
eyes unto thee, because my sins have prevented my prayers, and have ascended
up to thee, before them. Against thee, O Lord, have I sinned, Psalm. 51.
and done much evil in thy sight; yet wherefore should I dye in my sins,
seeing it is not thy pleasure, that any sinner should dye, Ezech. 18.
but turn unto thee and live? For thou art good and gracious, and sauest
those, who are altogether unworthy, out of the abundance of thy mercy in Christ
Jesus the Righteous. For although thine anger against sinners is insufferable,
and who may abide it? yet thy mercy toward offenders is unsearchable, and who
can find out the depth thereof or describe it? Psalm. 22.
Our Fathers in their troubles cried unto thee and thou did deliver them,
they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded. And though they, by
their offenses had justly provoked thine anger, yet (upon their humiliation)
thou did remember thy covenant, and ease them of their afflictions. O Lord,
be merciful also unto me, for I am miserable and wretched. Heal my soul,
Psalm. 41.4.
for I have sinned against thee. Psalm. 6.3.
My soul is very much disquieted within me, how long Lord will it be, Psalm. 13.
ere thou look upon me and deliver it? Lighten mine eyes, Psalm. 13.3.
for I have (too long) slept in death, and my sins have (too long) had
domminion over me. Return O Lord at the last, and be gracious unto me. O
deliver my soul, and have mercy upon me: And all my bones shall say: Lord who
is like unto thee? To thee be all Honor Praise and Glory, world without end,
Amen.

Another.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the only Physician of sick souls, who in the fullness
of time, came into this World, not to call the Just, but sinners to Repentance.
Mat. 9.13.
Behold me, the most wretched of all sinners, who (with as much humility as I am
able) in the confidence of thy great goodness, cast my self before the
footestoole of thy Majesty, confessing my great, and grievous offenses. And,
if the Publican in the Gospel durst not lift up his eyes to Heaven, Luc. 18.
but stood a far of, and smote his breast, saying, Lord be merciful to me a
sinner, what shall I do, whose sins surpass the greatest sinners offenses?
For all my inward and outward parts, are wholly depraved, and nothing that is
good, remains in me. And, when I look, into the book of my conscience, I
find, that I have abominablie polluted that garment of innocence, which I
received at my Baptism. I have put all my strength to offend thee with all the
members I have. For, my feet, Romans 13.15.
have been swift to evil, and slow to good: mine eyes, open to Vanity, and
shut, to that, which is truly amiable. My hands, stretched to covetousness,
and closed from the works of mercy: mine ears, ready to hear evil, and
stopped to the good motions of the Spirit: and my Soul (the noblest part in
me) which has eyes to contemplate the Glory of thy Majesty, I have turned
away from the consideration of thy Excellency, to vain, and transitory things
of this life, I have given liberty, to whatsoever mine eyes have desired, and
have not resisted the unclean passions of my heart: so that the whole course
of my life, has been, a continual warfare against thee. How often have I
returned as a dog to the vomit, and as a Sow washed, 2. Pet. 2.22.
to the mire? I am that Foot, which has said in his heart, Psalm. 14.
there is no God. For I have lived so dissolutely, that I have made plain
demonstration by my behavior, that I believed, Thou either were not at all, or
else could do nothing at all. Thou O Lord, have often called me, and I have
neglected thy voice: Thou have expected me, and I have abused thy patience.
Thou have given me the treasure of a long time to repent, and I have consumed
it wastefully. Thou have stricken me, and I have not been sensible of thy
hand. Thou have afflicted me, and I have made no use of thy correction. Thou
did sweat, to make me clean, and I still remain in my pollution. I am
hardened, as well with thy punishments, as with thy blessings: being rebellious
to the one, and unthankful for the other. And what shall I further say? but
that my heart, soul, thoughts, and body, are all impure and defiled, and that
of all sinners I am the chief, 1. Tim. 1.15.
unworthy, that the Earth should any longer sustain me, or that I should expect
any thing from thee, but thy seuerest Judgments. For it thou sparedst not
Lucifer and his Angels, for one only sin of Pride, but did cast them from
Heaven, Jude. 6.
to be reserved for everlasting chains of darkness, unto the Judgment of
the great day: what can I hope or look for, that have offended thee, not in
one offense alone, but in all kind of transgressions? For my sins are in
number, numberless; in so much, that I hate my self, for my madness, that
from so noble a liberty, I am fallen into so base a servitude: and find my
self overwhelmed with the horrible dread of thy fearful Judgments. Psalm.
55.5.
Yet when I behold and consider that infinite mercy of thine, which surpasses
all the rest of thy works, Psalm. 145.9.
I am a little refreshed, and my soul is a little comforted and revived: for,
as by the examination of the haynousnesse of my sins and the strictness of
thy Justice, I did almost despair: so considering and weighing, the
testimonies of thy Servants, left upon record, Ezech. 18. Joel 2.
for the comfort of poor distressed souls, I am somewhat again, cheered and
raised up. For, besides those places of consolation, and many more, I find, by
diverse Parables and similitude of thine own, how ready and propense thou art,
to receive and pardon the penitent. As, Luc. 15.
by the lost penny, the lost sheep: and by the Prodigal Son, whose Image I
find in my self, and whose life, mine does fully parallel. Wherefore O Lord,
I humbly entreat thee, to restore me (thy lost Son) to thy favor: and
withal, to give me true sense and knowledge of the Innocence, I have lost. I
do not desire, that thou should deal so kindly with me; as that Father
did with his Son: but I shall be happy and glad, if thou will entertain me, as
one of the meanest of thy hired Servants. My hope and confidence is, that thou will pity me, because thou art the fountain of pity, and compassion.
Behold me therefore, with the eyes of pity, look on me, and ease me, who
come unto thee laden with the heavy burden of my sins: pardon them, Mat.
11.28.
and save me, for thy infinite mercy: and remember not my sins, but thine
own sufferings: think not on me, as a proud and rebellious malefactor, but as
an humble and penitent convert. Look on me, with those eyes of compassion,
wherewith thou did sometime behold, Luc. 7.48.
Mary Magdalen, Luc. 22.62.
Peter, and Luc. 23.43.
the good Thief: give me true knowledge of my sins, with the first; true
contrition, with the second, and receive me with the third, into thy Heavenly
Paradise. Let thy obedience satisfy for my rebellions, thy innocence for my
guilt, thy humility for my arrogance, thy fasting for my intemperance, and thy
Justice for my iniquity. Mat. 26.39.
Lord if thou will thou can make me whole, and rerestore me to thy former
grace. Purify, purge, and cleanse me from my offenses, and open mine eyes,
that I may clearly see mine own pollution: and make me to grieve, that I have
not grieved for my sins, as I ought to have done. And as thou have, by thy
long suffering, hitherto expected my repentance, so, of thy infinite mercy and
goodness, pardon me, repenting: and grant me grace, that I may be afraid
to offend thee hereafter. Hear me O sweet Savior, and make intercession for
me to the Father, with whom and the Holy Spirit, thou do live and reign
coequall and coeternall Lord God, World without end. Amen.

Confession of sins.
I confess, O Lord, That Job 14.4.
I was borne in uncleanness. That Psalm. 51.5.
I was shaped in wickedness, and in sin my mother conceived me. Deuteronomy. 29.18.
That I am a root of bitterness, Deuteronomy. 32.32.
A wild Vine of Sodom, Romans 11.24.
A branch of the wild Olive, Ephesians. 2.3.
The child of wrath, A Vessel of dishonor and perdition,
That Osee. 7.16.
my heart is rebellious, like a starting Bow. That Psalm. 5.10.
my throat is an open sepulcher, venting all folly. That Esa. 6.5.
I am of polluted lips. That Psalm. 144.11.
my tongue talks nothing but vanity. That Mat. 7.22.
mine eyes are evil, prove to lust. That Psalm. 58.4.
mine ears are uncircumcised, and like to the deaf Adder. That Ier. 3.3.
I have a Forehead of brass, and a neck of iron. That Heb. 12.12.
my hands are slow to good, That Romans 3.15.
my feet are swift to evil.


I have sinned against thee O Lord, and in thy sight, not fearing thy Majesty.

My sins are: In quantity, Esa. 57.8. Psalm. 25.11.
Large, and of a great size. Of long continuance, From my mothers breasts. Hos.
9.9.
Deep. Heavy. Like a Psalm. 38.4.
Burden. Like Zach. 5.7.
Lead.
Stretching to heaven with their cry. Ier. 30.14.15.
Many in number: Like the Stars: Psalm. 40.12.
More then the hayres of my head. Esa. 57.20.
Oftentimes reiterated. Ier. 6.7.
As a Fountain casting out water.
Till they become as a habit. Esa. 1.18.
As red as Scarlet and Crimson. Romans 7.14. 1. King. 21.25.
I am sold under sin.
Till they become natural to me. Ier. 13.23.
Like the Aethiopians skin, The Leopards spots.


In quality, The worst of sins. Strong, Esa. 5.18.
like Cords and Cartropes. Romans 6.21.
Gaining nothing thereby. For Ezech. 13.19.
a handful of Barley, a little bread.
Committing Ephesians. 4.19.
sin with greediness, sin upon sin. Ier. 3.3.
with impudence. 6.15.
not being ashamed. Gal. 2.18. Ia. 4.17.
knowing it to be sin. Mat. 18.7.
giving offense thereby. Romans 1.21.
unthankfully. 2. Pet. 2.22.
like the Dog to his vomit: the Sow to the mire.




Psalm. 119.137
Therefore O Lord, because thou art Just, and thy judgments true.

I reap the fruit of my foolishness.

Romans 6.21.
For what fruit have I in those things whereof I am ashamed? My days are
consumed in vanity, and my years in the bitterness of my Soul.

Psalm. 38 3.
And now there is no health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure: neither is
there any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin.

My heart trembles also, with remembrance of thy Judgments.

I feel bitterness above the bitterness of death, in that I have forsaken
thee, O God, and that thou have forsaken me.

Woe unto me rebellious wretch, for thus doing.

See and consider, O Lord, how vile I am become, for my soul abhors to live.

Psalm. 38.8.
I have roared for the disquietnesse of my heart.

And what shall I now say, or wherein shall I open my mouth? what what shall I
answer, seeing I have done these things? Job.


Job.
Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me out of this body of death?

When I have not what I can further say or do, this only remains, this is my
last refuge, that I direct mine eyes to thee.

Psalm. 130.
Out of the deep have I called to thee, O Lord: Lord hear my voice.

If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who
may abide it?

Enter not into judgment with thy Servant O Lord for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

Wherefore O Lord, I appeal from Thee, to Thee,
From Thee: a Just Judge, To Thee: a merciful Father.
From the Throne of thy Justice. To the Seat of thy Mercy.


O Lord he pleased to admit of this appeal.

If thou do not, I perish.

Mat. 8.25.
And O Lord, carest thou not if I perish?

1. Tim. 2.4. 2. Pet. 3.9.
Who would have all to be saved, none to perish.

Psalm. 119.94.
I am thine, O save me.

138.8.
Despise not the work of thy hands.

Wisd. 11.24.
Who hate nothing which thou have made.

Psalm. 116.15.
I am thy Servant and son of thy handmaid.

Dan. 9.19.
Thy Name is called on by us.

Heb. 11.16.
Thou art not ashamed to be called our Lord.

I am the price of thy Sons blood. O spare thy workmanship, thy Child, thy
Name, the price of thy Sons blood.


Ioh. 9.30.
God hears not sinners.

Yet I pray thee remember of what I am made, that I am but Psalm. 78.40.
flesh, and a wind that passes away and comes not again.

Take notice of the matter of which I am made.

Remember Psalm. 103.14.
that I am but dust. Frail Flesh. Light Wind. Loose Dust.


And will thou O Lord: Job 13.25.
break a leaf driven with the wind to and fro? and will thou pursue dry
stubble?

1. Pet. 5.6.
I humble my self under thy mighty hand.

Spare the humble and contrite.

2. Sam. 19.19.
David spared Shemei that railed on him. And David was a man according to thine
own heart.

Therefore do thou spare me.

Ahah King of Israel, forgave the King of Syria his offense, 1. King. 20.31.
upon his humiliation.

Was there ever King of Israel more merciful then thou?

Thou forgauest the same Ahab 1. King. 21.29.
(who had sold himself to sin) when he humbled himself.

Spare me also I beseech thee.

Psalm. 80.4.
O Lord how long will thou be angry with thy Servant which prays.

Surely Lord Job 31.3.
I hide not my sins like Adam, but confess them.

Behold 1. Cor. 11.31. 2. Cor. 7.11.
I Judge my self.

Accept O Lord the Sacrifice, Of a troubled Spirit, A contrite heart. A grieved
soul. A wounded Conscience.
Though I have sinned against thee.



Psalm. 22.4.
Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted and were not confounded.

Thy mercies Psalm. 25.6.
have been ever of old.

Psalm. 89.49.
Lord where are thy former loving kindnesses?

Sir. 2.10.
Look at the Generations of old, and see, did ever any trust in the Lord and
was confounded, or whom did he ever despise that called upon him?



Psalm. 119.49.
Remember thy Word unto thy Servant; upon which, thou have caused me to hope.

Psalm. 119. 41.
Let thy mercy come unto me O Lord: even thy Salvation, according to thy Word.

Tit. 1.2.
God has promised, which cannot lie.

Heb. 6.17. Romans 3.3.
And confirmed it with an Oath. Which promise the unbelief of men cannot make
void.

2. Tim. 2.13.
If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself.



Psalm. 30.9.
For what profit is there in my blood, if I go down into the Pit?

Psalm. 6.5.
For in death is no remembrance of thee, and in the Grave who shall give thee
thanks?

Psalm. 88.10.
Will thou show wonders to the Dead? or shall the Dead arise and praise thee?

Psalm. 88.11.
Shall thy Loving kindness be declared in the Grave, or thy faithfulness in
destruction?

Esa. 38.18.
The Grave cannot praise thee, Death cannot celebrate thee: The living, the
living, he shall praise thee.

Psalm. 118.17.
I will not dye but live, and declare the works of the Lord.

Psalm. 34.8. 1. Pet. 2.3.
O taste and see how gracious the Lord is, blessed is the man that trusts in
him.

Thy mercies O Lord are Psalm. 109.2.
Sweet. Psalm. 67.17.
Comfortable. Psalm. 63.4.
Better then life. Psalm. 5.7. 51.1.
Many. A multitude of them, Psalm. 130.6.
Plentiful. Luc. 1.78. Romans 5.20. 1. Tim. 1.14. Psalm. 17.7.
Tender. Superabundant. Wonderful. Psalm. 71.13. 86.1. 119.156. 103.12. Ephesians.
3.18.
Infinite. Great. Broad. From the East to the West. Long. Ephesians. 3.19.
Deep. Psalm. 36.5.
High, To the Heavens. Above the Heavens.
Psalm. 108.4.
Past Knowledge. Psalm. 25.5. 103.17. 136. 89.2.
Eternal. Of old. For ever.
Psalm. 79.9.
Preventing. Psalm. 23.6.
Following. Psalm. 32.11.
Compassing. Psalm. 103.13.
Pardoning. Psalm. 103.4.
Crowning. Psalm. 145.9.
Over all thy Works. Romans 5.20.
Our sins. Ia. 2.13.
Thy Justice.

2. Cor. 1.3.
Thou art the Father of mercies.

Thou art our Patient and slow to anger.

Wisd. 11.23.
Thou winkest at the sins of men, because they should repent.

Psalm. 95.10.
Sparing thy people forty years.

Psalm. 78.39.
Many times thou did turn thy wrath away, and would not suffer thy whole
displeasure to arise.

Lam. 3.22.
It is of thy mercy, that we are not consumed.



Psalm. 89.32.33.
I will visit their offenses with the rod, and their sin with scourges,
nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him.

Psalm. 103.10.
He has not dealt with us after our sins.

Hos. 11.8.
How shall I smite thee O Ephraim?



Psalm. 103.9.
He will not always he chiding: neither keeps he his anger for ever.

Psalm. 30.5.
His wrath endures but the twinkling of an eye.

Esa. 54.7.
For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather
thee.

Abac. 3.2.
In anger he remembers mercy.

2 Samuel 12.13.
David said I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said to David, The Lord
has also put away thy sin, thou shall not dye.

Esa. 30.18.
The Lord waits to be gracicious unto us.



Thy Compassions are called Luc. 1.78.
bowels of mercy.

Psalm. 106.43. Mat. 15.32.
When thou did see the misery of thy people, thou had compassion on them.

Mat. 18.27.
Then the Lord of the Servant moved with compassion, loosed him, and forgave
him the debt.



Psalm. 130.7.
With thee is plenteous Redemption.

Luc. 15.22.
The father of the Prodigal, not only pardoned him, but put on him the best
Robe, and a Ring, and killed the fat Calfe for him.

Luc. 15.7.
He will have joy in Heaven, for a sinner repenting.



Such as Peter, Luc. 26.74.
who forsware thee. Paul, ^. Tim. 1.13.
who blaspheamed thee. The Luc. 23.43.
Thief on the Cross. The Ioh 8.
Adultresse. Luc. 7.36.
Mary Magdalen.


Ier. 3.1.
They say, if a man put away his Wife, and she go from him, and become
another man's, shall he return unto her again, shall not the Land be greatly
polluted? But thou have played the harlot with many Lovers, yet return again
to me says the Lord.

Luc. 6.35.
He is kind to the unthankful and evil.



1. Pet. 1.4.
In whom he has given us great and precious promises. 2. Cor. 1.19.
And in whom all the promises of God are Yea, and Amen.

In Ioh. 16.23.
naming of whom it will be sufficient.

Mat. 15.22.
Jesus thou Son of David have mercy on me.

Mat. 1.21.
Which name Jesus, was given unto him, because he saves us from our sins.

Aug.
Lord, do not so earnestly mark our sins, as that thereby thou forget thine
own Name.

Thou Son of David 2. Sam. 19.
(who forgave Shemei his sworn enemy reuiling him.) Forgive me. O Christ
hear me. Intercede for me.


Make the Father propitious to me.

Say unto my Soul Psalm. 35.3.
I am thy Salvation.

Let not thy Apostle comfort me in vain, when he says: 1. Tim. 1.15.
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners.

Romans 5.20.
Where six has abounded, there grace has super-abounded.

God has concluded all under Romans 11.32.
sin, that he might have mercy upon all.

Romans 5.10.
When we were Gods enemies, we were reconciled to him, by the death of his
Son.

Let not another of thy Apostles say in vain.

1. Pet. 3.18.
Christ once suffered for sin, the just for the unjust, that he might bring
us to God.

Let not the third.

Ia. 2.13.
Mercy rejoices above Judgment.

Let not the fourth.

1. Ioh. 2.1.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Christ Jesus the
Righteous. 1. Ioh. 2.2.
And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the
sins of the whole world.

Let not thine own Words be spoken in vain.

Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give ye
rest.

Luc. 5.32.
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Ioh. 12.47.
I came not to Judge the World, but to save it.

These things are not, cannot be spoken in vain.

Psalm. 94.19.
Wherefore in the multitude of the sorrows that are in my heart, thy comforts
(O Lord) have refreshed my soul.

Heb. 4.16.
Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need.

Which I beseech thee to grant me. For thy great and many mercies. Thy Names
sake. The Glory of thy Name. Thy promise sake. Thy practice sake. My misery. My
infirmity.
Even for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake.

The seven penitential Psalms analyzed.
1 Psalm 6.
1 O Lord my God, rebuke me not I beseech thee, in thy fierce indignation
against my sins, either in this life, or at the day of Judgment, neither
chasten or correct me in thy hot displeasure, by condemning me to eternal
death.

2 Have mercy and compassion upon me, according to thy accustomed goodness O
Lord, for I am weak and frail by nature, strengthen me therefore by thy
Grace, O Lord, and heal me, by curing the infirmities of my soul, for they
are multiplied so greatly upon me, that my bones, and all my inward parts are
vexed, and disquieted, with the remembrance of them.

3 My sinful Soul, considering my manifold offenses, and trembling at the
thought of thy just anger against them, is also (like as is my flesh) sore
troubled, and almost at the point of desperation: but thou O Lord, that
desire not the death of a sinner, how long will it be, ere thou look upon
me, and bring me out of this misery.

4 Return from the rigor of thy Justice O Lord, to the sweetness of thy
mercy, and deliver my soul, from the bondage of sin: O Lord save me, from
the assaults of the Devil, not for any merits of mine, but for thy mercies
sake, in Christ Jesus my Savior.

5 For in death there is no remembrance of thee, to praise and glorify thy
Name: and who, surely none there is, that shall give thee thanks, or celebrate
thy goodness, in the Grave of Hell, where nothing is to be heard, but weeping,
gnashing of teeth, and blasphemies.

6 I am weary and faint, with my groaning and sighing, for my transgressions,
every night, when I should take my rest, I wash my bed, weeping for them, and I
water my couch, the place of my rest, with my tears of unfeigned repentance.

7 Mine eye of reason and understanding, is consumed and grows weak, because
of the grief I take, fearing thy Judgments: yet it waxes Old, and I continue
in sin, because of the united forces of all mine enemies, the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil.

8 Depart therefore far from me all ye mine enemies, which are, and have
been the workers and causers of mine iniquity, by your tentations, and evil
examples: for henceforth, I will have no more to do with you; for my
conscience assures me, that the Lord, of his infinite goodness, has heard,
and pitied the voice of my weeping: and therefore I should be unthankful to
him, to return to those sins, which he, in his mercy, has forgiven.

9 The Lord, I cannot repeat it too often, has graciously heard my earnest
supplication, for the pardon of my sins, and he The Lord, plentiful in
pity, has not only now, but will also hereafter, receive my prayer,
whenever I call faithfully upon him.

10 Let all mine enemies therefore, who have sought my destruction, be ashamed
at my conversion, and be sore vexed and troubled at the consideration of Gods
Judgments. Let them no longer delay, but repent and return to the Lord, and
be ashamed, that they have so long deferred their conversion, and suddenly,
without any longer delay, make their peace with him, by unfeigned repentance.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

2 Psalm 32.
BLessed is he in this life, in assured hope, and thrice blessed, in full and
perfect fruition, in the life to come, Whose transgression, by Gods mercy, is
forgiven, in respect of the offense: and whose sin, by the imputation of
Christ's righteousness, is so covered in this World, that it be not laid open,
at the day of Judgment, in respect of the punishment.

2 Blessed and happy is the man, unto whom, in regard either of offense, or
punishment, the Lord, accepting the merits of Christ, imputes no sin, but
gives so ample a remission of them, that he takes no notice of any sin in
him: and in whose Spirit, as well as outward show, is no guile, but penitently,
without hypocrisy, bewaileth his offenses.

3 When I my self (I speak by experience) kept silence, dissembling and
covering my sins, wherewith my conscience was oppressed, my bones, and inward
parts, waxed old and feeble through my roaring, which God regarded not, though
I cried all the day long, and that, because I confessed not my sins aright
unto him.

4 For day and night, continually, thy hard hand of affliction was heavy upon
me, to punish my obstinacy, and to reduce me to repentance; and by reason
thereof, my moisture and vigor, which I formerly had, is turned, like to the
drought of Summer, and is almost withered, and dried up.

5 My sin therefore, at the lest, being thus handled by thee, did I resolve
to acknowledge unto thee, in contrition of soul, and mine iniquity, which I
formerly concealed, I have not any longer hid, but humbly confessed unto thee.

6 I further said within my self, when thy grace began to work in me, that I
will no longer continue in my rebellion, but penitently confess all my
transgressions, and iniquity unto the Lord, gracious and merciful: and I had
no sooner done it, but thou (of thy wonted compassion) forganest the iniquity,
and punishment of my sin, committed against thee.

7 For this remission of finne, as it was necessary for me to pray for it, so
shall every one, of what condition soever, that is godly, (for the just also
fall) pray unto thee, O Lord, in a time, when thou may be found, in a fit
season. But in the greatest danger of Floods, and swelling of the great waters
of afflictions, God will so preserve the just man, that they shall not have
power to come nigh unto him, to oppress or ouerwhelme him.

8 Thou O God, art my hiding place, and refuge, in all tribulations, thou (for
in none other will I trust) shall preserve me by thy power, from trouble and
adversity. Thou shall compass me about with thy mercy, and I will sing unto
thee, Songs of praise, for my deliverance.

9 I will instruct thee (says God) O man, if thou will be ruled by me, and
teach thee in the way of righteousness, which thou shall walk in, without
erring. I will guide thee, in the right way, with mine eye of providence, that
no evil shall happen unto thee.

10 Be ye not therefore O foolish men, (since I am so careful over you)
without reason, as the unruly Horse, and dull Mule, which have no
understanding, to bridle their headstrong desires: Whose hard Mouth must be
held in with strong hand, and with bit and bridle, and you, with tribulations
and afflictions: if you be, then (as they must be held in, lest they come near
thee, and fall upon their rider, or kick at them, so) shall you be forced by
adversity, to know your selves, lest you oppose God your Creator.

11 Many sorrows either in this world, or torments in the world to come, shall
be to the obstinate and unrepentant wicked: but he that with his whole heart
depends on, and trusts in the Lord his God, the Mercy of God shall compass
and defend him on every side, from all dangers.

12 Be glad then, Oye servants of the most High, in the salvation of the Lord,
and not in your own strength, and rejoice, in feruency of spirit, ye that are
just, and righteous: shout for joy, in the comfort of a good conscience, all ye
that are upright in heart. For that the Lord is gracious to those that love
him, and has delight in the prosperity of his Servants.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

3 Psalm 38.
1 O Lord, I do not altogether decline from, and refuse thy corrections, only
this I require of thee, that thou, rebuke me not in thy fierce wrath, by
condemning me with the reprobate: neither chasten me, poor sinner, too
severely, by the extraordinary afflictions of this, as if it were in thy hot
displeasure.

2 For it is not without cause, that I should thus deprecate thine anger, for
thine arrows of grief and anguish, stick fast in me, and are sore upon me,
already, and thy hand of present affliction presses and troubles me sore.

3 There is no soundness nor health in my flesh, because of the vehemence of
thine anger, against me: Neither is there any rest or quiet in my bones, and
inward parts, when I consider, that thy displeasure arises to ward me, because
of the gricuousnesse and wickedness of my sin.

4 For (having recollected my thoughts) I find, that mine iniquities (which
hitherto I regarded not) are so many, that they are gone over my head, they are
past my understanding, for quantity and quality, and as a heavy burden, for
the weight of them, they are become too heavy for me to bear any longer: they
press me down so much, that I cannot look up to heaven or heavenly things.

5 My wounds, which sin has made in my conscience, stink in the nostrils of
God, and they are so abominable, that now, they corrupt, and putrify in mine
own sight: and all this is come upon me, because of my foolishness, that have
let them go so long unsearched, (unrepented of) that they are almost past cure
or remedy.

6 I am troubled notwithstanding, that I have so long put of my conversion, I
am bowed and pressed down, with the weight of my transgressions, and am
humbled in soul, for them greatly, and crave pardon for them. I go mourning
and grieuing all the day long, bewailing the former time of my life misspent.

7 For my loins are filled, and infected with a loathsome disease of carnal
concupiscence: and there is no soundness nor goodness at all, in my flesh, for
that it rebelleth against the Spirit.

8 I am feeble in body, and sore broken in mind, in so much, that considering
with my self, how grievously I have offended thee, I have roared and cried
bitterly, by reason of the disquietnesse of my heart: O Lord therefore forgive
my offenses.

9 Lord, who know all things, and do search into the hearts of all men,
all my desire to be reconciled to thee, and to lead a new life is before thee,
thou know it, and my groaning and earnest Prayer mingled with sighs and
tears, is not hid from thee, but (I hope) is ascended into thy presence.

10 My heart, which has lost the peace of conscience, pants, with fear of
thy Judgments, my wonted strength fails me, and I am grown weak: as for
the light of mine inward eyes, wherewith I was wont to discern good from
evil, it is also dim, and gone from me, and I am become, like to them, that
walk in darkness.

11 My Lovers, and those which I took for friends, because they see me go
about, to forsake my evil courses, stand aloof of from my sore, and in stead
of giving me comfort, become mine adversaries: and my kinsmen, who in my
prosperity fawned on me, now stand a far of, and leave me comfortless.

12 They also of mine enemies, that seek after the overthrow of my life, and
eternal happiness, lay snares and tentations for me: and they that seek my
hurt, in bereauing me of my good name, speak mischievous and false things to
my reproach, and imagine deceit, how to divert me from the right way, all the
day long.

13 But, I, being resolved to persist in the way of repentance, and to trust
wholly in the mercy of God, behaved my self to them as a deaf man, giving no
ear to their allurements, and made as though I heard them not: and I was in my
behavior to them, as a dumb man, that knew not how to speak, and that opened
not his mouth.

14 Thus careful was I, least mine enemies should entrap me, and I continued
still, as a man, that hears not, nor is moved with their tentations: and in
whose mouth, (notwithstanding their evil deeds to me) are no reproves.

15 For in thee O Lord, (let them do what they can,) do I hope, and put my
confidence, that thou will keep thy promise, and hear me, when I call upon
thee, O Lord my God and Savior.

16 For I said in my prayer to thee, hear me O Lord, least if thou forsake
me, they should rejoice and triumph over me, for when, and as soon as my
foot of faith slippeth never so little by infirmity, they presently imagine,
that thou have forsaken me, and magnify themselves as though they had
obtained a great victory against me.

17 For I cannot marvel, that they should so do, considering, that when I
feel the weight of my sins, I my self am ready to halt, and despair: and
the reason of my sorrow is, because thy Judgments are ever before me, and in
my thoughts.

18 For remedy whereof, I will declare, and confess to thee O Lord, in the
bitterness of my soul my iniquity, and take revenge of my self for it: yea
I will be, (as long as I live) heartily sorry, and much grieved for my sin
past, though it be forgiven.

19 But mine enemies, think not of forsaking their ways, they are lively and
merry, and cry peace, peace, to their souls: and they are strong to do
evil: and they also that hate me (because they see my conversion) wrongfully,
and without cause, are multiplied, and excedingly increased.

20 They also, that unthankfully render evil to me, for the good, which I
have done unto them, are also become mine adversaries, and do unto me, all
the mischief they can, and why? because they perceive my conversion, and that
I follow and love, the thing that good is, which they hate.

21 Forsake me not, either in tentation, or tribulation, though they persecute
me, O Lord, the author of my salvation: O my God, whom I desire to serve, be
not far from me, by withdrawing thy grace from me,

22 Make have (least I faint under the burden of my sins) to help me,
against my enemies, O Lord, who art my only stay in this life, and my
Salvation, in the life to come.

Glory be to the Father etc.

4 Psalm 51.
1 Have mercy upon me miserable sinner, O God, full of mercy and compassion,
according to thy loving and infinite kindness, to the sons of men: and as my
sins are infinite, so according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, which
thou have ever showed to penitent sinners, blot out of the book of thy
remembrance, my innumerable transgressions.

2 Wash me thoroughly, with the blood of thy dear Son, from mine iniquity,
whereby I have so often offended thy Majesty: and cleanse me, in the fountain
of thy mercies, from my sin, whereby I have also offended my neighbor.

3 For behold O Lord, I hide not, nor excuse, but in the bitter tears of
repentance acknowledge and confess, my horrible transgressions against thee:
and my grievous sin, in which I did for a time take delight, is grown odious
to me, and is ever before me, in remorse of conscience.

4 Against thee, most merciful Father, only, have I sinned, and though I were
ashamed to commit sin in the sight of men, yet I have done this great evil
in thy alseeing sight: yet O Lord be merciful to me, and pardon it, that thou
might be justified, and found true and faithful, when thou speak (as thou
have often done) of mercy and forgiveness to the penitent, and be clear from
the imputation of injustice, when thou art arrogantly and falsely Judged for
severity, thy punishments being just, though the eyes of our understanding, be
not so clear, as to perceive the justice of them.

5 Behold O Lord, that I, as all mankind, was shapen in the iniquity of
original sin, from which fountain, springs my misery: and in sin, and
concupiscence, did my mother conceive me, from whence, grows the infirmity
of my flesh.

6 Behold also O LORD, I know, that thou desire Truth, Faith, and Integrity,
in the inward parts of my conscience: and in the hidden parts of me (my Soul)
thou shall make me, by the illumination of thy Holy Spirit, to know Wisdom,
to eternal life.

7 Purge me, leprous sinner with spiritual Hyssope, the blood of thy Son,
in stead of the Hyssope, which was wont to cleanse the leprous, in the law:
and by that blood, I shall be clean, and purified, from the leprosy of sin:
Wash me, in the fountain of Grace, and then, by the tears of repentance, and
the merits of my Savior, I shall be whiter in thy sight, then Snow.

8 Make me poor wretch to hear, and sensibly feel, the joy and comfort, of
remission of my sins: and let me find gladness in the promise of life
eternal, that the Spiritual bones of my soul, which thou have broken with
tentations and afflictions, may rejoice, and give thee thanks and praise.

9 Hide and turn away thy face, and wrathful countenance, from my sins, lay
them not to my charge: and blot out of thy Register, all mine iniquities that
they never appear to condemn me.

10 Create an new form in me (polluted sinner) a clean and pure heart: O God,
the Creator of all things, and renew by thy Grace, aright, and sanctified
Spirit within me.

11 Cast me not away, into the pit of desperation, by debarring me from thy
presence, where (only) is fullness of joy: and take not for ever, thy Holy
Spirit of comfort, from me.

12 Restore unto me rather, the unspeakable joy of thy Salvation in Christ
Jesus, which they feel in their consciences, to whom thou remittest their
sins: and when I am re-instated in thy favor, uphold and keep me, from
falling again, with thy free, powerful, and saving Spirit.

13 Then, even when I shall be so restored, I will, by word of exhortation, and
example of conversation, teach transgressors, how they shall keep thy ways
and commandments: and by that means (thy Grace assisting) they, which now are
sinners, shall forsake their wickedness, and shall be truly converted to
thee.

14 Deliver me, and quit me, from my former bloody offenses, and keep me
henceforth, from blood guiltiness, and carnal corruptions, O God, my
protector: Thou God, which art my Redeemer, and Author of my Salvation: and all
the days of my life, my tongue, for joy thereof, shall sing unto thee, and
that aloud, and cheerfully: and praise thy Name, by extolling of thy
righteousness, who do justify sinners, and art merciful to the penitent.

15 O Lord, who give wisdom to the simple, Open thou my lips, which are
closed by sin, from doing any service unto thee: and then, with boldness, my
mouth shall utter, and show forth thy praise, for to thee alone, belongs all
Honor, and Glory.

16 For thou O God, desire not, that I should offer the Sacrifice of Goats
and Calves, to expiate my offenses, else would I willingly give it, and lay it
on thy Altar: but thou (having by sending thy Son Christ Jesus, abrogated the
ceremonies of the Law) delightest not any longer, in burnt offerings, but in
obedience to thy Commandments.

11 The Sacrifices accepted of God, and whereby we are in Christ reconciled to
him, are a broken and humble Spirit, dejected with the sight of sin: a broken
and contrite heart, truly mortified and repentant, O God, thou have promised,
that thou will not despise, but lovingly accept.

18 Do good O God, in thy good pleasure, and be favorable and gracious, unto
Sion, thy Catholic Church: Build thou, upon a sure foundation of religion,
and establish the hearts of thy Saints, and Servants, the walls of thy Church
Jerusalem.

19 Then shall thou, in Christ Jesus, be pleased with us, and with the
Sacrifices of Righteousness, in thy Congregation. And with burnt Offerings and
Oblations of our hearts. Then shall they, thy Servants thus established, offer
bullockes, the Sacrifice of praise, upon thine Altar, in thy presence, to the
honor of thy most holy Name. Glory be to the Father, etc.

5 Psalm 102.
1 Hear my prayer, which in the bitterness of my soul, I make to thee, O
Lord, whose mercy, is the Sanctuary of distressed sinners: and let nothing
stand between that mercy and me, which may hinder my cry to come to thee.

2 Hide not thy face, turn not away thy countenance from me, as if thou were
offended at me, but rather, in the day of adversity, when I am in trouble and
sorrow, incline thine ear of pity unto me, and that right soon, and speedily.

3 For my days, which I have misspent, are consumed away like smoke, which for
want of substance, resolves to nothing: and my bones which by my broken
spirit, are dried up, are burnt up as a firebrand.

4 My heart is dejected and smitten with the thought of thy Justice, and it is
withered, with remembrance of thy Judgments, like grass, without juice or
sap: so that, in this anguish of soul, I forget, and loath to eat my bread.

5 By reason of the grievous voice of my groaning, sighs, and tears, I am so
consumed away, that my bones for want of flesh, cleave to my skin, and I am
nothing, but skin and bone.

6 I am (for shame that I have offended thee) become in condition, like a
Pelican, that lives solitarily in the Wilderness: and I am like an Owl, not
daring to be seen, but that auoideth the light, and is continually, in the
desert, shunning the company of other birds.

7 I watch, and sleep not, for the thought of my sins, and am as a sparrow,
that caring for no company, sits alone, making grievous lamentation, in a
mournful note, upon the house top.

8 Mine enemies, seeing me thus penitent, reproach me, with opprobrious
speeches, all the day continually, deriding me: and they that (while I was
their companion in sin) applauded me, are upon my conversion, mad against
me, and do combine, and are sworn, to do me mischief, and to that end, set
themselves against me.

9 For this cause, taking no pleasure in this world, I have eaten ashes, and
fed upon course meat, like as if it were fine bread, and dainty fare: and I
have mingled my drink with tears, weeping, and lamenting for my sins.

10 Because of thine indignation at me, for them, and thy wrath against my life
past, all this evil, and more, has befallen me, for thou have lifted me up
very high, and from thence, have cast me down, that my fall might be the
greater.

11 My days, few and evil, are passed like a shadow upon a Sun-diall, that
declineth toward the evening: and I, that lately seemed to flourish, am
withered, and dried up, like grass without sap, for want of thy comfort.

12 But thou O Lord, which were, and art, shall continue immutable, and shall
endure for ever, while all transitory things pass, and come to nothing: and
thy glorious works, shall be had in remembrance, unto all generations, even
unto the end of the world.

13 Thou O Lord, who seem to men to sleep, shall arise, in thy strength,
and have mercy and compassion upon Sion, thy Church militant, now oppressed,
with the tyranny of Antichrist: for the time, to look upon her, and favor
her, is at hand, yea the set time, which thou have decreed for her deliverance,
is, or will not be long, ere it come.

14 For they which be thy true and faithful Servants take pleasure and
delight, in her stones (their fellow Servants) and are glad when they see them
prosper: and favor and pity, the very dust, and ruins thereof, when they see
them under persecution.

15 So, that when they shall be delivered from their misery, the very heathen
shall fear and tremble, at the Name of the Lord, and be converted to him: and
all the Kings, and Potentates of the earth, which now oppose the Truth, shall
acknowledge thee O Lord, to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and be afraid,
at the greatness of thy Glory and Majesty.

16 When the Lord, by his almighty power, shall build up Sion, and repair the
ruins of his Church, he shall then, to the confusion of his enemies, appear
in his glory, which they shall not be able to endure.

17 He will then in mercy regard, and hearken to the prayer of his poor
servants, and the destitute of his help: and not any longer seem to turn
away his face from them, nor despise their prayer, and earnest supplications.

18 This mercy of his, shall then be recorded, and written, as a remembrance;
for the generations to come, even to the end of the world, which shall attempt
the like against his Church: and the people, yet unborn, that shall succeed,
and be created, in ages to come, shall praise, and magnify, the Lord, which
only, does marvelous things.

19 For he has in mercy by sending his Son Christ Jesus, looked down from
the height of his Sanctuary, his holy place: even from Heaven, his Fathers
bosom, did the Lord Jesus behold the earth, and had compassion upon all the
Sons of men.

20 To hear, and pity the groaning of the prisoners, such as did groan under
the burden of the law, and to loose, and set at liberty by his passion, and
intercession, those of the posterity of Adam, that are appointed to suffer
death, for not fulfilling the same.

21 To the end, that they being so delivered, may declare, and show the power,
and the Name of the Lord, which is Jesus the Savior, in Sion, his Church: and
magnify and extol his praise, in Jerusalem, his holy habitation.

22 When the faithful people, which are yet dispersed over the face of the
earth, are gathered together, and made one congregation, and the Kingdoms of
the earth, which are yet in darkness, are instructed, to serve thee, the only
Lord of Heaven and earth.

23 He even the Lord, in the time of this expectation, has weakened and abated
my strength, so that I can do no good of my self, in the way of this my
earthly pilgrimage: he has shortened and cut off my days, by afflicting me for
my sin.

24 I said yet, in this weakness and anguish of my soul, O my God, withdraw
not now thy mercy from me, and take me not away out of this world in the midst
of my days, in the chief time of my strength: as for thy years, as they are
from all eternity, so shall they endure, throughout all generations, even for
ever.

25 Of old, at the beginning of time, have thou of thine own power, laid and
created the foundations of the earth, the visible world, anwd all things in it:
and the heavens and firmament thereof, are the only work of thy almighty
hands and power.

26 They, even heaven and earth, and all things in them shall pass away and
perish, from the form they now have: but thou O Lord, the creator of them,
shall endure immutable. Yea, without all doubt, all of them, as thou have
decreed, shall wax old, and consume with age, like a garment, long worn, and
as a vesture or garment shall thou, by the sound of the last trump, change and
dissolve them, and they shall yield to thy power, and be changed.

27 But thou O Lord art the same, always unchangeable: and thy years, being
from all eternity, shall have no end, but continue for ever.

28 The children and posterity of thy faithful Servants, begotten by the
seedes-men of thy Word, shall continue in grace in this life: and their
righteous seed shall stand fast, and be established for ever, together with
them in glory hereafter, and enjoy everlasting happiness before thee in thy
blessed presence.

Glory be to the father, etc.

6 Psalm 130.
1 OVt of the depth of tentations, dangers, and sorrows for my sins, wherein
my Spirit is almost overwhelmed, have I, by fervent prayer, cried, and called
unto thee O Lord, who only art able to give me relief.

2. Lord, of thy mercy haste thee, and hear my voice and petition; and deliver
me from my misery. O my God, Let thine ears of pity and compassion, be
attentive to consider and well weigh the lamentable voice of my humble
supplications, and let not my prayer, return unpitied or unheard of thee.

3 If thou Lord, contrary to thy disposition, should be so exact and
extreme, as in the rigor of thy Justice, to mark the iniquities, which we,
by our natural corruption, daily fall into, and punish us accordingly: O good
Lord, who? none, not the most upright, shall be able to answer one for a
thousand, or stand before thee, (without much horror,) at thy Judgment seat.

4 But, for the comfort of poor wretched sinners, and to keep us from utter
desperation, we find it recorded, by the holy Spirit, that There is
forgiveness of sins, and mercy toward sinners repenting, with thee, by
Jesus Christ, who came to save sinners: and yet, this mercy of thine, is tied
with such conditions, that thou, who also art Just, may be also feared, lest
thy lenity be abused.

5 I, for my part, wait and confidently expect, for the Lord, to receive mercy
from him: My sinful, but repentant soul, does wait, to receive consolation:
and in his Word (whereby he promises mercy to repentant sinners,) do I hope,
and place my whole confidence, because I know, that he which has promised, is
Just.

6 My sinful Soul, in this expectation, waits for the Lord, and tarieth his
good pleasure, to comfort it, more earnestly then they that in a disconsolate
long night, watch for the morning: yea (I say it again) more zealously, then
they, that are weary of the night, and watch for the light of the morning.

7 Let Israel and all Gods faithful people, hope still, and put their trust in
the goodness of the Lord: and not without cause: For with the Lord, though he
justly take vengeance on us, for our sins, yet there is, ever was, and will
be found, Mercy toward penitent sinners: and with him, by Jesus Christ, is
not only forgiveness for a few sins, but plenteous redemption, from the
captivity of the Devil and sin.

8 And he, even Jesus Christ, by his merits and intercession, shall redeem and
save Israel, and each of his faithful servants, from all his iniquities, and
the punishment due for them.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

7 Psalm 134.
1. Hear my earnest and humble Prayer, O Lord, which in misery, I make unto
thee, Give ear, and be not deaf, to my supplications, in the time of my
distress: but in thy faithfulness and truth, which endures for ever, answer
me, and grant my petition, which I make, not trusting in any merits of mine
own, but in thy righteousness.

2 And my further petition to thee is, that thou enter not into the throne of
thy Judgment, by strictly examining my misdeeds, and dealing rigorously with
me, thy poor Servant, who has misspent his talent: for in thy allseeing
sight, shall no man living in this vale of misery, be justified or found
innocent.

3 For the old enemy of mankind, the Devil, has by his malice persecuted,
and sought to entrap my soul, to separate it from the love of thee: he has
smitten, and cast my life and soul down to the ground and filled me full of
earthly desires, he has made, and caused me to dwell, and take pleasure in,
the darkness of my sins, as those, that are without sense, and have been
long dead.

4 Therefore O Lord, considering my desperate estate, is my spirit overwhelmed
with grief within me, and my heart, is disquieted within me, and is also
desolate, and sore troubled.

5 I yet, in the midst of the sorrows that are in my heart, do remember what
I have read and heard, what thou have done in the days of old, how that thou
have been gracious to the penitent, and severe against the unrepentant sinner.
I meditate also, on all thy works, but especially on that of thy mercy, and I
muse, and exercise my self, in contemplating on the work of thy hands,
admiring thy Power, and Wisdom, in the creation of all things.

6 I stretch forth, and lift up my hands in my prayers unto thee O Lord: my
soul (which is dry for want of the deaw of thy grace) thirsts after thee,
for the water of life, as a thirsty land, in a time of drought.

7 Hear me, and answer me speedily, delay not O Lord for my spirit waxes
faint, and fails me in my devotion: Oh hide not thy face and loving
countenance from me miserable sinner* least it come to pass, that I be like
in condition, unto them, that go down headlong after their own inventions,
into the pit of destruction and perdition.

8 Cause me by thy spirit, to hear and feel, thy loving kindness and mercy
in the morning speedily, least I perish: for in thee only, and not in the help
of men or Angels, do I place my whole trust and confidence: cause me by thy
grace, to know and learn the way of thy testimonies, wherein I should, and
ought to walk, without declining to the right hand, or the left. For I lift up
my soul by prayer and repentance unto thee, who only can direct me aright.

9 Deliver me O Lord, by thy power, from all mine enemies, visible and
invisible, for I fly, and make have for succor unto thee, as to my protector,
to hide and defend me from their violence.

10 Teach and instruct me, (that am ignorant) to do thy Will; and those
things, which thou command, for thou art my God and director: Thy Spirit is
good, and all sufficient for me: Lead me therefore by it, into the right way,
which brings, into the land of righteousness and truth.

11 Quicken me again O Lord, and revive me, from the death of sin, for thy
Names sake, which is Jesus, and for thy righteousness sake, and love to
goodness, bring my soul by thy grace, out of the trouble and anguish
whereinto my sins have brought me.

12 And of thy tender mercy and compassion, cut of, and kill in me, mine
enemies, the concupiscences of the flesh, and destroy and confound all them,
that with injuries and tentations afflict and disquiet my soul, which is
wholly devoted to thee: for I am thy Servant, and Son, of thy handmaid, and
desire to serve thee, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of my life.

Glory be to the Father etc.

Directions before receiving the Holy Communion.
AS many as desire to be partakers of the holy Sacrament, of the Body and
blood of Christ, (as of necessitte every one must be, that intends to receive
benefit by him) ought, before the taking of it, to prepare his soul, and fit
it, for the due receiving of it, and not come to it carelessely, without due
examination of himself, and respective consideration of the excellency and
worth thereof.

And therefore, before the time of communicating, we ought to spend some time,
or days, (the more, the better) In meditating upon the great and unspeakable
love and mercy of God, toward us. miserable sinners, in ordeining so powerful
a means, to purge and cleanse us, and bring us to him: In believing all his
promises made to us in Christ Jesus: in applying them to our selves: in
performing the works of charity: in examining, in what estate our souls do
stand: in calling to mind our sins, and confessing them to God: in grieuing
and repenting for them, and that in all humility and Godly sorrow: in Luc.
15.20.
returning with the Prodigal: smiting our breasts with the Publican: Luc. 18.13.
weeping with Mary Magdalen: begging mercy with the thief on the Cross, Luc.
7.38.
and lastly, in promising to God, to lead a better life, for the time to come.

Thus if we do, no doubt, but we shall be welcome guests to this feast, as
being of that number, for whom it was prepared. For by how much the more, we
come prepared to take this Sacrament, so much the greater, shall be the grace,
which we shall receive by it.

There are four Duties required in every Communicant. First Faith to believe,
that Jesus Christ did, and suffered all things, which are written of him in the
Holy Scriptures, for the Redemption of mankind. Secondly Repentance, by which
a man (confessing his sins to God, with a purpose to lead a new life) is
reconciled to him. Thirdly Reverend behavior, that in all humility, we make
our selves fit guests for such a feast. Fourthly Meditation and Attention, that
we, during the time of the administration of the Sacrament, attend no earthly
thoughts, but wholly fix our souls, upon our Savior Christ, and meditate on
nothing, but this great and high benefit, and thereby be inflamed with a
hearty love, and thankful mind to God, not only for his infinite love, in
suffering so great things for us, but also, for instituting this blessed
Sacrament, to remain to the end of the World, as a sure pledge of his
continuance amongst us, and perpetual care over us.

After we have communicated, and are refreshed, we ought also, to be thankful
to God, for so great a benefit ( thankfulness being, not the least duty of
this service. The Sacrament it self, being called Eucharistia, which is
thanksgiving) and to strive, to imitate him, as well in life, as death: to
live purely, and not to defile our souls again, being purged and cleansed, by
the powerful operation of this blessed Sacrament: that so, by Examination,
meditation, thanksgiving, faith, and constant resolution of amendment. We may
worthily receive Christ into our souls, and be made members of his mystical
body.

Meditations and Prayers before the Communion.
WHat am I O Lord, that I should be so bold as to come near to thee? what am
I, that should attempt, to receive this, so great and high a mystery? what is
man by nature, but a vessel of corruption? unapt to any good, and propense,
and most ready for any evil. What is man, but a creature, of all others, most
wretched? blind in Judgment, inconstant in his actions, unclean in his
desires, and (though small in desert, yet) proud, and great in his own
conceit? Thou see O Lord what I am. But thou O Lord, art great, good, wise
and eternal: omnipotent in strength, wonderful in wisdom, deep in thy
counsels, terrible in thy Judgments, and absolutely perfect in all thy
works. How then dare I, that am so base and unclean a creature, approach to
the Feast of so great a God, and a Lord of so great Majesty. Behold, the
Heavens are not clean in thy sight, Job 15.15.
and the pillars of Heaven shake and tremble at thy nod. Saint John the Baptist
(who was sanctified in his mothers womb) professed himself not worthy to
unloose the latch^t of thy shoes. Ioh. 1 27.
Saint Peter cried out to thee, Luc. 5.8.
to depart from him a sinful man. How then, can I, the chief of all sinners,
but tremble at thy presence? O LORD, I fear that (being thus wretched and
unfit) I shall not be admitted to this Feast, but rather be repelled, for want
of a wedding garment, Mat. 22.22.
even the garment of a Sanctified soul. For my whole life, has been so
wretchedly and lewdly spent, and my days have been so wickedly wasted, that I
hourly seemed, to renew thy passion. Many a time, Mat. 26.14.
I have (with Judas) sold thee, for a small sum of pleasure or profit, and now
in coming to receive thee unworthily, what do I else, but with him, betray
thee with a kiss? How then shall I dare to receive thee, Mat. 26.26.
in so desperate and wicked estate. How can thou abide, or dwell in so
loathsome a Dungeon, wherein, there is no part, room, or corner clean? O Lord
I acknowledge mine unworthiness, and yet with all thy mercies are not hid from
me: and by them, I am encouraged to come, with confidence unto thee: for by how
much the vnworthier I come unto thee, by so much the more, will thy mercy be
glorified, if thou do not reject me. Lord, thou art not wont to put sinners
back, but to call, and set them forward to repentance. Wherefore O Lord,
animated by thy calling, and inuitation, I come unto thee, ouerburdned with the
weight of my sins, hoping to find ease and releife of thee. Thy custom
(while thou were upon earth) was to receive sinners: Luc. 15.2.
and to eat with them: and thy delight was to be with the Sons of men. If
thou O Lord be still pleased with such guests, behold one here at this time,
of that kind, a notorious sinner. I verily believe, that thou tookest more
pleasure, in the tears of the sinful woman, then in the great feast of the
proud Pharisee, Luc. 7.38.
and for a few tears of hers, did forgive many sins unto her. Luc. 7.47.
Behold O Lord, new matter offered for thy great mercy to work upon. Here lies
a sinner, who has many more sins then she, but fewer tears by many: who,
though he has more grievously offended, yet does more carelessly bewail his
offenses then she did. She was neither the first, nor the last, who thou in
thy mercy did receive to favor. O Lord, let me also be one of the Subjects
of thy mercy: and although I have not tears sufficient to wash thy feet; yet
thou have shed drops of blood more then sufficient, to cleanse my sins. I
read O Lord in the Gospel, that all that were diseased, flocked to thee; Luc.
16.17.18.
and (by that Virtue which came out of thee) were healed: and I verily persuade
my self, that thy Nature is not changed: for in thee is, and will be, to the
end of the world, health and remedy for all griefs: and thou art readier to
make us whole, then we are to ask health of thee. I know O Lord, that this
Sacrament (which I so earnestly look after) is not only meat for those that
are in health, but Physique also for the sick: and does not only refresh the
Righteous, but cleanses those that are Sinners also. If I be weak, by it I
shall be strengthened: if in health, in health by it I shall be preserved: and
if dead in sin, by it I shall be revived. I humbly therefore entreat thee O
Father, that (as David did admit Mephibosheth to his table, 2. Sam. 9.
for his Fathers sake: so thou would suffer me to be partaker of thy
Heavenly Table, for thy Sons sake, who with so great labor and sorrow, did
regenerate us, by his death on the Cross, who lives and reigns with thee,
and the Holy Spirit for ever.

Prayers before the Communion.
O Almighty Lord God, Father of all mercies and consolation. I humbly beseech
thee to behold with the eye of pity, my poor and wretched soul, which,
though thou did create after thine own Image, and washedst with the blood of
thy dear Son, yet I have so abominably defiled and defaced with the stain
of sin, that it can hardly be known. O Father, I was thy Son, whom thou
did so lovingly embrace and load with blessings, and who was in thy house in
great honor and dignity: In the Sacrament of Baptism, thou did adopt me,
and gave me the inheritance of a Son and heir, but I unthankfully, and
prodigally, by my evil life, have wasted my Patrimony: I have wickedly abused
the flower and prime of my youth, and the good parts and faculties of my soul
and body, with the pleasures of the flesh, pride, surfeiting, envy, lust,
covetousness, idleness, rebellion, and disobedience: and now, at the last, I
find that all the temporal delights of the flesh and the World are altogether
vain, and vanish like smoke. For all flesh is grass, Esa. 1. Pet. 1.24.
and all the Glory of man, is but like the flower of the field, and is suddenly
gone. He that is rich to day, to morrow becomes poor and miserable: he that
walks in health, and strength of body to day, to morrow is (by sickness)
made feeble and weak: he that lives to day, the next day dies: and he,
which to day, glories in the greatest pomp, to morrow is laid in his Coffin,
and carried to his Grave. Therefore O Lord, consider the weakness and frailty
of man, and turn away I pray thee, thy face from my sins, and remember not
them so, in thine anger, that thou forget either thine own mercy, or my
weakness* By mine own fault, I confess O Lord, and by my evil couersation,
I have made my self unworthy of thy favor, and by my evil concupiscences, I
have grievously wounded my conscience. I have often grieved thy Holy Spirit, by
not harkening to the good motions thereof, but yielding to my sensual lust,
and beastly appetite. Yet O merciful Father, cast me not utterly from thy
sight: for from the beginning of the world, it was not heard, that thou did
reject any sinner, that, with a contrite heart, came unto thee. Behold I come
unto thee in great necessity, and cast my self at thy feet, confessing thy
greatness, and multitude of my sins. They have brought me into that evil
state and condition, that I am not worthy to be called thy Son, Lue. 15.21.
yet I pray thee receive me into the number of thy hired servants. Give me
grace, heartily to repent me of my sins, feed and cherish me with the bread
and drink of the body and blood of thy Son Christ Jesus, that by thy mercy,
I may be received to grace, and restored to the former dignity, from which I am
worthily cast, and to the inheritance of thy everlasting kingdom, through the
same our Savior Jesus Christ.

Another.
O Blessed Savior, I poor unworthy sinner, have a great desire and earnest
longing to come to thy Table, but considering my many and grievous sins,
tremble, and fear to approach unto it. For when I consider thy words to thy
Disciples, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, Ioh. 6.53.
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. And on the other side the words
of the Apostle, Whosoever shall eat this bread, 1. Cor. 11.27
and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord. I am in such a straight, that I know not what to do. For
gladly would I receive this Sacrament, being desirous to live: but fearful I
am, to take it unworthily, trembling at thy Commination. I come therefore to
thee, the fountain of mercy, hoping that thou will wash me: I come to thee the
good Samaritan, Luc. 10.34.
hoping that thou will cleanse my wounds. I open my grief, and discover my
iniquities to thee: I look upon my finnes, great and grievous, and thereupon
tremble: Yet beholding thy mercies, great and plentiful, I am therewith again
refreshed. Remember O Lord, how many drops of Sweat and Blood, thou did shed,
How many Pains and Sorrows, thou did sustain, to expiate my sins. I
entreat thee therefore by them, to purge and purify me, that I may worthily
be incorporated into thy body, which is thy Church, and may worthily also
receive this blessed Sacrament: that so, together with thy whole Church, I may
give thee praise everlastingly.

Or thus.
O Merciful Lord Jesus, I confess my self to be a most grievous and wretched
sinner, not worthy to approach into thy presence, altogether unfit and unmeet,
Luc. 7.6.
to receive thee under the roof of my soul; in respect of the staynes and
pollutions thereof, and that it is not decked and fitted, with such good
graces, as thy Majesty and presence requires, and therefore am afraid to come
near unto thee. Yet O Lord considering thy comfortable saying, that Thou do
not desire the death of a sinner, Mat. 11.28.
but that he should turn unto thee and live; and thy blessed inuitation, how
lovingly, with the arms of thy mercy stretched out, thou have called all, that
are heavily oppressed, with the burden of their sins to come to thee for
comfort and ease. And lastly, thy usual practice, in pitying and releeuing
those, which were cast down, with the thought of their misdeedes: as the Luc.
23.
Thief on the Cross. Luc. 7.
Mary Magdalen. Ioh. 8.
The woman taken in adultery, the Luc. 18.
Publican. Luc. 26.
Peter and Paul (all of them grievous sinners:) I am comforted and emboldned to
come unto thee, assuredly trusting, that thou will (of thy goodness) supply my
defects; and make me a worthy receiver of the high mystery and benefit, of thy
blessed Sacrament, whereof of my self I am altogether unworthy. Stretch out
thy right hand, O sweet Jesus, to me, thy poor servant, and give out of thy
rich storehouse of mercy, what I want: that thereby I may be made a living
Temple to thee, and an acceptable habitation for thine honor to abide in. And
grant, that being cleansed by thy mercy and goodness, I may by thy grace and
power, persevere in all godliness and holiness of conversation, to the end of
my days, and attain to that blessed place, where thou raignest, with the
Father and holy Spirit, world without end, Amen.

Meditations and Prayers after the Sacrament received.
IF all the Creatures in the world should offer themselves together with me, to
praise thee, O Lord, yet is it certain, that we could not give thee sufficient
thanks for the least of thy mercies: and if together we cannot sufficiently
praise thee for the least, how much less can I alone perform so great a duty,
for such inestimable blessings, as I have, at this time received: for
vouchsafing to visit me, comfort me, and honor me with acceptance and
admittance of me, to thy blessed Table. Luc. 1.43.
If Elizabeth the mother of John Baptist, (upon the Virgin Mary's entrance to
her house) said, Whence is it that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
What shall I say, whom the Lord himself has visited, and united to him, by
his blessed Sacrament, being a vessel and receptacle of all impuritie, who
has so often offended, despited and neglected him? King David wondered Psalm. 8.
why God should so esteem of, or visit man. But I wonder much more, why he
should be made man for man, abide with him, suffer death for him, and give
himself to him for spiritual food. Solomon after he had built a Temple to
God, reasoned thus: 1. Kings 8.27.
But will God dwell indeed on the earth? Behold the heaven of heavens cannot
contain thee, how much less, this house, that I have builded: May not I much
more marvel, that God will not disdain to come and abide, in this my poor
and wretched soul? What greater benefit or grace, what greater argument of his
love is there, can there be showed to me? Oh my soul, if thou would but
thoroughly conceive the happiness that comes to thee by this holy Sacrament,
then consider and well weigh, what benefits it brings with it. By it the
sons of men are made the Sons of God, and all that is earthly or carnal in
us, is mortified, that the Deity may live and abide with us. What therefore O
my Lord shall I do? What thanks shall I render to thee? with what feruency
shall I love thee? For if thou, so mighty a Lord, have vouchsafed to love me,
poor wretched creature, how should it be, but that I should return love
again to thee? And how shall I express my love better, then in forbearing
those things which thou do abhor, and following those things which thou
do command? Give O Lord to this end, thy concomitant grace to me, whereby I
may return a reciprocal love to thee, and love those things, which are
acceptable to thee, and avoid those things, which are to thee unpleasing. Give
me a heart which may love thee, with so true, faithful, and constant
affection, as that nothing under the Sun, may separate me from the love of
thee. Romans 8.39.
Let me not follow the love of the world, or delight in the vanities of it any
longer: but give me power, to kill and quench all other love and desires: and
to love thee only, desire thee only, and only think of thee, and thy
Commandments: that all my affections and thoughts may be fixed on thee, that
in all tentations and adversities, I may have recourse to thee only, and
receive all comfort from thee alone, who live and raignest one God, world
without end, Amen.

Another.
I Humbly thank thee, O sweet Savior Jesus Christ, that thou have so
plentifully refreshed my dry and fainting soul, with the holy Sacrament of thy
precious body and blood. I earnestly entreat thee further, that whatsoever is
in me vicious, or contrary to thy blessed will, may, by virtue of this Blessed
Sacrament, be rooted out of me, that my soul may become a fit habitation for
thy holy Spirit. Let it be to me the absolution of my sins, the confirmation
of my faith, an increase of all thy graces in me, the viands of this my
peregrination and pilgrimage, the only delight of my soul, peace and joy in
tribulation, health and strength in affliction and tentation. Let it be a light
and guide to my actions, and my only comfort in the day of my dissolution. Let
the Palate of my soul, be so changed thereby, that it may relish nothing
besides thee. Grant also, that I may hunger and thirst after this bread of
life, and cup of salvation, and that I may with a pure mind, and chaste
affection, receive it often, that thereby, my soul and body may be preserved
to life everlasting. To thee be all praise, power, and dominion ascribed now
and for ever.

Or thus.
I Yield thee all possible thanks, O merciful Lord, that of thy own mere
goodness, and without any merit of mine, thou have so plentifully at this time
satisfied me, with the extraordinary food of my soul, thy blessed body and
blood. O Lord, I heartily repent me of my many sins past, and am heartily
sorry, when I consider, how unprofitably and wickedly, I have spent my life
hitherto: I desire O Lord to amend what is amiss in me: be thou aiding (I
beseech thee) to me, that I may not only duly bewail, and lament for that
which is past, but take heed to my ways, for the time to come. And to this
end O Lord; do thou strengthen me with thy spiritual aid, for without thy
help, and the direction of the Holy Spirit, I shall not be able, to do any
good thing, or perform that, which is pleasing to thee. Grant O Lord, that I
may hereafter, faithfully follow and serve thee, who have at this time so
lovingly vouchsafed to come to me. And because (through my infirmity) I cannot
follow thee as I would, be pleased to assist me, with thy power, and draw me
after thee, Let my soul be so strengthened by virtue of this Sacrament, that it
may esteem nothing pleasing or delightful, in comparison of thee: that it may
lust after no transitory thing, nor be disquieted, with any worldly cross, but
by thy assisting grace, I may overcome all the difficulties of this life, and
bless thee in the life to come,

Or thus.
O Blessed Lord Jesus, who, of thy unspeakable love, have condescended to my
infirmity, and vouchsafed in these mysteries to come unto me, and have made me
partaker of thy blessed body and blood, I humbly entreat thee, of thy infinite
goodness, not to look back upon my sinful life past, and to give me grace
to obey thy Commandments hereafter, 2. Pet. 2.22.
and not to return to those former sins as a dog to his vomit. Grant, that
this most holy Sacrament, may be, to me, life and Salvation, and not turn to
my greater punishment, and condemnation. Grant, that it may cleanse my soul
from sin past, and strengthen me against all tentations to come. Grant,
that it may be so wholesome and nourishing to me, that I may walk in the
strength thereof, all the days of my life: and at last, be brought by thy
merits, to that place of Glory, where thou do reign, together with the
Father and the Blessed Spirit for ever.

Psalm. 103.
Praise the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name.

Praise the Lord O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits.

Which forgiueth all thy sin, and heals all thine infirmities.

Which saves thy life from destruction, and crowns thee, with mercy and
loving kindness.

Which satisfies thy mouth with good things, etc.

Motives to thanksgiving.
IT is not the least part of the Duty of a Christian, in the sight of God, to
be thankful to him, for the benefits, he daily bestows upon us. For as God
is kind, merciful, and loving to us, so he expects, that we should render
back thanks to him, for those blessings, which we receive from him. For we
have nothing else to retribute to him, but a thankful memorial of his
blessings. And this King David well understood, when he said what shall I
render to the Lord, Psalm. 116.12.17.
for all the benefits he has done unto me? I will offer to thee, the
Sacrifice of thanksgiving etc. As therefore, we ought to be diligent in
Prayer, for those things we want; so ought we also, to be perpetually
thankful for them, when we have obtained what we desire. And when we have
done all that we can, we cannot give him due praise and thanks for the least
part of that, which we daily receive. For if we respect that which is past,
present, or to come, we shall still meet with matter enough, which expresses
his goodness and love to us, and exacteth this Duty from us. If we consider
that which is past, then we shall soon perceive that, but for him, we had not
been, at all, nor been preserved hitherto, amongst so many dangers, without
his protection: if that which is present, we cannot but acknowledge, that by
his alone goodness we live, and enjoy those blessings, wherewith we are
loaded, beyond desert: if that which is to come, he is our hope, of all good
things, which we desire, or expect, either for this life, or for the life to
come. And as God accounts Thanksgiving a Duty, Psalm. 50.23.15.14
so he takes it for an Honor done unto him, if we perform it. He has so
much esteemed of it, always, even from the beginning, that he reputed and
accounted it, above the rest of the Sacrifices offered unto him. Ose. 14.2.
Mala. 1.11.
Besides, we may consider, that, in the Law, God himself instituted a peculiar
and special Sacrifice of oblation of thanks. For the Feast of the Paschall
Lamb, was no other thing, but an Eucharisticall or thankful service, Exo. 12.
in remembrance of the wonderful delivery of the Jews, from their servitude.
Our Savior also, instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist, Luc. 22.
for a perpetual remembrance, and memorial, of all his benefits, to mankind,
especially, of our Redemption by his death. Hester established a feast, Hest. 9.
to preserve a thankful memory of the Jews deliverance from the plots of
Haman. And in brief, it was generally, evermore the practice of Gods Saints,
to express this Duty as may be seen, by many Songs, Hymns, Psalms, and
Prayers of thanksgiving, which are left unto us in the Scriptures, as
patterns for us to imitate: Of Exo. 15.
Moses and Miriam. Deuteronomy. 32.
Of Moses alone. Iud. 5.
Of Deborah. 1. Sam. 2.
Of Hanna. Psalm. 34.96.103.107.111.113. etc.
Of David. in diverse places of the Psalms. Esa. 18.10.
Of good King Ezechias. Io. 2.3.
Of Jonas. Abac. 3.2.
Of the Prophet Habacuc. Dan. 3
Of the three Children. Luc. 2.19.
Of the Angels. Luc. 1 68.
Of Zachary. Luc. 1.46.
Of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Act. 4.24.
Of the Church. Rene. 5.12.
And of the Elders. And after those examples, of necessity we must frame our
selves: for be sure of this, That whenever praise and thanks shall fail,
and he wanting on our parts, toward God, then presently, God will withdraw his
hand of mercy, and bounty, from us.

Thanksgiving.
I Thank thee, O merciful Father, Lord of heaven and earth, for all thy
mercies and favors, continually heaped upon me: for that thou have, not only
created me after thine own Image and likeness, Genesis 9.6.
and given to me a body, with all the parts and members thereof, and a soul
with all the powers and faculties thereof, that with them and by them, I might
know, love and serve thee, but that thou have so graciously preserved both body
and soul, from time to time, from all dangers. Thou have always been my
refuge in tribulations, and my defense and succor in adversities: When I went
astray, thou did reduce me into the right way; when I offended thee, thou
did gently correct me; when I was sad, thou did comfort me; and when (for
the grieuousnesse of my sins) I was ready to despair, thou of thy mercy and
compassion did strengthen me, and keep me from utter ruin. I acknowledge O
Lord, thy more then fatherly indulgence toward me, from my birth to this
present time: for volesse thou of thy goodness, had vpheld me, I had long
ere this time, been drowned and overwhelmed in the bottomless gulf of my
sins. But thou have delivered me from the jaws of the roaring Lion, who has
daily sought to devour me, 1. Pet. 5.8.
and have defended me, from al his snares and assaults. And as thou have of thy
mercy preserved my soul from destruction, so thou have oftentimes delivered my
body from the gates of death, when many sickenesses and infirmities took hold
of me. I thank thee also O Lord, for all other thy temporal blessings, which
thou in plentiful manner have heaped upon me, as food, raiment, wealth,
possessions and children: For my health and liberty, for the prerogative which
thou have given me over all thy creatures, in their subjection to my service
and use. I thank thee also O Sweet Savior, for the infinite work of my
Redemption, and for thy exceeding great love, in accomplishing that great
work: that thou would suffer so many torments, sorrows, labors, and
griefs; yea so bitter and disgraceful a death, even the death of malefactors,
to Redeem me, from a most desperate and certain state of damantion, (which I
must justly have fallen into) to a state of Glory, and Immortality, which I by
no means could have deserved. I thank thee also O Lord, most holy, for all
other thy Spiritual graces and blessings, as my Regeneration, Vocation,
Sanctification, for thy blessed Sacraments, for my preservation, and hope of
glorification. O Lord, I am not sufficient, to render unto thee condign
thanks and praises for all these thy mercies: yet accept I humbly pray thee,
these poor and weak thanks which I offer unto thee, according to my bounden
duty and Service. For as there is no hour of my life, wherein I do not enjoy
thy favors, and taste of thy goodness, so (if my frailty would permit) I
should spend no time of my life; without remembering them, and praising and
blessing thee, for the same, Glory be therefore to thee O Lord my Creator:
Glory be to thee O Jesus, my Redeemer. Glory be to thee O Holy Ghost my
Sanctifier. Glory to the high and undivided Trinity, whose works are
inseparable, and whose dominion endures world without end.

Another.
Almighty and everliving God: I humbly thank thy heavenly Majesty, for all
thy blessings, which thou have vouchsafed to me, poor and sinful creature:
that thou have created me, and given to me, a body, the worke-manship and
excellency whereof when I behold, and well consider, I find, so many several
benefits received, as I have members, veins, joints, sinews, and nerves: all
which discover and manifest the wisdom, and power of the Maker of them: The
benefit of which several parts, none can so well know, as they, which want any
of them, or are grieved with the infirmity or weakness of them. I therefore
bless thee, that thou have not created me blind, lame, deaf, or dumb,
euill-shaped, or weak in my senses, but have given me a sound and right mind,
in a healthful body. I further praise thy name O Lord, for that thou have
infused a soul into this my body: a work so glorious and transcendent, that,
if I were not altogether stupid, and void of all Judgment, I would not, by my
actions, account so basely of it as I seem to do, nor defile it with such
impure, contemptible, and vucleane works, as I daily commit. I thank thee O
Lord, that I was not borne among Infidels; and amongst those, who do not
truly call upon thy Name: but in that part of the world, where thy Gospel is
truly preached, and thy Sacraments duly administered. I thank thee also, for
thy gracious preservation of me, from my birth to this present hour: I
confess O Lord, that it is of thy mercy and goodness that I am thus
preserved: for if thou should but withdraw thy hand of preservation from
me, it could not be, but, that in the twinkling of an eye, I should miserably
perish, and return to nothing. I thank thee, that thou have of thy
providence, appointed all thy Creatures for my sustenance, and service: some
for health, and some for delight: Grant O Lord, that I may use them to those
ends, for which thou have created them: and that by them I may be moved,
truly to meditate on thy goodness, and seriously praise thee for them. I
further thank thee O Father, that, when as by our first parents fall, all
mankind was in the state of damnation, it pleased thee (not to deal with us,
as thou did with Lucifer, whom thou utterly expelledst thy presence, but)
to send thy only Son from thy bosom into this world, that by his bitter
death, we might be restored to our former estate. I acknowledge O Lord that I
owe much unto thee for my Creation, but much more for my Redemption. For what
would it have profited me, nay, what misery should I not have suffered, to have
been borne, and afterward to be condemned for ever? I thank thee O Lord, that
thou have also vouchsafed to call me out of the depth of darkness, and shadow
of death, wherein I lay, by the admirable light of thy Justifying Grace, to the
true knowledge and love of thee. It is not the least of thy benefits O Lord, it
shows not the least part of thy power, that thou have called me from so vile
an estate, whereinto I had cast my self after Baptism, (and in the same had
continued many years rebelliously) to the estate of Salvation. For it must
needs be acknowledged, that thy mercy is great, in pardoning sinners their
offenses: but withal, it cannot be denied, but that thy power is greater, in
making sinners righteous and just. Great was the benefit of my Creation, but by
that act, I was only made the Son of man: but greater is the benefit of
Justification, for thereby (in Christ) I am made the Son of God. Great is the
benefit of Redemption (and indeed the greatest of all others:) but without
Vocation and Justification, it had auailed me nothing. Great is the benefit
which arises by the Expectation of Glory: and no less is this of
Justification: for it is a work of no less power to make a Just man a sinner,
then to make a Just man happy and blessed: for as much as, the difference
between Sin and Grace, is more, then between Grace and Glory. I acknowledge
therefore O Lord, that the benefits which arise by these Heavenly gifts and
graces, are so great, that my tongue fails, and my heart wants ability,
wherewith sufficiently to praise thee for them. I praise thee also O Lord, for
thy Blessed Sacraments, for that of Baptism, whereby I was cleansed from the
guilt of original sins, and regenerated and adopted, into the number of thy
Children: and for the other, of the Blessed body and Blood of our Savior Jesus
Christ: the Sacrament of Grace, Unity, Charity, and Remission of sins, the
food of our Souls in this Pilgrimage, and the Conduit, through which, all
graces are conueighed to our fainting Souls, Lastly I thank thee, for thy
preservation of me in thy Grace, by which I am restrained from returning to the
mire, with the washed Sow, 2. Pet. 2.22.
and to the Vomit, with the Dog: and by which I am strengthened, to do
something, acceptable and pleasing unto thee. I confess O Lord, that
whatsoever good I have done, is wrought in me by thee: and whatsoever
tentation or evil I escape, is merely by thy providence. O Lord continue and
keep me still in this Grace, that I may so use all thy blessings, and so keep
them in mind, that they may stir up in me, a more ardent desire to magnify
thy Blessed Name, and a great care of ordering my ways hereafter: that I may
no more grieve thy Holy Spirit, who with thee, Ephesians. 4.30.
and thy Blessed Son, our alone Savior, lives and reigns one God, world
without end.

Another.
ALL praise, honor, and glory be given to thee, O Lord God, Father almighty,
for all thy inestimable benefits bestowed upon me, and all mankind, whether
private or public, general or particular, spiritual or temporal. Who is
able to reckon up or declare the several kinds or parts of them? for creating
the world, for beautifying, enriching and making it fruitful for the use of
man: for giving unto us souls and bodies, and adorning them, with infinite
faculties and gifts: and (which exceedes the rest of thy blessings) for
delivering us from the power and servitude of sin and the Devil: for
forbearing and expecting our repentance so long, preserving us from all
dangers, and furnishing us with all things necessary for this life.

What praise shall we render to thee, O Sweet Jesus, for all that thou have
done, and suffered for us: we praise and bless thee, for thy Incarnation and
Birth, for all the labors, pains, sorrows, wounds and disgraces, together
with the vile and ignominious death which thou did suffer, to reconcile us to
thy Fathers favor, from which, our sins had justly excluded us: for which
thy great love to the Sons of Men, Blessed be thy holy Name.

O Holy and Blessed Spirit, who in the beginning of time, did move upon the
face of the Waters: Genesis 1.2.
at our Saviors Baptism, Mat. 3.16.
in the shape of a Dove: Act. 2.3.
and on the Apostles in the shape of fiery tongues, we praise and worship thee,
for inlightning our understandings: for fitting and making us apt to conceive
the mysteries of life eternal: for converting us from evil conversation, to
newness of life; and for Sanctifying us to life everlasting: for directing us
in the works of truth, and governing us, in our temporal affairs.

O Glorious and Sacred Trinity, infuse into us we beseech thee, such measure of
thy Grace, that we may be daily mindful, of all these thy Blessings. Pardon
all our former ingratitude and negligence, in that we have been no more
zealous to love thee, nor more careful to serve thee, and so forgetful to
thank thee, for all thy benefits and mercies. Illuminate our hearts, that we
may firmly believe in thee, devoutly call upon thee, and obediently execute
thy Holy Will, that at the last, we may by the merits and passion of thee O
Savior, attain to that heavenly Mansion, where thou O blessed Trinity in
Unity, and Unity in Trinity abidest world without end.

I thank thee O Lord, For my Creation. my Being. my well being.
That I am endued with Reason. That I am A Civil man. A Christian. Free borne.
Ingenious. Of honest Parents.
That I am sound in mind. Senses. Body.
That I am well brought up. taught.



I thank thee, For thy gifts of Nature. Grace. Estate.
For delivering me from Danger. Infamy. Trouble.
For the health of my Body. A Competencie of Estate. Friends. Children. Kindred.




I thank thee O Lord: For my Redemption. Regeneration. Instruction. Vocation.
Consolation. Illumination. Justification. Hope of Glorification.
For thy Patience toward me. Grace preventing me. Governing me. Continual care
over me. Strengthening me in tentation. Reproving me in ill. Assisting me in
good.
For the Compunction of my heart. The hope of pardon for my sins.
For the Benefits I have received. For any good done by me. For all those that
have done me good, by their Writings. Sermons. Conferences. Prayers. Examples.
Reproves. Injuries.
For all, and every of these, and for all other, known, or unknown,
remembered, or forgotten.


I confess, and will confess thee.

I bless, and will bless thee,

I thank, and will thank thee, as the Author, and Giver of them all.

SEVEN PSALMS OF THANKESGIVING, analyzed
1 Psalm 8.
1 O Lord our God, Creator and Preserver of all things, how excellent,
glorious, and reverend is thy great, and holy Name, not in one particular
nation only, but in all the Kingdoms of the earth: who, as thou have
magnified thy Name in the earth, so have thou set and extolled thy glory above
the heavens also.

2 Out of the mouths and tongues of babes and sucklings, even very infants,
have thou, because men of riper years and understanding, neglect thy Glory;
ordained strength, and given little children ability, to praise thee, because
of the malice of thine enemies, the principalities of this world: that thou
might, by this thy great wisdom, and power, still the tongues, and
suppress the blasphemous speeches, of the enemy and auenger: when he shall
see, that by such weak means, thou can effect, so great matters.

3 When I consider, and duly weigh, thy Heavens, and the Glorious frame
thereof, the work of thy fingers made and created only by thee: together, with
the Moon, and the Stars, and other beautiful lights of Heaven, which thou,
at the beginning of time, have ordained of nothing, I cannot, but in the depth
of admiration, say:

4 What is man, for whose use and service, thou have made them, and all things
in this world, and him, to serve thee? That thou, so great and glorious a God,
art mindful of him, in so large a manner: and what is the Son of man, the
posterity of sinful Adam, that thou, in such measure of mercy, visitest and
regardest him?

5 For if I look unto his creation, and consider whose Image he bears, I
find, that thou have made him in all respects, very little lower in degree,
then the pure Angels, who are honored with thy presence: and have, of thy
bounty and especial favor, crowned him with Glory and Honor, in making him
so glorious a Creature.

6 Thou made, and have appointed him also, the vicegerent on earth, to have
dominion, and command over thy Creatures, the works of thy hands, and
creation: thou have subjected, and put all things which thou have made, under
his feet to obey and serve him.

7 All Sheep, and Oxen, Beasts for his food and sustentation, yea and not
those only, but the untamed beasts of the field also, have thou made pliable,
and serviceable to him.

8 The Foul of the Air, some for food, and some for pleasure, and delight,
and the fish of the vast Sea, which is stored with variety, and whatsoever else
passes, swimmeth, or lives, through the unknown paths of the Sea, are also
created by thee, to serve him.

9 O Lord our Lord, when I seriously consider, thy power and wisdom, in thy
work of creation, and the especial honor and favor thou she west to
mankind, in giving him this large commission over the rest of thy Creatures, I
cannot but admire, and say, how excellent, and great is thy Name, and power, in
all the kingdoms of the World, there is none O Lord, worthy to be compared to
thee.

Glory be to the Father etc.

2 Psalm 30.
I Will extol thee and praise thy Name O Lord, as long as I live, and not
without great cause, for thou in thy mercy have lifted me up, and endowed me
with thy blessings: and have not made, no, nor suffered my foes, who intended,
if thou had forsaken me, to rejoice and triumnh over me.

2 O Lord my God and Savior, I cried, and made my humble supplication unto
thee, in my trouble and adversity and thou, of thy accustomed goodness, did
graciously hear me, and have healed me, of all mine infirmities.

3 O Lord, thou, by the power of thy grace, have brought up, and restored to
life my sinful Soul from the Grave of perdition, whereinto my sins had well
nigh cast me: Thou have in thy love to me, kept me alive, and preserved me,
from my dangerous sicknesses, that I should not yet go down into the pit of
death, but live, and praise thy Holy Name.

4 Sing and rejoice unto the Lord our God ( O ye Saints, and faithful people
of his, who have with me, felt and tasted of his mercy) and give thanks
together with me, at the remembrance, and consideration of his holiness.

5 For his anger and displeasure endures toward sinners, but a moment, and
short space, if they truly turn unto him: and if we truly consider his
mercies, we shall find, that in his favor is life to those, that lie
desperately sick in their sins, if he but touch them, with his finger of
Grace: as for weeping, heaviness, and affliction, it may, and of necessity
must, sometime befall his servants, but yet it shall endure, and afflict them
for a night, a little while only: but joy and comfort, comes again to
refresh them, in the morning by sending the light of his countenance upon them.

6 And before I fully understood, how God used to deal with his Servants, I
was so confident of my self, that in my prosperity, when I felt the grace of
God abundantly in me, I said, and presumed, that I was so fully settled in
Gods favor, that ^ shall never fall, or be removed from it.

7 Lord, by thy favor and goodness, thou had fixed, and made my mountain
of Grace, to stand so strong, that I concei^d my self so secure, that I could
not slide back, or fall away: yet after a while, I found by exp^ that I was in
an error, for thou did but hide thy face, and a little while obscured thy
Grace from me, and being left to my self, I found such an alteration, and
defect in me, to do good, that I was therewith sore troubled, and disquieted.

8 I thereupon presently recalled my self and cried earnestly by prayer to
thee O Lord; and betook my self unto the Lord, who never utterly forsakes
his Servants, and to him I made my earnest supplication, never ceasing, till I
obtained his return, and thus I said in my prayer.

9 What profit O Lord is there, can there be, in my blood, or death, when I go
down into the pit, or if I die in my sins: surely none to thee, for thou
delightest not in blood, or in the death of a sinner. Shall the dust, or they
which are resolved thereinto, before repentance, praise thee? or shall it
declare thy Truth, and show thy Glory? nay verily they shall rather, in the
horror of punishment, blaspheme thy Name. Suffer me not therefore, O Lord, to
be of that reprobate number, of which I must needs be one, if thou absent thy
self, or withdraw thy Grace any longer from me.

10 Hear me therefore O Lord, and that right soon, for my spirit waxes
faint, for want of thy Gracious assistance: and have mercy upon me, in this
distress. O Lord, I renounce all further confidence in mine own strength: be
thou my only stay and helper. Upon this petition The Lord heard my request, and
thereupon I turned my prayer into a song of praise, and said;

11 Thou O Lord, art worthy of all honor and praise, for thou have turned for
me, and for my good my mourning for thy absence, into dancing and joy for thy
gracious presence: thou have made me, to put of my sad habit of Sackecloth
and sorrow, and in stead thereof, have girded and apparrelled me, with a
vesture of gladness, even the peace of conscience. And all these things have
thou done for me,

12 To the end, all my sorrow being removed, and I being delivered from all
fear, my glory, tongue, and heart together, may sing praise and thanks to
thee, who have done so great things for me: and that I should not be silent,
in extolling thy mercy. And therefore O Lord my God, as thy goodness
deserves, and my duty requires, I will, with all the affections and faculties
of soul and body, give thanks unto thee, and praise thy Majesty for ever, as
the only author, and finisher of my Salution.

Glory be to the Father etc.

3 Psalm 34.
1 I Will bless and praise the Lord, for all that he has done unto me, at
all times; as well in adversity, as prosperity: and his praise, as it shall
ever be in my mind and heart, so shall it be continually without
intercession, in my mouth, by declaring it, to others.

2 My Soul especially, shall make her boast, and glory in the Lord, and not in
any thing that is in me: so the humble, and they which are any way dejected,
when they shall hear thereof, how gracious God has been to me, shall in hope
of the like mercy to them, rejoice, and be glad also.

3 O ye, whosoever have felt Gods favor, as I have, magnify, and extol the
mercies of the Lord with me for his goodness: and let us joyfully with one
accord, exalt, and praise his Name together.

4 I my self, when I was in trouble, sought the Lord by prayer, and
humiliation, and he rejected not my petition, but graciously heard me, and
granted it: yea, and he not only delivered me from the danger I was in, but
from all my fears also, which I conceived at it.

5 They also, that lived in former Ages (our Forefathers) whenever they were
distressed, looked up and cried unto him: and were relieved by his mercy, and
lightened by his grace: and their faces were not any whit ashamed, because they
did put their trust in him.

6 This poor man (even my self) cried (by their example) in my distress: and
the Lord, plentiful in compassion, graciously heard him: and caused and
delivered him immediately out of all his troubles and calamity.

7 The good Angel of the Lord deputed by him, for each man's protection,
encampeth, and fortifieth round about them, that with an unfeigned heart, fear
and serve him: which Angel preserves them in all their ways, and delivers
them from all the machinations of the Devil and his Angels.

8 O taste ye therefore, and see, make experience, and you shall soon find,
that the Lord is good and loving to those, that faithfully call upon him: and
you will also confess with me, and say, Blessed and happy is the man that
lays aside all confidence in himself, and that in all his necessities,
trusts in him, and his protection.

9 O fear, reverence, and love the Lord, all ye, that by truly believing in
him, become his Saints, and observe his Commandments: for take this, as an
infallible truth, that, There is no want to them, they shall lack nothing,
that is needful for them, that with an upright heart, fear and serve him

10 The young Lions, and mighty men of this world, although they think
themselves happy, yet do they lack true peace of conscience, and suffer
hunger, and want that which is truly good: but they, which with a pure heart
and humble spirit, seek the Lord, and desire to please him, shall not want any
good thing, when the Lord in his Wisdom, shall think it needful for them.

11 Come therefore, O ye children, that desire to be informed: and with
attentive minds hearken, and give good ear unto me, that am experienced in
the mercies of the Lord, and I will teach and instruct you, in the fear of the
Lord, which is the beginning of wisdom.

12 What man is he, among the sons of men, that desires to live a good life:
and loves to spend many days so in this life, that he may see, and enjoy
good, and happy days hereafter.

13 Keep first of all, thy tongue from speaking evil, let that member do no
man wrong, and preserve thy lips, from speaking guile, or that which is
false, though it be to thine own prejudice: for the Lord abhors lying
lips.

14 Depart from evil, avoid all things which thou know displeasing to God,
and yet think not that sufficient, except thou also apply thy self to do
that which is good, and acceptable to him: Seek peace, between God and thy
self, thy self and thy conscience, thy self and thy neighbor: and if thou
shall find that peace, in any of these particulars, shall fly from thee,
pursue it with all thy might, that thou may recover it.

15 The provident eyes of the Lord (for thy comfort, in taking this course) are
ever fixed upon the righteous, to preserve them from all evil, and to confirm
them in all good: and his ears of compassion are always open unto their cry,
to deliver them, from all distress.

16 The face of displeasure, and the angry countenance of the Lord, on the
contrary, is set and bent against them that forsake good and do evil, without
remorse of conscience, to cut off, and root out, not only such wicked persons
themselves, but the very remembrance of them from the face of the earth, that
there shall remain no memorial of them.

17 The righteous in their affliction cry, and fly unto God for succor, and
the Lord, in mercy, hears their prayer, yea, and in his good time, delivers
them, out of all their troubles, either, by aiding them with spiritual
comfort, that they faint not under them, or by removing their afflictions from
them, or them, from their afflictions, by taking them into Heavenly joys.

18 The Lord (who has a continual care over his elect) is ever nigh unto
them, in comfort, that are of a broken and humble heart: and always saves
such, (and no other) as are of a contrite and bruised Spirit, that they fall
not into desperation.

19 Many in number, and great in weight, are the afflictions, and troubles of
the righteous, for they that will live godly in Christ, must suffer
persecution: but the Lord, of his infinite goodness, forsakes him not, but
delivers him in due time, out of them all, that they shall not be able to
do him harm.

20 He, even the Lord, keeps and preserves all his bones, which though the
wicked go about to break, yet, notwithstanding all their attempts, not so
much as one of them is, or shall be broken, by them: and not only so, but the
hairs of his head, are numbered also.

21 Evil, on the other side, shall slay the wicked, and turn them to
destruction, and they, whosoever they be, that hate the righteous, whom the
Lord loves, shall be desolate, and deprived of the comfort of Gods Holy.
Spirit.

22 The Lord, by his power, and goodness, redeemeth, and saves the Soul of
every one of his Servants, from all evil: and none of them, that put their
trust and confidence in him, and his mercy, shall be left desolate, or without
consolation.

Glory be to the Father etc.

4 Psalm 103.
1 BLesse^ and magnify the Lord, thy Creator, O my soul, for all his mercies
and favors extended to thee, and all that is within me, holy, and pure, give
praise unto, and bless his holy and great Name.

2 Bless the Lord O my Soul, I say again, as well for thy creation, as for
all his other great and glorious works, and at any hand take heed, that thou
be not ungrateful to him, and forget not, nor let slip out of thy remembrance,
all, or any of his benefits, not only in forming thee after his own Image, as
in his continual care and preserving thee, from many dangers.

3 Who, only by his power can, and of his mere mercy and goodness forgiueth
all thine iniquities, pardons all thy sins, as well actual, as original,
how great so ever, how many so ever, as often, as with a pure heart, and humble
spirit, thou repentest thee of them. Who, like a good Physician, heals all
thy diseases, and thy infirmities, by the regeneration, and renewing, of his
holy Spirit in thee.

4 Who, only redeemeth and saves thy life from destruction, and utter ruin,
and who, instead of taking just and severe revenge of thee, for thy sins,
crowns and compasses thee, with loving kindness, many blessings, and
comfort thee, with his tender mercies, which are above the rest of his
works.

5 Who, in his providence, satisfies, and fills thy mouth, and desire, with
all good things, necessary for thy sustentation: so that thy youth, by his
power, is renewed like the Eagles, by curing thy weakness, and infirmity, and
making the lusty and strong.

6 The Lord releeueth them that suffer wrong; and executes Righteousness and
Judgment, without respect of persons, and stands for all, that are unjustly
oppressed, against those, that are too mighty for them.

7 He, in former times, at the publishing of the Law, made known his ways,
and taught his Commandments unto Moses, by whom, he gave directions to
succeeding ages, what they were to follow, and what to avoid: and his mighty
acts were well known unto the children of Israel, by their many and great
deliverances.

8 The Lord our God, is merciful in forgiving offenses, and gracious, in not
imputing our sins unto us: he is slow to anger, expecting the conversion of
sinners: and plenteous in mercy, exceeding in his love, and liberal in his
benefits, to those that fear him.

9 He will not always chide, nor be ever displeased with his children: neither
will he remember our sins, and keep his anger against us for them, for ever,
but in his wrath, he will ever be mindful of his mercy.

10 He has not dealt with us, nor punished us rebellious wretches, after the
quality of our sins, wherewith we have daily offended his patience, nor has
he rewarded or retributed to us, according to the heinousness of our
iniquities: for he knows, that, if he should strictly enter into Judgment
with us, no flesh could be saved.

11 For like as the Heaven is high as we see, and far above the earth: so
great is his mercy above his Justice, toward them that fear him, and in
remorse for their offenses, truly turn unto him.

12 As far also in distance, as the East part of the world, is situate from
the West, which by reason of their separation, can never come near to each
other: so far, at the least, has he removed, and put away our
transgressions, and sins from us, that they never shall come near unto us to
do us any harm.

13 Like as a tender and compassionate Father, pitieth his disobedient
Children, and upon submission, receives them again to Grace: so the Lord, who
is the Father of mercies, pitieth, and grieueth to see the afflictions of them,
that in fear and trembling, for their sins, return unto him.

14 For he, the Lord, which knows all things, knows also our frame, that
we consist of flesh and blood, subject to corruption and frailty, and he with
all remembers, and considers, that we are but even Dust, fashioned out of
the earth, and therefore, must needs partake and savor, of earthly substance.

15 As for wretched and frail Man therefore, his days are but as grass,
which is green in the morning, and before night is cut down and withered: and
as a fading flower of the field, which for a while only, in the spring time, is
beautiful, and afterward, is cropped or decays: even so, and in no more
assurance, is he, that in the greatest prosperity flourishes. For after a
while in a short time, he is no more seen, nor his remembrance, shall be no
where found.

16 For as the Wind and Storms passes over it, and presently it is gone, and
withered, and the place thereof where it grew, shall not know it, nor bear it
no more: So man, after he has a while, left the troubles and storms of this
world, shall soon die, and be forgotten, and the place of his being, will be
no more known.

17 But yet the mercy, and loving kindness of the Lord, to the Sons of Men,
is, and was from everlasting, and shall continue to everlasting, to the end of
the world: and shall ever be upon them, especially, that which unfeigned hearts,
serve, love, and fear him: and his righteousness in all his promises, shall
be accomplished to his servants, and unto their Childrens Children, their
posterity, through many generations.

18 To such especially, as forget not his Commandments, but faithfully keep,
and observe his Covenant: and to those, that remember and be mindful of his
Commandments, and frame themselves, to do them.

19 The Lord, who commands the observance of his Laws is most worthy of all
Honor, and not to be neglected: for he has (before the foundations of the
World) prepared his Throne, and seat of Majesty in the Heavens, where he is
attended on, by the glorious company of Angels, and his Kingdom, is not
straightened, or limited, to one peculiar place, or country, but he Rules, and
commands over all people, and nations.

20 Bless therefore the Lord, that is so mighty, ye, that be his holy Angels,
magnify, and laud his holy Name, ye, that excel in strength, and that gladly
do, and execute his Commandments, and that, by harkening unto, and obeying
the voice of his Word, willingly execute his Will, and pleasure.

21 Bless ye and praise I say, the Lord, your, and our God, all ye his
heavenly Hosts, ye blessed Angels, ye that are Ministers, and Servants of his,
that willingly and gladly execute, and do his pleasure.

22 Bless and praise together, with one accord, the Lord, our God, all his
works, which he has created, for the celebrating of his Glory, where so ever
ye remain, in all places of his Dominion, every where: and lastly, as I began
with thee O my Soul, to stir thee up to his praise, so I end with the same
excitation, Bless, Praise, Laud, and Magnify the Lord, thy God, O my Soul,
to whom, he has ever been so gracious, and merciful.

Glory be to the Father etc.

5 Psalm III.
1 I Will praise the Lord, and give thanks unto his holy Name, with my whole
heart, and that, not only in my private devotions, but in the public assembly
and meeting of the upright in heart: and in the congregation of the faithful,
the Church also.

2 The wondrous works of the Lord, our God, even from the beginning, through
all ages, even to this time, are so great, and glorious, that worthily, he
alone deserves to be magnified for them; they are sought out, and searched
into, of all them, that have pleasure and delight, in meditating, and
contemplating therein.

3 His work, in the creation and fabrique of the universe, is honorable and
glorious, of all his creatures worthily to be admired: and his righteousness,
and equity, his care and providence, in the preservation and government of it,
is likewise to be magnified, because it is permanent, and endures for ever.

4 He has made and perfected his wonderful works, with such wisdom, and
power, that they ought to be remembered, and his Name to be celebrated for
them: And as he is omnipotent, so the Lord is also gracious, and loving to his
Servants, and full of compassion, plenteous in mercy, to every repentant sinner.

5 He has of his providence and bounty, ever, given meat, and all other
necessaries, to them that fear and serve him: yea, and he, as he has
formerly, so, will he ever, to the end of the world, be mindful of his
Covenant of Grace, to his servants.

6 He has showed and manifested to his people, his elect, the power and
efficacy of his great works, not only in the creation, but in the Redemption
of mankind: that he may give unto them, that are in Christ, the heritage of
the heathen, according to the promise, made to our forefathers.

7 The works of his hands, all his actions, are done in verity and Judgment:
and all his Commandments are sure, just, holy, and worthy to be observed.

8 They stand fast, and are settled firm for ever and ever, to the end of the
world: and they are done, and commanded, upon good grounds, in truth and
uprightness, as being enjoined by the author of truth and equity.

9 He in the fullness of time, sent Redemption and Salvation unto his Elect
People, by Jesus Christ: he has commanded his Conenant of the new Testament,
for ever to be observed by them: and it concerns them carefully to keep it,
because he, which commanded it, is a jealous God, and severe to transgressors,
and Holy and reverend is his Name.

10 The filial fe are of the same holy and reverend Lord, is the beginning and
Basis of all true Wisdom: which who so ever has not attained to, is not
really wise, how so ever he may be esteemed by the world: but a good and
perfect understanding have they, and they are truly wise indeed, that do his
Commandments, and keep his precepts: his praise and remembrance endures for
ever, and continues throughout all generations. Glory be to the, etc.

6 Psalm 138.
1 I Will praise and bless thee O Lord, with my whole heart, with all my
strength: yea, before the Gods, in the presence of thy holy Angels, will I sing
praise and laud unto thee.

2 I will worship in fear and reverence, toward thy holy Temple, dedicated to
thy honor and service, and I will praise thy holy and great Name, for two of
thy blessings especially, namely, for thy loving kindness in comforting
distressed sinners, and for thy Truth, in performing thy promises: for thou thy
self have preferred and magnified thy Word of Truth, abone all the attributes
of thy Name else, whatsoever.

3 In the day and time of my affliction, when I cried unto thee, by earnest
prayer, thou did not stop thine ears, but graciously answeredst me: yea and
strengthnedst me with thy Grace, and strength in my soul.

4 All the Kings and mighty men of the earth, be they never so high in
condition, shall, and may worthily praise thee, without disparagement to
themselves: when they, by the preaching of the Gospel, hear, the words of thy
mouth, which are nothing but Truth.

5 Yea, they shall sing and rejoice, in exercising themselves in the ways and
Commandments of the Lord: for great and unutterable, is the Glory and Majesty
of the Lord of Hosts.

6 Though the Lord our God be high, and his Majesty be above all things, yet,
in his abundant mercy, has he respect unto the lowly in their own eyes; and
the more humble they are, the more he regards them: but as for the proud, and
those which exalt thhmselues, he despises them, and knows them, as it were
a far off.

7 Though I walk and live, in the midst of trouble and sorrow, and in the
shadow of death: yet, when so ever I call upon thee faithfully, thou will (I
know) revive and raise me up: thou shall also stretch forth, and reach unto me,
thy hand of power, against the wrath and malice of mine enemies, and bridle
their fury: and thy right hand of omnipotence, shall save me, from all their
enterprises.

8 The Lord of his goodness, will perfect and finish, that which concerns
me, and my Salvation: thy mercy and loving kindness O Lord, never fails, but
endures from generation to generation, even for ever: withdraw not therefore,
that mercy of thine from me O Lord, and forsake not thou, the work of thine
own hands, not made by any strange God, but by thee, the only, and true God.

Glory be to the Father etc.

7 Psalm 145.
1 I Will extol and praise thee, my God, and Creator, O King of Majesty and
Glory: and I will bless and magnify thy Name, O preserver of mankind, for
ever and ever, even all the days of my life.

2 Every day, not a day shall pass over my head, but I will bless thee, and
be speaking of thy mercies: and I will praise and give thanks unto thee, and
to thy Name, for ever and ever, as long as I live.

3 Great and glorious is the Lord, far exceeding all the false gods of the
heathen, and greatly is he to be praised for all his works: and his
greatness, has neither end, nor beginning, but is unsearchable, and past man's
finding out.

4 One generation and age, shall praise, and leave the memory of thy goodness,
and thy works of power, wisdom, and mercy to another succeeding generation:
and shall declare to posterity, the remembrance of thy mighty acts.

5 I my self, as well as I am able, will, as I have good cause, speak of, and
extol, the glorious honor, and the exceeding greatness of thy Majesty: and
tell unto the people, the excellency of thy wondrous works.

6 And not only I, but all other Men, shall be forced to confess, and speak
of the exceeding might, and the wonderful effects of thy terrible acts,
against thine enemies: and I, according to my poor ability, will declare unto
posterity thy Greatness and Majesty.

7 They even all people, which are governed by thy power, and satisfied with
thy goodness, shall abundantly utter, and continually with praise acknowledge
and keep the memory of thy great and superabundant goodness and mercy: and
shall, in all assemblies and congregations, sing, and rejoice, because of thy
Righteousness, when thou rulest, and disposest all things.

8 The Lord our God, notwithstanding our grievous sins, is gracious, and
loving, yea and full of compassion by nature, evermore slow and unwilling to
wreak his anger upon us, it being an act contrary to his disposition: and in
stead of punishing, he is of great mercy, and ready to pardon the repentant.

9 The Lord is also good and gracious, not to any particular person or people
only, but to all that turn unto him, and if we shall consider his tender
mercies, to the sons of men, they are over, and exceed his Justice, and all
his other works.

10 All thy works and creatures shall therefore praise, and magnify thee O
Lord, in general: and above the rest thy Saints, and Servants to whom in
particular thou extendest thy mercy, shall bless and continually praise thee,
for the same.

11 They especially shall not be silent, but speak of, and declare unto
those, that have not known thy Name, the Glory, and Majesty of thy Kingdom,
which is above all the kingdoms of the earth, and shall, wheresoever they
come, talk of, and set forth, thy mighty power, which no potentate is able to
resist.

12 To make known and to make manifest thereby, to the sons of men, even all
the gratiousnesse to come, his mighty and wonderful acts, which he has done
in our time, and in the ages foregoing: and also the glorious Majesty, and
super-excellency of his Kingdom and power.

13 Thy kingdom, O Lord is not temporary, or of short continuance, but it is
an everlasting Kingdom, was without beginning, and never shall have end: and
this thy dominion and rule endures firm and stable, throughout all
generations, to the end of the world.

14 The Lord in his mercy, vpholdeth and lifts up all those that fall by
frailty and weakness: and raises up by the grace of his holy Spirit, all
those, that be dejected, bowed and cast down with the thought of their sins.

15 The eyes of all creatures wait and are fixed upon thee, as upon their
careful father, for sustenance and help: and they, no sooner call unto thee,
but thou of thy providence, suppliest their wants, and give them their meat,
and all things necessary for them, not only in due proportion, but in due
season and time also.

16 Thou openest thy hand of bounty, and satisfiest the insatiable desire of
men, which nothing but thy self can satisfy, and of every other living thing
besides.

17 The Lord is only righteous, just and unreprovable, in all his ways, and
actions: and it is he only, that is holy, and pure, in all his works.

18 The Lord is nigh and ready at hand, unto all them, that in distress, call
upon him, and seek unto him, for help. Yea, to all, without respect of
persons that call upon him in truth, faith, and uprightness of heart.

19 He is so gracious, that he will not only hear them, but grant their
petitions, and fulfill, and satisfy the desire and request of them that fear
and serve him: he also, will hear their cry, in time of affliction, and will
save, and deliver them, out of all their trouble.

20 The Lord, by his omnipotent power, preserves and keeps all them, that
love him sincerely, and obey his Commandments, but as for all the wicked, and
unrepentant, obstinate sinners, those will he destroy, from the face of the
earth.

21 My mouth shall, as long as I have any being, speak of, and declare the
praise, and Majesty of the Lord, most mighty, and as I do, so, Let all
flesh, people, nations and kindreds, from the rising of the Sun, to the going
down thereof, bless, land, and magnify together with me, his holy and great
Name, even for ever and ever, from this time forth for evermore.

Glory be to the father' etc.

Imprecation.
THis part of Devotion, (or of zeal as I may call it) although it seem harsh
and not well to stand with the Charity of a Christian, yet in these Cases, it
has been, and may be lawfully used.

1 When the Church of God, in any part of the World, lies (as it were) at the
stake, and groaneth under the burden of Persecution, and the enemies thereof
are incorrigeable, and not to be reconciled, in this case, not only a private
man, in his Devotions, but the Church also, in general, may use these
Imprecations, to the end, that the Church, may by these kind of Prayers and
Gods assistance, recover its former peace and quiet.

2 When, as a Christian man shall perceive, that his enemies aim altogether
(against the Rules of Charity,) at his utter subversion, both in Body and
Soul, in this case also, a man may (without breach of Charity) use these
Imprecations.

And in either of these Cases, if the children, either of Gods, or our own
enemies, shall join, assist, or persist maliciously in the steps of their
Parents, they are, in our estimation, to be accounted of no better, nay, not so
well, as the very Heathen, who have not known the name of God at all.

And to this end, I have only given you a taste, of some of the zealous
wishes, and earnest desires, or Imprecations of some Holy men, Prophets and
Apostles, which are set down, in sacred Scripture, and left (no doubt) for our
imitation, in the several Cases before named.

Imprecations against the enemies of God and his Church.
REspect not thou their offering. Number. 16.15.
The Lord shall trouble thee. Ios. 7.25.
Destroy them, Psalm. 5.10.
let them fall by their own counsels. Break the arm of the wicked. Psalm.
10.15.
Break their teeth, O God. Psalm. 58.6.
Let them be scattered. Psalm. 68.1.2.
Let them flee. Drive them as Smoke, melt them as wax. Power out thy wrath
upon them. Psalm. 79.6.
Make them like a wheel, Psalm. 83.13.
and as the stubble before the wind. Burn them as the fire burns the wood.
Psalm. 83.14.
Persecute them with thy tempest. Psalm. 83.15.
Fill their faces with shame. Psalm. 83.16.
Let them be confounded and troubled for ever. Psalm. 83.17.
Let them be as grass on the house top. Psalm. 129.6.
Grant not their desires. Psa. 140.8.
Let the mischief of their own lips cover them. Psa. 140.9.
Let burning coals fall upon them. Psa. 140.10.
Let them not be established upon the earth. Psa. 140.11.
Let evil hunt them. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 16.22
let him be Anathema Maranatha. If any man preach any other Gospel, Gal. 1.9.
etc. Let him be accursed. I would they were even cut off. Gal. 5.12.

Against the enemies of our Souls.
Let them be confounded and put to shame, Psalm. 35.4.
that seek after my soul. Let them be as chafe before the wind. Psalm. 35.5.
Let the Angel of the Lord chase them. Let their way be dark and slipery.
Psalm. 35.6.
Let the Angel of the Lord persecute them. Let Destruction come upon them.
Psalm. 35.8.
Let them be confounded and ashamed. Psalm. 40.14.
Let them be driven backward. Let them be desolate. Psalm. 40.15.
Let death seize upon them. Psalm. 55.15.
Let them go down quick to Hell. Let them be covered with reproach and
dishonor. Psalm. 71.13.
Set a wicked man over him. Psalm. 109.6.
Let Satan stand at his right hand. Let his prayer become sin. Psalm. 109.7.
Let his days be few. Psalm. 109.8.
Let his children be fatherless, Psalm. 109.9.
and his wife a widow. Let his children be vagabonds and beggars. Psalm. 109.10.
Let the extortioner catch all he has. Psalm. 109.11.
Let there be none to extend mercy to him or his children. Psalm. 109.12.
Let his posterity be cut of. Psalm. 109.13.
Let the iniquity of his Fathers be remembered. Psalm. 109.14.
Cast forth lightning, Psalm. 144.6.
and scatter them, shoot out thine arrows, and destroy them.
THE TEN COMMANDMENTS analyzed
THe Law of the Two Tables, was written by the Deuteronomy. 4.13.10.3.4.
Finger of God, and delivered, and promulgated, by the Ministry of Exo. 19.24.
Moses, and Act. 7.53. Gal. 3 19. Heb. 2.2.
Angels, and contained summarily, what God commanded the people to observe, and
what to avoid.

It is divided into two Parts. Our Duty toward God. Our Duty toward our
Neighbor.


The four first Commandments enjoin the first Duty.

The six last, the last.

And thus follow.

The preface Exo. 20.
God spoke all these words saying. I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

God spoke, etc.
This Preface belongs to all the Decalogue, and contains a description of
the Person, who gave the Law.

Who being God, the Creator, and disposer of all things, is to be obeyed:
neither are we, to make any scruple, or doubt, but that, all things which he
commands us in his Law, are just, and Holy.

I am the Lord.
Who only, is Omnipotent, and was from all Eternity, from whom, all things that
are, had their beginning: and who has absolute and sole power, to command, and
prescribe Laws, unto us.

Thy God. Psalm. 144.15.
Happy is the people, who have the Lord for their God.

By these words (thy God) every one of us, may receive particular comfort,
that, as he is able, so he is willing, and ready, (by making this covenant to
be ours) in his particular providence, and care, to do good to every one of
us, in our need, if we keep his Commandments.

God.
A God, to relieve and aid us, not a severe Judge to condemn us.

Let us therefore, With all reverence serve him, as a Lord. With earnest
desire, repair to him in our need, as to a merciful God. With hearty zeal,
love him, for his goodness. With trembling, fear to offend him, for his
Justice.


Leuit. 20.7.
And let us be holy, as he is holy.

Which brought thee, etc.
In this delivery of the Jews from their servitude, is his infinite Power
described: whereby, he is declared to be, as well able to save his Servants, as
to confound his enemies.

And this deliverance, is foretold and paraleld by the Prophet, as a Type of
our deliverance, Esa. 52.
from the servitude of sin.

The first Commandment. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.
Thou shall have no other Gods.
Having (as it were) settled in our hearts, his Authority and Power, to
prescribe and make Laws unto us, his first precept is, that we have no other
Gods before him.

1 Neither by abating any reverence due to him.

But to worship him with all our heart. By acknowledging him to be the only
true God. By honoring, serving, and praising him, above all things. By
trusting and relying wholly upon him. By expecting all good from him. By
humbling our selves before him, and patiently bearing, whatsoever he shall
please to lay upon us, and subiecting our wills wholly to his.


2 Nor by attributing any honor to other Gods, or Idols, or putting any
confidence in Saints or Angels, Earthly pleasures, Riches, Honors, or the
like, lest we offend thereby. As Rachel did, Genesis 30.1.
by asking children of Jacob. As the King of Syria, 2. Kings. 5.6.
by desiring Ioram to heal Naamans leprosy. As Asa, 2. Chr. 16.12.
by too much trusting to his Phisicians. As the Fool in the Gospel, Luc.
12.16.
trusting to his riches.


Before me.
Neither secretly in thy heart.

Nor in the view of God, and the World openly.

Not, but that God is every where, and sees into the secret corners of our
hearts, and is omniscient: but to set a note or brand of impudence upon us, for
our indignity to him, if we shall make open profession of our Idolatry, to any
false God, or Idol, in worshipping it, or of our excessive love, or doting,
upon any Creature, by putting confidence in it, and neglecting our dependence
on God, who is only able, by his omnipotency, to relieve us.

The second Commandment. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image,
etc.
AS in the first Commandment, God requires, that we worship him only, so in
this, he forbids all undue and indirect worshipping of him: and enioyneth
us, not to make any resemblance, to worship him by; because he is a Spirit, and
is only to be worshipped in Spirit and Truth.

Thou shall not, etc.
1 Therefore we are not to grave, or make any Image, or resemblance of him.

For when he gave the Law, (says Moses Deuteronomy. 4.15.
) he appeared in no manner of similitude.

Esa. 40.18.
To whom then will ye liken God? or to what likeness will ye compare him?

2 Neither are we to make the likeness of any thing, to worship it.

For as we ought not to make any resemblance of him: so neither when we make
the similitude of any thing else (the true use of making pictures, and the
like, being lawful) not to worship it, or attribute any honor to it.

Saint Paul says, Romans 1.23.
that the Gentiles changed the Glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image
like to corruptible man, and to Birds and four footed Beasts, and creeping
things; wherefore God gave them up to uncleanness, etc.

Thou shall not bow down, etc.
1 Either by bowing the body, uncovering the head, or bending the knee to them.

2. Or by setting the same in any eminent place to worship them, bestowing
extraordinary cost on them, making Pilgrimages to them, or dedicating Altars,
Lamps, or the like, to them.

For I the Lord, etc.
By this Commination, he shows his Power to punish offenders, and that he is
able, and all sufficient, to supply our wants likewise.

Am a jealous God.
And suffers no Corriuall, Competitor, or sharer in his Service.

My Son give me thy heart: thy whole heart.

And visit the sins, etc.
Punishing them, that run after false Gods, in many descents, even as long as
they shall continue, in their Idolatrous courses.

As the Jews in general.

Solomon, and others.

1 To show how odious Idolatry is to him. 2 To force men (who naturally have a
love and care to their posterity) by this commination, to abstain from it,
least their issue be plagued.
Psalm. 97.7.
Confounded be all they that worship carved Images, and that delight in vain
Gods.

And showing mercy, etc.
The mercy of the Lord is Psalm. 145.9.
over all his Works. Ia. 2.13.
over his Justice.


For whereas he punishes Idolaters in his Justice, but to three or four
generations. He is merciful to thousands of those that worship him aright,
throughout all generations. Luc. 1.50.


His reward is always greater, then his punishment.

It is his proper work, Esa. 28.21.
and suitable to his nature, to have mercy, but he is hardly drawn to punish,
as being a work altogether unsuitable to his disposition.

To them that love me.
With their whole heart, without hypocrisy, and do not impart that worship to
others, which is due to him.

And keep my Commandments.
In obedience, walking in his ways.

All his Commandments, but chiefly this, concerning his worship.

The third Commandment. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in vain.
THe Name of the LORD, which in it self, is Holy, True, and Just.

Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord in vain.
And therefore we ought not to profane it, or take it in our mouths, lightly,
or upon every small occasion.

Herein we offend. When we Blaspheme God, either openly, or in our hearts. When
we use his Holy Word to any profane, scurrilous, or impure end. When we commit
Perjury. When we murmr against him. When we leave his Providence, and
consult with Witches, or the like. When we swear, upon triuiall, and light
causes. When we curse, or use unlawful Imprecations. When we perform not
that, which we faithfully promise. When we (in any action of our own) detract,
from Gods Glory, and attribute, and arrogate too much to our selves.


For the Lord will not, etc.
The Lord, and Judge of Heaven and Earth, who sees, and observes all our
actions, is so far from conniuing at this sin, that without repentance, he
will condemn every one, that offends therein.

Saul, 1. Sam. 14.^.
for unadvised Cursing and adiuration, lost a victory against the Philistims.
1. Sam. 14.24.


For consulting with a Witch, 31.4.
was with his sons, brought to untimely ends.

Sennacherib, 2. Kings 19.10.
for blaspheming God: was slain, by his own sons.

Ananias, Act. 5.5.
for lying to the holy Ghost, died suddenly.

The fourth Commandment. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc.
IN this Commandment are two things contained.

1. A Precept, or declaration of the will of God.

To set apart some day, 1. To the public worship of God. 2. In ceasing from
our labors.


2. A Reason, of the Commandment. 1. Because God after the Creation rested on
the seventh day. 2. Because he also blessed and Sanctified it.


Remember
Let not worldly cares put it out of thy mind, but observe it with all care and
Religion.

1. Not without great cause was this Precept so strictly urged. 1. Because by
the neglect of it, arises the neglect of all Spiritual duties. 2. Because
that in it was contained a Type or shadow, of the great and everlasting
Sabbath, which is our Sanctification. 3. Because that we have thereby, some time
to show mercy to our servants and beasts, wearied with labor.


That thou keep holy, etc.
In frequenting the Church, and there to exercise thy self, In Prayer. Hearing
the Word. Receiving the Sacraments.


In pious and religious works, as Visiting the sick. Releeuing the poor.
Meditating on Gods work. Praising him for them. In refraining from sin. In
resting from servile labor.


And although that part of the Jews Sabbath be abrogated, which respected the
Seventh day, Sacrifices, and other exterior acts of Gods worship, commanded,
and enjoined to the Jews: yet the Church has appointed in stead thereof the
Lords day or Sunday (called the first day of the week) wherein all Christians
are bound to retain and observe all the duties of the first Sabbath, Reave.
1.10.
Act. 20.7.
1. Cor. 16.2.
avoiding the Jewish strict and superstitious Ceremonies.

Six days, etc.
In following the vocation appointed there by God, wherein thou art to omit
nothing, necessary for the sustentation of thy family.

And not to spend those six days wholly in idleness, pleasures or excess.

Nor in the public duties of the Sabbath, and thereby neglecting the care
over thy family.

But the seventh day.
In that day, neither thou, nor any of thy family, or cattle, shall do any
servile labor, (except in case of necessity, and preservation of Gods
Creatures from damage or loss) but ye shall spend it in those religious
duties, formerly set down.

In case of necessity ( Mar. 2.27.
The Sabbath being made for man, and not man for the Sabbath) we are to
conceive, that it was ordained not to destroy, but to preserve him, and
therefore all works are not forbidden that day.

1. As dressing of meat. Numb. 28.1.
By the example of the Priests, who on the Sabbath killed the Beasts, for
sacrifice, and dressed the rest. And of Christ's Disciples, plucking ears of
corn; Mat. 12.1.
and Tertullian says, that the Ancient and Primitive Church never fasted on
the Sabbath day. De Coron. militis. c. 3.


2. Ministering Physic to the sick. Luc. 6.
By the example of our Savior healing on that day. Io. 5.


3. Saving Corn, Hay, Houses, and the like from perishing. By our Saviors
question to the Pharisees. Mat. 12.11.


2. The Reason why God commanded the observation of the first Sabbath, was, 1.
Because, after God by his Word, had created the universe of nothing: he rested
himself, from all the work that he had made. Genesis 2.2.
2. Because this day was by him blessed and sanctified.


And the Reason why the Seventh day was changed into the first day of the
week, upon which the Christians Sabbath is observed: was, in remembrance of
our Saviors Resurrection, (which happened on this day) as may be gathered by
Christ's selecting that day to appear twice to his Apostles after his
Resurrection. Ioh. 20,19.26.


The second Table.
The fifth Commandment. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may
be long in the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.
AS the first Table, teaches the Honor and love of God, so does the second,
the Duty we owe to our Neighbor. And the first Commandment of this Table,
enioyneth us to honor and reverence our Parents, as being the thing, which God
esteems next in degree to his Honor.

And it contains, First, A Precept. Secondly, A Promise.


1 The Precept, is General, and Particular.

1 The General comprehends our Duty to all our Elders, and Superiors, whom
God has set over us, for our government and preservation: which duty, is of
necessity to be performed, in respect of the upholding of Politic
government.

2. The particular Precept, contains our duty to our natural Parents,
Father and Mother, of what degree, estate, or condition soever they be.

Whether Poor or Rich, Good or Bad, this Commandment lays hold on us.

Honor thy Father and Mother.
That which we are enjoined to do by these words is to

Reverence them: as from whom we received our being.

Love them: for their care, sorrow, and pains in our education.

Obey them: in all lawful things, as being appointed by God, to command over
us.

Be thankful to them: In requiting their charge and love: In ministering to
their necessities.

Be patient with them: In their Correction, and bearing with all their
Infirmities.

That which we are forbidden to do against them, is Exo. 21.17. Leuit. 20.9.
Not to speak evil of them, or to curse them. Mat. 15.5. Mat. 7.11.
Not to see them want. Not to be ashamed of them, for poverty, or other cause
whatsoever.


That thy days may etc.
2. The Promise, is made to all such, as shall keep this Precept, which is Long
days, of life here, and happy too, else they would be no better then a Curse.

Long days hereafter, for ever in bliss, which is the highest blessing that
can befall to any.

This Promise God made. 1. To provoke us to that Duty, of reuerencing and
obeying our Parents, and Superiors. 2. To show, how highly he esteems of it.


The sixth Commandment. Thou shall not kill.
THis Commandment follows properly and in order, in the next place: for man's
life, being the most previous thing in this world, and upon which all other
things depend, God seems to take care, by this Commandment, for peace and
quietness, whereby man's life may be preserved.

Thou shall not kill.
Neither thy self nor others.

Neither shall thou have any desire to do any such act.

Under this Commandment are diverse other particulars forbidden: for as God
forbids the Act: so does he command that all occasions or means to execute
that Act, be forborne, and taken away.

If God command us not to kill, then he prohibits: Anger. Quarrelling. Chiding.
Hatred.


Mat. 5.22.
And all other things of this nature, which may be as prouocations to flaughter.

And on the contrary, he enioyneth us. To love our neighbors as our selves.
To live peaceably and quietly with them. To do good for evil.


And all this because: Man is the Image of God. Flesh of our Flesh.


The thing, that Christ paid so dear for.

The seventh Commandment. Thou shall not commit Adultery.
Thou shall not commit adultery.
THe chief aim and scope of this Commandment is, to preserve the marriage bed
inuiolate. And with great reason it is placed next to the prohibiting of
homicide: because, that next and dearest to a man, after his own life, is the
preservation and Honot of his wife; for they two are but one flesh. Genesis 2.24.


And by this Commandment, is also implicitly and secretly forbidden Whoredom.
Incest. Sodomy. Romans 1.26.
Sins against Nature. Mat. 5.28.
Unlawful desires and affections. Uncleanness. Evil talk. Obscene songs,
and impudent behavior. uncivil sights. Lasciuions Pictures. Intemperance of
diet. Delicacy and excess in Apparel, and the like, being prouocations, to
the Sin here forbidden.

And as we are prohibited these things, so are we commanded hereby. To live
Chastely. Temperately. Mat. 5.8.
Modestly. and Purely in heart. For by these Virtues (as our Savior tells
us) we shall come to the beatificiall vision of God, and enjoy that
Blessedness, which he has promised to those, that in pureness of heart, love
and serve him.

The eight Commandment. Thou shall not steal.
Thou shall not steal.
THat is, thou shall not take from another, any thing which is not thine own.
And against this Commandment we may offend diverse ways. By committing
Sacrilege, taking any thing, from the Church. By with holding that which is
due, to King, or Prince. By robbing on the high way, or out of houses. By
deceiving any man. In bargaining. In false weights and measures. In being
bankrupt without cause.
By oppressing the poor, or keeping his pledge. By encroching upon the
possessions of any other, either by violence openly, or by fraud, in removing
Land marks etc. By keeping that which is found, from the true owner. By
denying, or concealing a trust. By detaining the Laborers hire. By Living
idly, and eating, out of another man's labor. By neglecting a Masters
Service, and mispending his goods.


The Ninth Commandment. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
Neighbor.
Thou shall not bear false witness, etc.
THou shall not give false evidence before a Judge, against any man. Whosoever
does so, is not only guilty of the breach of this Commandment, but of the
Third also, in committing Perjury.

Neither is false Testimony with an Oath, forbidden only, but also, without an
Oath.

1 Thou shall not accuse thy brother unjustly. Slander him. Revile him.
Backebite him. Abuse him by uncivil jests.


2 Thou shall not lie or equivocate. Either for sport. Or to avoid danger or
loss.


For although some seem to approve:

Of Jacob, Genesis 27.19.
in lying to his Father that he was Esau.

The Midwines, Exo. 1.19.
to save the Children.

Rahab the Harlot, Iosu. 2.4.5.
to save the spies.

Michol, 1. Sam. 19.14.
to save David her Husband.

Judith, Iud. 11.5.
to deceive Holofernes.

Aug.
Yet it is safer (with Saint August.) to hold, that all lies, being directly
opposite to truth, must needs be sin.

The Tenth Commandment. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house.
Thou shall not, etc.
THis Commandment, is directly against Covetousness, or evil Concupiscence,
the issue of Original Sin, which was derived to all mankind, after the fall
of Adam.

Not Covet.
No man ought to covet or desire (no not so much as in his heart) any thing,
which belongs to another man, and whereby, he may receive any damage or
detriment.

Neither his house, which is his inheritance, and his defense, against the
heat of the Sun, and the sharpness of the cold.

Nor his wife, which is bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. His partner
as well in sorrow, as pleasure.

Nor his Servants, without whose help and labor, he cannot dispatch his
affairs.

Nor his Cattle, which do his work.

In conclusion, nothing, which may any way prejudice him.

Now, seeing that Ia. 2.10.
He, which is guilty in breaking one part of the Law, offends in all, and
that, to the keeping of it, the whole inward and outward man is required: and
that the flesh (while we are in this world) is wholly opposite to the Spirit:
It is impossible for us, to fulfill the same by our own endeauours. For it is
with us, as it was with Saint Paul. Romans 7.18.
In our flesh dwells no good thing, and the good that we would, we do not,
but the evil which we would not, that we do. And seeing also, that Romans 3.20.
by thee deeds of the Law, no man can be justified: not that the Law is in
fault (being good of it self) but our own flesh, Romans 8.7.8
the carnal mind being enmity with God, and they which are in the flesh, not
being able to please him: for the comfort therefore of all, when as neither the
works of the Law could justify us, nor we were able to fulfill the same: God
of his infinite mercy, sent his Son Christ Jesus, into the world, Galat.
3.13.14.
that he suffering death for us, might redeem us from the curse of the Law,
that we might receive the promise of the Spirit, through Faith.

For in him, all the Promises, Ceremonies, and the Law it self, were fulfilled
and ended.

1 The Promises.

As Genesis 1.15.
the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head.

Genesis 22.18.
In thee shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed.

2 The Ceremonies.

The Priesthood, by his eternal Priesthood. Psalm. 110.4.


The Sacrifices, by his own Oblation. Heb. 7.27.


Circumcision, Luc. 2.21. 3.21.
by his Circumcision and Baptism.

Passover, by the Eucharist. Mar. 14.22.


3 The Law.

By his satisfaction, and absolute fulfilling of it, in whom was no sin, nor
spot; Cant.
but an absolute and perfect Righteousness. which Righteousness, he has of
his free will and mercy, imputed to us, and made ours, if with a lively Faith,
we apprehend him, and believe on him.

And in this respect, it may be said, that he observes and fulfilleth the Law
of God, who (not trusting to himself or his own works) commends himself
wholly to the Grace of God, Romans 8.3.4. 2. Cor. 5.21.
and seeks all his righteousness by Faith, in Christ Jesus.

So that we are to rely on those words, which Saint Paul spoke in his Sermon
at Antioch. Be it known unto you therefore, Act. 13.38.
men and brethren, that through this man (Christ Jesus) is preached unto you,
the forgiveness of sins: And by him, all that believe, are justified from
all things, from which you could not be justified by the Law of Moses.

But yet, we must take this along with us. That this Faith, whereby we
believe, that Christ satisfied the Law, and is become our Righteousness and
Perfection, is merely by Gods Grace and Favor infused into our hearts by the
Holy Spirit: which stirs up in us a love, and desire, to keep the Law of
God: which though the same desire never attaineth to perfection, while we live
in these earthly tabernacles, for the frailty and indisposition of the Flesh,
yet God in his mercy, accepts the same, for Christ's sake.

For the better conceiving of the drift and scope of these Commandments, we
are to take notice of two things.

1 Whereas, in every Commandment, the grossest sin, tending to the breach of
that commandment, is only forbidden by name, yet we are to conceive, that all
sins of that nature, (though lesser in degree, and not named) together with
the prouocations thereunto, are likewise inclusiuely contained, in that
prohibition.

2 And where any Virtue is commanded to be observed, there all the Vices and
Sins, contrary to that Virtue, are forbidden. And where any Vice is
prohibited, there all opposite Virtues to it, are enjoined.

Meditations of Death.
THat all men must dye, being long since enacted by Statute in the Parliament
of Heaven, unrepealed: and the knowledge of the day of Death, being by God kept
from us, Aug. in Psalm. 34. Conc. 1.
lest we should promise to our selves any thing for future time: I shall not
need, to spend many words, to prove either the absolute necessity of the one,
or the uncertainty of the other. Only give me leave, to conclude this work,
with a few meditations, and Prayers, which may serve as well for those, who
feel the hand of God by sickness: as for those which are in perfect health,
to meditate and think upon, that they be not taken unprovided. And this
exercise of Meditation of death, and resolution to die, ought not to seem
strange, or hard to Christians. For the Philosopher in his time, accounted all
days spent, without serious consideration of our end; to be but fondly
consumed, and affirmed that the whole life of a wise man, Plato.
was nothing but a meditation of death. And therefore it has been observed,
that Abraham, Genesis 23.3: 19.
when he was in the Land of Canaan, purchased no more Land, then would serve to
bury his dead. To teach us, that we should not fix or fasten our minds, upon
the transitory things of the World, but have our affections bent, upon another
world, and meditate upon the day of our death, which brings two benefits with
it; first it delivers us out of many cares, and troubles, and secondly it
leads us to joys unspeakable. The first of these benefits, the Heathen man,
could see, Artabanus to Xerxes. Herod. l. 7.
by the light of Nature, when he said, that No man lived in so flourishing
estate, who, if not often, yet once i^ his life, did not desire rather to die,
then to live. For the unavoidable calamity and grievous diseases incident to
this life, do so often disquiet, and vex a man, that notwithstanding our life
is naturally short, yet sometime it seems over long unto him. And therefore
(says he) Death is the most acceptable and wished for Sanctuary, and place of
refuge, for a life, full of misery and grief. And for the second take (amongst
many) that of Saint Cyprian. Cypr.
We pass by death to immortality, neither can we come or attain to eternal
life, but by leaving this life. Nor is our corporal death to be accounted, an
end or period of life, but a passage to a better, for by this temporal
journey, we pass to Eternity. For this separation of the soul and body
(commonly called Death) if we consider the true scope and aim of God in it, is
not inflicted by him, as a severe Judge, to punish the Elect, but as a most
merciful Father, who only calls his Children, from a dungeon of misery, to a
place of all felicity and happiness. And this is that, which has always
made the Godly to leave this life, with such willingness and joy: and to
endure with so great courage and constancy, all their greatest agonies.

Meditations for the sick.
Set thy house in order for thou shall die. Esa. 38.1.


Job. 19.25.
I Know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the earth.

Job. 19.26
And that I shall be again clothed with this skin, and in my flesh I shall
see God, Job. 19.27.
whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold. This hope is laid up in
my breast.

Lord let me know mine end, and the number of my days: that I Psalm. 39.5.
may be certified, how long I have to live.

Psalm. 39.6.
Behold thou have made my days as it were a span long, and mine age is as
nothing in respect of thee, and verily every man living is altogether vanity.

Psalm. 39.7.
For man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain, he
heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.

Psalm. 39.8.
And now Lord what is nay hope? truly my hope is even in thee.

Psalm. 39.9.
Deliver me from all mine offenses, and make me not a rebuke to the foolish.

Psalm. 3911.
Take away thy stroke from me, for I am consumed, by the means of thy heavy
hand.

Psalm. 39.12.
When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to
consume away, like a moath fretting a garment: every man therefore is but
vanity.

Psalm. 39.13.
Hear my Prayer O Lord, and with thine ears consider my calling: hold not thy
peace at my tears.

Psa. 39.14.
For I am a stranger with thee: and a so^ourner, as all my fathers were.

Psa. 39.15.
O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength, before I go hence, and
be no more seen.

Job 13.23.
Answer me, O Lord, How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my
transgressions and my sins.

Job 13.24.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face from me, and hold me for thine enemy?

Job 13.25.
Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and will thou pursue the dry
stubble?

Psalm. 71.8.
Oh cast me not away in my weakness, forsake me not when my strength fails
me.

Though I be afflicted, yet let me not be destressed: Though in want of some of
thy comforts, yet not of all: Though chastned, yet not forsaken.

Psalm. 94.12.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastnest O Lord, and teach him in thy law,
Psalm. 94.13.
That thou may give him rest in the days of evil.

Psalm. 119.67.
Before I was troubled I went a stray, but now I shall learn thy Word.

Psalm. 25.7.
O Lord remember not the sins and offenses of my youth. Nor judge me
according to my works: For I have done nothing worthy of thy sight, but of
eternal death. Wherefore I pray thee, Psalm. 51.1.2.
blot out all my offenses, and wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and
cleanse me from my sin.

Job. 7.20.
I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men? Why have
thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden unto my self?

Job. 7.20.
And why do thou not pardon my transgressions, and take away mine iniquity?
for now I shall sleep in the dust, and thou shall seek me in the morning, but
I shall not be.

Job 10.20.
Are not my days few? cease then, and let me alone, that I may take comfort a
little.

Job 10.21.
Before I go, whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness and
shadow of death.

Job 10.22.
A land of darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadow of death,
without any order, and where the light is as darkness.

Psalm. 89.27.
What man is he that lives, and shall not see death, shall he deliver his
Soul from the hand of the grave?

Psalm. 55.4.
The fear of death ouerwhelmeth me, and my heart is disquieted within me, for
that I have daily sinned and not repented, considering that from the Infernal
pit there is no redemption.

But be thou merciful to O Lord, and save me for thy Names sake, and in thy
strength deliver and comfort me.

Psalm. 119.75.
I know O Lord,that thy judgments are just, and that thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled. Oh let this light affliction
(which will quickly be gone) cause unto me afterward a more excellent and
eternal weight of glory. 2. Cor. 4.17.


Psalm. 94.19.
In the midst of the sorrows that are in my heart, let thy comforts O Lord
refresh my Soul.

Job. 10.8.
Thine hands have made me and fashioned me round about, yet thou do destroy
me.

Job. 10.9.
Remember I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou
bring me into the dust again?

Job. 10.10.
Have thou not powered me out like milk, and crudled me like a cheese?

Job. 10.11.
Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and fenced me with bones and
sinews.

Job. 10.12.
Thou have granted me life and favor, and thy visitation has preserved my
Spirit.

O Lord, thou numbrest my Job. 14.16.
steps, and do set a watch over my sin.

Job. 17.1.
My breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the Grave is ready for me.

Job. 14.
I have said to corruption, thon art my Father, and to the worm, Thou art my
Mother and Sister.

Job. 7.1.
Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth, and are not his days as the
days of an hireling.

Job. 9.25.
My days are swifter then a Post, they flee away and see no good.

Job. 30.23.
I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house appoinfor all the
lining.

Woe is me therefore O Lord, that I have sinned. What shall I do? whither
shall I fly? but to thee O Lord my God. Be merciful to me in the last day.
My soul is very much disquieted within me, but Lord, I require thy aidee and
comfort.

Be mindful O Lord, of thy Psalm. 119.49.
Word, wherein thou have caused me to put my trust and let thy mercy come unto
me according to thy Promise. For thou art my maker, and I am the work of thy
hands.

Deliver me O Lord, from eternal death, in that day, wherein Heaven and Earth
shall be dissolved, when thou come to Judge the Earth.

I am affrighted when I consider that day, the day of thy wrath, the day of
misery, that great and exceeding bitter day.

O Lord in that day where shall I hide my self from the face of thine anger.

O Lord, when thou come to Judgment, condemn me not I beseech thee, but
deliver from the gates of hell, my poor soul, which I commend unto thee.
Acknowledge then O Lord thy Creature, not made by any strange gods, but by
thee, the true and living God. Make my Soul joyful with thy presence, and
remember not my sins, but according to thy great mercy think upon me in
that day, for the merits of my Blessed Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

A Prayer for the Sick.
Almighty and most merciful Lord God, who by the infirmities of this life,
do put us in mind of our mortality, and by these outward afflictions, do
call us to inward Repentance: I cry unto thee with my whole heart: Psalm. 6.1.
Rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy displeasure. Psalm. 6.2.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak; O Lord,heal me, for my bones are
vexed. Thou art He, O Lord, Job. 5.18.
That woundest, and healest again, 1. Sam. 2.6.
that killest and reuiuest, that leadest to the gates of Hell, and bring
back again. If this my sickness O Lord, be not unto death, help me on this
my bed of infirmity, and strengthen me. If thou think expedient rather, that
I should die then live, do with me according to thy good pleasure, and receive
my Spirit to thy peace, which I commend into thy hands, who live and raignest
God of all mercy, world without end, Amen.

Or thus.
O Merciful Lord God, who of thy great mercy do forgive the offenses of
those who truly repent: mercifully look upon me thy poor Serand hearken unto
me, who humbly crave of thee, remission of my sins. Renew O Lord in me
whatsoever is corrupt and decayed, by the Devils malice, or mine own frailty.
Pity my sighs, pity my tears, pity my groans; vouchsafe to be reconciled
to me, that have confidence in nothing, but thy mere mercy. O Lord, it griueth
me, that I have offended thy Majesty, and it grieueth me much that I can
grieve no more then I do. And I humbly pray thee, by the Death, Passion, and
Intercession of thy Son Christ Jesus, to pardon my offenses: promising, that
if I recover my former health, thy grace assisting me, to abstain from
displeasing thy Majesty hereafter. I willingly O Lord, and freely from my
heart, for thy sake, forgive all offenders and offenses against me, and I
heartily desire all those, whom I have any way offended, to forgive me. O Lord,
though my natural man trembles at the thought of death, yet I profess, that
I am willing to die, if it be thy good pleasure. I have received life, and all
the blessings of this life from thee, what shall I render back to thee for
them. I will willingly receive this Cup of death and praise thy Name. Psalm.
31.6.
I commend into thy hands my spirit, and whither thou disposest of me to live
or die, I resign it to thy good will and disposition; and humbly pray thee,
that if thou see it good, for me, to prolong my days on earth, that thou
would renew my conversation, by the direction of thy holy Spirit, that I may
pass those days, in thy fear: if thou be otherwise pleased to dispose of me,
take me I beseech thee into the arms of thy mercy, for Jesus Christ's sake my
only Savior and Redeemer.

Or thus.
O GOD of all consolation, who have promised to hear all those, that
faithfully call upon thee, and not to reject any, that with a contrite heart,
and penitent soul, shall humble himself before thee: I humbly entreat thee in
the name and mediation of thy Son Jesus Christ, that thou would be
pleased to be merciful to me, thy poor Servant, at this time afflicted with
sickness. O Lord pardon, forget, and blot out of thy remembrance, whatsoever I
have committed against thee, in the whole course of my life. Seal and confirm
unto me (by thy Spirit) a pardon unto me for all my offenses, that I may
thereby receive such comfort in my soul, that I may with all joy and
willingness, depart out of this life, unto thee. Let me be certified, that
there is Romans 8.1.
no condemnation to those which are united and engraffed into Jesus Christ by
Faith: that I may be confident, 32.
that neither my sins, death, the Devil, nor ought else can draw me away or
separate me from thee: and that I may be assured, that thy Throne will not be
to me a Bar of severity, but a Haven of safety, and a sure Sanctuary and
refuge for me to fly unto. Strengthen this Faith in me, which may serve as a
Buckler to defend me from all tentations: and that forsaking the confidence or
strength of all other things, I may fly wholly to thy mercy in Christ Jesus,
whereby I may be protected, from the Terrors of thy Judgment. Grant unto me
distressed sinner, these graces, even for the same Jesus Christ his sake, who
with thee, and the Holy Spirit, lives and reigns for ever.

Or thus.
Almighty and everlasting God, whose years fail not, and who have determined
the days of man, which he cannot pass, yet thy self endurest for ever, and
thy Throne from generation to generation: Remember, that I am but dust, like
grass, and my days, as the flower of the field, which flourishes in the
morning and in the evening is dried up and withered. Psalm. 39.5.
O let me know my end, make me mindful of my mortality. Psalm. 39.14.
I am a stranger with thee, and a soiourner as all my fathers were, and cannot
promise my self one hour, much less, any days, or years in this my
Pilgrimage. Psalm. 6.2.3.
I am like a tottering wall and a broken fence, give me grace therefore, that I
trust not in the uncertainty of this life, like the rich fool in the Gospel,
but that I may every hour, Luc. 12.
prepare my self in thy fear, to pass out of this frail mansion; and to
expect thee, with a solid faith, and firm hope, waiting cheerfully, for the
day and time of my dissolution. Tit. 2.13.
And looking for that blessed hope and glorious appearing of our Saniour Jesus
Christ. Make me like the faithful and wise servant) ever ready and prepared
for the coming of my Lord, lest being suddenly prevented, I be taken like a
Bird in the snare of the Fowler. O Lord, thou have by this gentle correction,
put me in mind of my mortality, give me also Grace, that I may make good use
of it, that I may cast of all the cares of this world, and wholly betake my
self, to make my peace with thee. And I humbly pray thee, that thou would
not forget me in my pains and miseries, in all my infirmities: be not far
from me, when, by reason of the terrors of death, and assaults of the enemy, I
shall have most need of thy help: but strengthen my soul with thy holy
grace, against all tentation that my Faith fail me not, but that, thy holy
Spirit assisting me, I may overcome my spiritual enemies, and at the hour of
death. Lord (I beseech thee) let thy servant depart in peace according to thy
Word. Luc. 2.29.


Or thus.
BLessed Lord Jesus Christ, the only comfort of the living, and the eternal
life of those which dye in thee. I wholly submit my self to thy blessed Will,
whether it please thee to suffer my soul any longer to live, in this earthly
Tabernacle to serve thee, or to have it depart out of this transitory world:
being certainly assured, that it cannot perish, being committed to thy
keeping. O Lord, I put of this frail flesh with a willing mind, in the hope
of the Resurrection of it, at the last day, together with my soul, when it
will become much more glorious and happy, then now it is. I beseech thee O
Lord Jesus, strengthen me with thy Grace, against all temptations, and defend
me with the shield of thy mercy against all the assaults of the Devil. I
know that of my self I have no strength: wherefore, my whole confidence is in
thee. I have no merits of mine own to allege, for I see many, yea, too many
of my sins, to stand up against me: but by thy mercy, I trust, that thou will
repute ^e amongst the Just. Thou were borne for me, did hunger, thirst, fast
and pray for me, thou did many good works and sufferedst many bitter things
for my sake. Let thy blood wash away the spots of my offenses; Let thy Justice,
cover my unrighteousness, and thy Merits plead for me before the great and
severe Judge. And as my sickness increases, let thy Grace increase, that my
faith fail not, my hope waver not, nor my love to thee wax cold. Let me not
be cast down, or dejected, with the terror of death; but when death shall
seize on the eyes of my body, let the eyes of my soul, look to thee, and when
the use of my tongue shall fail me, let my heart cry unto thee, Psalm. 31.6.
I commend my spirit into thy hands O Lord, who live and raignest etc.

Psalm. 23.4.
Although thou kill me, yet will I trust in thee, and though I walk in the
midst of the shadow of death, yet will I not fear, because thou Lord art with
me.

A short Table of the chief Heads contained in this Book.
A General Exhortation to Prayer. page 1 In regard of Gods Precept. 2 Promise.
3 Christ's example. ibid. The Necessity. ibid. The Dignity 4 The Benefit. 5
Directions how to Pray.
1. To God only. 8 2. In Faith. 9 3. In Hope. 10 4. In Charity. ibid. 5. In
Humility of Spirit. 12, 13 Of Body. 14 6. In Perseverance, 15 with feruency
and attention. 17 The Time for Prayer. 20 The Place for Prayer. 21 How to pray
aright. 22 Prayer divided into Parts 25 The use of the Lords Prayer. 28 The
Lords Prayer analyzed. 32 Petitions for spiritual Graces 68 A Prayer before
Prayer 78 Before a Sermon 80 Petitions for temporal blessings. 82 Rules for
the Morning 84 Morning prayers private. 85 For a Family 97 Rules for the
Evening and Night. 102 Evening prayers private 105 For a Family 116
Prayers.
For a married man 121 For a married woman. 124 For a Child 126 For a woman
with Child 128 For a young man or maid 129 For a Servant 132 Before a Journey
133 After a Journey. 135 Intercession 137 Deprecation 140 In affliction. 145 In
time of Pestilence. 147 The Creed analyzed. 152 Confession of Gods Glory. 164
Motives to Repentance. 169 The Duty of Repentance. 175 Confession of sins.
179 Seven Penitential Psalms analyzed. 218 Direction before the Sacrament.
259 Meditations and Prayers before the Sacrament. 263 Meditations and Prayers
after the Sacrament. 276 Motives to Thanksgiving 285 Thankesgiuings. 289 Seven
Psalms of Thanksgiving analyzed. 305 Imprecation. 345 The Ten Commandments
analyzed. 350 Meditations of death 384 Meditations for the sick 387 Prayers
for the sick. 395
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 38. line 16. in the margent read Hallowed. p. 80. l. ^. r. thou. p. 97.
in the mar. r Genesis 1.26.9.6. p. 114. l. 7. r. seventy times seven. p. 116. l.
9. r. sleep in peace. p. 119 l. vlt. r. power. p. 130. l. 1. r. self be able
to get. p. 144. l. 13. r. sentence, Depart. p. 156. l. 9. put out us. p. 164.
l. vlt. r. bosom. p. 169 l. 9. r. who. p. 178. l. 5. r. Repentance. p. 190. l.
6. r. I have brought forth. p. 211. l. 15. r. art patient. p. 267. l. 16. r.
long. p. 271. l. 6. r. the greatness. p. 291. 17. r. damnation. p. 297. l. 16.
r. Just man of a sinner. p. 307. l. 23. r. thy vicegerent. p. 309. l. 15. r.
triumph. p. 314. l. 8. r. to the end that all. p. 323. l. 17. for not only r.
as well. p. 328. l. 23. r. felt. p. 329 l. 7. r. with. p. 340. l. 13. r.
wherewith p. 341 l 26. r. generations. p. 345. l. 14. r. incorrigible. p. 374.
l. 10. r. beatificall.


