ALL THE SVBmyssyons, and recantations of Thomas Cranmer, late Archebyshop of
Canterburye, truly set forth both in Latin and Englysh, agreeable to the
Originalles, written and subscribed with his own hand.

Visum and examinatum per reuerendum patrem and Dominum, Dominum Edmundum
Episcopum London.

Anno, M. D. LVI.

The true copye of the first submission o Thomas Cranmer, late Archbishop of
Caunterburye, which afterward by inconstancye and unstableness he the said
Thomas Cranmer did cancel, the oryginall whereof was sent to the Queen's
Majesty, and her privy counsel, as follows.
FOrasmuch as the king and Queen's majesty's, by consent of their parliament,
have received the Popes authority within this realm, I am content to submyt
my self to their laws herein, and to take the Pope for chief head of this
church of England, so far as Gods laws and the laws and customs of this
realm will permit.

Thomas Cranmer.

The true copye of the second submission of the said Thomas Cranmer, which he
the said Thomas did advisedly subscribe with his own hand, and did not
afterward revoke it, the original whereof was also sent up to the Queen's
Majesty and her said counsel, as before.
I Thomas Cranmer doctor in divinity, do submyt my self to the catholyke
Church of Christ, and to the Pope, supreme head of the same church, and
unto the king and the Queen's Majesty's, and unto all their laws and
ordinances.

Thomas Cranmer.

Tertium scriptum Cranmeri sua ipsius manu exaratum, and per eum in buccardo
exhibitum London, Episcopo.
I Am content to submyt my self to the king and Queen's Majesty's, and to all
their laws and ordynaunces, as well concerning the Popes supremacy as others.
And I shall from time to time move and stir all other to do the like, to the
uttermost of my power, and to live in quyetnes and obedience unto their
majesty's, most humbly, without murmour or grudgynge against any of their godly
procedinges. And for my book which I have written, I am contented to submyt me
to the judgment of the Catholyke church, and of the next general council.

Thomas Cranmer.

Quartum scriptum Cranmeri sua ipsius manu exaratum, et per eum in buccardo
exhibitum London, Episcopo.
BE it known by these presents, that I Thomas Cranmer doctor of divinity,
and late Archbishop of Canterbury, do fyrmely, stedfastlye, and assuredlye
believe in all articles and points of the christian religion, and catholyke
faith, as the Catholyke church does believe, and has ever believed from the
beginning. Moroeuer, as concerning the Sacraments of the church, I believe
unfeignedly in all points as the said catholyke church does and has believed
from the beginning of Christen religion. In wytnes whereof I have humbly
subscribed my hand unto these presents, the.xvi. day of February. M. D. lv.

Thomas Cranmer

The true copye of a fyfte submission of the said Thomas Cranmer, written and
subscrybed with his own hand in ye presence of master Henry Syddall, and of
one called Frater Johannes de uilla Garcina, a notable learned man, as follows.
EGo Thomas Cranmer anathematizo omnem Lutheri and Zuinglij haeresim and
quodcunque dogma sanae doctrinae contrarium, confiteor uero and credo
firmissime unam sanctam and Catholicam ecclesiam uisib lem extra quam salus non
est, atque eiusdem in terris supremum agnosco caput episcopum Romanum, quem
fateor summum esse pontificem and papa^ ac Christi uicarium cui omnes tenentur
subesse fideles. ^am quod ad sacramenta attinet credo and colo in sacramento
Eucharistiae ueru^ Christi corpi and sanguinem sub speciebus panis and uini
uerissime citra ullum tropum and figuram contenta, conuersis and
transubstantiatis pane in corpus and uino ^ sanguinem redemptoris diuina
potentia. Atque in sex alijs sacramentis (sici in hoc) id credo and teneo quod
uniuersa tenet ecclesia ac sentit Roman^ Credo insuper purgatorium locum ubi ad
tempus cruciantur defunctoru animae pro quibus sancte ac salubriter orat
ecclesia sicut and sanctos colit ^ illosque praeces effundit. Demum in omnibus
me profiteor non aliud sentire quam ecclesia catholica and Romana tenetiae me
poenitet quod aliud unqua tenuerim ac senserim, deum autem supplexoro ut
pietate sua mihi condonare dignetur, quae in illum and eius ecclesiam commisi,
fideles simul rogo et ol secro ut pro me praeces effundant, eos autem qui meo
aut exemplo aut doctrina seducti sunt, per sanguinem Ihesu Christi obtestor ut
ad ecclesiae ^^deant unitatem idemque dicamus omnes, ut no^ sint in nobis
schismata. Postremo sicut me subijcio catholicae christi ecclesiae eiusdemque
supremo capiti, ^ me submitto Philippo and Mariae Angliae regibus atque eorum
legibus and decretis, and testor deum optimum maximumque haec in nullius
gratiam, nulli^ metu a me confessa, sed ex animo and libentissime ut meae and
aliorum su^ conscientiis consulam and prospiciam.

Per me Thomam Cranme^
Testes huius subscriptionis. Frater Ioannes de uilla Garcin^ Henricus Sidallus.


The true copye of a syxte submission of the said Thomas Cranmer, written and
subscribed with his own hand as follows.
EGo Thomas Cranmer pridem Archiepiscopus Cantuarien. confiteor, and doleo
exanimo, quod grauissime deliquerim in coelum and aduersus Anglicanum regnum,
imo in uniuersam Christi ecclesiam, quam ^nge seuius persecutus sum quam olim
paulus, qui fui blasphemus, persecutor, and contumeliosus. Atque utinam qui
Saulu^ malicia and scelere superaui, posse^^um paulo que^ detraxi honore^
Christo and ecclesiae utilitatem recompensare. Verum meum utcunque animum latro
ille euangelicus solatur. Ille namque tunc ^andem ex animo resipuit, tunc illum
furti pertesum est, quum furari am^lius non liceret: and ego (qui meo offitio
and aucthoritate abusus, and Christo ^onorem, et huic regno fidem et religionem
abstuli) iam tandem dei maximo ^eneficio ad me reuersus, agnosco me omnium
maximum peccatorem, et curiosi qua possem deo primum, deinde ecclesiae, and
eius capiti supremo, atque ^egibus, toti demum Anglicano regno condignam
reddere satisfactionem. Verum sicut latro ille felix, quum non esset soluendo
quas pecunias and ^pes abstulit (quum nec pes nec manus affixae cruci suum
officium faceret) ^orde and lingua dumtaxat (quae non erat ligata) testatus est
quod reliqua ^^mbra essent factura, si eadem qua lingua liberate gauderent.
Illa confessus est Christum innocentem, ea obiurgabat impudentiam sotij, eadem
ante^ctam uitam detestatus and peccatorum ueniam impetrauit, and ueluti claui
quadam paradysi fores aperuit. Huius exemplo non mediocrem concipio de Christi
misericordia spem, fore ut mihi peccata condonet. Manibus and pe^libus careo,
quibus quod destruxi iterum reedificare ualeam (relicta enim sunt tummodo labia
circa dentes meos) sed uitulos labiorum nostrorum recipiet, qui est supra quam
credi possit misericors. Hacigitur concepta spe libet hunc offerre uitulum,
hanc minimam and corporis and uitae partem licare. Confiteor in primis meam
ergadeum opt. max. ingratitudinem, agnosco me omni indignissimum beneficio and
pietate, dignissimum uero omni non (...) humano ac temporali sed diuino and
eterno supplicio, quod in Henricum 8 and maxim in eius uxorem Reginam
Catherinam uehementissime deliqui, quum diuortij causa and author extiti: quae
sane culpa, omnium huius regni malorum and calamitatum seminarium fuit. Hinc
tot proborum neces, hinc totius regni schisma, hinc haereses, hinc tot animorum
and corporum strages ^bortae sunt, ut uix possim uel rationae complecti. Sed
quum adeo sint haec grauia iniciaque dolorum, aperui fateor ingentem senestram
haeresibis cunctis, quarum ego praecipuum egi doctorem and ducem. In primis
uero il lud uehementer meum excruciat animum, quod sacrosanctum Eucharistia
Sacramentum tot blasphemijs and contumelijs affecerim, negans Christi cor pus
and sanguinem uere and realiter sub speciebus panis and uini contineri, editis
etiam libellis qui ueritatem pro uiribus impugnabam: in hac sane part te non
solum Saulo and latrone deterior, uerum omnium quos terra unque su^ stinuit
sceleratissimus. Domine, peccaui in coelum and coram te. In coelum, quod mea
causa tot caret coelicolis, quod coeleste hoc beneficium nobis exhibitum negaui
impudentissime. Peccaui and in terra, quae tamdiu hoc sacramento misere caruit,
in homines quos ab hac supersubsta^tiali esca reuocaui, tot occisor hominum,
quot inedia perierunt. Defraudaui defunctorum animas hoc iugi and celeberrimo
sacrificio. Atque ex his omnibus manifestum est, quantopere etiam post Christum
in eius uicarium iniurius extiti, quemlibris etiam editis potestate priuaui.
Propterea magnopere and impensissime oro summum pontificem, ut mihi ob Christi
elementia^ condonet, quae aduersus illum eiusque apostolicam sedem commisi. Ac
serenissimos Reges Angliae, Hispaniae. etc. Philippum and Mariam supplex oro,
ut regia qua pollent cle mentia mihi uelint ignoscere: totu^ etiam regnum, imo
uniuersam ecclesiam rogo and obsecro, misereantur huius miserae animae, cui iam
praeter linguam nihil est reliquum, quo possim illatas iniurias and damna
resarcire. Praecipue uero quia tibi soli peccaui oro clementissime pater (qui
omnes ad te uenire quamlibet facinorosos and cupis and praecipis) me propius
and cominus digneris intueri, sicut Magdalenam and Petrum respexisti, uel certe
sicut latrone ex cruce aspiciens, tuae gratiae and gloriae promissione dignatus
espauidu^ et trementem animum consolari, ita etiam solita et natiua tua pietate
oculos misericordiae ad me conuertas, nec non tuo me digneris alloquio, dicens,
Salus tua ego sum, Et in die mortis, hodie mecum eris in Paradyso. Scriptum est
hoc anno domini, 1555. Mensis Martij. 18.

Per me Thomam Cranmer.

(...) prayer and saying of Thomas Cranmer, a little before his death, all
written with his own hand as follows.
GOod christen people, my dear beloved brethren, and my systers in Christ, I
beseech you most har^ely to pray for me, to almighty god, that he will for^yue
me all my sins, and offenses, which be ma^y without number, and great above
measure, but ^et one thing greuethe my conscience more then all ^he rest,
whereof god willing, I intend to speak more ^ereafter, But how many and how
great soever ^hey be, I beseech you to pray god of his mercy to pardon and
forgive me all.

O Father of heaven, o son of god redemer of the world, o holy ghost,
proceeding from them both three persons and one God, have mercy upon me a most
wretched caytife, and miserable sinner, I have offended both heaven and earth,
more then my tongue can express, whyther than may I go? or whither shall I fly
for succoure? To heaven I may be ashamed to list up mine eyes, and in earth I
find no refuge or succoure, what shall I than do? shall I dyspayre? god
forbid, O god thou art merciful, and refusest none, that comes unto the for
succoure. To the therefore do I run, to the do I humble my self saying: O
lord god my sins be great, but have mercy upon me, for thy great mercy.
God was not made man, for our small offenses. Thou did not give thy son
unto death, for small sins only, but for all, and the greatest sins of the
world, so that the sinner return to the in his heart, as I do here at this
present: wherefore have mercy on me o lord, for although my sins be great,
yet thy mercy is greater, I crave nothing, o Lord for mine own merytes but
for thy name sake, that it may be hallowed thereby, and for thy dear son Jesus
Christ sake, and now therefore, O father that art in heaven, hallowed be thy
name* Thy kingdom come. etc.

Every man desires good people, at the time of their death, to give some good
exhortation that good folks may remember after their death, and be the better
for the same. So I beseech god grant unto me, that I may speak some thing
whereby he may be glorified and you edyfied. First it is an heavy case, to
see how many folks be so much doted of this present world, and so careful of
it, that for the world to come they seem to care very little or nothing.
Therefore this shall be my first exhortation, that you set not overmuch, by this
present world, but upon the world to come, and upon God, and learn to know
what this lesson means of Saint John. The love of this world (says he) is
hatred unto God. The, ii. exhortation is, that next unto God, you obey your
king, and Queen, willingly and gladly, without murmuring or grudgynge, not for
fear of them, but much more for fear of God, knowing that they be gods
ministers appointed by god, for to govern and rule you, and therefore they
that resist them, resist gods ordinance. The third exhortation is that you
love together, like brethren and systerne. But alas pity it is to see how
faint this love is, many taking other not as brother and systers, but rather as
strangers, or mortal enemies. And yet I pray you learn this one lesson, to
do good unto all men, as much as in you lies, and to hurt no man, no more
then you would do to your natural louinge brother, and sister. For whosoever
hates any person, and goes about maliciously to hurt him, surely without
doubt god is not with that man, although he think himself never so much in
gods favor. The, iiii, exhrotation shall be to them that have substance and
riches of the world, that they well consider and remember, iii, sayings, of
the scripture. One is of our Savior Christ himself, who says, that rych men
hardely come into hea uen: a sore saying, and yet spoken of him that knew the
truth. The second is of S. Ihon, who says thus. He that has the substance of
this world and sees his brother in necessity, and shitteth up his mercy
from him, how can he say that he loves God? The third is of S. James, who
says to covetous rich men after this manner: Weep and howl you rich me^ for
the miserye that shall come unto you, your riches do rotte, your clothes be
moth eaten, your gold and silver wax cancre, and rustie, and their rust shall
bear witness against you, and consume you like fire, you make a hoorde and
treasure of gods indignation against the last day: let the^ that be rych
ponder well these. iii. sentences, for if ever they had occasion to show their
charity, they have it now, the poor people being so many, and victuells so
dear.

Here to declare the Queen's just title to the crown.

ANd now forasmuch as I am come unto the last end of my life whereupon
hangs all my life passed, and al my life, to come, either to live with my
Savior Christ, for ever in joy, or else to be in pains ever, with the
wicked deuilles in hell, and I see before my eyes presentlye, either heaven
redye to receive me, or else hell ready to swallowe me up, I shall therefore
declare unto you my very faith, without color or dissymulation, for now is
no time to dyssemble, whatsoever I have said, preached, or written in time
past. First I believe in God ye father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. etc.
And I believe every article of the catholic faith, every clause word, and
sentence, taught by our savior Christ, his Apostles and prophets, in the
new and old testament, and all articles explicate and set fourth in ye
general counselles. And now I come to the great thing that so much
troubles my conscience more tha^ any other thing yt ever I did, and that is
settinge abroad untrue books, and writings, contrary to the truth of gods
word, which now I renounce and condemn, and refuse them utterly as erronyous
and for none of mine. But you must know also, what books they were that you
may beware of them, or else my conscience is not dyscharged. For they be the
boo^ which I wrote against the Sacrament of the Au^tare sith the death of King
Henrye the eyghte. But whatsoever I wrote than, now is time and place, to say
truth, wherefore renouncyng al those bo^s, and whatsoever in them is contained.
I say and believe that our Savior Christ Jesus is really and sub stancially
contained in the blessed Sacrament of ye Aultare under the fourmes of bread
and wine.

Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Regiae Maiestatis. Anno.
M. D. LVI. Cum priuilegio.


