THE AMOROSE Songs, Sonets, and Elegies: Of M. ALEXANDER CRAIGE, Scoto-Britane.

Imprinted at London by William White. 1606.

Prima velim teneris intendat amoribus aetas,
Et canat ad Cytharam nostra camena suam.
Molle meum Leuibus cor est penetrabile telis,
Et semper causa est cur ego semper amo.
Vitantur venti, pluuiae, vitantur, et estus,
Non vitatur amor, mecum tumuletur oportet.
TO THE MOST GODLY, VIRTUOUS, BEAVTIFVLL, and accomplished PRINCESS,
meritoriously dignified with all the Titles Religion, Virtue, Honor, Beauty
can receive, challenge, afforde, or deserve; ANNA, by divine providence, of
Great Britane, France, and Ireland, Queen* ALEXANDER CRAIGE wishes all
health, wealth, and royal felicity.
GReat Tamburlan cloaked his fantastical cruelty he exercised on Lazars and
Leprous men, with a foolish kind of humanity, putting all he could find or
hear of, to death, (as he said) to rid them from so painful and miserable a
life: Though my Poyems (incomparably bountiful, incomparably beautiful, and
so peerless Princess) be painful to me, and unpleasant to the delicat
Lector; shall I with Tamburlan destroy them? or like a cruel Althea, consume
with fire the fatal Tree, kill mine own Meleager, and so inhumanlie cut off
mine own birth? I gave life to my Lines, and shall I now become their burreau?
O live my deformed Child, some other hand shall commit thee to Phaeton or
Deucalions mercy, then mine: Though Anaxagoras resolved to die; yet for
Pericles his Masters sake he took courage, and lives. Your royal God-mother
poor Rymes has saved your life: yet am I not like Hercules, who th^^w Ionius
in the Sea, that by the violence of wind and wave the carkas might be carried to
foraine shoares, for propagation of his fame. I hunt not for fame; nor print I
those Papers for praises, but to pleasure your Princely eyes with variety of
my vain inventions* Megabysus going to visit Apelles in his worke-house,
stood still a long tim^ without speaking one word, and then began to censure
of Apelles works; of whom he received this rude and nipping check So long as
thou held thy peace, thou see^medst a wise man; but now thou has^ spoke, and
the wotst Boy of my ^oppe thinks thee a fool. I am ^old (divine Lady) to
borrow thy blessed name, to beautify my blotted Book; and have se^^ those
Poems, like Apelles Pictures through the world: nor do I care (since it is
your Princely pleasure to protect them) the foolish judgment of Megabysus.
Syrannes the Persian Prince answered those (who seemed to wonder why his
negotiations succeeded so il, when his discourses were so wise) that he was
only master of his Discourses, but Fortune mistress to the succes of his
affairs. My Sonnets and Songs are (gracious Princess) for the most part,
full of complaints, sorrow, and lamentations: The reason is, I was master of
my Verses; but Fortune Mistress of my Rewards. When Thetis courted Jupiter, and
when the Lecedemonians send Legates to the Athenians, they put them not in
mind of the good they had done them, but of the benefits they had received of
them. Your Majesty's munificens, and frequent benefits bestowed upon me, have
headlong impelled me to propine this worthless work to your Royal view.
Happy beyond the measure of my merit shall I be, if I can purchase this
portion of your Princely approbation, as to accept and entertain these
triuiall toys (where your Grace shall smell Flows to refresh, Herbs to
cure, and Weeds to be avoided) in the lowest degree of least favor. But
howsoever, wishing your Highness as many happy years, as there be words in my
Verses, and Verses in my worthles Volume: I am

Your Majesty's most obsequious Orator, Alexander Craige, Scoto-Britan.

Epistle general to Idea, Cynthia, Lithocardia, Kala, Erantina, Lais, Pandora,
Penelopae.
ZEuxis painted a Child bearing Vine clusters in his hand so perfectly, that
the Fowls of the air were deceived, and descended thereto in vain: But
angry at his work, he cried out, I have painted the Clusters more lively then
the Child, and the burden better then the bearer; for had the Child seemed as
vine as the Vine Grapes, the Fowls had bin affraied at his face. I have in
these amorous Sonets and Songs matchles Idea, virtuous Cynthia, grave
Lithocardia, sweet Kala, lovely Erantina, lascivious Lais, modest Pandora,
liberal Penelopae, painted my Love; but have (allasse) taken more pains on
the Passions, then the Poyems; and more work on my woes, then the Verses. But
had my Lines been as lively as either they should, or I wish they had been. No
Momus affraide at the beauty of my Verses, had presumed (to my disgrace) to
gather the Grapes of my Errors. Nor had I needed (which necessarily I must do)
to employ the Patrocinie of your protections. Were I an other Hercules, I could
not cut off all the hissing heads of Hydra: and were I as perfect a Painter as
Apelles, some sawsie Souter shall censure above the Sho^. But with Agatharchus
(who did all in haste) I humbly crave at all your hands (which with all
reverence, and analogike service I kiss) and look you will excuse

Your loving, but rude Zeuxis.
A. C. Banfa-Britan.

TO THE READER.
SMyrnean Maeonides used in his delicate Poems diverse Dialects, as Ionic,
Aeolic, Attic, and Doric: So have I (O courteous Reader) in this; and but
alas in this, imitate that renowned Hellenist Homer, in using the Scottish and
English Dialectes: the one as innated, I can not forget; the other as a
stranger, I can not upon the sudden acquire. The subtle Merchant placed Aesop
in the middle betwixt Cantor and Grammaticus, that by the interposition of that
deformed fabulator, the other two might appear the fayrer. So have I in
midst of my modest Affections, committed to the Press my unchaste Love to
Lais, that contraries by conttraries, and Virtue by Vice, more clearly may
shine. To each (courteous Reader) that will both of this and that mixtture of
Ditties and Dialects, courteously censure, I am but end to the fatal end,

A most loving Friend, in all p^ssible employment. Craige.

To IDEA.
MAny times from the Table of my Chamber (matchless Idea) have my dearest
Friends, both by them selves, and my Servant (whom I sometimes employed to
write for me) stole the inventions of my wanton vain, those amorous Ditties,
such as they best liked: and for which having, thereby served the humor of my
passion, I cared no more; wherein their gain and my loss were all one. But
now, by printing my then scattered, and now lately collected Scrowles (the most
and best part whereof, I can not find) I have thought good to ease my self,
and satisfy (but with the first, your Ladyship) my friends. The noble Romans
were from all antiquity, accustomed to leave those Kings whom they had
vanquished, in the possessions of their kingdoms, that Kings by them made
slaves, might be instruments to vprayse the tropheis of their glory. Thou
know (Divine Idea) I am thine by conquest; and yet thou allowest me the
seeming fruition of my liberty, while in deed I must pay the eternal tribute
of unfeigned Love: For as Carn^ades the Cyrenean Philosopher said of
Chrysippus; And Chrysippus were not, I could not be* my being is by thy
munificence. Take this in good part: and still I rest,

Idea's ever obleged and vnmanumissible slave, Ad Ideam.
O bona non tractanda homini bona digna rapina,
Caelic^lum, superis o bona digna locis.


To CYNTHIA.
OFfend not, fair Dame; Though the Lines of my Picture change and vary. The
World runs on Wheels, all things therein move without intermission: the
solid Earth, the rocks of Caucasus, and the Pyramids of Memphis; both with
public, and their own motion. Constancy it self, is nothing but a
languishing and a wavering dance. I am a Pamphilus, and can not settle my
object. And since my Love runs staggering with a natural drunkenness, I pray
thee (virtuous Cynthia) with patience peruse those Poyems: And (as Aristippus
said to his man, who by the way was over burdened with too much money) carry
what you may, and cast away the rest.

Your La. howsoever, and wheresoever. Ad Cynthiam.
Nil forma natura tuae, nihil astra negarunt,
Vna supercilij si tibi dempta nota.


To LITHOCARDIA.
I Fear to prefixe (Hono. Lady) to these few Poyems, a long Epistle, least
some Diogenes should bid me shut the Ports of Minda ere the Town run out.
Let me this much kindly pray, and prevail with your La. as to vouchsafe them
some place in the bench of your bibliothek. Xerxes, whose Armies obumbrate all
Hellespont, was feign in a small Fishbote for safety of his life, to ^lie from
Greece. So may you at some idle hours deigne, and discende to behold my
rusticke Rymes, and kindly excuse his errors, who ere long, has purpose to
present and please you with some bette^ Poyem. Till when, and ever,

I am your La. own. Ad Lithocardiam.
Vt nullae cunctis formosa est faemina tantum,
sic nulla est misero tantum adamata mihi.


To KALA.
THese Poyems are, I confess (sweet Kala) unworthy thy presence, and so have
more need of thy protection: But let (as Cicero writes in his Epistle to
Octauius) Confession be a medicine for Error. Twixt Metellus Macedonicus, and
Scipio Africanus, were mortal Wars: but when Scipio dyed, Metellus prayed
the Citie-men to concur, least their Walls should be overthrown. Many
lovely iarres have been amongst us; but in my absence, those my Papers like
Citizens of a good republike, shall all concur to please and honor thee: And
I both at home, and abrod, shall continue

Thine till death: Craige.
Et quanquam molli semper sis dedita amori,
Candida nulla magis, nulla proterua magis.


To LAIS.
EVery man (as Pittacus affirms) has some imperfection: in me Love is most
predominant. But a^ Alcibiades cut off his fair Dogs ears and tail, and so
drove him in the market place, that giving this subject of prattle to the
people, they might not meddle with his other actions. So have I presumed to
publish these my castrat Rimes under (o lascivious Lais) thy protection, that
my chaster Verses may appear less faulty. Antinonides the Musician, gave
order, that before or after him, some bad Musician should cloy and surfeit his
auditors. So when the Lector shall be weary to ^uerread these lubricke Lines,
he shall with more alacrity consider and ouerlooke the rest. And thus were not
hereby I minded to beautify my other Poyems, J could gladly consent, that all
those Lines of Lais, were over whelmed in oblivion, I glory not (God knows) in
my frailty: and more for euitation, then imitation, are these Songs forth
sent to the view of the censuring world. And thus nor craving, nor careful of
thy acceptance, O Lais, I cease to serve, or more

to be Thine.
O miseri qu^ru^ gaudia crimen habent*
Dum furtiua dedit nigra munuscula nocte,
Me tenet, absentes alios suspirat amores.


To ERANTINA.
IT is a wounderfull delight I take to live i^ Love; it is ever at my heart,
and most in my mouth: and such assistaunce it gives to my life, that it seems
the best munition I have found in this humane peregrination. The Disciples of
Hegesias, hunger starued them selves to death, incensed thereunto with the
persuading discourses of his lessons, til the time King Ptolomey forbade him
any longer to entertain his School with such murtherous precepts. Though I
wear the hours of the day, and waste the days of my life in Love: I muse, I
roue, and walk: I enregister my humors and my passions. Let none be entised by
my example: for I am borne to love, and to die

Thy Lover.
O quid dura tuum sic me contemnis amantem,
Neglectumque tuas despicis ante fores:
Frigidasaenit Hyems, immitis et ingruit ather,
Exclusum pateris me tamen esse foris.


To PANDORA.
THE very same Sonets which a^ some time pleased you (modest Pandora) with much
more courtesy and honor, then they, or I, any way deserved, to receive and
read, I have (but without alteration or change) here placed and reduced in a
solid body. When Babylon was besidged by Darius, the number of Women was so
great, the Captain commanded every man to choose one; which being
accordingly performed, the rest were put to death, that their victuals might
the longer endure. Had thou been there, and I Captain of the Babilonic,
army, thou should been first of all thy sex selected to been saved. Pardon
(peerless Pandora) the perseverance of my presumption, in still affecting
thee: and for my sake peruse these Sonets, which may happily continue some
days and years after me: That since I could not be beloved being on-life, I
may with desperate Herostratus, be famous after death: Till when (as Socrates
said) as I may, I am

Thy unalterable man,
Ah nunquam potuj lachrymis, aut fletibus vllis,
Efficere vt nobis mitior ipsa fores:
Hoc nocuit misero seruisse fideliter vnj,
Hoc nocuit tanta semper amasse fide.


To PENELOPAE.
ANtiochus in his youth, writ vehemently in praise of the Academie; but being
old, he changed copy, and writ as violently against it. While I am young, I
must write of, and for Love; and I must go, because I cannot stand still: I
am like the rolling Stone which never stays, till it come to a lying place. As
Infants repose in the rocked Cradell, so my spirit finds rest in restless
Love. Alexander disdayned the Corinthian Ambassaders, who offered him the
Freedom and Burgeosie of their City: But when they told him that Bacchus and
Hercules were likewise in their Registers, he kindly thanked them, and
accepted their offer. Do not (O virtuous Penelopae) disdain my small and
poor propine. O be not ashamed to see thy name in the base Chattons of my
Poesy: Since better then Bacchus, and hardier then Hercules are in my
Registers. Thus, kissing thy liberal hand, I heartily commend both me and
them to thy tuition.

Your La. A. C.
Si qua videbuntur scriptis temeraria nostris,
hoc constans very pig^us amoris erit:
Consilio regitur quisquis moderantius ardet,
quique amor est aliis fit furor ille mihi.


To the Queen her most excellent Majesty.
APelles man did all his Wits employ
To paint the shape of Laedais Daughter fair:
But when he saw his work proved naught, poor Boy,
He wept for woe, and took exceeding care:
Then decked he her with Jewels rich and rare:
Which when the brave Apelles did behold.
Paint on (quoth he) poor Boy, and have no fear,
When Beauty fayles, well done to enrich with Gold.
I am (fair Princess) like the Painters man,
As ignorant, as scant of skill as he:
Yet will J strive and do the best J can,
To manifest my loving mind to thee.
But to supply the weakness of my skill,
In place of Gold (great Lady) take goodwill.
Craige.

Amorous Songs and Sonets.
TO IDEA.
IN Golden world, when Saturn did vpgiue
To Pluto, Joue, and Neptune, his Empire
They cast their lots both how, and where to live*
Because it was old Saturns own desire:
Joue ruld the Furnace far above the Fire,
The stately Vault, beyond the starrie round:
And Neptune gat the glassie Salt to hyre,
Then Pluto chooss'd the Hellish black profound:
When Cupid spied they gave him but the Ground*
Impatient wagg, went out to walk abrod,
And conquering these that were but lately cround,
He made him self over all those Gods a God.
Then Love to thee, as to my Lord I yield,
I fear to fight, where Gods have fled the feeld.
Omnia vincit amor, et nos cedamus amorj.


To IDEA.
Down from the Skies for to behold my Dame
Came Goddesses, and all the Gods above:
Joue, Saturn, Mars, bright Phoebus, and with them,
Rich Juno, Minerue, and the Queen of Love:
Her beauties fame, their minds did so commone,
They run, and took no rest till they came their,
Thus armies proud, approch't for to approve,
And give their doom, that she was matchles fair:
Love like the rest, would feign looked on, and swear
Unknit (fair Dame) this Craip, quoth he, and thou
Both Bagg and Bow a bonie while shall bear,
Shoot where thou will, and I shall well allow:
They change, and she shot Love, that he was feign
To skarfe his eyes, and beg the Bow again.
Caecus amor superos superat, lithocardia amorem.


To LITHOCARDIA.
OF late the blind, and naked Archer Boy,
A libertine, out through the plains would play
With ayre-deuiding wings without conuoy:
He vaging went, and wist not where away.
Sad Venus wep't, and thus to me can say.
Did thou behold my blind Babe any whare?
For he is gone; O pity strange estray:
And he is fightles, syndo^les, and bare:
In Craigs and Rocks such Elu's do make repare,
And so perhaps he harbers in thy heart.
It was too true, yet durst I not declare
His being there, for fear of further smart.
To want her Babe, brave Venus still does murne,
she drown's the world with tears, and yet I burn.
Hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbi^.


To LITHOCARDIA.
Love set his Bow, his Bag, and Bolts aside,
And went out through the watrie vaults of air
Disposd to play; he goes without a guide,
And with the Winds he wauers here and their:
Till at the last a fleeting Castle fair
On smooth and glassie Seas he does epsy:
He bords their Bark, the fishing craft to leare:
The poor men yeeldes, not daring to deny,
He hales their Hooks, and baits them by and by.
Then Thetis rose, and asked if Love would burn
The liquid seat wherein her Lord did ly,
Dissuading him from such a cruel turn.
Fear not said Love, I came to fish, thou sees,
And left my flames in Lithocardias eyes.
O non human^ nata puella toro.


To CYNTHIA.
THe Hobbie Haulke can catch at all no pray,
Unless above her aim and mark she fly.
The Palm does bear the brauer boughs some say
From neighbor trees, the higher that it be.
So fared of those my fancies fond and me,
In hope of hap, I cannot cease to sore.
If loved, I live: and if disdained, I die.
I pray, I praise, I plead, and I implore:
Proud Cytherea loved Adonis poor,
And Cynthia served Endimion Shepherd swane;
So though I be inglorious and obscure,
Yet may she love her Poet and her Man.
Mount then brave thoughts through water, fire and air
And desp'rately pursue the sweet, proud, fair.
Blanditiis amor est, et succo molli^r omni.


To PANDORA.
SInce Joue him self was subject unto Love,
And left the lift to catch a mortal pray.
If Neptune did from glassie Seas remove,
And would for Love, aside the Scepter lay.
If Pluto loathed his dark and pitchie Cave,
To spoil Proserpine Cer^s Daughter fair.
If proud Apollo Daphui dear to have,
Left Phaeton to rule his fyrie Chair.
If shaghhaird Satyrs mountaine-climing race,
Pursued Aenona through the Phrygian Woods.
If piping Pan from Music sweet did cease,
To hunt the Naiad Nymp's by ban^es of Floods?
What can I do (sweet haar^) but love thee still?
On whom nor Gods no^ men can gaze their fill.
Iussit amor, quis enim mag^^ non ceda^ amorj,
In cignum, in pluniam qui iubet ire Jonem.


To ERANTINA.
NOr there where as the yoaked restles Horse
With Phaeton begins their wonted race,
and leads their Lord throughout the lift perfor^^
To circumgire the Earth into each place.
Nor there where as the hot and fyrie face,
The burning beams of Phoebus bright appear,
When he diuyds the day in equal space
With glorious rays in his meridian Sphere.
Nor there, whereas Apollo proud, for fear
Our coming night, his lingering should control^
With speedy pace from our Horizon hear,
Is headlong hurled to view th'antarticke Pole.
Nor no where else can any match at all
be found to her; whose virtues makes me thrall.
Tu mihi sola places.


To ERANTINA.
O Wounder to the world, who^ woundering eyne
Do wounder still as on the rarest fight
Of Natures frame; yet come to common light,
Or Hemisphere, where our Horizon been.
Sweet lovely Laura, modest, chaste, and cleene.
It seems that Poet Petrarche took delight,
Thy spotles praise in dainty lines to dight,
By Prophecies, before thy self was seen.
And now fair Dame, since thou art borne to be
That Comet strange, and that prodigious Star,
Whence life and death, and peace and bloody war*
And calm and storm proceed, as pleases thee:
Shine still, and still with sweet aspect infuse,
Eternal theme, and matter to my Muse.
At mea c^m multis placuisset musa puellis,
Huic vnj, dixj, noster inheret am^r.


To IDEA.
THe chastest Child will often for mercy cry,
And bid the striker stay and hold his hand:
Yea though he weep, his tears he will vpdry
And kiss (suppose against his will) the wand.
With chiuering chin, but sturring will he stand,
And patiently suppres his present pain:
Poor Babe he dare not but obey command,
And hold his peace, least he be lasht again.
Such is my state, I saikles soul am slain,
Nor can I get the smallest grant of grace,
Nor dare I now, though I have cause, complain:
And though I durst, my plaints would have no place
Thus am I feign for fear of further wrong,
Even with the Babe to burst, and hold my tongue.
Non tame^ audebam tacit^s operire dol^res,
Ingenium metuens casta puella tuam.


To CINTHIA*
IT sometime chanst, as Stories tell by chanse,
That Hercules and Hylas were alone,
And severally they went apart to pause:
But he and he, accompanied with none,
Till Hercules to Hylas made his moan,
That he for drouth was like to give the Ghost.
Thus Hylas to Ascauius Flood is gone,
To draw a drink, and lowting life has lost.
So when mine eyes had spurd a speedy post,
To set the floods of favor to their friend,
My burning heart, which drouth of comfort crossed,
They dround them selves, and nothing else obteind:
So Destanies my doleful death concludes,
By double force of Furious flames and floudes.
Vror, et heu nostro manat ab igne liquor.


To IDEA.
THe Lipper man, whose voice can not be hard,
With doleful hoarse unpleasant tune will cry,
And crave for love of Jesus Christ reward,
And alm's of such as chance for to pass by:
But when (allace poor soul) he does espy
That no man hears, not yet regards his voice,
No longer then takes he delight to ly,
But claps his dish, and keeps his language close.
Right so as cursed, and careful is my Cross,
Suppose the Fates have not deformed my shape,
No words I use for to lament my lose,
But make my Lines to be the Lippars Clap.
Go Sonet then and beg, I thee beseech,
Some grace to him, whom fear deterres from speech.
Dicere qua puduit scribere iussit amor.


To IDEA.
IN stately Troy which was by force of fire
Subdued in end, and turned in embers cold,
Apollo's Church while Priam did empire,
Was beautiful and brave for to behold:
In midst whereof hung in a not of gold
A Coca^rice, that Spider, Bird, nor Fly,
To enter there, nor build durst not be bold:
That famous work from filth was kept so fry.
The like (fair Dame) may well be thought of thee
For why, before thy beauties Altar hings,
Canceld with pride, both blood and birth I see,
With cold disdain, which serve as certain ^ings,
To warn a far my fancy to refrain,
And rather wrake then once reveal my pain*
Cor dolet g^lidu^ torpet sub pert^re sanguit,
Me tamen oppressum dicere vetat amor.


To PANDORA.
I Pause not on the gold of Tagus sand,
Nor Erithrean brave and shyning shells:
Ilong not for the limits large of Land,
Wherein the barbar newfound Nations dwells:
I bid not of these bounds whose boosome swells
With birth of brave and costly Jewels rare,
Which with their Musk and Siuet sweetest smells
In fairest Chattons, set perfume the air.
My pridles Heart subdued with Love and fear,
Seeks that those Songs the Heralds of my heart
Might move the sweet and flintie hearted fair
Some favor once, and pity to impart:
Else that upon the Alter of her wreath,
She would accept th'oblation of my death.
At sieve te regum Muneranulla vol^.


To PENELOPE.
I Serve a Mistress infinitely fair,
And (which I more esteem) exceeding wise,
In that, beyond the bounds of all compare:
And this in her the wondering world enuies,
Thence does of love my restles rage arrise,
Thence flows the font of all the harms I have:
Her wit my heart, her beauty charmed mine eyes,
To Venus thus and Pallas I am slave:
If curious heads to know her name do crave,
She is a Lady Rich, it needs no more,
And wealthy Juno wonted pride may leave,
And gladly serve the Dame whom I adore:
Rich, wise, and fair, to thee alone as thrall,
I consecrate love, life, lines, thoughts, and all.
At mihi seruitium, et tristis iam vita paratur,
Illaque libertas pristina surripitur.


To PENELOPE.
SHort is the day, but long (allace) to me,
Who live in love, and am not loved again:
My lovely, fair, and loueles Saint I see,
Does guild with gold her hid and coy disdain.
think thou fair dame, to buy my love with gain
Cause thou art rich, I pray thee think not so:
I am thy slave, and for thy sake am slain.
Nor can my Rim's reveal my inward woe.
Put now a point Panelopa I pray,
unto this web so often retex'd by thee,
Pay love with love, and make no more delay*
O rain no more thy shewers of gold on me,
One kiss of thee would breed me more conten^
Then make me king of Cresus Lydia^ rent.
To LITHOCARDIA.
By Anagram.
WHen Churches all of Asia les and more,
By Xerxes great were burnt, and cast to ground
Of pity he Dianais Church forbore.
A piece of work whose like could not be found:
And yet by fames report to be renound,
Herostratus did set the same on fire,
Which Xerxes great suppose a Monarch cround,
Did spare vnspoyld for all his proud Empire.
Right so, when as so many did conspire
To conquer me a poor and Country Swain,
My hardened heart withheld their hot desire,
And I till now, vnconquerd did remain.
That by my loss, I must enlarge thy fame,
And slay my self to serve a glorious Dame.
Non ego seruitium Dominae tam mite recuse,
Ah pereat si quis vincula et ipse times.


To LITHOCARDIA. Anagram.
AS Marigould did in her Garden walk,
One day, O ten times happy was that day
I thitherward to see my Saint, did stalk:
Where Floraes Imp's joyed with her feet to play,
And lo unseen behind a Hedge I lay,
Where I beheld the Roses blush for shame,
The Lillies were empald upon the spray,
The Violets were staynd about my Dame:
My Mistress smild for to behold the game,
And sometimes pleased upon the grass to sport*
Which canging hew's new colors did acclaime,
For blythnes of so sweet a Saints resort,
And from that walk while as away she w^nt.
They weep with deaw, and I in tears lament.
Spr^^it nostras galatea querel^^.


To KALA.
Fair Kala, fairer then the Wool most fair,
Of these my fair and silver fleeced Sheep
Which are committed to my careless care,
And up and down those dainty Dales I keep:
Fair Sheppeardesse, for thee alone I weep.
None hears my plaints but bleating beasts and I,
And for thy sake I sigh when I should sleep,
And on thy name amid my dreams I cry.
The^ since thou know's the thraldom of my mind
And how my neck to bear thy yoke is worn:
Have pity once, and prove not ay unkind,
And laugh no more thy shepherd swain to scorn
But if thou mind'st for to remead my moan,
Let fancies then, flocks, folds, and all, be one.
Tum mistum ciuerem communi onerare sepulcher,
Amborumque vnus contegat ossa lapis.


To LAIS.
What ever thou be that claims or courts my dear
And in my absence would supply my place,
If courts thou, I pray thee to forbear,
Rob not my right, and lately granted grace:
For if at were, I friendly crave thy case,
And thou had credit as I sometime bade,
Were it not wrong, if I should proudly prease
To rave thy right? yes I may surely said:
Be who thou will, I challenge thee therefore,
That with thy Daffings deauis my Lais ear;
Cease from thy suit, and in to time forbear,
Else we can be companions true no more.
For put the case thou speed, thou gains these two,
A facill Dame, and of a friend a foe.
Casta ma^e nec te lusus, nec munera vinca^^.


To LAIS.
EVen as a ventering Merchant skant of skill,
Whom Fortunes frown or fate has forced to fall
To recempence his former loss he will
Within one Ship and Vessel venture all.
So have I used my Stock, though it be small:
My Heart I send half dround into despair
Unto my Saint, whom eue^^erue I shall:
She is the Shipp, and it the ventered ware.
Often has my mind bin cloyed with clouds of care
When contrar winds, with cold and stormy rain
would threat my loss; but now from bounds of fear
My ventring thus, has made me rich again.
Then shall my Muse triumph and mourn no more,
Since second winds have brought my Shipp to shore.
At nunc tota tua est, te solum candida secum,
Cogita et frustra credula turba sedet.


To PANDORA.
O Watchful Bird proclaymer of the day,
Withh^ld I pray, thy piercing notes from me:
Yet crow, and put the Pilgrim to his way,
And let the Worke-man rise to earne his fee:
Yea let the Lion fierce, be feared of thee,
To leave his prey, and lodge him in his Cave:
And let the deep Divine from dreaming fly.
To look his leaves within his close Conclaue:
Each man save I, may some remembrance have,
That gone is night, and Phosphor draws nie:
Beat not thy breast for me poor sleepeles slave,
To whom the Fat's alternall rest deny:
But if thou would bring truce unto my tears,
Crow still for Mercy in my Mistress ^ares.
To PANDORA.
GO you o winds that blow from north to south,
Convey my secret sighs unto my sweet:
Deliver them from mine, unto her mouth,
And make my commendations till we meet.
But if perhaps her proud aspiring sprit,
Will not accept nor yet receive the same,
The breast and bulwark of her bosom be it:
Knock at her heart, and tell from whence you came,
Importune her, nor cease, nor shrink, for shame:
Sport with her curl's of Amber cullour'd hair,
And when she sighs, immix your selves with them
Give her her own, and thus beguile the fair.
Blow winds, fly sighs, where as my heart does han^
And secretly commend me to my sanct.
To PANDORA.
IN Arcadie sometime (as Sydne says,)
Demagoras a proud Lord did remain,
In whom no thing I mark that merits praise,
Save that he served Parthenia sweet with pain:
But when he found she loved him not agane,
With leprocie he did infect her face,
Which caused the constant knight for to complane
But not to change his love in any case:
Pandora fair his woose infect'd allace
With leprocie of loathsome cold disdane,
Bred by my foe, to further my disgrace:
Yet neither faith nor fancy shall refrane:
Yea, were her face deformed as it is fair,
I should ay serve, though I should ay despair.
Fortuna potes inuita fecisse beatum,
Quem velis.


To LITHOCARDIA.
A Very World may well be seen in me,
My hot desires as flames of Fire do shine,
My sighs are air, my tears the Ocean sea
My steadfast faith, the solid Earth, and syne,
My hope my heaven, my thoughts are stars divine
My ielosie the very pangues of Hell,
My sweet the Saint, to whom I do propine
For sacrifice my service and my sell.
That hateful Hagge, who near my Dame does dwell
My rival foe, my Love the Summer sweet,
My Springtime, my deserts which so excel:
And my Dispaires, the Winter cold and weet.
But (O allace) no Harvest can I see,
Which spoils my years, and maks me thus to die
To ERANTINA.
WEll may I read as on a snowie sheet
Of paper fair, my fortune in thy face,
Since at my sight thine eyes are both repleit,
With loueles looks presaging but disgrace:
And thou into my visage wann allace,
May see in sad characters of my care,
Since neither ruth nor pity can have place,
A boundles Book, a volume of dispare.
Thus like a Glass my face may well declare
My love to thee, and with my love my pain:
Thine show's again (though it be matchles fair)
Thy hateful heart and undeserved disdain.
O antipathie strange to be susteind,
I love my foe, thou hats thy faithful friend.
Vidi ego quae veneris falleudo iura res^suit,
Perfidiae penas saepe luisse graves.


To IDEA.
The Brethren three whose hot persut has brought
Death to them selves, and bondage to their land,
When as their foe before them fled, they thought
The victory was placed into their hand:
And yet his flight inferd no fear they fand,
For as they came, he slew them one and one.
A Parthian form, whose fight in f^ght does stand,
For while they fly, their foes are killed anon.
Even so may I, unhappiest I complain:
But pity thus to serve a Parthian Dame,
Who shuns my suits, and makes my fancy fane,
With hosts of harm's for to pursue the same.
O sweet discord, O sweet concord agane,
She flies to kill, I chase her to be taken.
To IDEA.
Fair lovely Haebae Queen of pleasant Youth,
Who bore brave Nectar to the Gods above:
Whose glansing beams like Phoebus in the south,
Do both bewitch and burn my breast with love.
O thou that wars the woundring world for worth
Whom Nature made to laugh her self to scorn,
More excellent then I can set thee forth:
Whose like nor is, nor shall again be borne.
My flowing Songs I consecrate to thee,
Good reason were, that they should all be thine.
Thy presence creats all those thoughts in me,
Which me immortal, and maks thee divine:
And such delight I have with thee to stay,
As twenty Moons do seem but half a day.
Et tua quod superest temporis esse precor.


To LITHOCARDIA.
THou who began by Menalus to moan,
And lay alone for to lament thy loss
Amid those green and grouie shads to groan
Where Musidorus knew thee by thy voice:
Thou have of me a comfort in thy cross,
With Princes proud if poor men may compare,
For why my cares suppose I keep them close,
Ouermatcheth thine, tho thy mishaps were mare:
Thy thuartring thoughts were drou^d in deep dispare
Mine have no hope for to be brought to pas:
Thy heart has hurt, and mine of blis is bare:
Thou changed thy shape, I am not what I was:
In end thou sped, I ware my work in vain,
I love allace, and am not loved again.
Speque timor dubia, spesque timore cadis.


To LAIS.
SEe Deianira, see how I am shent
By that same Shirt which Nessus to thee gave,
And thou again to me by Lychas sent,
I am inflamed flesh, bons, and all I have,
That Ichthiophagic Ethiopian slave,
Who boyls his angled Fish by Phoebus beams
Upon a Rock, no other stire may crave:
Nor Sun, nor Rock, but these my gliding gleams*
Yet sweet thy sworn Alcides will not die,
There is no deadly Dipsas in thy Sarke,
I languish but till I may meet with thee,
With quent Dialogs in the quiet dark:
And so till time such happy time afford,
My further will this bearer brings by word.
Saepe greges inter requie^^^us arbore terci,
Mistaque cum folus perbuit herba torum.


To PENELOPE.
THe Persian King in danger to be dround,
Asked if no help in humane hands did stand.
The Skipper then cast in the Salt profound,
Some Persians brave, and brought the King to land.
Then Xerxes crowns the Skipper with his hand,
Who saues the King deseru's (quoth he) a crown:
But he at once to kill him gave command,
Die die, said he, who did my Persians drown.
My Lady fair, a Xerxes proud does prove,
My worthles Verse she does reward with gold:
But (O allace) she lets me die for love,
And now I rue that I have bin so bold.
As Xerxes crowned, and killed his man; right so
She seems a frind, and proves a mortal foe.
Credula res amor est. etc.


At IDEAS direction, these two Sonets were made. 1.
MOre then I am, accursed might I be,
If er'e I did approach my dearest Dame:
But such a great respect was still in me,
As ay fear was equal to my flame:
Suppose some sots spoyld of the sense of shame,
Or feeling of my honest Love, will say,
And publicly to my dispraise proclaim
That I delight in loathsome Lust as they.
You sacred powers, I still inuoke and pray,
That all my speech turn poison in a clap,
If either I by word or writ bewray
One lusting thought her beauty to entrap,
Let pale Envy (fair Dame) admire and lie,
With chaste desiers I serve and honor thee.
To IDEA. 2
WIth chaste desires I serve and honor thee
Great Archi-mistris of my ravished mind,
Most virtuous, wise, and fair, of all thy kind:
Whose least command I vow to do or die.
Chaste was my Love, yet is, and ay shall be,
The praising Papers which I have propin'd,
May well bear witness how I am inclind,
And can (ye know) controull me when I lie:
Phronesis erring could epsy no place,
Meet on this mould, but in thy breast to dwell,
A virtuous mind adorns a beauteous face;
And thou have both, and in them both excel:
This maks my love be chaste, my passions strange
And I had rather choose to die then change,
Aspice diuinas humano in corpore dotes
Nil mort^lae tibi faemina digna polo es.


To CYNTHIA.
Had thou been black, or yet had I been blind,
my muse had slept, and none had known my mind
Or yet could thou as thou art fair, be kind,
I had not thus with sighs increast the wind:
But lo these frowning favors which I find,
To which allace thou art too much inclind,
By which thy poor afflicted man is pind,
Have broke the heart, which beauty first did bind:
Smile then fair dame, and some time cease to frown
For smiles please me, and do become thee best:
And since thou sees how I am sworn thine own,
Smile still on him who loves thee by the rest,
So neither shall I wish thee to be black,
Nor curse my eyes, the causers of my wrecke.
Nam si quem placidis facilis dignaris ocellis,
Nectaris huic fontes, ambrosiaque fluunt.


To ERANTINA.
THe Tyrant Nero houering to behold
The wrack of Rome on top of Tarpe hill,
He saw the rich, the poor, the young, the old,
Amid the flams in in present point to spill:
Yet woondering on that wonder, stood he still,
And (cruel man) would neither mend nor meene,
But took his pleasure to epsy their ill,
And smild to see them smart before his eyne:
But had that man, that monstrous man yet been
Reserved on life by fatal Nimphs till now,
To view these flames which may in me be seen,
He would bewail my poor estate I trow,
whose boiling breast even like mont Aetna burns
When in his tomb the roaring monster turns.
To KALA.
THe Persian Kings all waters did abjure,
Save those which flowed from fair Ch^aspes flood:
From age to age this they observed as sure,
As though no Waters else could do them good.
This was a form, no rather bondage strange,
Which by no means these Monarch's brave would change.
I am as constant as a Persian King,
And thou more dear then meat or drink to me:
For all th'entisments beauty bright can bring,
With lisping tongue, and soull entising eye:
In spite of all these all as I began,
I am thy true and neuer-changing man.
Thus will I surfeit on thy beauty brave,
And Lyzard-like live on thy looks diuiue:
In presence absence I am sworn thy slave,
And still I would (were I a King) be thine:
And for thy sake, till life and breath endure,
All other love and service I abjure.
Tu quoque iunge fid^s fido cum coniuge amor^s,
Ipse etenim et coniunx ipse et amator ero.


To LAIS.
ALlace that absence has such force to foyll,
And to procure my ever pearceing pain,
Bereft of rest I toss, I turn, I toil,
Half in despair that we may meet again:
Think on my vows (and think they were not vain)
My countenance, and each thing else I pray,
Which then I used, when our goodnight was taken,
My inward wrack and woe for to bewray:
And when allone in clasped arms we lay,
With interchange of many soulesooke kisses:
Think how we shed before the dawn of day,
With miriads of vnaccomplisht wishes:
Which with my self for lack of presens pind,
I recommend unto thy virtuous mind.
Sic mecum fixis herebas nixa lacertis,
Mutua cum placido trahebamus gaudia lusu.


To absent ERANTINA.
EVen as a man by dark that goes astray,
Would feign behold and look unto the light:
Or as a Pilgrem erring from the way,
In wildsome ways, would feign be set a right^
As Mariners in black and stormy night,
O'reset with Seas, strange winds, and stormy rain
Longs to behold the beams of Phoebus bright,
That after storm, the calm may come again:
As he whom still the Iayler does detain
In bondage close, of freedom would be glade:
Right so shall I of presence be as feign,
To see the Saint for whom my sighs are shade,
Light, wisshed way, calm, freedom, should not be
So sweet to them, as Presence unto me.
To KALA.
Sore is my head and sorry is my heart,
And yet for all th'emplasters I apply,
No help has Nature, nor no aid brings Art,
Without, within, I burn, I fret, I fry:
A childish thing when Care does come to cry:
Yet this does most my Fever fell infect,
I hid my harms, and so in silence die,
And thus my head must riue, my heart must break,
But worst of all, while visage wan bewray,
What secret site my sick soul does assale,
How I or'edriue in deadly dooll the day,
And how this longsome Equinoct I vale:
She cruel she that should my Surgeon be,
Allow's my loss, and laughs, and lets me die.
Nec tamen vlla mea tangit te cura salutis.


To absent IDEA.
Fair dame, for who^ my mornfull muse has worn
To want thy fight the black and sable weed,
Whose houering hairs dissheueld rent and torn,
May show what baill thy absence long can breed:
Look if thou list my Rimes, and thou shall reed
But coaleblack woes in coaleblack words brought forth
thy absence long, has made my comfort deed,
And makes my Verses be so little worth.
Shine then upon my parched Sunburnd brain,
Chief stay of all my tempest-beaten state:
Leave not thy man disconsolate again,
Fair Gods of my Fortune both and Fate:
All earthly hopes for thee since I refuse,
Be thou my hope, my Mistress, and my Muse.
Vtque supercilio spendo^ nutuque loquaci,
Nonnihil ipsa meis m^ta venis precibus,


To ERANTINA.
OVtthrough the fair and famous Scythian land,
A River runns unto the Ocean mane:
Hight Hypanis with clear and cristall strand,
Borderd about with Pine, Fur, Oak, and plane:
Whose silver streams as they delight the eye,
So none more sweet to either taste or smell.
Yet Exampeus err his Lord he spies,
Maks him to stink like Stigian stanks at Hell.
Even so fair Dame (whose shap does so excel)
Thy glorious rays, thy shining virtues rare,
No Poets pen, nor Rhetors tongue can tell
So far beyond the bounds of all compare:
Yet are they spoyld with poysning cold disdain
And such as drink thy beauties floods are slain.
Nil nostrae mouere preces verba irrita ventis,
Fudimus et vanas scopulis impegimus vndas.


PANDORA refuses his Letter.
THe saikles soul Philoxenus was slain
By courts kind Amphialus the Knight,
(Who for the fair Cornithian Queens disdain
Borne to his foresaid friend had taken the flight:)
But when his Dog perceived that sorry fight,
He fawned upon his masters fatal foe:
Who then with heart and handful of despite,
Beats back the Dog with many bitter blo.
My dearest Dame and seemlie Saint even so,
For whose sweet sake I daily die and dwins,
Has slain her slave with all the wounds of woe,
And loathes allace, to look upon my Lins:
That with the Dog my Ditties must return,
And help their martird Master for to murne.
Quis Deus opposuit nostris sua numina notis.


To KALA.
TWixt Fortune, Love, and most unhappy me,
Behold a chase, a fatal threesome Reele,
She leads us both, suppose she can not see,
And spurs the Post on her unconstant wheel:
I follow her, but while I prease to speele
My bounds above, I fail, and so I fall:
Love lifts me up, and says all shall be well,
In hope of hap my comfort I recall:
We iornie on, Love is the last of all;
He on his wings, I on my thoughts do sote:
I fly from him, suppose my speed be small;
She flies from me, and woe is me therefore.
Thus am I still twixt Love and Fortune slain,
I neither take nor tarry to be taine.
To LITHOCARDIA.
GOod cause had thou Euarchus to repent,
The reakles rashness of thy bad decreit:
Thy cruelty did spring from good intent,
The grounds whereof were tedious to repeet:
Yet when thy Son fell down before thy feet,
And made thine eyes confess that he was thine,
Thou wept for woe, yet could thou not retreat
The sentence said, but sighed and sorow'd sine:
So may it be that once those eyes divine,
Which now disdain and loath to look so low,
As to behold these miseries of mine,
shall weep when they my constant truth shall know
And thou shall sigh (though out of time) to see,
By thy decret thine own Pirocl^s die.
To LITHOCARDIA.
I Fear not Love with blind and frowning face,
His Bow, his flame, nor sharpest hooked head:
A brauer Archer Death shall have his place,
And put a point to all my pain with speed:
And since it is my fate to be at feed
With her whom once I duly did adore:
Yet fatal Atrops now shall cut the thread,
And break the heart which she enjoyed of yore:
For favors floods which I did often implore,
Of Letheis Lake I time by time shall teast,
Her Marbel heart shall make me moorne no more
The burial stone my dolor shall digeast:
Then farewell she, auth, love, hard-heart, each one,
Come Atrops, Lethe, Death, and Burial ston^.
Nunc te tam formae tangit decor iste superbae,
Vt tua commorint taedia iniqua deos.


To inconstant LAIS.
HOw often have thou with Siuet smelling breath,
told how thou loud'st me, loud'st me best of al?
And to repay my love, my zeal, my faith,
Said, to thy captive thou wast but a thrall:
And when I would for comfort on thee call,
Be true to me dear to my soul, said I,
Then sweetly quhespering would thou say, I shall:
And echo-like dear to my soul, reply:
But breach of faith now seems no fault to thee,
Old promises new periuries do prove.
Apes turse the whelps they love from tree to tree
And crush them to the death with too much love.
My too much love I see has changed thee so,
That from a friend thou art become a foe.
Carminibus celebrata meis formosa N^aera,
Aterius mauult esse puella viri.


To LAIS.
SWeet Lais, trust me, I can love no more,
And which is worse, my Love is turned to hate:
Thou art unkind, and woe is me therefore,
Inconstant falls and to my grief ingrate,
It is too true I loved thee well of late,
And even as true thou lou'dst me well again:
I have allace, no pleasure to repeat
Our wishes and our vows since all are vain:
What resolutions and what plots profane
We two have had in love to live and die,
The time, the place, the tokens given and taken;
If they could speak, can thy accusars be:
But since thou still art false (I must confess)
Thy love was lightly won, and lost for less.
Ah crudele genus nec fidum faemina nomen.


To ERANTINA.
Blind naked love, who breeds those stormy broyls
Which from my dear me to my dole debars:
To me the pangs, to thee pertain the spoils:
Thou taks advantage of our civil wars,
I live exild, but thou remains too near,
Yet like a tirant she triumphs over thee.
Her presence maks thee more then blind I hear:
And absence is far worse then death to me,
Could I as thou, from ielous eyes be free,
Then should I be as blithe as thou art blind:
I should not then despair, nor wish to die,
Nor should my sighs increas the wavering wind.
O rigor strange since Love must still remain,
In presence blind, and I in absence slain.
Vna di^s tantum est, qua te non femina vidi,
Et sine iam videor seusibus es^s ^^is.


To PENELOPE.
WHen stately Troy by subtle Sinons guile,
And Grecian force was brought to last decay,
Ulysses brave with fair and facund style,
Achilles Arm's obtaind, and went away:
In Afrike yet he was constraind to stay:
For when his friends did taste of Lotus try,
As Homers works do more at length bewray,
They green'd no more the Greekish soil to see.
So fares with me, O most vnhapie me,
Since I beheld thy fair and heavenly hew,
The glorious rays of thy all conquering eye,
My rendering heart and soul did so subdew,
That for thy sake, whom ever serve I shall,
I have forgot my self, my soil, and all.
To IDEA.
MY Muse shall make thy boundles fame to fly
In bounds where yet thy self was never seen:
And were not for my Songs thy name had been*
Obscurelie cast into the grave with thee:
But lo when cold and limping age shall be,
A sign of death, and when the grave shall green
And gape within her bosom to conteene
Her child, in spite of Death thou shall not die:
For why, my Muse, my restles Muse shall eeke
Ten thousand wings for to enlarge thy fame,
And every quill of every wing fair Dame,
to preach thy praise ten thousand ways shall seek
Yet thou repayes my labors with disdain,
Thou lives by me, and I by thee am slain.
O ego non felix qui tam crudeliter a^^,
Nullaque me redamat.


To frowning CINTHIA.
IF Castor shine, the Seaman hoyseth sail,
With widkast womb the welcome winds to embrace
which gladly grasps the sare and prosperous gaile
And maks the Ship to run a fleeing race:
But if Orion shine, the storm is me,
He lowes the Sail, which stood of late so hie
Such is my state, if Castor-like thou smile,
I only live to serve and honor thee:
But if thou frown, allace allace the while,
As at the sight of Gorgons head I die,
As in thy lift so in thy looks divine,
Orion black, and Castor brave do shine.
Then since thou art the Orizon of my love,
Thine eyes the fatal stars which I adore:
With gracious blinks behold me from above,
Let me not sink, safe bring me to thy shore.
Or if thou loathes that I should live, then frown
For die I, live I, I am still thine own.
Diccte me Juuenem perijsse in amore maeaeque
Vnita quod fuerit Cynthia causa necis.


To PANDORA.
EAch thing allace, presents and lets me see*
The rare Idea of my rarest Dame,
Deep sunk into my soul the very same,
Whose view does still bewitch unhappy me,
The shining Sun, her heart transpersing eye.
The morning red her brave and blushing shame,
Night absence, and day presence does proclaim,
foul wether frowns, and calm sweet smil's may be
My scalding sighs tempestious winds, and rain:
But exhalations of my tragic tears,
In frost allace, her cold disdain appears;
In thaw, and fire, my melting heart agane:
And thus each thing brings purpose to be pinde
And to my thoughts co^mends the fair unkind.
To PANDORA.
Dear to my soul, and will thou needs be gone,
And leave thy Man behind thee but a heart?
Is this the pity which thou do impart,
Disconsolat to let me die alone?
Thou have two hearts; mine, thine, and I have none:
Here springs the surfe of my ensuing smart;
Yet play I pray the gentle Pirates part,
And as thou lou's my life, yet leave me one:
But brook them both I gladly grant and stay,
How can thou ride in raging rain and wind?
Yet thou must go, and woe is me away:
Then take my heart, and leave me thine behind.
I gave thee mine, O then give thine to me,
That mine and thine be one twix me and thee.
Vna fides, vnus lectus, et vnus amor.


To LAIS.
I Have compard my Mistress many time
To Angels, Sun, Moon, Stars, and things above:
My Conscience then condemned me of a crime,
To things below when I conferd my Love:
But when I find her actions all are vane,
I think my Rimes and Poyems all profane.
With perfect eyes her Pageants I espy,
To no thing now can I compare my Dame,
But Theramenes shoo; the reason why,
It served each foot: and she can do the same:
She hears the suits of rich, poor, great, and small,
And has discretion to content us all.
Si vitium leuitas, nulla puella hona est.


To PANDORA.
Feign would I go, and feign would I abide,
Sweet Hais agene, and kiss me err I go,
Deny me not since there is none beside,
No teltale here, though thou would give me two:
Yet give me one, if thou will give no mo;
But one is none, then give me two or three,
Thy Balmie breath does still bewitch me so,
As I must have an other kiss, or die,
Thy Rubent blush now bids take leave of thee:
Feign would I go, and I would kiss as feign,
Then give me one, or change a kiss with me:
If neither give nor change, take all again:
When thine and mine are thus conturb'd, I kno
Thou can but smile, that I deceived thee so.
Mihi dulcia iunge
Oscula, et in nostr^ molle quiesse sin.


To PENELOPE.
WHile fierce Achilles at the siedge of Troy,
(the fatal Nimphs had so decreed) was slain
A sudden strife arose who should enjoy
The Arms of that praise-worthie Grecian:
Ajax alleged he should the Arm's obtain,
And by the sword to win and wear them vowed,
Ulysses said, they should be his again:
And he them gaind, if Stories may be trow'd,
But lo the shield by Sea's was loosd, we read,
And by a storm driu'n from Ulysses sight,
And rould to Ajax grave, though he was dead,
To show the world that he had greatest right:
So when my tomb shall end those tears of mine
there shall thou sigh and say, I should been thine.
Tum flebit cum mi senserit esse fidem.


To CINTHIA.
Often have I meant with Music, sleep, and wine,
The sovereign cur's for superficial cares,
For to revive this wounded heatt of mine,
And free my self from sorrow, sighs, and tears:
Yet neither all, nor any one of those,
Have force to end, or cure, or change my woes:
My griefs are grown to such confused force,
No number rests for more, nor place for worse.
If I had merit to be martird still,
And with the fury of thy frowns abused,
I could digest thy gloomings with goodwill,
And neither look nor crave to be excused:
I love my Rod like Moses; but if I
Perceive it prove a Serpent, I must fly.
If thou will bind me still to be thine own,
Smile still (fair Dame) if not, I pray thee frown.
Vincuntur molli pectora dura prece.


To LITHOCARDIA.
FAlse Eriphile sometime did betray
Facidic wise Amphiaraus her spouse,
(Who willing from the Theban wars to stay)
To hide himself secure at home he trow's:
Thus while his driftes Adrastus disallow's,
She (knowing that her husband should be slain
At Thebes) for a golden chain auow's
To tell Adrastus where he did remain;
And thus reueald, he goes against his will,
But leaves Alcmeon to revenge his wrack
On Eriphile, which he did fulfill,
When doleful news of fathers death came back
So since in love thou art so vnloyall so long,
Some strange Alcmeon must revenge my wrong.
Quaeque prius nobis intulit illa ferat.


To LAIS.
WHen Cressid went from Troy to Calchs tent,
and Greeks with Trojans were at skirmidg hot
Then Diomed did late and air frequent
Her company, and Troil was forgot:
Thou lay alone, such was allace thy lot,
And Paris brookt poor Menela thy Dame,
She twind in two the matrimonial knot,
And took a stranger when thou went from hame.
Such is my case, if I may say for shame,
I florisht once; once there was none but I:
I once was loved, and I have lost the same,
And as God liu's, I know not how nor why:
So that my Saint for falsehood I am sure,
May match the Grecian or the Trojan whore.
Non sum ego qui fueram, mutat via longa puella^,
Quantus in exiguo tempore fugit amor.


To KALA.
Often have I sworn; often have thou prayed me too
No more to love, nor more to look on thee:
Since looks and love have made so much adoo
Twixt loueles thee, and vnbeloued me:
Yet were I damned without redres to die,
I can not cease from serving thee fair Dame:
Yea thou and all the woondering world shall see
The faith, the force, the fury of my flame,
Most like unto the questing Dog am I,
Who still does on his angry Master fawn,
While thou corrects, I kindly quest and cry,
And more thou threats, the more I am thine own
Thus love or loath, or cherrish me or chide,
Where once I bind, but any breach I bide.
Sit mihi panpertas tecum iucunda neaera.


To KALA.
WHen Aedipus did foolishly resign
His Kingdom to his Sons, that he and he,
Above the Thebans year about should reign,
And that his Crown biparted so should be,
Polinices first raignd, but faith we see,
He from the Crown Eteocles debars:
Thus while they live, they never can agree,
And after death, their burning bones made wars.
My rival foe against all right enioyes
That Crown and Kingdom which pertains to me
That proud usurper worker of my noyes,
Shall find a foe, unto the day I die,
And were we dead, that are too long alive,
Our Ashes in th'exequial vrne would strive.
Riualem possum non ego far Jonem.


At the news of IDEAS death, Dialogue twixt the Poets Ghost and Charon.
Ghost. COme Charon come:


(Ch) Who calls?


(Gh.) a wandering Ghost,
By fortune led unto the Stygian shore.,

(Ch.) What seeks thou here?


(Gh.) a safe transpor^ with post,
As thou have done to many mo before.

(C.) Who slew thee thus?


(G.) even she whom I adore,
Has rould my name in scrowls of black disgrace.

(Ch) What made her thus into thy grief to glore?


(G.) Love was my foe, and changed in wars my peace.


(C.) Go then aback, this Bark shall not embrace
The smallest one whom Love at fead has borne.

(Gh.) That shall I not, for lo before thy face,
I shall over sail the flood and thou had sworn:
The Darts of Love both Boat and Oars, shall be,
Sighs shall be winds, and Tears a Styx to me.

An other Dialogue to the same purpose.
Ghost. COme Charon come.


(Ch.) Who calls?


(Gh.) a martyrd man,
Since Fame foorthtold the fairest fair was deid.

(Ch.) What seeks thou?


(Gh.) Help to croce thy waters wan,
And I will pay thee for thy pains with speed.

(Ch.) Thou seems to be a quick and living leid,
And not a vmber, nor a palled Ghaist.

(Gh.) Fear not for that, since I for passage pleid,
But let me have thy helping hand with haist.

(C.) Though sage Aeneas did o're-saile my stream
By Sybils help, none else must go again.

(G.) Then thinks thou Charon, to enjoy my Dame
And stay my voyage from the Elesian plain?

(C.) Yes surely yes.


(G) No Charon thou shall lie
For Love has wings, and I have learnd to fly.

Panditur ad nullas Janua nigra prec^s.
IDEA after long sickness, becomes weil; and as he wept for her, he wishes
compensation of her tears in his distress.
O Beauty doomb astonished Maruels child,
The wanton object of my weeping eye,
Blithe was my heart before I was beguyld,
And made to bear a servile yoke by thee:
But now allace, though I by birth be free,
And not a slaue-borne Muscouite by kind,
My Saint so Lords my heart, that now I see,
There is no manumission to my mind.
Fair heavenly Tigres, be no more unkind,
I wept for thee, when weerds did all conspire
Thy wrack; O then behold how I am pind:
Weep thou for me, thy tears may quench my fire
As I did thine, so meene thou my estate,
And be not called the worst of ills ingrate.
Sis ingrata licet fi modo bella manes.


To CYNTHIA.
PRoud Zeuxis gave his Pictures all for naught,
Such was the love he to his labors bore,
That by no gold nor price they could be bought,
And thus save thanks poor man, he gaind no more
I am as poor, and even as proud as he,
For Love nor Lines I crave no price from thee.
For if thou digne but with a gracious smile,
To look my Lines, and spy how I am pind,
And with my toys the swift wingd time begile,
Then am I paid according to my mind*
Joues oath was Styx, and Phoebus Daphnes hair;
But from henceforth I by thy smiles will swear.
To ERANTINA.
NO heart so hard, tho wrought of Vulcans steel,
Or fearcely forged of Adamantine stone,
That do endure or last so long so leele,
As mine, who loves thee most unloving one,
Whose purpose is and plot, as I suppone,
Most cruelly her captive thrall to kill,
Who only lives to love but her alone:
Though she reward my true intent with ill:
Such is my state, I but abide her will,
She has the fatal stick into her sleeue,
And when she list her fury to fulfill,
Althea-like she may my breath bereave:
Nor leave vnlou'd, I rather choose to die,
Then beat the fire, and burn the fatal tree.
Nam mea crudeles tetigerunt corda sagitte,
Atque animam petijt vulneris asperitas.


To PANDORA.
Can thou have ears, and will not hear my plaint
Can thou have eyes, and will not wipe my tears
Have thou a heart, and feels not how I faint,
Debating twixt dispairing hops and fears?
Can thou not see those sad and civil weairs
Which are within the kingdom of my heart,
Where Legions of persuing pangs appeairs,
My utter wrake and ruin to impart?
Here burns the fire, there sticks the deadly dart:
Here tears me droun, there smoky sighs me smore
Here Beauty wounds, there riuals runs athwart,
And ielous eyes do pry into each pore:
When al these al and thou my wrack contriues,
I can not last, and I had twenty lives.
Perfida sed duris genuit te montibus horrens,
Cantasus, hircaneque admorunt vbera tigr^s.


Newyeares gift to PENELOPE.
THat Colatine did talk in Tarquins tent,
His Lady Lucrece was most chaste most fair,
He afterward had reason to repent,
She died a deemd adultres in despair.
The Lydian King brought naked both and bare,
His wife before his friend for to be seen,
Which brought him self we see into the snare,
For he was slain, and Giges brookt his Queen.
Yet can not all these wracks forewarne my Muse,
To hold her peace, but praise thee more and more:
I love thee still, and I will not refuse,
Though small allace, be my reward therefore.
And so (fair Dame) for Newyears gift receive
My heart thine own, my self to be thy slave.
To PENELOPE.
WHen Alexander did subdue and bring
The coastly Isles of Inde to his Empire,
He captive took proud Porus Indian King,
And bid him ask what most he did desire?
Naught said brave Porus do I now require,
But that thou use me as a King should be,
Thou shall have friendly hostage to thy hyre:
And for my sake I grant thy suit (said he.)
Long with my passions have I borne debate,
Often have I fought, and now have lost the feeld,
It is my fortune for to be defeat.
I am thy Captive, and fair Dame I yield:
As Macedo was to the King of Jnde,
If not mine, yet for thy cause be kind.
To LAIS.
WHen Dionise was shut from Regal seat,
And quite deposd from his Imperial throne
For tyrannies too tedious to repeat,
Which made often times the Siracusans groan,
When he was thus disgraced, and left alone:
He could not cease to play the tyrant still,
He grew a pedant infants poor anon,
He taught and quhipt to exercise his ill.
I with my Love have played the licher long,
And she the loun with many more then me:
This custom vile, maks sin to seem no wrong*
And she must turn a common Whore I see,
Though both be bad, and each of both unsure,
I rather serve a tyrant then a whore.
To absent PANDORA.
LOng since has Cynthia shown her full faced pride
And now compeirs with crescent horns again
Since at the banks of Neptuns flowing tide,
I took my leave and show how I was slain:
Allace allace, they have not wept in vain,
Who left us annals of eternal date,
Condemning absence for a cruel pain,
A foe to faith, a vnfriend unto fate:
A happy life had I in love of late,
To joy the sweet fruition of thy face,
Now from thy sight estranged is my state.
Since all my life is darkness and disgrace:
Yet midst my woes I wish that well thou be,
And with the winds I send those sighs to thee.
Nulla mihi fine te rident loca, displicet aquor,
Sordet terra, leaves od^ cum retihus hamos.


To PENELOPE seek.
WEre I as skild in Medecin as he,
Who did restore Hippolits health again,
When he was torn with horse; then should thou see
I should prepare emplasters for thy pain:
But since I am no Aesculap at all,
I am thy Bondsman, and thy Beadman thrall.
Phaebe fau^, laus magna tibi trib^etur, in vn^
Corpore seruato restituisse duos.


Newyeares gift to IDEA.
THe Locrian King Zaleucus made a law,
That each adultrar both his eyes should lose,
But when his Son was faulty first he saw,
That sacred Kings have hid and secret foes,
Incontenent unto the stage he goes,
And from his Son one eye, one of his own
He caused pull out, and in the sight of those
A careful King, a father kind was known.
In Janus Kalends fair and lovely sweet,
Time out of mind has been a custom old,
That friends their friends with mutual gifts should greet
To keep true kindness from beco^ming cold.
Zaleucus-like these Lines are sent by me,
To keep the law and kith my Love to thee.
Da veniam merui nil ego, iussit amor.


To CINTHIA.
Why loves thou more (fair dame) thy Dog then me?
what can he do but (as the Scholar said
At Xanthus feast) shake ears and tail on thee?
And I can do much more to make thee glade,
With tedious toil and longsome labor made.
He can perhaps bring thee thy Glo^e, or whyl^
Thy Kirchiff when it is either left or laid
Behind thy heels with sweet and backast smyles:
But I, whom thou disdainefully exyles
From thy sweet bed, and thy most sweet embrace;
Which fawning Currs with filthy feet defiles,
I could do more, but I l^ck leave allace:
Fie Natures bastard, make no Dog thy Love,
Least thou a Monster, I a Martyr pro^e.
To KALA.
I First receiud since did sweet Saint unfold
Thy lovely Lines, the legat^ of thy mind,
And did with blithe and ioy-swolne breast behold
How thou continew'd constant, true, and kind.
But when I did perceive how thou wast pind,
Pind for the absence of thy loue-sick sw^^ne,
My tongue was doomb, my silent eyes were blind,
I read and mused, and mused and read again:
And be thou judge (dear hea^^) if I was feign*
When I euolu'd from out the Pape^ whit,
That Symboll, swe^te transparent pure and plain,
Wherein some time thou ^ ^oke so much delight:
Yea th^ise each day* (fair Mistress) till we meet,
I kis thy Symboll, and thy golden sheet.
Quisquis ad hanc vertit peregrinam littera puppim,
Ille mihi de te multa rogatus abit.


To KALA.
I Swear (sweet Kala) by my flames, thy eyes,
O eyes: no eyes, but rather stars divine:
Sweet Dionean twins into their skies,
And by those kind alluring looks of thine,
I swear by all our tears whils thine, whils mine,
Nor mine nor thine, but both combind in one:
By all the sighs blown from the sacred shrine
Where Craigs true heart has his heroic throne,
I swear by all our secret vow's each one,
Made in the dark, and reconfirmd by day:
By all our kisses when we were allone,
And all the wishes when I went away:
Let Weerds and Fortune do the worst they can
I am in spite of Mis^^s Nose, thy man.
To KALA.
O How I long to hear from thee again,
And understand the tenor of thy state:
Thrice has the Moon begun to wax and wane,
With spheirs and horns since I received thy wreat:
Then give me leave (sweet Lady) to regrate,
Since thou may have of traualing troops such store,
And I have sent so many lines of late,
Thou art unkind, and woe is me therefore:
Each one that comes from thee, or from thy shore,
In hope of news, I entertain for thee:
Each Post I meet, each Horn I hear, yields more
Harmonious sounds, then music sweet to me:
But when my hopes prove naught with sorry mind,
I sigh and say, unkind, unkind, unkind.
Tempora fi numeres been quae numeramus amantes,
Non venit ante suam nostra querela diem.


To CYNTHIA.
WHen those which at Ardea did remain
With Aracins did many times contend
For Confind Lands, which neither could obtain,
In many Battails, though much blood they spend,
Yet that sometime the strife should take good end
Both they and those refer them selu's to Rome,
Imperious Romans parties both offend,
And to them selves the questiond Lands assume.
Long wars heue been betwixt thy Maid and me,
If she or I my louesicke heart should have;
She thinks it hers, it was once mine, and we
To end this strife, thy sacred sentence crave.
Thou like these conquering Romans in this cas^
By spoiling both, posseyds my heart in peace.
Cynthia prima fuit Cynthia finis erit.


To ERANTINA.
THe ielous eyes which watch my loving Dame,
And Argus-like to trap me still attend,
They with my loss allace, but seek her shame:
Which I beseech thee loving Lord defend.
O would to God my honest course were kend,
Or that my breast were made of Cristall clear,
That trial might be taken what I intend:
And my true part in presence might appear.
But (O allace and weladay) I fear,
These iarres shall soon engender such debate,
As shall but doubt debar me from my dear,
And enterchange my wonted good estate.
O harmony unhappiest of all,
Bad chance brings change, and change has framed my fall.
Res est solliciti plena timoris amor.


To ERANTANA.
DIsordered Hairs the types of my disgrace,
The testimonies of my servile state:
Ou'ruaile my wanne and pale disfigured face,
And let my favor answer to my fate:
For since I am th'vnhappiest he, I wait
That Love, or Fortunes envy can assail:
What rests then? but still for to regrate,
Since word, nor writ, nor prayers can prevail:
And since my dear disdainfully does deal
With hopeles me, who was and is her own,
My pearsing pains shall on my visage pale,
With hoarie, rough, and crumpled skin be known.
And such as sees my furrowed face, shall say,
The fair Unkind is cause of my decay.
Illa dies fatum misero mihi dusit ab illa,
Pessi^a mutati cepit amoris hyems.


To ERANTINA.
LOng have I had long hairs upon my head,
Long have I had hid harms within my heart,
Yet none of those are powerful for to plead
The smallest salve or softning to my smart.
Could I draw forth the sharp and golden dart,
Wherewith allace, I secretly am slain:
Or put those black vnpouled locks apart,
For which the world accounts me to be vain:
Could I to flit as to be fast be feign,
Or think that foul that I have thought too fair,
There should no harm into my heat remain,
Nor should my head be ouerhung with hair.
Sweet, if thou loves me, powll those locks I pray
If not, cut life, love, locks, and all away.
To PANDORA.
O What a world I suffer of extremes,
Twixt hot desire and icie cold despair:
Most like the swift impetuous tyds of Theames,
Are those the ebs and flowings of my care:
I live allace, a martire late and air,
Coold with despair, and burnd with hot desire:
I see allace, and can not slip the snare,
In floods I fry, and freeze amid the fire:
In Sestian seas to Her^ sweet I swim,
And feign would touch the fimber of her goun,
Hoys'd with desire unto the clouds I clim,
But by despair Leander-like I drown:
My D^lphin dear, let not Arion dee,
Save me vnsunke, and I shall sing to thee.
Quicquid ^o^abor dicere uersus erit.


To PANDORA.
Fair Sicil fertile first of Cruel Kings,
When Dionise did all thy state overthrow,
And wrought so many strange and monstrus things
And led so long a life without all law:
Sad sorrow was the Syracusan Song,
And all save old Hymera, wished him dead,
She wished him weel, cause many tyrants sprung:
And were he gone, a worser would succeed.
It is my weird, and woe is me therefore,
To serve and love where recompense is none.
Often have I changed, and now can change no more
For badder ay succeeds, when bad are gone.
And this sweet heart maks me thy beadman thral,
Least by thy loss, in harder haps I fall.
Quando ego non t^^^ui graniora pericula verit.


To PANDORA.
When Scythian Lords long from their lands had bein
Their slaves usurped their absent Masters place:
both wealth and wives they breok'd before their eine
And did the same seven years posses in peace:
They turning home, and seeing such disgrace,
fought with their servants for their wealth and wives
But by the men the masters gat the chase,
And hardly escaped with hazard of their lives.
Then they consult with neither swords nor glaues,
Nor open wars, to make their foes to yield,
with whips and wands they bat their randring slaves
And by the change of weapons wan the feeld.
Since sighs, nor tears, nor ditties can subdue thee
I must (fair sweet) with Scythian arms pursue thee
To IDEA.
I Put my hand by hazard in the hat
Where many names did intermixtly lie,
With her and her were you and this and that,
A fortune blind, or niuie nake to try:
And lo such was my luckie luck that I
Among so many, found thy Noble name,
And on my head, that thou and all may spy,
I well auow the wearing of the same:
It shall infer no foil unto thy fame,
That thou art borne upon so base a head:
A Beggar find's a stone of curious frame,
And yet the stone remains a stone indead.
So thou art thou, and of more worth to me,
Dear Valentine, then thou wast wont to be.
To LITHOCARDIA.
GReat Alexander gave a straight command,
That every Soldier in the Camp should shave
And that his face as haireles as his hand,
Both Greek and Persian time of wars should have:
When Arms were put a part, he lent full leave
To wear long beards; a sign of fat-fed peace:
And thus in Greece a stranger might perceive
The Countries state into the Soldiers face.
I am content that custom to embrace;
I have no beard to show my peace with thee:
But thou will say, my hairs portend disgrace,
And discontent is in my downcast eye:
It is too true; but let me rise or fall,
Or sink or swim, I am thy feruient thrall.
Addimus his precibus lachrimas quoque verba preantis,
Perlegis, et lachrimas fi^ge iudere meas.


To LAIS.
WHy love I her that loves not me again*
Why am I friendly to my fr^mmit foe?
Why do I wear my waiting on in vain,
In serving her that has deceived me so?
Why did I thus my freedom sweet forgo,
To pleasure her that plagu^^ me with disdain?
Or wish her weel that ever wrought my woe,
And would not sigh suppose she saw me slain:
O foolish I, and haples I alone.
No then, O faythlesse and disloyal she,
Whose tried untruth thus maks me to complain^
And wish before the fixed day to die:
For now tint time and travel maks me sure,
I played the fool, and she has played the hoore.
Periuriavidet a^aut^^*
Jupiter et ventos ^rrita far iubet.


To LAIS.
Brave Troilus the Trojan stou^ and true,
As more at length in Chau^er we may find,
Dreamd that a fair White Bull, as did ensue,
Had spoyld his Love, and left him hurt behind.
The Phrygian Nymphe Aenona dround in drerd,
When Paris toward Greece made sail from Troy.
In dreams foresaw, as after did succeed,
Her Love and foreine Lady should enjoy.
When Hecuba the Wisemen did employ,
Her dream of flaming Fire for to expon^,
They shortly show that Paris should destroy
And set on fire fair ^lion stick and stone.
Right so might I, if weer^s had not withstand,
In doleful dreams foreseen the fall I fand.
Quid tuneam ignere tunc^ ta^^^ ^^^ia d^wers.


To IDEA.
LAst year I drew (fair Dame) by very chance,
Thy Noble name amongst a number more:
Glad was my soul to see the weirds advance
The happy hazard of my fortune so:
And proud thereof, upon my pate I placed thee,
With anagram's and Sonets sweet I graced thee.
But now (wise Dame) behold a wonder strange,
Which both I wish thee to believe and hear:
(I am so loath where once I choose, to change)
That in my heart thou harbors all this year:
Then from a Hat I drew thee err I saw thee,
Now from my heart it is my doom to draw thee.
Why should I hazard what I have so sure,
Or scrape thy name into a scuruie Scrowle?
O thou art writ in blood's characters pure,
Within the center of my louesick soul:
Let others try a fortune blind and bear thee,
Both on my head and in my heart I Will wear thee.
To KALA.
BLind Love (allace) and Ielosie undo
That constant heart which I bequeath to thee:
I love thee most, and am most ielous too,
By this I live, by that undone I die:
Not that I think a fickle change can be,
Where virtue dwells, but that mine own vnworth
Is worse then twenty rival foes to me:
My base estate these bastard thoughts brings forth
O were my moyane equal to my mind,
Or were my wealth as great as my goodwill,
Could I command the costly Isles of Jude,
Thou should be weell, and I should fear no ill.
Then Fortune, Fates, and all ye Gods above,
Enlarge my luck, or else make les my love.
Venit amor grauius quo serius vrimur intus,
Vrimur, et secum pectora vulnus habent.


To PANDORA.
WHile gathering in the Muses garden flowrs,
I made a Nosegay, which perfumed the air,
Whose smell shall savor to times latest hours,
And shall for ay adorn thee cruel, fair.
I laid me down upon the grassie green,
Where I beheld fruit's, flowr's, and herbs anew,
Foorthspred by Flora glorious Summers Queen,
Whereon the calm and gentle Zephir blew:
On haughty hills, which Giant-like did threat
To pearse the heavens with their aspiring head,
Grew warlike Firs, strong Oaks, and Ceeders great,
Whose shaddie boughs the leau^e groves ou'rspred
Thus high and low I looked where I lay,
Yet neither fruit nor flower was like my Hay.
To KALA.
WHen silent night had spread her pitchie veil
On all the parts of Vestais fruitful lace.
And horned Luna pensive fad and paile,
Was at thy presence darkened with disgrace;
Think (comely Kala) with what kind embrace
We show the secrets of our sigh-swolne soul,
How strict a bond we tied in little space:
Which none but heavens have credit to controul^*
Sweet Shippardes think on thy Loue-sick swane,
Whose life, whose all, does on thy love depend:
Let naught save death, divide us two again,
And let our loves even with our lives take end*
And when I cease for to be true to thee,
Breath vanish in the winds and let me die.
Dij preter hoc iuheant vt euntibus ordine fatis,
Jlla meos oculos comprimat, atque suos.


To his Rival and LAIS.
AS thou art now, so was I once in grace,
And thou wast once disgraced, as now am I.
O wondrous chance, o cruel contrary case,
O strange discord, yet greeing harmony.
I once was loved, thou loathed; but now epsy
How I am loathed, and thou art loved alone:
In this the wheel of Fortune you may try:
I raignd, thou had no reign; thou reigns again,
Then happy thou, if so thou might remain:
But faith thou must come down there is no dout,
And thou must be a partner of my pain,
The nixt must needs have place his time about:
Else fortunes wheel should whirle about no more
Nor Lais fair be falls, as of before.
Turpius est pulchra nam meretrice nihil.


Farewell to LAIS.
Thou fawns (fair nymph) for frindship at my hand
And says, thou seeks no more of worldly blis:
But feid forgot that friendship true may stand,
And cries met mercy if thou made amiss.
But hark my heart, and trust me weel in this,
I can not love a feigned friend; no no:
Since I am so acquaint with Judas kis,
Shape not (my sweet) for to deceive me so:
For I have read in Stories old, of two,
Zethius and Amphion did discord,
Till time Amphion music did forgo,
Which by his fellow was so much abhord:
Thy suit (my sweet) is seasond with such ^als,
We shall not friend so long as thou art falls.
Non amo te fateor quid enim simulare access est.


A sparing farewell to KALA.
FOnd Celuis some time in a foolish vain.
Would needs apply emplasters to his foot,
And would as sick men do, sigh, weep, and plain,
And make the world believe he had the Gout:
And by this custom which he had, we reed
Dissembling Celuis took the Gout in deed.
How many broyls betwixt us two have been,
Which I often times of purpose would devise,
That in that sort our love should escape unseen,
And vndeuulged in a dark disguise?
But faith that custom has deceived me so,
That in effect I am thy fremcast foe.
When first our Love was in the pleasant prime,
Thou lou'dst me well, I loved thee well again:
But here behold the strange effects of time,
My fire turns frost, thy love turns cold disdain:
Yet time may friend which made us foes; til when,
I wish thee weell, but am no more thy man.
N^mque vbi non amor est vbi non miscentur amoris,
Suauia nil lauti, nilque leporis inest.


A wrathful farewell to KALA.
THe whitest Silver draws the blackest skore,
In greenest Grass the deadly Adder lowrs,
The fairest Sun does breed the sharpest showrs,
The fowlest Toads have fairest Stons in store:
So fairs'd of Love, and woe is me therefore.
In greenest Grass lies hid the stinging Adder,
In fairest shining Sun the fowlest wadder,
A precious Pearl placed in a poysning Pore:
Shall I supp sweet mixed with so sour a falls?
Or drink the Gall out of a Silver pot?
Or shall I cast on liberty a knot?
Als fast, als lows; als lowse, als fast, ay falls:
No, I beseech the Gods that rule above,
They let me never leave, and ever I love*
Durius in terris nihil est quod viuat antant^,
Nec modo si sapias quod minus esse velis.


To PENELOPE.
WHen Tyndaris was brought from Troy again
and princely Pergam leueld with the ground
And fatfed earth with Phrygian flesh was feign
Through shallow furrs fair fruit's for to refound,
The facund wise Ulysses most renound,
By fatal answers was foretold we find,
That he should not in deadly deep's be dround,
Although withheld with many contrar wind:
Yet that unhappy and that bastard brat,
That Parricid which from a far should come,
Telegonus whom he with Circe gat,
Should kill his father at his coming home:
Though I have past as many storm's as he,
The last is worst, and for thy love I die.
Elegy to KALA.
REed this, and then no more,
this shall be last of all,
And should been first, if now I could,
my published Rymes recall,
But they are gone abrod
upon the wings of Fame:
Na, can the glyding Ocean waves
put bounds unto the same:
The spacious Continent,
Nor yet the bordering mane,
Can neither h^ld the woes nor vows
of my unquiet vane.
Nor prayers, nor the praise
which I have pend for thee,
Which makes me thus for to be pind,
and thee so proud to be.
This then shall be the last,
since first it can not be;
For I have waird already else
a world of words on thee:
But worlds Democrit said,
were infinite, and so
Thou looks to find infinites
of worlds of words, or more:
No no; my Poyems have
proclaymd thy pride, my pain,
And I am woe that I have waitd
so many words in vain.
For I have dryd the brain
of my invention quit,
And neither conquered my desire,
nor purchased thy delight.
Lo then how I was led
with Love, that Lordly elff,
That bred no pleasure unto thee,
nor profet to my selff:
But as Phaeneus poor
for Physic sought in vain,
And by his foe was cured, when as
he hoped he had been slain.
So thy disdains have cured
my hurt and vlcerd heart,
And I am weell against thy will,
but sense of old-felt smart.
To Sea with sweetest streams
flows Hypanis the flood,
But Exampeus poysning well,
maks bad which erst was good.
And thus unlike it self
grow's Hypanis: even so
Thy coy disdain has changd a friend,
into a fremmed so.
Thou sawst my dwining looks,
my scalding sighs and sobs:
Thou sawst my tear swollen eyes were full
of liquid pearlie globs.
And yet, as Nero proud,
when Rome was burnd, did grow
As glad as at a Comic sport,
and laugh to see the low.
So thou falls Tyran, thou
from turret of thy pride,
Thou smild at my mishaps as proud,
as brave as Neptuns brid.
But worthy Phocion
a Captain brave and stout,
For these unkind Athenians,
fought forty Batels out,
And yet was slain by them:
and when he died, it is told
He prayed his Sone for to forgive
his death, for kindness old.
So though I be in point
by thy disdain to die,
My heart shall charge my houering hand,
to write no ill of thee:
For like Themistocles,
I rather drink the Gall,
Then fight against my once good friend,
though now my love be small.
Then sometime friend, farewell;
this is my most revenge,
To think no good, to write no ill,
but last of all to change.
His Resolution of absence and farewell to Lithocardia.
Fair Dame adue, for whom I daily die,
And quick and dead a martyr still remain:
Now must I ^lit o fairest, far from thee,
And fly the force of undeserved disdain,
Since I have weard my warbling Verse in vain.
O Verse to be my sorows children borne,
Abortiue birth brought forth with too much pain
And recompensed too much with too much scorn:
Since Lines and I and all are all forlorn,
Fair Dame receive this last enforst adieu,
For I shall see, if Fates have not forsworn,
If change of Nations natures can renew,
If tract of time, if change of soil or air,
May help thy Love, or hinder my despair.
Quid loquor infaelix, an non per sax a per igne,
Quo me cunque pedes ducunt men's agra sequetur.


His Reconciliation to Lithocardia after absence.
O Lautia poor was glad,
when the Amazon Queen of yore,
Received a Nosegay from her hand,
suppose she smeld no more.
Cherillus heart was hois'd
to highest heavens he thought,
When Macedo over looked his Lines;
suppose he liked them naught.
So, if thou take my Verse,
a loving poor propine,
Which ouer-shadowed with thy sight,
throughout the world shall shine.
If thou the sheet receive,
though thou unfold no folds,
Yet shall those hidden Lines be blithe,
whilst thou their backs beholds:
And I poor hopeles soul,
thy weell affected man,
Shall be as blithe as Cherill was,
or yet Olautia than.
Take then my faultles Sheet,
bedewd with mourning Ink,
And if thou will not view my Verse,
to know the thing I think;
Yet shall the Paper serve
(O fair and matchles Dame)
To be a Bottom to thy Silk,
or safftie to thy Seame:
But least my mourning Ink
like Niobe's black tears,
Should black thy brave Mineruik work,
whilst it thereto adhears,
Pine with thy snow-white hand
the Verse before thy view,
That they may not infect nor foil
the farfet Silks fair hew:
And thou shall see no more
set down before thy face,
For to reveal my endless woe,
but this one word Allace,
Allace, allace, allace,
Allace, allace again,
Ten thousand times allace allace,
can not expres my pain.
Allace I am thine own,
na have I hap to view
Heraclits flood of change thereby,
my nature to renew.
None knew of Hercules
the poisoning deadly shafts,
But Philoctetes; none but I
complains conceals thy crafts.
Though thou have faild to me,
I am not false to thee:
I am thy Beadman day by day,
and bondsman till I die.
And would to God thou had
rich Amaltheas horn,
To yield what fruits thou list, though I
live lightlied and forlorn.
Aeneas lost at Troy,
Creusa fair his wife
And through and with ten thousand Greeks
he made a desperate strife:
And rooming up and down,
emboldned with despair,
He cried aloud Creusa come,
but could not find her there,
And still he crid, till time
her pallid ghost anon
Appeard, and gave him certain signs
that she was dead and gone.
So shall thy soul thy Ghost
begin for to remove,
And leave to be within thy breast,
before I leave to love:
And when thy Ghost is gone,
and past the Elisian lake,
No Dido shall complain of me,
nor suffer for my sake.
If Romans did return
in Arms of shining Steell
Our Rubicon, then were they deemd
foes to the common weell:
But my returns to thee,
are full of love and peace,
As witnesses this iterat,
and often said word Allace.
If I have said too much,
let me thy peace implore,
And my Epiloge with a sigh
I seal and say no more:
Protesting since thou knows
how I am sworn thine own,
And how thy Virtues by my Verse,
throughout the world be known:
Thou will have some remorse
upon my careful case,
And let thy Courtasies conclude,
my long long-cri'd Allace.
To LAIS.
THe fair faced Woman, and deformed Ape,
Has Nature framed to want a tail we see:
The silly beast with her unseemly shape,
Seems well content and pleased that so should be:
And yet the Woman strives even and morn,
To have a tail and still in Naturs scorn.
But let it be (for to supply this want)
Each discontented whore should have one tail,
What reason is it (since Nature knew them skant)
A pockie Punck with pluralties should deal?
This then is true, which I observe as sure,
A Beast has more discretion, then a Whore.
Hac venit in thalamos dote superba tuos.


His constant Resolution to ERANTINA.
SHall absence long, or distance far of place,
With lowering looks of frem'd unfriendly foes?
Shall tract of time for les or longer space,
Have any force to cause me change my choice?
No surely no; I am not one of those:
I shall be found no falce nor flitting friend,
My love shall last as long as life suppose,
Luck be not such as sometime I have seen'd:
But what reme^d, I may not mend* but meen'd,
And with your will I hold me well content:
Though many thwartering things have interueend
To interturb and stay our true intent,
Yet all those iarres shall not my mind remove
The day of death shall be the date of love.
Dum paris aenone poterit spirare relicta,
Ad fontem xanthi versa recurrat aqua.


Confirmation of his love to ERANTINA.
SHall absence long bring change,
or make my mind to move?
Or yet shall distaunce far of place,
unlock the link of Love?
Shall either this or that,
yon, or the other thing,
Have force to break the block we band,
before the Paphian King?
Thou art mine Hero still,
and though the streams be stark,
I through the waltering waves shall swim
to thee but Boat or Bark.
I am not Iasons meat,
Maedea to beguile:
My faith is firm, this the cause
exponis me exile.
Nor am I come by line
of traitor Trojans race*
I never thought no not by dream,
my Dido to disgrace.
Nor am I he who brought
the black ^aill for the white,
Least Ariad^e killed his sire,
and if their wrack was white.
A Pyramus I am
in deed, in thought, in word,
And should (wist I thou were not weell)
with blood imbrew my sword:
And if by Fames report
thy pains I can perceive
As Hemon did, shall I give
the Ghost above the grave.
No that I look to find
such friendship on thy part,
Or promis kept which ay shall be
inshrind within my heart:
Or that I grieve for grace
thy honor to degrade,
For if my Saint be safe and sound,
how can I but be glade.
In tears as Biblus did,
though I consume away,
Who was huerted in a Well,
as ancient Writers say.
And though I be resolved
to love thee term of life,
Yet must I leave thee for a while,
Ulysses left his wife.
My word shall be my word,
my kindness shall be known,
And with my oath I will no boure,
for I am sworn thine own.
And for thy sake I vow
the Pilgrems weed to wear,
And when in wildsome ways I walk,
the Rod and Bag to bear:
And this my hoarie head
vnrased shall remain;
A tipe of my continuing truth,
till we two meet again.
And so with heavy heart,
adue my dearest Dame,
In happy state long may thou live,
till I envy the same:
And would to God thy wealth
were such as I would wish.
So till the Gods our meetings grant,
thy snowie hand I kis.
To LAIS.
IF Rodopae the loath some Strumpet vile,
Became to be a great Egyptian Queen,
Put not sweet heart thy hop's into exile,
Good luck may light upon a life vncleene:
She was a Queen, thou must an Empress be,
For thou art thrice as great a whore as she.
Cui madidos minxit mentula ^ulta sinus.


His unwilling Farewell to PENELOPE.
A Frind some time to Thracian Cotys send*
In sign of love, a vessel rich and rare:
But back again before the bearer wend,
He brake the same in pieces here and there;
Not for contempt, but to prevent my care,
I brake this gift which thou have brought, said he,
For if my servants break the fame, I swear,
They should been bate, and I incensed be.
I Cotys-like (proud Dame, to ease my pain,
And that thou be not forced to hear my cries)
Must leave to love; nor shall my Songs again
Thy surfeit breed, nor come before thine eyes:
Not, that I loath, where I so long did love*
Thou art unkind, and I must needs remove.
His loving farewell to PANDORA.
Dear to my soul once degne,
those passions to peruse,
The Swan-like Dir'ges and the Songs,
of this my deeing Muse;
Which are Minerua-like,
by beating of my brain,
Brought forth to show the wondering world,
my long suppressed pain:
For like the doomb borne son
of that rich Lydian King,
Now at the imminent of death,
with tongue untied I sing.
Had Atis-like my foe
thy wedding day been slain
By Tydeus fearce, then had I brook'd
fair Ismene allaine.
Or had thou been a man
like her whom Phestne bred,
Whom Telethusa promest with
Ja^the fair to wed.
Then had my rival been
as far from thee as I,
Nor had he now, nor thou been judge
to my complaint and cry.
As Tantalus did cut
poor Pelops corpse a sunder,
And made a banquet of his Son,
vnro the Gods rare wonder:
Yet did they recollect
his cutted Corpse again,
And Tantall they condemd to die
In hunger staruing pain.
So cruel thou hes karu'd
ten thousand ways my heart,
And thou indures obdurat still,
and senceles of my smart:
Yet will the Gods, I hope,
recure and purge my pain,
And punish all thy cruelties,
with cruelties again.
Had I Ixion-like
made vaunt of Iunoes spoil,
With patience then I should abide
thy fury and this foil.
But since it must be thus.
from Athens I will fly,
With wise Demosthen^s, and then
in Neptuns asyll die.
Then cruel fair farewell,
I may remain no more,
I mind before we meet again,
to see the C^ltik shore.
But howsoever I err,
or wheresoever I vaig,
In weell, in woe, in want, and wealth,
thou shall command poor Crag:
Yea might I make a Feast,
as did Democrits sire,
To all the Persian troops, over which
great Xerxes bore empire.
Or were I begging bread
like Ithak Irus poor,
Whom proud Ulysses with his fist
feld dead into the floor.
Yea be I rich or poor,
or poor and rich again,
At hazards all I am thy man,
and so shall ay remain.
Fair Homicid farewell,
against my heart I go,
And that al-make^ knows I make
a voyage full of woe:
But even as At^ri^
with silence swee^ does (...)*
And none pe^ce^^'s ^f up or down,
or whither (...) the (...)
So none save thou shall (...)
the cause of all my pai^^*
And none shall know wherefore I go,
nor when I (...) again.
And so till time we (...)*
dear heart, whom I (...)*
Farewell; ye^ (...) me leave to ^^gh*
and say, Farewell once more.
To his PANDORA from England.
NOw while amid those dainty Douns and Dales
with Shepherd Swains I sit unknown to me
We sweetly sing, and tell pastoral tales:
But my discourse and Songs-theame is of thee;
For otherwise allace, how can it be.
Let Venus leave her blessed abod above
To tempt my Love, yet thou sweet soul shall see
That I thy man, and thou shall die my love.
No tract of time, nor sad eclipse of place,
Nor absence long, which sometime were due cures
To my disease, shall make thy slave to cease
From serving thee till life or breath indures:
And till we meet, my rustic mats and I,
Through woods and plains, Pandoras praise shall cry.
To LAIS.
HArpaste poor, was blind of either eye,
Yet would thee not believe that it was so*
The rooms are dark wherein I dwell, said she,
Take me abrod, and but a guyd I Will go:
The wife was led abrod into the wind,
And yet poor soul she still continued blind.
Thinks thou that change from this to yonder place*
Can cause thy shame and scandal to decay?
No Lais no, I pray thee hold thy peace,
And put these fond opinions quite away:
For while thy life, or yet my sins endu^^,
The world shall say, thou art a shameless whore.
Faemina nulla bona est, vel si bona contigit vlla,
Nescio quo casu r^s mala facta bona est.


His faithful service to IDEA.
MY wandering Verse has made thee known al^ where
Thou known by them, and they are known by me*
Thou, they, and I, a true relation bear:
As but the one, an other can not be;
For if it chance by thy disdane I die,
My Songs shall cease, and thou be known no more.
Thus by experience thou may plainly see,
I them, thou me, and they do thee decore.
Thou art that Dame whom I shall ay adore
In spite of Fortune and the frowning Fats,
Whose shining beauty makes my Songs to sore
In Hyperbolik lofty ^eigh conceits:
Thou, they, and I throughout the world be known
They mine* thou theirs, and last I am thine own.
To my Honorable good Lord and Master (the true Maecenas of my Muse) George
Earl of Dunbar, Lord Barwick, high Tresurar of Sotland.
I Am (Noble Maecenas) a spendthrift, unwisely liberal; more prone to propine
Presents, and make foolish Feasts, then to pay my Debts: All my babbling Bills
are already baptized, and nothing left, save these subsequent Songs; which to
your Honor, in all duetifull love and devotion, I dedicate. Philopaemen did
sometime leave his company, and coming aloue to a house where he was expressly
looked for; his Hosts, who knew him not, and saw him so evil favored a
fellow, employed him to help her Maids to draw water, and mende the fire for
Philopaemen. The Gentlemen of his train finding him busy at work, enquired
what he did? who answered, I pay the forfeyture of my vnhandsomnes. I have
thought good (my Honorable good Lord and Master) to give these Songs the last
place in my Book: if any demand the cause, I answer with Philopaemen, For
their methodles and irregular vnhandsomnes. If your Honor do not protege and
defend them, some Parasiticall Abdagasis will seek to kill Asineus and his
brother under trust: But be you a royal and second Artabanus, who said to
Abdagasis, (I can not consent to betray a man that trusts to my protection;
and since he has given me his hand, I will keep the oath I have made to him
by my Gods:) Do herein (dear Lord) as you will encourage me hereafter to
undertake a greater task. I have highly (I confess) abused both time and
talent in these amorose and idle toys. But your Honor upon the gracious
acceptaunce hereof, may happily ere long see me recover my estate, and reedifie
the decayed walls of my youth. What I have here set down, is for your
sollace; and so I beseech your Honor to accept from the Table of my Chamber, at
your liberal charge and allowance, the.5. day of November 1606.

Your Honors own man to the last article of expiration, Craige.

To the Reader.
MArie of Vitezokia beyond Iordane, flying to Jerusalem when Titus and his
Romans besiedged the same, was enforced for hunger to kill her sucking Son,
and having eaten the one half, the rest she reserved. The Enemies smelling
the sent of that ezecrable meat, threatened to kill her, unless they were
sharers with her. Then she uncovered that part of her Son which she had left
uneaten. At which sight they trembled, and horror fell upon them. Then said
Marie, this is truly my Son, and my doing; eat you of it, as I have done;
be you no more effeminate then a woman, nor more merciful then a Mother. My
Poyems and Verses are (beloved Lector) the birth of my brain, and the offspring
of my ill adventured youth. I have these years bygone luxuriously feasted and
surfeited hereon, and have with the Vitez^kian Woman, covered this part of my
Child till now: I pray thee with patience, take a part with the Parent; next
time (God willing) thou shall fare better. But if any ask (how I presumed to
inuit my noble Ma^ster my Lord, my Mecaenas, my all, to this foolish and
filthy Feast of mine?) I answer: Themistocles was animated to noble actions
by beholding Miltiades trophies. And Alexander beholding Achilles Tomb, did
grievously sigh with an honorable emulation. And his courteous welcomming of my
vanities, will ravish brave minds from the boundles troubles of the world, and
win them to the contemplation of Virtue. And so his Honorable example in
reading and respecting Learning and the Learned, shall pull donwe the Babell of
ignorance. I confess (as Plutarch speaks of Aristophanes Poyems) my Verses
are written for no moderat man's pleasure: yet since by his Honor they are
countenanced, I beseech thee (good Reader) use me kindly; and for his sake,
sit still with him, and take a part of my profane Feast. My Lord pays for
all, it costs thee naught save thanks.

Thine as thou behaues thy self, A. Craige.

ALEXIS to LESBIA.
COme be my Love, and live with me,
And thou shall all the solace see,
That glassie gulfs or earth can bring,
From Vesta's wealth, or Neptuns reign.
For we shall on the Mountains go,
In shaddie Vmbers too and fro:
In Valleys low, and on the Bray,
And with thy feet the flowrs shall play.
And I shall make thee pleasant Poses,
Of Dasies Gilliflowrs and Roses:
My Arms shall be a Belt to thee:
Thine if thou will, the like to me.
Of Floraes tapestrie thy Gown,
Thy Cap shall be my Laurel Crown:
Which dressed of Daphne's hair shall shine,
Whyls on my head, and whyls on thine.
And thou upon thy rock shall rest,
And hear the Echoes from my breast*
For I shall sing in Sonets shill,
the charming numbers of my quill.
Yea we with woond'ring eyes shall gaze
On many sundry c^ous maze:
And view the Arc^^tecture fare,
Of rich and stately ^uddings rare.
And we shall look a^out and see,
The wrack of time before our ee:
The pendul stones, their builders ban,
Imploring help at hand of man.
And we shall see the Rivers rin,
With delicat and dainty din:
And how my Douern night and day.
With sweet Meanders slides away.
To pay her debts unto the Sea.
And like a wanton Nymph does fly
Through blooming banks with smiling face
Her Lord the Ocean to embrace.
And we shall see the towrs of tree,
Half seem to swim, and half to fly:
Part in the Sea, part in the Air,
And Eag'l here, a Dolphin thaire.
We shall behold Nereid Nymphs,
Make waters welcome from their lymps:
And every hour into the day,
Fresh Floods and The Ocean billows play.
And we shall hear the Roches ring,
While storme-presageing Mermayds sing:
And on the Rocks the law's shall roar,
Salut and resalut the Shore.
And when Apollo taks his rest,
With weary Horses in the West:
And Cynthia begins to shine,
Thy Poets Tugar shall be thine.
Then shall thou see my homlie fare,
And what poor riches I have their:
And if those things can move thy mind,
Come, come, and be no more unkind.
LESBIA her answer to ALEXIS.
IF all were thine that there I see,
Thou paynts to breed content to me:
Then those delights might move my mind
To yield, and be no more unkind.
Since naught is thine that thou sets down,
Save Songs, thy self, thy Belt, thy Crown,
Thy Tugure, and thy homely fare:
And that poor wealth which thou have their.
I might be compted most accursed,
To dwell with thee, suppose I durst:
And men might think me more then mad,
To leave the better for the bad.
Yet least I should be deemd ingrate,
To loath thee for thy poor estate,
Though Fortune be thy fremmit foe,
No reason were I should be so.
Thy Lines allure me to be thine,
And thou shall see it soon or sine:
The crystal streams shall backward move,
Ere I forget thy faithful love.
A new persuasion to LESBIA.
ONce more I pray thee be my Love,
Come live with me, and thou shall prove
All pleasures that a Poets vain,
Can find on mould or in the mane.
Will thou upon my Paruas walk,
And tread the Flowrs with leauie stalk,
Which bud on my biforked tops:
Bedewed with sweet Cactalian drops.
On Thithorea will thou go,
Or Hyampeus too and fro?
Or will thou with Pierid Nimphs,
Drink of these euer-flowing Limphs,
From Hyppocrene which diuall,
Or springs of Aganippe wall?
Will thou repose thee in the shade,
Which Nature has divinely made?
Apolloes Laurel thou shall see,
And lovely Venus Myrtle tree,
Alcides Popler full of state,
The Palm which thriues in spite of hate.
Mineruaes Olive, and the Mirr,
And of great Mars the warlike Firr:
Which Nature has so well desposed,
And therewithal such walks enclosed,
As for rich Tapestrie shall serve,
From beams thy beauty to preserve:
The Gilliflowrs and Roses sweet,
Shall stoop their tops beneath thy feet:
The V^olet and Primrose fair,
The Marigold with yellow hair:
Both Moli and the Balm shall smell,
With Miriads more then I can tell:
The lovely Herald of the Spring,
The Philomel to thee shall sing,
Both Lark and Maues shall abo^e.
Thy head their small recordars toone:
I Will make thee Garlands fair of Flowrs,
With Amadriads in their bowers,
With Myrtill boughs brave to behold,
And paint their leaves with spangs of gold,
Which I will checker all with frets
Of pretty pinks and Violets:
And when Apolloes Coach agaue
Gives way unto Dianaes Wane:
Thy Poet on his pyping Reed,
Thy fancy with sweet Songs shall feed.
Thou shall want no content of mind,
S^ue wealth, which seldom Poets find:
If poverty has power to move,
Come, come sweet heart, and be my Love.
A Letter to LESBIA, showing his discontents.
Often have I prayed thee be my Love,
Come live with me, and thou shall prove
All pleasures that a Poets vain
Can find on mold, or in the mane:
Yet neither can my Love (allace)
Nor my oblectaments have place,
To move thy hard and flintie heart,
Some piti^s portion to impart.
Dispeasure maks my Muse be doomb,
And Parnas barren is become:
My Wels are dry, trite ways my walks,
My Flowers do fade upon their stalks:
Trees lack both leaves, and Larks to sing:
Those Fruits thy falset does forth bring,
Had thou not known that I was poor,
Then Luker might thy love allure:
Why art thou of so churlish kind,
To love the moyan, not the mind?
Proud in her heart would Phillis be,
To prove thy pediseque, for me:
She follows me, and yet I fly,
Pursew'd of her, and plagued of thee:
But would thou to thy servile slave,
Bequeath the credit which I crave?
Muse, Birds, Hills, Wels, Trees, Flowrs, and Walks,
Would sing, flow, flourish on their stalks:
And I revived by thee (fair Dame)
My wonted courage would acclame.
Then let me know thy utter will,
Upon this Paper good or ill:
And so till I the same receive,
I am thy well affected slave.
Sonet to LESBIA.
TIme and my thoughts Together spurr the Post,
For once I thought to spend my time for gain:
Yet while I thought this thought, the ti^^ was lo^t
And left me there, to think my though^ was va^^e
And while I pause the posting time to spend,
Time spends it self and me: but how I muse:
The more I muse, the mo^e ^ have my end.
Thus Time does me, an^ do Time abuse:
That Time once tint can not return again.
A secret sorrow does posses my mind,
But least the world should know why I complain
Dear to my soul I pray thee prove more kind.
I dream the dark, and drive in dooll the day,
Thus wast my time, and wear my self away.
LESBIA her answer.
Drive not dear heart, in dooll the day,
Wast not thy self nor Time away:
Do not so much as dream by night,
Unless thy Dreams be short and slight.
Though wavering wits in time will vaige,
Be thou thy self a constant Craige.
And for thy Love thou bears to me,
I am thy debtor till I die.
What I have hight hap good or ill,
But fraud or fear I shall fulfill,
I am not of a churlish kind,
To love the moyane not the mind,
No contrar chause, nor fortune strange,
Shall make my settled mind to change:
I am thine sworn, and I shall seal
What I have said; till when fareweale.
CODRVS Complaint and Farewell to Ralatibia.
A Shepherd poor with store of pains oppressed
Beneath the branches of a leauie tree,
With Lute in hand delivered his unrest,
When none was nie but Satyrs, Fauns, and hee^
And having tund his base and treble string,
He sighed, he sob'd, and thus began to sing.
Why am I banished from those blessed bounds
Where I was wont with pleasure to repair?
What cruel doom my comfort so confounds,
And casts me in the confins of despair?
What have I done, said, thought (allace the while)
that can procure proscription and exile?
I am condemned, and no inditment heard:
There is no grace nor mercy in her eyes.
I plead for peace, and presence is debard:
I love, she loath's; I follow, and she flies:
All modest means that may be, I have used,
My Songs, my self, my friends, are all refused.
Why, was I borne to be the point of pain,
The scorn of Time, the obloquie of Fame?
My fellow Shepherds frollicke over the plain,
They feed their flocks, and court the country Dame
On Holidayes their Sonets sweet thy sing,
And to their Loves their best oblations bring.
But I exild from Kalatibia's eyes
By her decret, whom I shall ay adore:
Must sacrifice, sigh, tears, plaints, gro^s, and cries:
But all in vain, and woe is me therefore:
I long, I love, I fry, I freeze, I pine,
No punishment can be compard to mine.
Allace, allace, my flocks both starve and stray,
quit macerat to want their masters eye:
Which with Liciscais harmles Bark would stay,
And turn again from neighbor corns to me:
My little Lambs, my fair and fertile Ewes,
With sad reports their plaints for me renewes.
What madness mooues remorsles fair, thy mind,
Since neither plaints nor prayers can have place?
Have thou concluded still to kythe unkind,
And day by day delight in my disgrace?
O be it so! if needs it must be so,
For I am armd for every kind of woe.
Since I am thus proscribed, I pray thee take
(Fair Kalatihia) this enforced fareweale.
Since Fortune, Love, and weerds, auow my wrake,
To whom shall I (despised soul) appeal?
O love no more, nor leave no more a thrall,
Die Codrus die, end love and life and all.
But Pusillany me poor and hartles man,
Why would thou die to please so proud a Dame?
Though thou be banished for a while, what than,
She Is not so cruel but she may reclame?
Yet fly, be gone; let good or bad befall thee.
And care no more, suppose she never recall thee
And thus poor soul, from out the Grove he goes,
And leaves (allace) both Lines and Lute behind:
Which I (the true Secretar to his woes.
And fellow of his fortun^) did forth find:
And for his sake I sigh, sing, say, and show them
that cruel she, who^ they concern may know the^.
CODRVS his reconciliation to his heart, after he has abiured KALATIBIA.
Poor wandering heart, which like the prodig child
From reasons rule has run so long astray,
Misled by Love, with fancies fond beguild:
And now returned with torn and rent array,
my half and better part since thou art come,
with true remorse most kindly welcome home.
Laciuious looks of life bewitching eye,
Inconstant oath's of most unsettled mind,
You falls inflections of a Judas knee,
You worthles vows which vanish with the wind,
Dispatch your self, and let me live in peace,
Within my heart thou have no dwelling place.
Come sit thee down (dear heart) we will have a feast
My fond Conceits I for a Calfe will kill:
I am thy Oast, and thou shall be my guest,
Repenting Tears will furnish Wine at will:
Our Music Sighs: and if I were more able,
Faith thou should find a banquet for thy table.
With hearty draughts will we to drink begin,
Unto the brim let reasonn fill each bowll:
I Will lock the gate, and Love shall not look in,
That our contract may knit without controull,
In surest sort let us betroth our self,
And band against Beauty, and the blinded elfe.
Sigh sorry heart, and I will weep with thee,
Let no eclipse divide us two again:
Let Reason henceforth guyd and ruler be,
And want no more the swift wingd Time in vain
And while my tears can intertaine thy feast,
Repenting heart thou art a pleasing Ghuest.
Now setlet heart secure and f^ee from fear,
Though all the earth should sink in seas of Love,
Fleet in the Arc, sit still in Reasons chare,
And to the world give verdits from above,
The life of Wisdom in Experience lies:
Then let thine own misfortuns make thee wise.
Faemineos post hac disce canere dolos.
FINIS.
To the Author.
Love now resolved to work so rare a wonder,
As to make Rocks bereauers, Stones a Stream,
Straight to a Craig of Caledon he came:
Whose yet undaunted pride he began to ponder.
Have I (said he) the Earth's deep Center under,
Made Phlegeton his floods to fear my flame?
Did I the mighty Trident bearer tame,
And threatened roo, the thrower of the thunder?
And shall one only Craig withstand my dart,
With that his Arrow to his ear he drew,
which through the yielding air loud whistling flew
And turned his hardness to a humane Heart:
From out whose wound, witness you Nymph's but names
Great Floods gush out of sweet Castalian streams.
I. M.

Cragio suo.
INgenij si verna seges primoribus annis,
in tam laudandum luxuriauit opus:
Quos fructus sperare iubes cum forttibus annis,
Iudicij accedit lima seuera tui.
Robertus Aytonus.

De Alexandro Rupoeo populari, familiari et amico suo qui supra plebem vulgus
et populum.
THreicij quisquis credit modulamine vatis
saxa, feras, scopulos ressilijsse locis:
Orphea crediderit rediuiuum carmine Rupis
Arctoae tumulo ressilijsse suo.
Arthurus Gordonus.


