THE WAY TO A BLESSED ESTATE IN THIS LIFE.

BY EZEKEL CVLVERVVELL.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson, for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the entering in of Pope's Head Alley out of Lumbard-streete. 1623.

THE WAY TO A BLESSED ESTATE IN THIS LIFE.
THAT which our Lord Jesus from Heaven writ unto the Church of Sardis; Rev. 3.1.
Thou have a name that thou live, but art dead, may be truly spoken of the
greater sort of not-counterfeit Professors of the Faith in our time: for it is
clear by the Text, that this is not spoken of hypocrites, who are stark dead,
but of such who having some life remaining in them, are in a dead sleep: Many
drowsy professors.
for these of whom I speak, take good pains to keep up a name of
Christianity, both in the exercises of Religion, and in their outward
behavior, (though in both there be much sailing) but in very truth there is
but a little life of faith and love in all their Profession, as may appear in
their cold and uncomfortable prayers, in their wandering and drowsy hearing of
the Word, and unfruitful receiving of the Sacraments, and much more in their
abuse and neglect of the secret exercises of Prayer, reading, and meditation by
themselves, and conference with others, seldom deeply bewayling their estate,
less rejoicing in the assurance of their salvation by Christ, as seldom
delighting in God, with a zeal to set forth his glory in every part of their
life.

Though this be the state of the greater part of those that have some truth of
grace in them, yet may we say again, A few worthy.
that there are with us, (as in the Church of Sardus) a few names that have not
defiled their garments, that is, do live vnrebukably, and walk worthy their
holy calling, having a sweet feeling of Gods favor unto them, and so can
boldly come unto him in time of need, with assurance that he does graciously
respect them, their prayers, and unfeigned obedience; who likewise do more
delight themselves in God, then in all earthly things, accounting it their
greatest grief to offend him, and greatest joy to please him; possessing their
souls with confidence and patience in their greatest trialls, looking for the
appearing of Christ.

This is that blessed estate to be enjoined in this life, What a blessed life
here may be attained.
which God has prepared, (though in diverse measures) for the faithful, all
which may well be contained in this short sentence of the Psalmist. Psalm.
37.4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he will give thee thy hearts desire:
which I doubt not but all true Christians (when they have well considered it)
would be glad to attain unto: Desired by many, not attained.
But either through ignorance of the way how to attain it; or through
negligence; not putting in practice what they know: they spend many years,
either securely, or uncomfortably, seldom attaining to that heavenly feasting,
which (if they were wise) might be their daily refreshing: How this life is
attained.
whose estate I much tendering, do endeavor to show them, how this happy life
may be attained; which I conceive to be only by a more plentiful feeding upon
Christ by faith. It is without question, that all and every part of our
spiritual life is in Christ, of whose fullness we receive grace for grace: and
this is as clear, Ioh. 1.26.
that we receive no grace first or last from Christ, but by believing: in which
respect Christ is truly and principally said to be our spiritual food, Ioh.
6.27.35.
and believing to be the true feeding upon him. Which being so, 34.
it necessarily follows, that feeding seldom or weakly, we cannot have much
spiritual strength: and otherwise feeding plentifully and soundly, we shall be
fat, and flourishing in grace, and so attain unto the blessed life spoken of.

How to feed often in the day on Christ.
For the better understanding and practicing whereof, this is specially to be
considered, How every true believer may daily, yea, often in the day, by faith
feed upon Christ, that so he may receive from him all spiritual nourishment,
for his refreshing and strengthening to every good work.

This is done by setting before us those sweet promises, which God has made to
us, for the strengthening of our faith in all our necessities: and, so
particularly to apply them to our selves. Whereby we may comfortably assure our
selves, that we shall enjoy that which God has promised. Wherein we are first
to get the true meaning of that which is promised.

Secondly, To see we have a good warrant, that this is promised to us, that
thereupon we may conclude, we shall certainly enjoy that which God has
promised, seeing he is faithful who has promised.

But seeing this is not well conceived by many, Example.
I will make it plain by example, 1 Cor. 1.30 it is said; But of him are ye
in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption. In which is as much said as may be conceived,
or desired; the meaning whereof is, that every true believer, is by Gods spirit
made a living member of Christ Jesus, from and in whom, he is made by God a
true partaker of all things needful to salvation: that whereas he is by nature
foolish, guilty, filthy, and in bondage, now in Christ he is made perfectly
wise righteous, holy, freed from all his enemies, and so restored to full
happiness. This promise of God being clearly understood, must now be applied
particularly by every believer to himself, thus: Seeing God who is
all-sufficient; and faithful, that in his Word, which is Truth it self,
promised these great benefits (in which all are contained) to every true
believer, therefore I who do truly, though weakly, believe in Christ, may
boldly assure my self, that all these be mine, and therefore I shall not want
any thing needful for my present comfort, or eternal happiness. Which
whosoever does daily practice in this manner to maintain, and increase his
faith by application of this, and all other of Gods promises, he shall daily
more and more enjoy in this life that blessed estate we speak of.

Pray for faith.
But for as much as faith is the gift of God, and we cannot further believe then
we be drawn by Gods spirit, therefore we must join often and fervent
prayer, that God by this means would increase our faith.

This may seem easy to be performed, Not easy.
but upon better trial, it will not be found so easy to do it effectually;
for besides our own great untowardness to believe, I cannot think of any
duty, wherein our common Adversary, will use more cunning, and diligence to
hinder us, then in this: either by keeping us from the work, or beguiling us
in it: whereby it comes to pass, that very few do (to any good purpose)
practice the same.

Two chief letts.
Amongst many lettes which hinder the faithful practice hereof, I observe these
two, in two diverse sorts of believers. The former in those, 1. Not prizing
Christ.
in two diverse sorts of believers. The former in those, who not sufficiently
feeling their wants, and too much contented with their estate, do not so prize
Christ, and this blessed estate in him, as may move them to take this pains,
and therefore never reach unto this growth in grace whereunto they might come,
if the fault were not in them selves. The other let is in those who highly
prizing the benefit, 2. Our unworthiness.
and earnestly laboring for it, are by the sense of their own unworthiness,
so kept downe' that they cannot with any hope look up, for so great a blessing.

Remove of the first let.
For the remooving of both these lettes, the first sort are to bethink
themselves, what an uncomfortable account it will be, when God shall call them
to it, to see how many years they have spent, with little growth in grace,
either to the glory of God, or good example to others, or to the peace of their
own souls. Whereas on the other side, they might have attained unto such a
sweet life, as would have been a heaven upon earth; namely, To rejoice always
in the Lord.

Of the second let.
For the other poor souls, who are kept down with the sense of their own
unworthiness, they are to know, that all Gods promises, are free and
undeserved, so as no unworthiness ought to hinder them from believing: yea,
rather they that have the most sense of their own unworthiness, have most
encouragement to believe, for that voice of Christ, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you:
serve not only for our first conversion, but in all our distresses whatsoever,
throughout the whole course of our life.

Satan will beguile;
If any escape both these lets, and go about this work, then will Satan use
all his skill to beguile both sorts: such as are weak and heavy hearted, Some
that they believe not;
soon discouraged, he tempts and persuades, they labor in vain, and do not
believe, when indeed they do, as shall appear. Others, that they have more
faith then they have.
The other sort who are too well conceited, and light hearted, Satan labors to
persuade, that they have more faith then indeed they have, and that their case
is better then in truth it is.

It shall be therefore the wisdom of all who will not be deceived, carefully
to examine and try themselves; which that they may the better do, let them
consider of these marks that follow: whereby either sort may certainly judge
of themselves.

Four marks of faith not seen.
For such as conscionably endeavor to nourish their faith in such manner as has
been showed, and yet find no comfort, but fear they do not believe, (when
as indeed they do) these are to discern their faith by such secret
operations, as do certainly show faith to be there, though it be not seen:
namely, An unfeigned grief for the want of faith, 1. Grief for want of faith.
with an incessant endeavor for the attaining of it. Again, A reverent esteem
of God, and hearty affection of unfeigned love to him, which cannot be without
some former apprehension of Gods love to them, which is in many, (though they
see it not). And lastly, A tender Conscience, 4. A tender conscience.
fearing to displease God, even in smaller matters, which others little regard.
Whosoever shall find these fruits, (which cannot come but from faith) may
certainly know, that there is a root of faith grounded in their hearts, though
they see it not. No fruits: no faith.
But such as have no feeling of their faith, and see no such effects in their
lives, have just cause to think that they have no faith at all.

Notes of true and false comfort.
As for the other sort, who are too well persuaded of themselves, that they
find comfort in meditating on Gods promises, whereas indeed they deceive
themselves, and have not that faith they imagine, as their fruits do show.

This may be discerned by these notes;

1. True, is hardly got.
First, True comfort is usually very heardly gotten, with much prayer and
labor, and it is often a long time before this be felt: therefore they who upon
their first thoughts on these promises, find comfort that they have part in
them, may so far mistrust, all is not sound, till they shall see some better
proof thereof: which if they do not, but for all this will be confident, that
all is well, it is to be feared, their comfort is not sound.

2. Fear of deceit.
For this is another property of that true comfort which springs from faith,
especially in young and weak believers, that they (so highly valewing the
benefit) are very fearful of being deceived, and must see good evidence,
before they will be persuaded, that they have this saving faith.

3. Poor in spirit, mourn, and lowly.
Whereof if they shall be persuaded, yet therwithall is joined such a feeling of
the weakness of their faith, and so of all grace, as makes them poor in
their own eyes, and mourn for their wants, thinking lowly of themselves, and
more highly reuerencing the graces of God in others. Whereas they who be
deceived, are as the Laodiceans; rich and wanting nothing, and so be merry, and
too light hearted, thinking too well of themselves, and too slenderly of
others, better then themselves.

4 Hunger and labor for more.
Another sure mark of sensible faith and comfort, is this; That they that have
tasted of it, can never be satisfied, but still hunger and labor for more:
none more diligently use all good means to grow in grace then they: Even as
the strong and most healthful body, does feed better then the weak and
sickly. But such as being well satisfied with that they have, and feel no
hunger, nor labor for more, it is evident their faith and comfort are not good.

5. Answerable obedience.
To proceed, and not to gather all that might be added hereto, this shall serve
for all; That as like fire, like heat: so like faith, like life, great or
small. So that where there is strong faith, there must needs be great
obedience, and therefore whosoever he be that is careless of his
conversation, and barren in the fruits of a holy life, his faith must needs be
weak, if not dead.

Wherefore to conclude, I advise every one, who by these marks shall discern
himself to be deceived, with fancy in stead of faith; to go about this work
more seriously, and to lay a better foundation of faith, and not to say, he
has found comfort, till he can bring good witness thereof. Which whosoever
shall neglect, shall in the end (to say no more) lament his folly, when he who
seeing his error, shall more carefully and constantly put in practice this
maine duty of daily feeding upon Christ, shall grow in grace, and attain to
that blessed life here, whereof we speak besides eternal life: the full
reward of all his labor.

FINIS.

