An Answer to six Reasons, that Thomas Pownde, Gentleman, and Prisoner in the
Marshalsey. at the commandment of her Majesty's Commissioners, for causes
Ecclesiastical: required to be answered. Because these Reasons do move him
to think, that controversies and doubts in Religion, may not be Judged by the
Scriptures, but that the Scriptures must be Judged by the Catholic Church.

1. The first is, for that the Scriptures are mute and dum. 2. The second, for
that they be full of hard and deep mysteries. 3. The third, for that S.
Peter says: No Scripture is to be taken after any private interpretation. 4.
The fourth, for that to appeal to the Scriptures, does seem to deny all
unwritten verities. 5. The fyft is, for that it were a great absurdity, not to
have a certain Judge of absolute Authority, in the interpreting of
Scriptures. etc. 6. The sixth is, for that in refusing the Authority of the
Churches absolute Judgment herein: we seem to deny the holy ghost, to be
the spirit of truth.
Written by Robert Crovvley.

Imprinted at London by John Charlewood. 1581.

To all the Pope his Catholics, in England or else where.
IN September last, I with others, was by sufficient Authority, appointed to
co^fer, with such of your sort, as at that time, were in her Majesty's prisons,
of the Marshalsey and the white Lion, in Sowthwark, restrained of liberty, for
refusing to conform themselves to that order of Religion, which is now
public in this Realm of England. And according to our duty in that behalf:
Master Henry Tryp, and I, did (as we were required) make our spedy repair,
first to the one prison, and then to the other. And after some conference had
with certain that were close prisoners: we came to confer with one Master
Thomas Povvnde Gentleman, in the lodging where he then lay. And finding him
altogether vnwylling to enter into any conference by speeches, because (as he
said) he feared to fall into danger of Law thereby: I answered, that he ought
to have a better opinion of her Majesty, (by whose appointment, we were come
to offer conference) then to think that she would send us, to entrap him, or
any other her subjects. For she needs not to seek more advantage against any
of them, then that which already by their disloyal behavior they have given
her. So that if she would proceed against them in rigor of law, and not in
mercy: she might cut their heads from their shoulders, and make no more to do
with them. But being desirous, by some means to bring to pass, that they
might become as obedient subjects to her, as she both has and does show her
self a loving Prince to them: she would not abridge them of liberty (which
for good and just, yea necessary causes, she is now enforced to do) but that
she would withal provide, that by co^fere^ce with such as be learned, they
might either be drawn from their errors: or else be found to be obstinate and
wilfully blind. But none of these speeches could move master Pownd to like
of any conference by speeches. Yet notwithstanding, he said he was ready to
confer by writing, and offered so to do. Whereunto I answered, that we had no
commission to deal that way: but yet if he would write, I promised to answer
him in writing. Upon this he pulled a Pa^phlet out of his bosom (the copy
whereof I have caused to be set before mine answer) and called in such as he
thought meet to hear it read. And after he had read it: he delivered it to me
to be answered. And this was done the. 7. day of September. The ninth of the
same month, I began to shape him an answer: and finished the same with as much
convenient speed as I could, being let with business, besides that business,
enough to occupy some man thoroughly. But by Gods help, the time was not long
before the answer was finished. But in this mean while (I know not by what
occasion) Master Povvnd, was removed to another prison, further of: so that I
could not come to deliver mine answer to him, neither did I think it meet to
be sent to him immediately from me, because I understood, that the right
Reverend Father the Lord Bishop of London, had commanded him to be removed
thence. I did therefore read, in the hearing of as many of your sort, as I
then found in the Marshalsey, both the Reasons contained in Master Povvnd his
Pamphlet: and also mine aunswers to the same. Promising, that with as much
speed as I might, I would send both to my said Lord the Bishop, with my
Letters, beseeching him, at his discretion, either to send mine answer to
Master Pownd: or else to cause him to be brought back again to the Marshalsey,
whether I might repair, to proceed in conference with him by writing. But my
said Lord, being oppressed with other affairs more weighty: and thereby
enforced to commit this business to some other, that were not so careful for
the dispatch thereof, as I would they had. And I my self also (not altogether
unoccupied otherwise) did not, (as in duty I ought) call upon my said Lord,
but supposing that mine answer had been shortly conuayed to Master Povvnd,
(because I heard not of his return to the Marshalsey) I rested, looking to
have received some reply from him: till at the last (even in the Month of
December last) I heard that the Copies of his Pamphlet were made common to many
of your sort, with great brags, that the reasons therein contained are
unanswerable. Yea, and some of our side, were required to answer them, even
as Master Povvnd had required me. Whereupon, repayring to my said Lord the
Bishop: I received my said answer again the 4. of this January, with his
allowance to publish it in Printe, together with the Copies of Master Povvnd
his Pamphlet, and the brief answer that Master Trippe wrote, after I had
finished mine, as by the same may appear. And this was thought needful to be
don, because the Copy of Master Povvnd his Pamphlet is already made so
common: our annswers being as yet, made known but to few. And that you may
have that first in sight that you like best: I have caused the Printer to
place the Copy of Master Povvnd his Pamphlet, immediately after this short
Epistle. Read these Reasons for your pleasure, and our aunswers for your
profit. And if you mislike with our aunswers, reply, if you can. You shall
find them of our side, that will deal with you, faithfully and freendely too.
Be not obstinately, and wilfully blind: least you do thereby provoke (yea and
enforce) our merciful Prince, contrary to her natural inclination, to deal
with you in Justice without mercy. Though we have great cause to think that
you (all the sort of you) do hate both: our Prince and us, for that Religion
which both she and we do profess: yet I dare assure you, that both she, and
all the Honorable and learned of her Realm, yea and all, of all estates, that
do unfeignedly profess that Religion that you hate, do unfeignedly love you,
and pray for the opening of the eyes of your understanding, that you may see
and feel, and embrace your salvation in Christ, and that being Englishmen, or
inhabiting within the English dominions, you may know and acknowledge her
Majesty, for your supreme Governor in all causes, next and immediately under
Christ, our only universal head. Fare you well. From my house at S. Gyles
without Creplegate of London, the. 6. of January. 1580. After the accoumpt of
the Church of England, and in the. 23. year of her Majesty's Reign.

()
Yours, when you shall show your selves to be true Christians, and English men:
Robert Crovvley, Clerk.

7. September. 1580. Six Reasons set down to show, that it is no orderly way
in controversies of faith, to appeal to be tried only by Scriptures (as the
absurd opinion of all the Sectaries is) but the sentence and definition of the
Catholic Church, by whom, as by the Spowse of Christ, always inspired with
the holy ghost, the holy Scripture is to be judged.
FIrst consider well these words of our Savior in sending us to the
Scriptures, saying: Search the Scriptures, for you think to have eternal
life in them. And these are they that bear witness of me. Mark well these
words, John. ^.
I say: that the Scripture is but witness bearer to the truth, and not the
Judge to discern of truth: for judgment giving belongs not to the witness
bearer, although he be as a rule to lead and direct the Judge in true
judgment. But what if this witness should be currupted, as no man will deny
but it may, yet this Judge to whom the holy Ghost is promised, will find it,
and reform it. Understand therefore my Reasons, why of necessity the Church
must be Judge of the Scriptures, and take your Pen and confute them I pray you
if you can.

1. The first is, The first Reason.
because the written Text is mute and dumb, uttering nothing to us from the
Book but only the words, and not the sense, wherein the life as it were of
the Scripture consists: And what definitive sentence can such a Judge give,
to over rule the conceyted mind of an opinatiue man: which has no evident
means to pronounce any judgment against him, but only to show him a dumb
sign in writing, which a wrangler may conster still to his own understanding
against all the world.

2 The second Reason is, because the holy Scripture (as S. Augustine says) The
second Reason.
is very full of hard and deep anysteries, in so much that when Honoratus
said to him (as many unlearned men say now a days) that he understood it well
enough without help of any instructor. Say you so (says he) you would not
take upon you to understand such a Poet as Terence is, well, without a Master?
and dare you rushe into the holy Scriptures which are so full of Divine
mysteries, without a Master? and dare you rushe into the holy Scriptures which
are so full of Divine mysteries, without a guide? All Heresies (says he) come
of nothing else, Nisi dum scripturae bonae intelliguntur non been: But while
the good Scriptures are not well understood: Heerto also S. Peter in his
second Epistle Cap. 3. bears witness saying: That many misunder stood S.
Paul in many hard places peruersly to their own perdition: But then you will
say, the hard places may easily he understood by conference of other
Scriptures. Well, admit a chyldish reason for a word or two, That because they
might so be among the humble minded, therefore they must needs be so, though men
be never so perverse: Yet give me leave to pose you then one Question farther
to ye quick. How is it possible to know by any conference of the Scriptures,
which is Canonical Scripture and which is not? certainly, if any Infidel
would deny the old Testament (as some Heretics in time past have done) and I
pray God there be not many* Atheistes at this day in England, which be farther
gone yet then they: Yea, if such a one should deny all the new Testament also,
we have no sure Anckor hold against him but the Revelation of God, by
tradition to his Church, which is the pyllor and sure stay of truth, which S.
Augustine well seeing, thought he might be bold to say, with due reverence to
God, and holy Scripture both: I should not believe the Gospel except the
authority of ye Church did move me thereunto, meaning that the tradition of
the universal Church, and the testimony of all the people of God, in whom
the holy Ghost dwells, must justly move us to credit that, which their
authority does command us to give credit unto. Therefore let any man beware
of fliyng from the Churches Judgment, to the Scripture only, least the
Scripture it self should utterly be denied, as by some Atheistes in England
(as I hear say is already: And then might such Infidels laugh all
Heretics to scorn, for robbyng them selves of their own defense: But now to
return to my purpose, if conference of one Scripture with an other, might give
light enough to all men: How happens it that all Sects, using that
conference, yet they can never agrre in their opinions, but diverse men, and all
using such conference, do yet construe it diversely? The vttermoste shifte
they have is this, (such a weak one as it is,) that the Reader must give
himself to prayer, for the truth to be revealed unto him. Wherein mark I
pray you the iutollerable pride of arrogant Hypocrites: that they will first
mistrust Gods revelation of the truth to his Vniaersall Church, for the
which Christ himself has prayed, and promised to teach them all tr(...)
most presumptuously to come and (...)pt God, to have that truth revealed
only to them selves, which being revealed many hundredth years agone, and
defined in general Counsel, by all the holy Fathers: where the holy Ghost
is always present, or at least by the holy Doctors in their writings set
down, yet they will not believe it, nor harken unto it: yet this is their
course, and so as they say forsoothe, they pray very heartily, though few of
them can wring out any tears in their prayers, but yet with such a faith in
the Lord (as their own term is) that they do all verily believe the truth
is revealed unto them. And yet perdie, they must needs be all deceived, as
long as they dwell in dissension, and are not in errors only, but one
contrary to an other: who now must be the Judge to try the spirits whether
they be of God or no, but only the Church? Or else shall they not be tried at
all, but continual permission for infinite Legions of liyng spirits, to be
still vndetected that they may seduce more and more.

3 The third Reason is, The third Reason. 2. Pet. 1. d.
because S. Peter says plainly, that no Scripture is to be taken after any
miuate interpretation, for it was not uttered after the will and fantasy of
man, but as holy men of God spoke it, inspired by the holy Ghost: yet most
contrary to this express rule, every private man shall have liberty to
interpret it to his own peruers will* after a private interpretation,
otherwise then at first it was inspired to the holy men. If ever man may
appeal from the Ecclesiastical sense of the universal Church to the Text it
self, as he understands it.

4 The fourth Reason is, The fourth Reason.
because by appealyng only to the Scripture, you seem to give men liberty to
deny all unwritten verities, which we have received of the Church, either by
express definition in general Counsel, or but by tradition. And I believe
at my first na(...) of unwritten verities: Master Crowley and his (...)
straight way, as though all such were (...) to temper their folly (I will
not say their pride) a (...) that point. I ask them all this question. How
they prove the Trinity of persons in the Unity of the substance in Godheade
by the express Scriptures? Or the two distinct natures in Christ and but one
person? Or God the Father to be Ingenitus? Or the proceedyng of the holy
Ghost, both from the Father and from the Son, as from one Fountain: or the
descendyng of Christ into Hell, by plain words of Scripture? (being therefore
of many now a days flatly deuyed,) Or the custom of Baptising of Infants,
seeing the Scripture, sounds rather, as though they should be taught first
their faith, before their were Baptized, saying: Go and teathe all Nations
Baptizyng them. etc. Or why we should keep the Sondaie now at all, and not the
Saterdaie rather which was the Jews Sabothe day, that the Scripture speaks
of to be sanctified? Although your Puritanes which go to plough upon all the
Churches Holydaies, seem not yet to know the Sondaie, for any of their making:
or why we should not abstain now still like Jews from strangled meats, as
the Apostels once decreed in the Acts, and by no express Scripture again
abrogated? Yea then why may not any Heretic deny al our three Creedes: both
the Apostles Creed, the Nicen Creed as it is called, and the Creed of
Athanasius, seeing never a one of these is written in Scripture expressly, but
all left us by tradition only upon credit of the Church. Mark you not how
these Bedlem Scripture men would shake all the foundations of our Christian
faith, by binding us to believe nothing but Scripture? Do not these blind
guides think you, lead us a trim dance toward infidelity? Thus much of
the fourth Reason.

5 The fifth is because that without a certain Judge for interpretation of
Scripture absolutely, The fifth Reason.
this absurdity would follow yt God which is the Author of al perfection, and
disposes every thing in sweet and decent order, had left his universal Church
in earth in this confusion: yt when soever any doubtful question should
arise, upon construction of his holy will, there were no provision at all
ordained by God for deciding of such strifes, and preservation of concord among
his people, and then certainly the kingdom of Gods Church, were not so well
provided for in their government: as every civil kindome is by policy of
carnal men, amongst whom, none almost are so barbarous, but that they have
Counselors for government of their state, and Judges for expounding, and
executing of their laws, as well as laws written, or else it were ridiculus:
would not he be counted a very wise man (think you,) in one of our
Parliamentes, which should step up like a grave Burgess, and persuade all
his fellows that for as much as they had a noble and an ancient Law written
unto them, the Realm should have no longer need henceforthe of any Prince,
nor any Rulers, nor Peers, nor Judges, nor Justices, nor civil Magistrates,
but every man (upon his word for the warrant) would be content to govern
him self orderly by the law written, which (as his wisdom) thinks is
plain enough. And truly no wiser be they but much more to be laughed to
scorn which will have the Scripture to be the only Judge for every man to
appeal unto, and refuse all authority of the Church in expoundyng thereof:
for who knows not that the Arrian Heretics, brought forty places of
Scripture for their horrible Heresy, more then the Catholics had against
them, but all falsely understood, which when it is so misunderstoode and
misapplied, then S. Augustine calls it the Heretics how, wherewith they
shoot out their own venomous arrows. And Vincent Lir. says, it is then the
Sheep cloathyng, which the Wolf does shroude him self in, because that
when a simple body, feels the softness as it were of his fliece, he should
not mistrust the Tyranny of his teethe: That is to say, of his false
construction of Scripture, wherewith he would devour his saul: So did the
Devil himself allege Scripture unto Christ, and as often as any Heretics
aleadge Scripture to us against the Catholic faith: So often says Vincentius,
we may be out of doubt the Devil does speak unto us by their mouths, and
says unto us even as he said unto Christ Si filius deies, mitte te deorsum,
as much to say, If thou wile be the son of God, and professor of his holy
Gospel, cast thy self down, from the high authority and tradition of this
Catholic Church, whom if we ask again why we should so do, then says
Vincentius, he comes out with Scriptum est enim: because it is written says
he, in the holy book, and from thence thou must learn a new lesson of me,
how to be a right Christian man. To whom we must say then: Vade Satan non
tentabis. etc. Auaunt Satan, etc. and that with great feruencie of faith: for
more perilous is the temption of such a flatteryng Serpent (says S.
Augustine) then the roaryng of an angry Lion, because the one we flee from
with fear, but the other with entising, may come the nerer to sting us.

6 The sixth reason most weighty of all is this: because if you will refuse the
authority of the Churches absolute judgment, The sixth Reason.
upon the Scriptures true cense, you shall seem plainly to deny the holy
Ghost to be the Spirit of truth, which upon the Apostles and all the
faithful was sent down with visible signs, and with his Church is promised
to remain unto the worlds end: by these words of our Savior, I will ask
my Father, and he shall send you an other comforter, to tarry with you for
ever, the spirit of truth: And a little after thus. The holy Ghost the
comforter, whom my Father will send in my name, shall teach you all truth:
Lo the Church is the surest Judge, and none shure but the Church, for all men
in doubts of Scripture, because it has a promise that it shall never err in
judgment, which is notably confirmed by the Prophet Esaias, saying. This is my
covenant with them says our Lord, my spirit which is in thee, and my
word which I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out
of the mouth of thy seed, nor of thy seeds seed, now, nor ever to the
worlds end. O most comfortable promise, that the Spirit of truth shall never
depart out of the Churches mouth. O fit Judge appointed to be Judge of
Scripture for our profits, without presumption. Remember then I pray you,
what a sottishe opinion this is which is held to the contrary, that every
private man, whom belike you will imagine to be one of the Church, shall have
good believe to be his own Judge in understanding of Scriptures, as your Crafts
men are: and yet that the authority of the whole universal Church, shall not
presume to ^ake any judgment upon them. Grauntyng this, as you must needs,
that the Church, which is our Mother (as the Scripture says) must needs
teach all her children, at first to believe in God (seeing faith must come by
hearing) and also to know the Scripture, and yet that the same Church being the
pillar and sure stay of touch, shall not be absolute Judge and imperial
Scholemistresse, to teach us all how to believe in God, and how to understand
the Scripture. For the blindness of your hearts, I may say as justly to you,
as Saint Paul said to the Galathians. O Insensati etc. O ye foolish
fellows, who has bewitched you, not to obey unto the truth? Which even of
Infantes and suckyng babes (as it were) is discerued as clear as the Sun? So
that you must not disdain Master Trippe to be tripped in this matter, for a
silie seducer, to maintain (as ye do all) so gross all opinion, being the
forest in deeds, for all such Foxes, to litter their whelps in. Therefore(...)
to conclude this Assertion: acquit your selves as well as you can, why you
may not all be justly suspected, to deny the descendyng of the holy Ghost
unto the Church, for as much as you refuse the Churches sentence in
judgment, with whom the holy Ghost is promised always to remain, and in
truth to direct them.

Haec est fides mea quia est Catholica. This is my faith, because it is the
Catholic faith.
Thomas Pownde.

The Answer to Pownde, His sixth Reasons.
TO the six Reasons that you set down, to prove, that to provoke to be tried
by the holy Scriptures only, in the controversies that may arise about
Religion, is no orderly way: I might in few words answer, thus, The first
Reason is fond, the second is false, the third is foolish, the fowerth is
fantastical, the fifth is fradulent, and the sixth is fanaticall.

Thus might your Pamphlet be answered in six words: as (before you did
read it, before so many witnesses as it pleased you to call to the hearing of
it) I told you that I thought it might.

But least you should triumph, after your manner, and say, that not being
able to answer your Reasons at large, I shifte you of with short sentences:
I will bestow some more time (which I could bestow much better) in
aunsweryng your rude Reasones: I hope so, that neither you, nor any of your
side, shall be able reasonably to reply.

The first Reason.
FIrst you say, that such controversies, may not be tried by the holy
Scriptures, because they be mute and dumb, uttering to us, from the book,
nothing but only the words, and not the sense, wherein the life (as it were)
of the Scripture, does consist.

How fond this Reason is. I think your self should see. For what sense can
there be in words, that can not be uttered by words? Or what words can
any manne use in openyng the sense of words written, but that the same being
set down in writing, may as well open the cense: as they might being
spoken and not written? you seem to imagine, that we would have the holy
Scriptures (as they be written in books, and enclosed in coueringes) to be
Judge of such matters, as you speak of: for otherwise, how can you call them
mute and dumb?

The Prophet Jeremy was commanded to write all the words of the Lord
against Judah and Israel, and all other Nations, in a book, and to cause the
same to be read in the hearing of all the people, and so he did, as appears
in the.26. of his Prophesies, that every manne might be turned away, from
their own most wicked ways, and so the Lord might be merciful to them.
After this manner would we have controversies judged by the Scriptures. Not as
they be written and kept secret in hooks: but being reuereudly read, wayed,
and considered, with the circumstaunces of person, time and place, with all
other necessary circumstaunces: so that the Readers, being willing to have
their controversies ended, do submit them selves to that judgment, that they
shall find in the Scriptures, so read, waied and considered.

As for your Opinatiue man and wrangler, that you speak of: if he will stand
still in his opinion (as you your self do (notwithstanding that it is made
manifest, by the holy Scriptures, that his opinion is not right: he must be
taken for an Heretic, and after one or two warnynges, rejected, being
subverted, as one that synneth even condemned by his own conscience. Titu. 3.


The second Reason.
Your second Reason I do call false, for that you do falsely report, that
the holy Scriptures are full of hard and deep mysteries. And for that you do
falsely affirm, that S. Austen did sharply reboke Honoratus* for rushyng so
boldly into the holy Scriptures, where as he would not be so bold, as to
take upon him to understand such a Poet as Terence was without a Master.

First, I would wish you to weigh well the words of S. Paul, written to
Timothy. Do thou ( says S. Paul to Timothy) 2. Tim. 3.
continue in those things which thou have learned, and are committed unto
thee, knowing of whom thou have learned them, and that thou have known (even
from thine Infancy) the holy Scriptures, which are sufficient to instruct
thee to salvation, through that faith which is in Christ Jesus. Every
Scripture that was written by divine inspiratio^, is profitable to teach, to
correct, to reprove, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfectly instructed to every good work.

If all Scriptures, be so full of hard and deep mysteries (as you have
said) then can not any Scripture be so profitable to teach etc. As Saint
Paul tells Timothy: That all Scriptures be, neither can the man of GOD be
thereby perfectly instructed to every good work.

We read, Luke 24.
that our Savior Christ, did sharply reprehende his two Disciples, as he
walked with them toward Emaus, for that they were so dull and hard to
believe, that which the Prophets had so plainly spoken. Ought not Christ
(quod he) to sufter these things, and so to enter into his glory? As though
he should have said: are you so doltishe and blockishe, that you understand
not so plain speeches as the Prophets have used concerning the sufferyng es of
Christ?

And appearyng to them afterward, as they were altogether in Jerusalem: He
tells them, that of necessity, all must be fulfilled, that had been
written concerning him, either in the law of Moses, in the Prophets, or in
the Psalms. And that they might understand the Scriptures, he did then open
their understandings: Whereby it appears, that it was not the hardness and
deepenesse of the mysteries (wherewith, as you say the Scripture is full) that
held them from the understanding thereof: but the dullness of their own
understanding, because they were as yet but carnal: and therefore could not
perceive things belongyng to the spirit of God, as Saint Paul has written.
1. Cor. 2.
The natural man, does not perceive these things that do belong to the
spirit of God. Not that we be of our selves, as of our selves, 2. Cor. 3.
sufficient to think any thing, but our sufficiency is of God. etc.

Now, for that which you have cited, out of Austine, concerning the
reprehendyng of Honoratus: I would gladly know of you, what Honoratus it was
that you speak of. One there was of that name, to whom Saint Austine wrote
his.120. Epistle. But that Honoratus was not like to use any such speech to
S. Austine. Neither does Saint Austine in that Epistle, use any such speech
to him, as you say he did. But in the last end of the Epistle, Saint Austine
shows him self to be of an other mind, then (by your report) your Austine
seemed to be. For he says thus.

Habes librum, and si prolixum, tamen, quantum existimo non superfluum. etc.
Thou haste here a Book (says Saint Austine) which though it be long: yet,
as I think, it is not superfluous. But do thou love the Ecclesiastical
writings also, and thou shalt not find many things, which thou should
need to seek for at my hands. But by reading and ruminating or cuddyng (if
thou do also purely pray unto the Lord, that is the giver of all good
things) thou shall learn thoroughly, all those things, or undoubtedly very
many of those things, that are worth the knowing, rather by his inspiration,
then by any man's admonition: Although, even in the same thing wherein we do
with right judgment allow that man that does outwardly admonish us well: what
other thing do we, then testify that we have an inward light that does
teach us, and is our Master? Thus far Austine. Let your friends judge,
whether it be likely, that this Austine, and this Honoratus, would use such
speeches the one to the other, as you report yours to have done.

One other Honoratus there was, to whom our S. Austine wrote his.161. Epistle.
This man held with Donatus: and in that Epistle Saint Austine does exhort
him, to render a reason quietly in writing, wherefore the name of the Church
should at that time remain only among the Donatists.

There was also a third, Honoratus, to whom our S. Austine wrote his.179.
Epistle. This man Saint Austine calls brother and fellow Bishop, and does
instruct him at large in the liberty of fliyng persecution: wherein he uses
not one word, that may be wrested to that meaning that you have reported.

But you will say, there is yet one other, to whom Saint Austine wrote his
Book, De vtilitate credendi.

Such an Honoratus there was in deed. But when you shall read that Book
with more indifferent judgment: you shall not find, that Austine to be of
your mind. Not much before that place that you take hold of, writing of the
truth of the Scripture, and noting that we ought to love the Scripture before
we learn it: he writes thus. Quicquid est (mihi creed) in Scripturis illis,
altum and diuinum est. etc. Believe me (says Saint Austine) whatsoever thing
is in the Scriptures, the same is deep and divine: truth is in it altogether,
and a discipline that is most meet for the refreshyng and restoryng of
minds: and undoubtedly, so moderated, that every manne may draw therehence,
enough to satiffie him self, if so be that he come to draw after a devout and
Godly sort, as true Religion requires. And immediately before the place that
you seem to take hold of: he (...)

By that interpretation that you make of the words that are written in the
sixteen of Matthew: ye maintain the gross error, of buildyng Christ his
Church upon Peter the man, Aug. de verbis. Domini. ser. 13.
and not upon Christ the Rock: not withstandyng, that the best of the
Catholic Doctors have written to the contrary. Yea, and herehence come all
your Indulgencies and Pardones, with absolute power for your Pope to do what
he will* without check or controulement.

I might here take just occasion, to rehearse all those errors, that have been,
and are holden by your sort, and ascribe them all, to that which S. Austine
speaks of in the words that you cite: that is. That by your sort, the good
Scriptures, are not well understood. But studiyng to be brief, I pass them
over.

To proceed in mine Answer: you eatche hold of S. Peter. And he must needs
help you to face out your lie. 2. Pet. 3.
If S. Peter will have your favor, he must needs bear you record, that the
Scriptures are full of hard and deep mysteries, as you have taught S. Austine
to say. But when the place that you cite shall be weighed, with indifferent
judgment: it will be found that S. Peter's meaning, was not as you take is to
be.

Saint Peter has written thus. But we look for new heavens, and a new
earth, according to his promise, wherein dwells righteousness. Wherefore
beloved, seeing that ye look for such things thee dilligent, that ye may be
found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless. And suppose, that the
long sufferyng of our Lord, is salvation: even as our beloved brother Paul
(according to the wisdom given unto him) wrote to you, as one that in all his
Epistles, speaks of those things, amongste which, some things are hard to
be understood, which they that be unlearned and unstable do peruerte, as
they do also other Scriptures to their own destruction.

If you read these words of S. Peter in the Greek tongue (wherein the
Apostle wrote them) you shall find that the Relative (...), is of the newter
gender, and cannot by the rules of Grammar, agree with (...), which is of the
feminine gender. Wherefore, it must be Englished, thus. In, or amongst which
things or matters that Paul wrote of, and not, in those Epistles that he
wrote: as in your application of Peter's words, you seem to understand him
to mean. But peradventure, you have no good likyng of the Greek Text, neither
of our Latin translations. I will therefore set down the words of S. Peter,
even as I find them in the translation, that is allowed in the Counsel of
Trent: and as they be written in an old written Bible that I have in Parchment,
written, I know not how many hundred years past. Thus are they written in the
Bible. Propter quod charissimi, haec expectantes, satagite, immaculati and
inuiolati ei inueniri in pace: and domini nostri longanimitatem, salutem
arbitremini, sicut and charissimus frater noster Paulus, secundum datam sibi
sapientiam, scripsit vobis, sicut and in omnibus epistolis, loquens in eis de
hijs, in quibus sunt quaedam difficilia intellectu, quae indocti and instabiles
deprauant, sicut and caeteras scripturas, ad suam ipsorum perditionem. And I
think, that you your self would translate them into English, thus.
Wherefore, dearly beloved, waityng for these things, give your endeavor to be
found unto him in peace, being without spot, and undefiled: and think that
the long sufferyng of our Lord, is salvation, even as our most dear brother
Paul (according to the wisdom that is given unto him) has written to you,
even as in every Epistle, speaking in them of those things, amongst which are
some things, that are hard to be understood, which unlearned and unstable
men, do deprave, even as they do other Scriptures, to their own
destruction.

I trust you do see now, that we need not that reason, which you do call
childishe, and is not indeepe so childishe, but that it has in all ages been
(and is still) allowed amongst the learned, for the best rule in understanding
of places of the Scripture, wherein is any difficulty.

But now you do beg (or rather take) leave, to pose us one question further,
to the quick. And thus you say. How is it possible, to know by any
conference of the Scriptures, which is Canonical Scripture, and which is not?
etc.

You seem to be persuaded that this question touches to the quick in deed.
For you affirm plainly, that if any Infidel, Heretic, or Arbeist, shall
deny any part of the old or new Testament, or the whole old and new
Testament (as in times past some have done.) etc. We have no Ankor hold
against such, but only the Revelation of God to the Church, by Tradition,
which Church is the pillar, and sure stay of truth. etc.

I confess, that the Church is the Pillar and sure stay of truth, as Saint
Paul writes. 1. Tim. 3.
But that this truth is revealed to the Church by Tradition (as you write)
that I deny. For God has taught, (and does still teach) the truth to his
Church, by the word of truth, and not by Revelation or Tradition. And that
word of truth is sufficient, and needs not that any thing should be added
to it: either by Revelation, or by Tradition. Yea* there is an horrible curse
pronounced against all such as shall add any thing to in.

The true Catholic Church, is in deed the Pillar and sure stay, whereon,
that truth that is taught by the word of truth, does stay. For that word
of truth, is the voice of her Sheepeheard, and she delights in hearing that
voice: but the voice of a stranger she can not abide to hear. The truth
taught by the voice of her Sheepehearde, she lays up in her heart: and all
her delight is to let men see it, in her life and conversation, that seeing
her good life, they may be occasioned thereby, to glorify her spouse Christ,
and his and her heavenly Father.

This is that authority, that S. Austine says, moved him to believe the
Gospel. And this authority caused him to write thus, against that Epistle of
Manichaeus, which the Maniches called their foundation. Tom. 6.
Ego vero Euangelio non crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae commoueret
authoritas. Surely, I would not believe the Gospel, except the authority of
the Church did move me thereto.

Not many lines before those words, S. Austine says thus to the Maniches. Apud
vos, vbi nihil horum est, quod me inuitet ac teneat. etc. That is: Amongst you,
where no part of that thing is, which might allure and hold me, there sou^deth
only a promising of the truth: which undoubtedly, if it be showed forth so
manifestly, that it may not be doubted of: it is to be preferred before all
those things that do hold me in the Church.

I pray you (Master Pownde) ponder well these words of Austine: and be not
afraid with Austine to yield, to the manifest truth, (when it shall be
manifested to you) only because it lacks the consent of Peoples, and
Nations, the authority of Miracles, the nourishment of hope, the increase of
love, the establishment of Antiquity, the hold from Peter's seat, the
succession of Priests, and the name of Catholic. For S. Augustine says: That
the manifest truth must be preferred before all these.

But if you will mark it well, you shall find that the truth which we hold
and teach, and would wish you and all your sort to embrace, does not lack
the cheifest of those things that moved S. Austine first to embrace it. For
it is the same, that first got credit, by those Miracles that were wrought
by Christ and his Apostles. Mark. 16.
It was, and is still nourished by hope: It was, and is still increased by
love, it is also confirmed by that seat which you call Peter's, and has the
succession of Priests, although not in such sort as you allow of. And last of
all, it has the right name of Catholic.

Thus, I hope, you do now see, that you have not rightly applied, either the
words of Paul, or of Austine: mynding thereby to prove, that the Church of
Room, (being such a Church, as now it shows it self to be) is the Pillar
of truth, and that Catholic Church, whereunto all Christians should and must
of necessity cleave, if they will be saved by Christ.

Your conclusion, wherein you advise all men to beware of fleeing from the
Church, to the judgment of the Scriptures only. etc. Was not so advisedly
made, as were seemly to be made, by one that were so well seen in the writings
of ye Fathers, as you would seem to be. For (as I think, yea, I am persuaded,
that I may safely affirm,) there is not one of the ancient Fathers, of your
mind in that point.

Saint Austine, in his Epistle forty and eight, written to Vincentius, says
thus. Noli ergo frater, contra diuina tam multa, tam clara, tam indubitata
testimonia. etc. Do not therefore (Brother) show thy self wylling, to gather
out of the wrytinges of Bishops, reproaches against so heavenly, so many, so
clear, and so undoubted testimonies: whether the same Bishops be on our side,
as Hilarious, or of the unity it self, before the faction of Donatus was
separated from it, as Cyprian, and Agripinus: First for that, that kind of
writing must be distinguished, from the authority of the Canon, for they are
not so read, that testimony should be taken out of them, that it might not be
lawful for any man, to be of a mind contrary thereto, if perhaps they
shall in any place be of other mind then the truth requires. For we are of
that number that may not disdain, to take even unto our self, this saying of
the Apostle. And if ye be of an other mind in any thing, Phil. 3.
God will reveal the same to you also.

Thus you may see, that S Austine does not allow the sentence of any man, no
nor the sentence of the unity it self (which I understand to be a general
Council) against the Canonical Scripture.

The same Saint Austine, writing to Saint Jerome in his fifteen Epistle,
Epist. 15.
says thus. Ego enim fateor charitati tuae. etc. I confess (says S. Austine)
I have learned to give this reverend fear and honor, only to those Books of
the Scriptures, which now are called Canonical: that I do firmly believe,
that none of the Authors of them, have in writing erred any thing at all.

By this saying of Saint Austine, it may appear, that he was of this mind,
that there may be error, even in the decrees of your general Councels.

Again, De Bapt. Libr. 2. Cap. 2.
against the Donatistes, Saint Austine writes thus. Quis autem nesciat
Scripturam canonicam. etc. Who can be ignorant (says Saint Austine) that the
holy Scripture, as well of the old as of the new Testament, is contained
within her own bounds or lymittes: and that the same is so preferred before
all the latter wrytings of Bishops, that concerning it, there may be no doubt
or controversy at all, whether any thing that is certainly known to be
written in it, be true or right. And the writings of Bishops, which have
been, or be written, after the confirmation of the Canon, may be found fault
with (if it happen that any thing therein do swerve from the truth) either by
more wise speech of any other, that is more expert in that matter: or by the
more grave Authority of other Bishops, or the wisdom of men better
learned, or by Councels, yea, and that the Councels them selves, which are
holden in particular Regions, or Provinces, must without any doubting, give
place, to the authority of full Councels, which are made of the universal
Christian world. Yea, and that the full or general Councels that are first
holden, may be amended by them that are holden afterward, when by any
experience of things, that thing that before was shut, is made open, and that
thing which lay hyd, is made known. And this may be done, without any
hautinesse of sacrilegious pride, without any swelling throat of arrogancy,
without any contencion of spightfull envy, with holy humility, with
Catholic peace, and with Christian Charity. Thus far Austine.

Now I think you will confess, that your Catholic Church may err: or else
that S. Austine, one of the Doctors of that Church did err. For he says, that
the latter general Councels, may amend the former. He says also, that there
may be no doubt or controversy about the truth of any thing, that is known
to be written in the Canonical Scriptures. Therefore, blame us not, though we
flee from the judgment of the Church to the scriptures, which can never
deceive us.

And as touching that inconvenience that you do put us in mind of, which is
the denying of the Scriptures by Atheists: I pray you let me propone one
question to you, and so pose you as night to the quick as you have posed us.
What if your Church should utterly be denied to be the Church of Christ? Or
what if those Atheists that be in England, or else where, should deny that
Christ has any Church at all: or that there is, or has been, any such
Christ as we believe in? Might not those Infidels (think you) laugh you to
scorn, for robbing your selves of your own defense, Ephe. 6.
which is the word of God, which Saint Paul calls the sword of the Spirit?

But now you will return to your purpose. If conference of one Scripture with
an other, might give light enough to all men: How happens it, that all
sects using that conference, the sectaries can never agree in their opinions.
etc. To this, not I, but S. Paul shall give you answer. 1. Cor. 11.
Oportet haereses esse, vt hij qui probati sunt, manifesti sint in vobis. It
can not be avoided, but that there must be heresies, or sects, that they which
be tried, may be made known amongst you. Let S. Paul defend his own
assertion, as he can. I will betake me to that uttermost shift that you say we
have, notwithstanding, that you call it a weak one.

Saint Austine says, that the Scriptures must be read, by such as do
undoubtedly believe, that they are most true witnesses. And these are his
words. Agant orando, De Trini. Libr. 15.
and quaerendo, and been viue^do vt intelligant. etc. That is: They must labor
by prayer, and by seeking, and by living well: that they may understand, that
is, that they may see in mind, (as much as may be seen) that which they do
hold by faith. Iam. 1.
And S* James says. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God. etc.

Thus may you see, that both S. James, and S. Austine do allow of this shift,
which you do accoumpt to be so weak, and such intolerable pride. Yea, S.
Austine adds these words. Quis hoc prohibeat? imo vero, ad hoc quis non
hortetur? Who can forbid this? Yea rather, who will not exhort heerunto? do
you therefore accou^pt of it as you lust: we will still use it, as the ready
way to attain to that knowledge, that is necessary for us.

As for the revealing of the truth to the universal Church, for which Christ
him self did pray: we confess that according to his promise, Christ has
revealed to them altogether, and to every particular member amongst them, as
much as he knew to be meet to be revealed to them. And so be the words of
his promise. Ille vos docebit omnia, and suggeret vobis omnia, quae cu^que
dixero vobis. He shall teach you all things, and he shall put you in mind of
all those things, that I shall speak unto you.

The pleasant pastime that you make, with the course that we take, in the
search and study of the Scriptures, I pass over: for I know, that he only
to whom we pray, does know how faithfully we pray, and whether with tears or
without. To him we shall stand, or fall* Judge not you an other man's Servant.

But you say, we must needs be all deceived, so long as we dwell in
dissension, and are not in errors only, but also, one of us contrary to an
other. And who now must be Judge, to try the Spirits, whether they be of God,
or no? Only the Church, (say you) or else they shall not be tried at all. etc.

For the first, Saint Paul has told you, that of necessity, sects must be
amongst men, 1. Cor. 11.
and even amongst such as be of the Church of Christ: And that because, such
as be allowed or tried, can not otherwise be known. And as touching the other
point, Saint Austine says thus. Contra insidiosos errores, Deus voluit ponere
firmamentum in scripturis, In. 1. John Epist. Cap. 2.
contra quas, nullus audet loqui* qui quoquo modo se vult videri Christianum.
It was the pleasure of God, to set in the scriptures, a sure Bulwark against
deceytfull errors: against which Scriptures, no man, that is any way wylling
to seem to be a Christian, dare be bold to speak.

As gold by the toutch stone, so are the spirits tried by the Scripture. And
every one that is skillful in the scriptures, that is, that can by conferring
of one scripture with an other. find out the meaning of the holy ghost in the
scriptures: may be as bold to use the scripture in the trial of spirits, as
the Goldsmith may be, to use the toutch stone, in the trial of mettalles. And
if ye think that the conference of one Scripture with an other, be not the
surest way to attain to the true meaning of the Scriptures, look Saint
Austine, De Doctrina Christiana. Lib. 3. Cap. 26. And thus much for answer to
your second Reason, which I have called False.

The third Reason.
THe third Reason that moves you to think, that the Scriptures are to be
judged by the Church: is, for that S. Peter has written, 2. Pet. 1.
That no Scripture is to be taken after any private interpretation. etc.

This Reason I have called Foolish, for that foolishly you do rushe into the
Epistle of Saint Peter, and report his words otherwise then he wrote them: and
then you your self do make a private interpretation of them, contrary to the
decree made in the Council of Trent: whereof you would seem to make greatest
accoumpt.

The words of Saint Peter, as they do stand in that translation that the
Counsel of Trent has allowed, are these. Hoc primum intelligentes, quod omnis
prophaetia scripturae, propria interpretatione non fit. Understanding this
thing first: that no prophecy of the scripture, is made by private
interpretation. I marvel how you (being such a Catholic as you profess to
be) durst set down Peter's words, otherwise then you find them in that
translation. For I am sure, you are not ignorant of the penalty that the
Council has Sessio. 4.
appointed for such doings.

But this is not all your misdemeanour in this behalf. For you make a private
Interpretation, contrary, both to the decree, and also to this third Reason
of yours. For, to make a private interpretation, is to make such a one as
differs from the ancient writers, and is not allowed of the Church. But
where can you show me any ancient writer, that has interpreted those words
of Peter, as you do?

Saint Austine medleth not with them. No more does S. Jerome, S. Ambrose, S.
Gregory, nor Chrysostom, nor any other of that time, that I have seen, or
can hear of.

Nicholaus Lyranus, writing upon these words of S. Peter, says that the
meaning of S. Peter, was to teach: that no prophetical Scripture has
beginning in, or does spring out of humane sense, or man's meaning. For thus
he writes. Propria interpretatione non fit, id est, Lyranus in. 2. Epi. Peter.
non fit sensu humano: ideo subditur. Non enim voluntate humana allata est
aliquando prophetia, sed spiritu sancto inspirati. etc. It is not made (says
he) by any man's own interpretation (that is to say) it is not made by humane
sense: and therefore, this saying is set immediately after. Prophecy has not
at any time been brought in, by man's will: but men inspired with the holy
Ghost. etc.

I think your Fathers of the Council of Trent, will allow Lyranus for a
Catholic writer: wherefore, I think also that they will not dispense with
you, for dissenting from him, in the interpreting of S. Peter's words.

But now, if ye will give me leave, I will tell you what I think to be the
meaning of S. Peter in these words. First I think, that you do know, that S.
Peter wrote in Greek. And then you must know, that the words which in the
allowed translation, are Priuata interpretatione: are in the Greek, (...). And
they that have any skyll in the Greek tongue, will tell you that (...) does
signify Impulsus, as well as Interpretatio. And may we not translate the
words of S. Peter thus? Omnis prophetica scriptura, non fit proprij impulsus.
Every prophetical Scripture, is not made of, or by private, or proper
impulsion. Or to translate it more English like: No prophetical Scripture is
made of, or by private or proper impulsion.

It seems to me, that both the words that go before, and also the words
that follow, do enforce this to be the meaning of Saint Peter. For he says
thus. We have a firm and sure prophetical speech: and you do well in that
you do give good heed thereto, as unto a Candle that appears in a dark
place, until the day may wax clear, and the day star may arise in your
hearts. But yet so, that you do first know, that no prophetical Scripture,
is made by private or proper impulsion. For prophecy has not at any time been
brought unto us by the will of men, but the holy men of God have spoken, as by
the spirit of God, they have been driven, or vehemently moved to speak.

Let your friends consider of this, and tell you whether this may be allowed
for Catholic or not. I do^ not write this, as one that do not think that
saying of yours ( No Scripture is to be taken after any private interpretation)
to be true: or as one that does allow the rashness of such as will rushe
into the Scriptures, without such reuerance as is seemly, and take upon them
to make interpretations after their own fantasies. I know that all that we can
do, and all the helps that we can have, are little enough, and therefore I
think it meet, for all men, to follow the rules that S. Austine prescribes,
writing, De Doctrina Christiana. And thus much may suffice to be said, to your
third Reason, which by good Reason, and for just cause (as I think) I have
called Foolish.

The fowrth Reason.
YOur fowrth Reason is, for that by appealing to the Scripture, we seem (as
you say) to give men liberty to deny all unwritten verities, which we have
received of the Church, either by express definition, in general Council, or
but by tradition. etc. And first, you delyght your self with a frumpe at
Crowley and his fellows, that will laugh (as you say) so soon as they hear of
unwritten verities. And it seems that you persuade your self that you have
done it very finely. And therefore I have named this Reason of yours
Fa^tasticall.

But yet a little to temper our folly (you will not say our pride) you will
ask us how we prove the Trinity of persons, and the unity of substance in
the Godhead, by express Scriptures. etc.

Nine verities we must prove by Scriptures, which are not (as you say) written
in the Canonical Scriptures. Well, to stay your wisdom, I will (by Gods
merciful assistance) do what may be done in this matter. And I hope to prove
as many of them, as be necessary to be known to salvation: even by plain
scriptures. And the rest. I hope I shall be able to prove, in such sort as the
Fathers have proved them, against such as have at any time denied them. And
first, I must prove, that in the Godhead, there be three distinct persons, and
but one substance. This and the second, that is, that in Christ there be two
distinct Natures, and but one person: I think I shall easily prove.

The Prophet David, has written thus. Psalm. 110. The Lord has said to my
Lord, Psalm. 110.
sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot stool. The
Lord shall send out of Sion, the Scepter of thy power, bear thou rule in the
mids amongst his enemies. Thus much in the two first verses. And in the fifth
verse he says thus. The Lord at thy right hand, has wounded even Kings in
the day of his wrath.

That the Prophet David, did in these verses of this Psalm, speak of the
divine Majesty, and of the second person Christ: it is manifested by that
which S. Matthew writes in his twenty and two Chapt. Vos quid dicitis de
Christo? cuius filius est? What do you say of Christ? whose son is he? etc.

The Lord. That is God the Father. Said to my Lord. That is to God the Son.
etc. Here have we two distincted persons, the Father, and the Son. And in
the second verse, he says: The Lord shall send out of Sion, the Scepter of
thy power, which is, the word of the Gospel. And this Scepter was sent out of
Sion by the holy Ghost, in the feast of Pentecoste: when he rested upon the
Apostles, in the shape of (...)rye tongues divided. So that here we have the
third person, and so consequently three distinct persons. The Father says to
the son, sit thou at my right hand. etc. And the holy Ghost sends the word,
which is the scepter of the power of the Son out of Sion. And in the fifth
verse he says. The Lord at thy right hand, shall wound even Kings in the
day of his wrath. Thus speaks the divine Majesty: God the Father, God the
Son, God the holy Ghost, one divine Majesty: to the Church of Christ he
re milytaunt upon earth. So have we the unity, of the three distinct persons
in the deity. And Christ him self, expounding the first verse of this Psalm
to be spoken of him self, does a warrant us, that he being David's son
after the flesh, is nevertheless David's Lord, and therefore God. And so both
God and man, and yet but one Christ. For be says: What say you of Christ?
Math. 22.
Whose son is he?

This might suffice to show, that these two verities are not unwritten, as you
do term them. But to satisfy you to the full: look what S. Matthew has
written, in the last Chapter, and last words of his Gospel: reporting the
words of our Savior, who says thus there. All power both in heaven and
earth, is given unto me. Go your way therefore, and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost:
teaching them to observe all those things that I have commanded you. And
behold, I am with you every day, even to the end of the world.

Here the man Christ, receives from the divine Majesty, all power, both in
heaven and in earth: and by that power he gives commission to his Apostles to
go and teach all Nations, and to Baptize them in the name of the Father, of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost. So that here again we have three distinct
persons: and their unity, in giving to Christ all power in heaven and in
earth: and the two natures, in one person Christ, in that he receives all
power in heaven and in earth, and gives commission to his Apostles to teach
and baptize.

If this will not satisfy you: I refer you to that which S. Austine has
written in his book, Tom. 3.
De Trinit. There shall you find proof upon proof, that these verities are
not unwritten.

The third verity that you say is unwritten, is that God the Father was never
begotten. It seems that you have not read S. Peaules Epistle to the
Ephesians: for if you had, you must needs have seen, that this is no
unwritten verity. Saint Paul writes thus. Huius rei gratia flecto genua mea,
ad patrem Domini nostri Jesus Christi, ex quo omnis paternitas in coelo and in
terra nominatur. Ephe. 3.
For this cause (says S. Paul) do I bow my knees, to the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, of whom all Fatherhoode, both in heaven and in earth
does take name. I trow you will not now say that this verity is unwritten.

The fowrth verity, that you say is not written, is that the holy Ghost
proceeds both from the Father and the Son, as from one fountain. If you
would read that which S. John has written: I think you would not say that
this verity is unwritten. John. 15. and. 20.
Cum venerit paracletus, quem ego mittam vobis a patre, spiritu^ veritatis, qui
a patre procedit: ille testimonium perhibebit de me. etc. When the Comforter
shall come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the spirit of
truth, that proceeds from the Father: he shall testify of me. etc. And in
the twenty Chapter he says. Haec cum dixisset, insufflauit, and dixit eis:
Accipite spiritum sanctum. When he had spoken these words, he breathed upon
them, and he said unto them: Receive ye the holy Ghost. etc. If breath may be
said, to proceed from the person that breaths: then may we say, that it is
written, that the holy Ghost proceeds from Christ, the son of God, even as
it is written, that he proceeds from God the Father.

I will be bold therefore, without any more a do, to conclude, that these
four verities, are not unwritten, but written in deed in the Canonical
Scriptures.

The fifth unwritten verity, is the descending of Christ into hell: this you
must have proved by plain words of Scripture, the lack whereof (as you say)
has caused many, now a days to deny it flatly. I am none of them that do so
deny it. But that he descended in such manner, as your Catholics have taught,
and as it has been set forth in their Stage Plays, and in their payntinges
in glass windows, and else where, I think would be as hard a thing for you
to prove, any way, as for us to prove by plain words of Scripture, that he
did in deed descend into hell.

I think you will grant that the speech used in the Creed, concerning
Christ's descending into hell, is figurative, used by the figure Synecdoche:
wherein the whole is understood in the part. For you will not (I think)
say, that Christ's body went into hell: For that was buried and rested in the
grave, till the time that it was restored to life again. Well. Then it was his
spirit, that descended into hell^ and not his body and spirit both. This
being granted (as I think, you will not deny to do) we shall easily prove,
even by plain words of the Scripture, that Christ descended into hell.

Saint Peter, in the third Chapter of his first Epistle, 1. Pet. 3.
says thus. Quia et Christus semel pro peccatis mortuus est, iustus pro
iniustis: vt nos offeret Deo, mortificatus quidem carne, viuificatus autem
spiritu. In quo and his qui in carcere erant spiritibus veniens, praedicauit.
etc. For even Christ (says Saint Peter) did once dye for sins, the just
for the unjust, that he might offer us unto God: mortified in the flesh
indeed, but quickened in the spirit, in which spirit, coming to those
spirits that were in prison: he did preach unto them. Now, I think you will
say, that I have proved by plain words of Scripture, that Christ descended
into hell.

But how great a matter were it, If this might not be proved by any plain
Scripture: seeing the Nicene Creed (used in your Mass) makes no mention of
it.

And Damasus, that was Bishop of Rome. 360. years alter Christ's ascencion,
when Iulianus the Apostata was Emperor, has in his Creed no word of it. And
yet he concludes his Creed with these words. Haec lege, Ieroni. Tom. 4.
haec creed, haec retine, huic fidei animam tuam subiuga: and vitam consequeris
and premium a Christo. That is: Read these words, believe them, hold them
fast, yoke thy soul to this Faith: and thou shall obtain of Christ, both
life and reward.

I note this, because I see that you shoot at this mark. To bind us, either
to prove all your unwritten verities by Scripture: or else, for lack of such
proof, to believe (as true) whatsoever your Catholic Church shall allow for
truth, although the same be never so unnecessary to be proved, or received
for truth.

Your sixth unwritten verity, is the custom of Baptizinge Infauntes. For this,
I need not to write much. Mark. 10.
Our Savior Christ has said: Suffer little Children to come to me, and
forbid them not: For to such does the kingdom of God belong. And Saint
Paul says: That the Children of believing Parents, are holy. 1. Cor. 7.
Therefore they are not to be holden from Baptism: more then the Jews
children from Circumcision.

Your other three whyes are scarce worthy the aunswering. Why should we keep
the Sunday now at all* and not the Saturday? Why should we not abstain now
still, like Jews, from strangled meats, as the Apostles decreed? And why may
not any Heretic, deny all the three Creedes. etc.

The first of these whyes, shall be answered with an other why. Mark. a.
As why may not the Church of Christians, being Lords of the Sabbath, choose
for their Sabbath, one day in seven, even that day, the observing whereof,
they shall see to serve best for their own edification? And why did the
Apostles (as it may be gathered, by that which Saint John has written in his
Revelation) Apoc. 1.
choose the first day of the week to be their Sabbath, and not the last? And
why do you not remember that Saint Paul does number the Sabbath amongst such
indifferent things, as are Meats and Drinckes, Collo. 2.
Festival days, and new Moons: which were but shadows of things to come?
etc.

And to your second why, I say that the Apostles saw, that it was necessary
for the time, to forbydde those Christians, that then lately had been Heathen
men: to seed upon strangled or blood. And needed not to abrogate it
afterward, Acts. 15.
when they were further instructed, and knew how to use the Christian liberty
without offense. A man might marvel, why any wise man, would move such a why
as this.

Your third, and last why, may be fully answered with these words. Because
there is no thing in those three Creedes: that may not easily be proved by the
Scriptures. And thus are all your whyes answered.

But, do you not mark, how these bedlem Catholics, would shake the
foundation of our Christian faith: by bynding us to believe, that Christ's
Catholic Church has set forth (as infallibly true) and to be believed under
pain of dampnation) three Creedes, the Articles whereof, they are not able to
prove by the Scriptures? do not these blind guides (think you) lead us a
trym dance, toward shameless error and ignorauuce? And thus much to your
fowrth Reason, which for good cause I have called, Fantastical. Both, for
that it seems that you persuade your ^elwfe, that you handle your self very
finely, in all that you write therein: and also, for that you have uttered
nothing therein, that may not well seem to spring out of a fantastical head.

The fifth Reason.
YOur fifth Reason, I have called Fradulent, because you do therein compare the
laws and Scriptures of God, to the laws of men, made for civil policy and
government. And the Judges and governors in civil policy, to the
Ecclesiastical ministers, and governors of the Church of Christ, in matters of
faith. This is fraudulently, to bring y^ holy Scriptures (which of right are
the toutchstone, for all men's judgments to be tried by) to be under the
judgment of some one man, as your Pope* (who challenges authority, above the
general Councels) or of that number of men that shall be gathered together in a
general Counsel (which do challenge authority above the Pope.) But God that
is Author of all perfection, and does dispose every thing in a sweet and
decent order: has provided much better for his Catholic Church, here
millitaunt on earth, then that it should be driven to seek for resolution of
doubts, at the bands of such Judges as may err, as your Pope and general
Councels have and may do.

The Father of lyghts, the giver of all good gifts, in whom there is no
change or show of variableness. The Spirit of truth, that can neither
deceive, nor be deceived: is ready at hand with every one, that in humility of
mind craves wisdom, and will not suffer any such, long to be in doubt of
any thing, the knowledge whereof is necessary to salvation. If you (says our
savior) which be naught, do know how to give good gifts to your children. How
much more shall your heavenly Father, Luke 11.
give the holy spirit, to them that ask it of him? Gods children may be bold
(in such cases as I have spoken of) to crave Gods spirit, and assure
themselves* to receive it at his hands. 1. Pet. 5.
But the proud and hauty minded, shall be as sure to find God their enemy.

This Judge is always ready in the scriptures, to open the understandings of
as many as do resort thither (with humility of mind) seeking there to be
resolved of their necessary doubts.

That both your Popes, and general Councils have erred (and therefore may err)
I will by Gods help plainly prove.

First, if it were possible to persuade you, that to make a decree directly,
contrary to the express commandment of God, is an error: then it should be
an easy matter to cause you to confess, that both a Pope, and a general
Council have erred.

For, the sixth general Council, holden at Constantinople, where.289. Bishops
were gathered together: it was amongst other things decreede, that holy Images
should be had in Churches, and that the same should be with great reverence
worshipped. Tom. 1.
And this Council was holden when the first Agatho was Pope, and this decree
was allowed by him. Disti. 16.
And afterward by Adrian the first Pope of that name.

So that one general Council, and two Popes, have erred in one decree, made
against, and directly contrary to Gods commandment. Thou shall not make to
thy s^l^e any graven Image. etc.

John ths. An. 956. Vorat. Plat.
12. of that name, behaved him self so well in his nine years government:
that one Historian calls him, Sceleratum virum. A man given over to all
wickedness. And an other calls him. Monstrum hominis. A Monster amongst men.
And at the last he was slain, being taken in adultery.

But peradventure you will say: these faults proceed of humane infirmity. But
what will you then say to Syluester the second, Plat. Volat.
that gave him self to the Devil, that he might obtain ye Popedom, which he
obtained in deed, and did enjoy it four years.

Benedictus the ninthe, lived so wickedly, governing the Church fifteen
years: that one Historian says, he was, Volat.
Vir plane probrosus and infamis, that is: A man altogether worthy of
reproaches, or evil reports, and infamous: And an other says: that after his
death, he was seen in an horrible shape, Plat.
and that be said thus. Iusto Dei iudicio damnatus sum, quia fine Lege vixi. I
am dampened, even by the just judgment of GOD: because I lived without law.

If all this will not suffice you, consider I pray you* the Council of Basil:
holden in the year.1431. And Pope Eugenius, that in those days ruled the
Church.16 years. This Engenius did once allow the decrees of that Counsel:
And afterward he did disallow the same. Whereby, it is manifest that he erred,
either in the first or in the last. And if the Popes authorite be above the
Council: then that Council did err in deposing that Pope. And if the
Council be above the Pope: then did that Pope err in excomunicating that
Council.

If you will take pains in reading the Histories; you shall find amongst the
Popes, the Saduces error, the Arrians error, the Pellagians error
mainteyned. Yea you shall find, and we do see manifestly, that at this day,
your whole Church does mainteyne the heresy of the Anthropomorphits. For you
have in all your Churches, the Image of God the Father: resembling an old man
with gray hairs, as though time had now made him old, as it does all
creatures.

But when your Church had three Popes at one time, John the.23. Gregory
the.12. and Benedict the.13. To which of these would you have sent us, for
resolution of our doubts* Yea, and when your Church was two years together,
without either Pope or general Counsel: whether would you have wished us, to
leave the Judgment in matters of Church controversies, at that time? I hope
you will no longer wish us to leave the Scripture that never did, nor shall
fail us, and depend upon such Judges as these, that have so often failed, and
as yet, were never full agreed.

As for your comparison that you make betwixt the Churches and worldly
kingdoms: it is not worth a Walnut. And your similitude of a wise Burgess in
Parliament: we weigh not. We know, and confess, that men's laws are not,
neither can be made so plain or perfect, but that it is necessary, that there
be Judges that may have authority to discide those controversies yt may arise
by occasion of sinister construing of ye meaning of the words of the law, or
by occasion of the darkness of the same. But where find you any such
darkness, or imperfection, Psalm. 119.
in the Scriptures of God? Does not David say: Lucerna pedibus meis verbum
tuum, and lume^ semitis meis. Thy word (says David) is a Lantern to my
feet, and a light to my paths.

Take heed that you be not one of them that Esaias speaks of. Esai. 5.
That do call light darkness, and darkness light. etc.

I do grant, that there may some question arise amongst men, about the
understanding of some places of Scripture: but this ryseth not of the darkness
that is in the scriptures, but of that darkness that is in man's understanding.
Which till it be opened by the merciful goodness of God: 1. Cor. 2.
cannot perceive those things that do belong to the spirit of God.

And we do think it necessary, that there be good, and learned men chosen,
and put in authority in the Church, such as may (when need is) call together
ye most grave, wise, and godly learned persons, in the fear of God, to
delyberate for the good government of the Church, and to take order, that all
things in the Church, may be done to the edification of the same, according to
the rule of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 14.
And if any proud or froward person, or any simple or ignorant person, do
move any question: or his, or their misdemeanour, do cause any question to be
moved, or any doubt to arise, about the true meaning of any part of the
Scripture: We think it meet, that in these cases, those places of Scripture
be reuerendly weighed, by those, wise, learned, grave, and godly men, so
called together in the fear of God. And that the persons so in doubt, be by
them certified, of the true meaning of those places. And that (if they will not
yield to that interpretation that shall be made by those men, and proved by
due circumstances, and conference of those places with other, to be the very
meaning of the holy Ghost in those places) then we hold those men for
Heretics, and do judge them worthy to be excommunicated.

Thus (if you will) you may see, that we are some thing wiser then your
Burgess in Parliament: and not so worthy to be laughed to scorn as he:
Although we do not make these men Judges of the scripture: but we do put them
in trust to search the Scriptures, that both they and we may submit our selves,
to that judgment, which they, by their reverend searching, shall find in the
Scriptures. As for the forty places of Scripture that the Arrians brought, for
the defense of their horrible Heresy: we are able enough (by the help of God)
to set forth plainly in their true meaning, and to withstand the Arrians
(without the help of our Catholic Church.) Notwithstanding the forty places
of Scripture, that they bring more then we can bring for the truth.

And we say, as S. Austine says: that the Scriptures to mysse understood,
and mysse applied, are the Heretics bow, to shoot out their own venomous
arrows. And as Vincentius says: They are the sheep clothing, which the
Woolfe does shrowde her self in in etc.

Yea, and we confess, that the Devil him self, did allege scripture
against our savior Christ, and did apply it as rightly as Bonifacius the
eight did, when after he had one day showed him self in his Pontificalibus,
that is, Luke. 22.
his Popely attire, and the next day in the robes of an Emperor: he said thus.
Ecce duo gladij hic. Behold, here are two swords.

Another of your Popes, setting his foot upon the neck of Fredericus, the
Emperor, said Super Aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis, Psalm. 91. Alexan. 3. An.
1174.
and conculcabis Leonem and Draconem. Upon the Aspe and Basiliske, shall thou
walk, and upon the Lion and Dragon shall thou tread. And surely, as often as
these wresters of the Scriptures, do speak unto us, the Devil does (as
Vincentius says) speak by their mouths. etc.

But here I leave your Vincentius and you together, till at some more leisure.
I may read him over. I can not think that he does handle that place of
Mathewe, so grosely, Math. 4.
as you would make us believe that he does. But though he do, the matter is
not great. For there is none that has any sense or feeling, in the
understanding of the Scriptures: but the same may easily see, that when our
savior Christ said. Non tentabis Dominu^ Deum tuum: Thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God: He had a far other meaning, then that which you would make us
believe that Vincentius does gather of these words. Yea, Athens I did first
write this answer, I have read over Vincentius, and have found that you do
belie him.

But as one mistrusting the authority of your Vincentius: you clap in the
neck of it, one sentence of S. Austine: but you tell us not where we shall
find it. But if those words be Austines (as it may be that they are) they
will, and do serve much better against you and your sort: then they can
against us.

And thus much to your fifth Reason: which I have called Fraudulent, for the
cause before mentioned.

The ^ixt Reason.
YOur sixth and last Reason, most weyghtie of all, is this: Because, if we will
refuse the authority, of the Churches absolute judgment upon the scriptures
true sense: We shall seem plainly to deny the holy Ghost to be the spirit of
truth. etc. This Reason I have called Fanaticall. For that in making so great
an accoumpt of this Reason: you seem not to be in your right wits. What
bedlem would abuse the words written in the fowreteene of John as you do: to
prove, that because our Savior Christ did pray for, and obtain, and did
give the holy Ghost, the spirit of truth, to his holy Apostles, and did
promise that the same should remain with them for ever, and instruct them in
all truth: therefore the same holy Ghost must needs be, and remain still in
that Church, which agreeeth with the Church of the Apostles only in name, and
is no more like the Apostles Church in doctrine and manners, then black is
like to white, and God is like the Devil.

The Wise man says, Sap. 4.
that Wisdom will not enter into a malicious soul: neither will she dwell in
a body that is subject to sins. For the holy spirit of Wisdom, flies from
deceit. etc. And shall we think that the holy Spirit of truth has been,
and will be still amongst such a rabble of Popes, Cardinals, and other
Catholics, as your own Histories make mention of, that have (besides their
beastly life) made decrees directly, contrary to Gods commandments? Yea,
shall we think that the Spirit of Christ, dwells amongst those
Catholics, that at this day do in the twenty and five Session of the
Council of Trent, pronounce all such accurssed, Tom. 4.
as do show them selves, either by doctrine or otherwise, to mislyke with the
having of Images in Churches: seeing the same is dyrectly contrary to the
second commandment of God? Shall we think that the holy spirit of God, did
guide those your Catholic Fathers, when they did in the same Session, blanch
the counterfeyting of Gods Majesty by an Image?

And think you that Esaias the Prophet, if he were now living, Esai. 59.
would allow your applying of his words to such Catholics, and to their
doings: seeing the same Prophet does so earnestly speak against the making
of Images, Esai. 44.
scorning both them and their makers, and plainly affyrming that they be good
for nothing.

The Scribes, the Pharisees, the high Priests, and Doctors of the law: might
as well have mainteyned, their corrupt Doctrine and Traditions against Christ
and his Apostles (even by those words of Esaias, that you apply for your
purpose) as you may now by the same, mayntaine all the corrupt Doctrines and
Traditions of your Catholics. For they did then persuade them selves (as you
do now) that the promise was made to them, and could not but be performed to
them. And that therefore Christ and his fauters, were Scismatiks and meet to
be excommunicated, as by them they were, in deed, and as by you, we be now.

But to our great and unspeakable comfort: our savior Christ has foretold
us of this, saying. These words have I spoken unto you, that you should not be
offended. John. 16.
They will excommunicate you, and the time will come, wherein whosoever shall
hill you, will think that he does God good service.

And that promise also, that you would some to rejoice so much in^ia in deed
as comfortable to us, as you would have men think that it is to you.

We know that the Spirit of truth departs not from Christ in his members
the Church, the true and unfeigned Catholic Church. Neither do the words
that the heavenly Father put into the mouth of Christ, his only begotten
Son, depart out of his mouth, the true Catholic Church: and yet dare not we
make that Church* Judge of that word. For they were not put into her mouth to
that end, that she should judge them: but that she should in all her
doings, be judged tried, and directed by them.

As sottishe as you say, our opinion is: we are so far from holding, that
every private man, may have leave to be his own Judge in understanding the
Scripture: that we do not grant it to the best learned, but do leave it to
him, that being (with humility of mind) sought in the Scriptures, will be
found there, yea, even by Crafts men, such as was Peter, and his fellow fisher
men. For he respects not men's persons, nor Occupations. And unto them that so
seek him there (whether they be many or few) he will open the sense of
understanding, that they may understand, as much as he knows to be meet for
them to understand. And such as have that humble spirit, will not search for,
nor show them selves destrous to know, any more.

Well, now you conclude, upon that which you say we must needs grant, that
is, that the Church is our mother, as Scripture says. Well, I am glad that you
are now become a Scripture man. But I pray you, where is that Scripture
written, that says, that your Catholic Church is our mother? It will be
hard for you to find it.

I write not this, as one that would deny the Church that is the Spowse of
Christ, to be the mother of Christians, in that sense that she is the Spowse
of Christ: But I write thus, to let you see, that I like not with your manner
of concluding upon this, being once granted. That this mother of ours, that
must needs teach all her children, first to believe in God (for that faith
comes by hearing) and also to know the Scriptures, and is the pyller and sure
stay of truth: must needs be the absolute Judge, and imperial
Schoolemistresse, to teach us all, how to believe in God, and to understand
the Scriptures.

This gear hangs together like Iermans lyps (as the proverb is:) If you had
said thus.

The Church (being the spowse of Christ) is our mother, and has received
commission, from her husband, and our father Christ, to teach us all those
things that he has taught and commanded her to do, and to teach us his
children to do: wherefore, if we shall not hearken to her, as to our chief
School mistress, under her husband and our father, so long as she teaches
nothing, but that which our father has commanded her to teach us: we shall
despise him, because we despise her, as it is written. Qui vos spernit, Luke.
10.
me spernit: He that despises you, despises me.

If you had written thus: a man might have made some sense of your words. But
as you have written, you seem to make the gray Mare the better Horse. And to
spoil our Father Christ of all his power: that our Mother, his Wife, may not
be found with out absolute power.

I see not therefore, why I may not for this blindness of your hearts, say as
justly to you, as S. Paul does to the Galathians. O insensati. etc. Oh you
foolish fellows, who has bewitched you, not to obey unto the truth? which
even of Infants and sucking Babes (as it were) is discerned, as clear as the
Sun. So that you must not disdain, though Master Trippe, do tryppe you in
your own turn, as a seely seducer, to maintain (as you do all) so gross an
opinion, being the forest in deed, for all such Foxes to litter their
whelps in. And here you seem to have had one fling at Master Fox also:
because you understood that he is one allowed in the Keepers warrant, to have
conference with you.

I marvel, how Master Turnebull escaped your frumpping pen. But to conclude
this assercion. Acquit your self as well as you can, why you should not all
be suspected to be Antichristians, for as much as you do so stowtly maintain
that man of sin, that sets up himself above all that is called God, and
sits in the Temple of God, and boasts himself, as though he were God.
Whom the Lord shall destroy, even with the breath of his mouth. And that
word, that you would have to be judged by your Antichristian Church: shall
judge both Antichriste and his Church. And that holy Ghost that came down
from Heaven, upon our Christ's Apostles, has remained, and does still
remain, and to the end of the world shall remain with his Catholic Church.
That is, with that Church, which believes, holds, and protests, that
Catholic Faith, that Jesus Christ, commanded his Apostles, to teach
Catholiquely, to all Nations and sorts of peoples, in all parts of the world.
Promising that the holy Ghost should always remain with the faithful, to
direct them in all truth, and godliness of living.

Thus, having first considered, the words of our Savior, in sending us to the
Scriptures, saying: Search the Scriptures. etc. I have found that the
conclusion that you make upon the manner of speech, that our Savior uses in
that place of Saint John his Gospel, is not. Secundum vnanimen consensum
Patrum: (that is) According to the agreeable consent of the Fathers: and
therefore condemned by your Fathers, in the Council of Trent, in the fowrth
Session.

Saint Austine, does accoumpt acurssed, whatsoever is taught, other then out
of the Scriptures, of the Law and the Gospel. Lib. 3. Chap. 6. Against the
Letters of Petilian. And in his book of Christian doctrine, and the.37. Chap.
He says: that without the authority of Scripture: our Faith does but stacker
or stumble. And again, in his.166. Epistle, he says: That both Christ and
his Church, are learned to be known in the Scriptures.

Basil says, In Asceticis.
that whatsoever is taught without the holy Scripture, is sin.

Chrysostom, in his second exposition upon Matthew, says: that the true
Church cannot other wise be known then by the holy Scriptures. Homilia. 49.

Yea, Saint Austine, in his first book that he wrote, against the Epistle of
Parmenianus, and the second Chap: does accoumpt it to be rashness, to give
credit, to any, that does not prove by Scripture, that which he affyrmeth.

I dare not therefore, give credit to that which you have written, till you
prove it by Scripture.

As for your six Reasons that you stay upon, I have conceived, and do
understand what they be. And as in the beginning of your Pamphlet, you desire:
so have I taken Pen in hand, and have done what I can to confute them. And as
I think, have done it sufficiently. If you can reply, do you take pen in
hand again, and do what you are able. I will not refuse to try the truth
of these matters, with you, or with the best on your side.

Haec est fides mea: quia vera, Christiana, Catholica, and Apostolica.

This is my Faith: because it is the true, Catholic, and Apostolic Faith.

Robertus Crowleus.
Subscripsit Henricus Trippe, Hijs quae a Domino R. C. responsa sunt.
A brief Answer to Master Pownds six Reasons* Written by Master Henry
Trippe.
Master Pownd: having perused the answer of Master Crowly to your six
Reasons, and finding them sufficiently answered, by that godly Father, (whom
you think not to be worthy naming, as you write to me:) I thought good rather
to subscribe to his answer, then to frame an other: How be it, to take from
you the advantage of glorying, which I think you will easily take against me,
as not being able to answer you: I will breefly urge you in some points,
wherein I see he has spared you.

And first I must needs show you, that all your Reasons are set one a
tottering foundation: because ye Judge her self is not cleared of suspicion,
for you take it as a thing granted, that the Church of Rome is the spowse of
Christ, which thing is in controversy, between us. It had been therefore an
orderly proceeding, to have dealt first with that matter, and to have put it
out of doubt, that your Reasons in appealing to her judgment, might have been
the stronger* Pighius one of your own men confesses, that the question of the
Church ought first to be discidid. Thus you build upon a false principle, and
overthrow the force of your own Reasons, if happily they had any force.

Secondly, that which you bring out of ye fifth of S. John's Gospel, to prove
the scripture to be but witness bearer to ye truth and not the Judge, though it
have some show of reason, yet being well wayed, it well vanishe: for you
imagine, because you find the word witness, which is, Verbum forence: That
by and by you must have a pitched Court, and a judgment seat, where shall be
presented many persons, in several places, one to be witness, an other to be
Judge, and perhaps some to be justified, and some to be condemned. But if you
had wayed other places of scripture, you should have seen that the holy
Ghost admits no such straight collctions: but framing his writing to our
capacity: Uses some time one phrase, and sometime an other. And you might
have found where the word is called a Judge, as in the twelfth Chapter of the
same Evangelist If any man hear my words, and believe them not, I judge him
not. etc. He that refuses me, and receives not my words has one that judges
him. The word that I have spoken, shall judge him in the last day. For I have
not spoken of my self. etc. Now judge you how soundly you have gathered: it is
witness therefore not Judge, or not rather both a witness and a Judge. So
might you reason of the diverse Metaphors given to the word, which is called,
Bread, Wine, Oil, Milk, Honey, Water, Rain, Light, Fire, Gold, Silver,
Pearl, and Iron rod, Scepter. Sword, and the breath of the Lords mouth. Now
were it not a fond Reason to gather, because it is the breath of the Lords
mouth: therefore it is no Sword, because it is a sword or Iron rod: therefore it
is not Gold. etc. Or because it is Gold, therefore it is no bread, when as the
holy Ghost has set down those sundry Metaphors, to express the power,
dignity, and commodity of the word. But this is none of your six Reasons and
therefore the weight of your cause lies not upon it: yet in pronouncing your
Treatise before witness, you gave it a great force.

Now to your Reasons.
YOur first Reason is grounded upon a false principle: for you imagine our
church to be without a Ministry, to teach and open the Scriptures, which is
not so, yea rather your Priests are mute, and not only that, but ye close up
the book of God, and will not let it be read, to make the Scriptures wholly
mute, least they might bewray your corruptions. But God be thanked, God has
opened the mouths of many by the Scriptures, to witness against your errors,
and so judge you by the same words, if you amend not.

Your second Reason pretends that the Scripture is very full of hard and
deep mysteries: surely I confess that the Scripture has his hard Mysteries
and hard places, but has it not also his easy familyar doctrines? Is there
not meat for all Estates, Milk for babes, and strong meat for good stomachs.
But I dare be bold to avouch, that it was Satan's policy, to rob the people
of the whole use of the Scriptures, under pretense of ambiguitie, as though the
whole Scriptures were nothing else, but Rydles. As for the trial of hard
places, the learned have set down two excellent rules, which I marvel you
can reject: the one is conference of Scripture with Scripture, the other is
begging of wisdom of God, who gives it to the Babes and little ones, and
hydeth it from the wise in their own conceyte, who stumble at plain places,
not being dyrected by Gods spirit. But howsoever they labor to try the
spirits, or whatsoever knowledge they do attain, they leave the suueraigntie
of the judgment to the word.

Your third Reason, grounded on Saint Peter's testimony* 2. Peter. 1. Erreth,
in not considering what the Apostle means, by private or not private, you
seem to place it in the multitude of persons, that give the interpretation:
but the Apostle places it in the authority of the Author of the word.
Therefore, one Prophet speaking in the Lords name, being truly sent from the
Lord, is more to be believed, then the whole pack of Priests, resisting of
malice, or ignorance, and they being many, are private, and one Prophet,
being but one, is not private.

Secondly, you pretend that every man may interpret the Scriptures as he
lysteth, which is a false charge. But we desire them, and allow them to read
the Scriptures, and to see whether those things which we teach them, be so or
no, according to the example of the faithful. Acts. 17. And as they are
commanded by Christ, and the Apostle. 1. John. 4.

In your fowrth Reason, while you went about to temper our pride, as you say,
it seems you diste^pered your own wits, in putting down, so many things in
ye name of unwritten verities, which notwithstanding are written: you ask of
the matter when I suppose ye mean ye terms, brought in by the Fathers to
express the doctrine more plainly. As the word Trinity, person, and other, to
make plain the doctrine against the Arrians. Here you were foully ouerseen.
And you would make as believe, that the Church has authority to point us new^
Articles of faith, without warrant of scripture: she was wont to challenge some
liberty in Ceremonies, and indifferent things, but you give her power in
Articles of faith.

Your fifth Reason stumbleth on the false principle, whereon you grounded your
first Reason, where you judge no government to be in our Church, because we
give the highest rule to the word, and govern thereby, as by a most perfect
law: after which no new Parliament need to be called, to add or diminishe
from it, but all men of all estates ought to put to their hands to see it
executed and kept: for the which cause (if they at any time assemble) the word
written is their direction.

Against your sixth Reason, I avouch that he that appealeth to the judgment of
the written word, does yield a most weighty Reason, to ratify the sending
of the holy Ghost to his Church, and that it is the spirit of truth. For
(...) the Apostles were so mightily endewed with the spirit, that they both
taught, and left in writing, the whole Councils of God, enough to make the man
of God perfect. etc: Then the Church that challenges the promise of that
spirit, wherewith they were endewed, must subscribe to that truth which they
have left written: for whatsoever is not agreeabl^ thereto, comes from an
other spirit, opposing it self against the spirit of God, which is never
contrary to it self.

Thus I have breeflie laid down (...) which I could have done more at large:
but Ma^ster Crowley has given you matter enough, and yet more then either he
or I can write, is set down by Chemnicius and others, whose Treatises you
might do well, either to read for your learning, or to impugn if you be able.

Your well wyller. H. T.

FINIS.

