THE Nosegay of moral Philosophy, lately dispersed amongst many Italian
authors, and now newely and succinctly drawn togegether into Questions and
Answers, and translated into English by T.C.

Seen and allowed.

Jmprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson. 1580.

To the right woorshipfull and his singular good Lady and mistres, the Lady
Martin of London, Thomas Crewe wishes long life with increase of all happiness
and woorship.
I Was bold (Madam) for two causes to dedicate this Nosegay unto your
ladishippe. The first is, the gentle accepta^ce that I know it shall have at
your hands, who have always been a favorer of learning, and of them that are
learned: The second is, that coming out under the name of so worthy a
Patronage, it shall be the better accepted of all men. I am bound also for two
causes to do the same, first to satisfy in part the duty which I owe unto
you, and to show some sign of the love that I ow to you and yours: Secondly
that the world may see that always a green tree is not fruitles: but that
that garden which before bare bra^bles and thistles, if it be well tilled, will
bear also sweet smelling flowers. The slips hereof were set in sundry Italian
gardens, and with branches thereof I met at Paris, which smelled so sweetly,
that I took the pains to transport them hither into England, and to bind
them up in this small nosegay, the which I pray your Ladyship so to accept, as
with (...) humble heart I present the same. Thus wishing continually the
increase of your woorship, with all other things which you would either to you
and yours, I end.

Your Ladyships most duetifull to command, Thomas Crewe

The Nosegay of Moral Philosophy.
Note that Q. signifies Question, and A. Answer.














































and hope to live long.















































is to wit, Money.



















































be served; and of a good prince, to be beloved.

























our secrets?













































Fortune health and liuelines of his body and person, and lastly virtue and
force of his mind and courage.









































































Draco commanded inuiolably to be observed and written with man's blood?

























Cicero) the Sun of the world, without the which the whole world should lie
in darkness and without order.

day better and better?





















oath should be.































Cicero) he is not as the envied is, and that the envied is better then he.











a man to loose his money, and yet cannot deliver him from peril: others say
that he is like unto a hog with a white head and a green tail.

Timon the Philosopher so detest and hate all mankind?

















and at plays.

Darius sent to the Scithians, to wit, the Mole, the frogge, the bird and
darts?







The Wiseman without Works. The Old man without Religion. The Young man without
Obedience. The Rich man without Charity. The Poor man without Humility. The
Great Lord without Virtue. The Christian without Fraternity. The Bishop without
P^etie. The Prince without Justice and mercy. The People without Law and
discipline. And the woman without shame and honesty.








Pares cum paribus facillime congregantur, and mores dispares disparia studia
sequuntur.













and break all.

That is to say, Little thieves are soon taken and hanged: but the great are
so strong in money, that they with their authority and freendship break all.

Licurgus the lawmaker was every day published, to the end to be well observed?















are those which profit a man most to think least of them?







Venus hurtful?



















Plato, say that when fathers are rich, the children are seldom virtuous?











honor and renown?





















all things are lawful for him, and to give his ear to parasites and
flatterers.

























world?





















great: or little pistols, which discharge their ^^otte sooner then great
cannons.





















Vipera?

gnawe themselves out of her belly. Thus if the father suffer, the mother
rests not unpunished, and in fine the children bear their share, and it comes
to them as they have deserved also.





















fire or water?



























and never gotten again.

































be served, but so^times serve, neither obeyed, but himself obey the prison of
ye body.

Bacchus the foolish God?

























world and the Devil.































































being required, or hope of any recompense again.





Alexander the great more honor his schoolemaister then his father?

















and dissension.































from an empty. For as the empty one makes far more noise then that which
is full: so does the fool make more babbling and ado, then the wiseman.



Magnaest tua fides. Great is thy faith.







Diogenes.

Socrates most apparently known?















































learn to speak?













































































Diogenes) which tell folks they will be married, and yet remain single.



















with fear, and lost with despair.

































teach children?

























































Diogenes) women.



































proper weapons.



























enemies still here and see what he does, and says.



















































































paying that which it promises, nor doing to his creature as it ought to do.





Alexander the great judge it better, to give ones daughter in marriage to a
poor man being wise, then to a rich man being a fool?



























































turns into evil?















































































































that a man can receive?

























salt with him.



































of good children.

























































Plato hold opinion, that to live happily in a city, one must chase away both
riches and poverty?



















Aristotle?











































enemy?







Democritus pull out his own eyes?



Cicero had in great commendation?











Licurgus most esteemed above all other Lawmakers?



























Plutarche compared those men which spoke loud and to no purpose, unto empty
vessels.

noise then the full ones that are profitable.



























with her as it lists.









Lacedemoniens, from the which (were it not by death) none could escape, at the
least to suffer one?













under in obedience, to teach him good manners and to learn him an art how to
live in time to come.



















and still to be certified what and where the enemies are.















Galen) he that thinks those good turns great that he receives and those
little, that he does.



































Pythagoras says, love is paid with love.





































Scipio refused the title of great, which the Spaniardes had given him?







the wiseman lamenteth, and repents that he has done?



















has nothing?





























for the whotter (says Aristotle) carries the colder.

















Plato?





























to the rich, glory to the happy, solace to the unhappy, beautifying the
noble, and exalting the unnoble.





Alexander the great lover of justice, would never permit, that offices,
appertayning too justice, should be sold?



























A true Cave of fantasies. A true Shop of deceites. A true Double malady. A
true Joy soon sick. A true Old age staffeles. A true Peace without faith. A
true Blindness without a guide. A true Stable of lies. A true Vale of misery. A
true Fountain of thoughts. A true Ship without governor. A true Arc of
sorrows. A true Sad consolation. A true Freedom of vices. A true Surety
perilous. A true Turning wheel. A true Vain imagination. A true Sloth set a
woork. A true Ignorance yet skillful. A true Poverty abounding. A true Rotten
prison. A true Fugitive beauty. A true Foolish wisdom. A true Bitter
sweetness. A true Languishing joy. A true Fair deformity. A true Miserable
felicity. A true Forest of Thistles. A true Slippery ye. A true Continual
war. A true Kingdom of Satan. A true Kind of base haughtines.














world and of least continuance?

Domitian the Enperour says, it is corporal beauty.























a delectatable detriment, a secret engyne and a library of recommendations.



















Aristotle) which a man takes for himself being in danger of shipwreck or
drowning.



and the Princess of sovereign happiness.





















Socrates to fire?

man and revive his spirits, but too much burns him.



































been veniatis, pecora campi.















Petrarche which says,

Nobilissimum vindictae genus est, parcere.





























Alexander the great to Plato, to think on the government of his people, and
the next day to put it in execution.























of many men desired.





















Plut arch) that are requisite and necessary in a child?



how to speak?























































deemed unconstant?

























































dishonor.



































































Aristotle) over many, and to obey one less or worse then any, he means
vice, and to be surpassed in honesty, courtesy, virtue, science, and
humanity, by them which are, by seeming, his inferiors.







words, and the conversation of women.















Plato) whom he does love and fancy without occasion.









in health:













Alfonsus king of Aragon) for they without fear, flattery, or hope of gain,
do counsel and guide kings, princes and other men what they ought to do, and
what they should not, and they are not importunate nor greedy of reputation,
neither are they given to rauine and pillage, as most part of counselors now
a days are, and besides that, if we will they speak, if not, they will hold
their peace at our commandment.

Diogenes merrily affirm, that old cheese and hard, was better and of greater
virtue than the new?



































Galba, that his wit was ill lodged?



Licurgus the Lacedemonian, judged a ruler, do all things to the glory of God,
and profit of the common weal.



































Socrates.



Alexander (not fortune) gives the good and folly the evil.













































evil cogitations?











Plato think that hangemen were more courteous then Tyrants?







Egyptians and Lacedemonie^s compare great Lords to flaming fire?

































own dexterity of wit.





























Lacedemoniens and The banes paynt the images of judges blind and without
hands?











































Socrates often exhorted and permitted his scholars and youths, to look
themselves in glasses?

to the same by good disciplines, and if in the glass they appeared foul, and
deformed, they might study how to amend that deformity by virtue.

Licurgus forbid the Lacedemoniens to banquet?



Lacedemoniens?

















weeping cheese and weighty.

Alquimiftes, fools, poor, and insensed?













































so said Diogenes to Alexander the great.

































praise nor dispraise the world?

























help the oppressed, and chastize the wicked.



















































Aristotle) a stranger on earth, a Pilgrim, exemple of malady, a pray of time,
a play of fortune, an Image of ruin a balance of envy and calamity, and all
the rest fleugme and choler.

all others?





































to be a Tyrant; and a Judge, potentate, or officer to be a thief?













Plato) that is between a sick man and a Physician: and as much (says
Aristotle) as is between a quick man and a dead.

Marcus Aurelius) compared to ships?







Propertius think gold to be the strongest thing of this world?







































Cicero, that can be in a good man?































































Thebans kill and strangle their male Children that were too sayre, and their
daughters that were too foul?

















Plato, that can vanquish his anger, and keep his own secret.



























Indians is not to be compared to that fruit which a woman bears in her
womb, if it be honest and virtuous.























Diogenes) their flesh is yet raw and vnboyled.





















love of the fool, as well as of the wise man?









Diogenes) that reprehendeth his friends without flattery; for as dogs and
flatterers bite, the one for to wound, ye other to dispoile: so true friends
correct the faults of their neighbors, and bite them to amend, and lay folly
aside.











the seed of Nature, to be merry, and live in a healthful place.

























FINIS.
Verses of a blessed life.
HOw happy is that wight,
that holds himself content
With goods and gifts aright,
which nature does present?
No substance else save this,
but full of care it is.
Who has to serve his need,
be he contented then,
Whose substance does exceed,
shall serve for other men.
Abundance brings in pain
more then enough is vain.
Who mountes to honors loft,
and sits on fortunes wheel
From top is tossed often,
and often adowne does reele:
With thunder claps we see,
hie Towers soon shaken be.
War, grief, nor envy fell,
repair not to the place,
Where mean estate does dwell.
He is in Angels case:
And he that needs few things,
Needs better far then kings.
Of worldly Wealth.
O Fount of flattery worldly wealth,
The nource of care and souls vnhealth,
To have thee is an hell of dread,
To want thee, gulphe of grief indeed.
For Wisdom.
O God of Fathers mine,
the God and Lord of mercies most:
Thou blessed father, blessed Son,
and blessed holy Ghost,
Which with thy word all things have made,
and all things do ordain,
That in this world abide and breath,
or else where do remain:
Bless thou thy handie work, O Lord,
and grant me wisdom pure,
Which ever is about thy seat,
and ever shall endure.
For I thy handmaides Son O Lord,
a feeble creature am:
Brief is my time, brief is my joy,
brief is the life of man.
Too weak also my wisdom is
to understand thy will:
Send then thy heavenly Sapience Lord,
out of thy holy hill:
That she by thee may me instruct,
what steps I best may tread,
And how from men's traditions best,
I this my life may lead.
For all their works are vain, O Lord,
their studies I detest:
Thou only Lord of Sion hill,
art he can make me blessed.
Bent to content. T. C.

Jmprinted at London by Thomas Dauson dwelling at the three Cranes in the
Vintree.


