LOVES COURT OF CONSCIENCE, Written upon two several Occasions, with new
Lessons for Lovers. Whereunto is annexed a kind Husband's advice to his Wife.

By Humfrey Crowch.



LONDON, Printed for Richard Harper, and are to be sold at his shop in
Smithfield, at the Hospital Gate, 1637.

Loves Court of Conscience, VVherin does sit Reason, Discretion, Grace, Truth,
and Wit.
The Crier of the Court.
LOvers stand by, and give your Judges place,
Reason, Discretion, Wisdom, Truth and Grace,
Which here is come your causes for ^o try,
Where justice sits embracing equity.
Intelligence.
MY Lords; here is a Lover newly slai^,
Whose corp^ within this coffin does remain.
I come to give you notice that thi^ Elfe,
Unjustly wronged, unjustly hanged himself,
A wretched woman was the cause of all,
His sad laments, and his untimely fall.
Grace speaks. I Can not see though she have hi^ abused
How he can from the murder be excused.

Reason speaks. It Is true my Lord, had he been (...) by me
From this same bloody fact he had been free

Truth speaks. ANd had the woman t^in me for her guide,
The man had lived, and she had bin his brid

Wisdom speaks. ANd had they both my precepts well observe
From Reason, Grace and Truth, they had (...) (...)

Discretion speaks. ANd had they not ^efus'd me to imb^ace,
Grace, Reason, Wisdom, Truth had taken pla^
How divine Wisdom will of them dispose,
We cannot say no man thi^ ^ecret knows, in^
But cause that Lovers should not be so doting,
I Will read some lessons to them worth the noting.

The first Lesson.
SVch whose hands with heart agree,
In true loves sweet sympathy,
Such whose loves and true affection,
Does to others give direction,
How to love and love indeed
If in love they mean to speed.
Such that can no rival brook,
Or suspicious of a look,
Or be angry for a kiss,
Or can wink at all a s^le;
Such whose jealous friends can never
From their hearts true love di^ever,
Such who when they play and toy
Do not work themselves annoy.
Love fixed on each others hearts,
Not upon the outward parts:
Lest that when those parts decay,
Love with glory pass away.
Such that do not love to range,
Such that cannot brook a change,
Such that with a roving eye,
Give no cause of jealousi^,
Such who when their friends would part them,
Neither friends nor so^s can start them.
Such who like the Camma^ill,
Thrive and flourish all the while,
And the more they are oppr^st,
They the more in love are blessed
Such as hate so foul a fact
As to break a true contract,
Or a true contract to make
False when once they do forsake,
Love and friend, and honesty,
In the twinkling of an eye:
Such as when contract they are,
Think a minute a whole year^,
Till they do enjoy their man,
Such shall live in happy states,
Such as naught but death can sever,
Happy be their fortunes ever:
This is love and worth commending,
Ever living never ending.
These to marry need not ^eare
Cause they honest minds do bear,
Whilst the rest that break their faith,
Live in fear of Heavens wrath.
The second Lesson.
THe Turtle Dove when she bath lost her mate,
Being exposed to good or evil fate,
Refuses comfort and her mate being lost,
Matches no more her first love being crossed,
Contrariwise made of another nature,
Do lose themselves contrary to this creature.
For when their Lovers constant do expect them,
Others do sue for love that do affect them,
And steals away their hearts, wins them and weds them,
Unknown to their first Lovers, bords and beds them,
This is a hell, a torture to the mind,
Of him that such discourtesie does find,
Offered by her whose credit lies a bleeding,
No good can come where is such bad proceeding.
And such a Comedy most commonly,
Ends for the most part with a Tragedy,
Woeful experience manifestly proves,
The woeful ends of such false-hearted loves,
This should teach men to have a special care,
Whom they affect, to whom they love do bear,
Since women are so fickle minded grown,
That when men think them sure they find them flown.
Just li^ (...) (...) (...) (...)
A (...) (...) the (...) (...) hardly (...),
Goes home with mi^h with melody and laughter,
And thinks to come again a fortnight after,
Then finds them gone, just so it is with men,
That sets their minds on women now and then,
But should they set a thousand watchful eyes,
Over these winged birds these Butter-flies,
Twere all in vain if they intend to fly,
They Will have their wills in spite of thee and I,
As soon hedge in the Cuckoo as constrain
A woman to be true so wilsull vain,
But yet I pity them in such a case,
That love such women so much void of grace,
Because I know the greater ^^ the love,
If truly placed, the harder to remove.
The third Lesson.
COncerning contract twixt a couple now
Without their friends consent I not allow,
But if the thing be done I cannot see,
Why friends should part friends that so well agree
To hurt the tender conscience of a maid,
Who ere thou art that shall her so persuade,
To break her faith she plighted to her love,
Shall (...) (...) God above
The (...) secrets of the heart
Will be revenged of thee, though they two part,
Nor is she free from Heavens punishment
Though it be do^ without her friends consent,
For though rash vows in heat of loves affection,
Are better broke th(...) kept by wits direction,
Yet how ^^^ this the conscience satisfy,
Corrupted with the sin of perjury,
As for example I do vow a thing,
I vow performance this to pass to bring,
Which is I break, and say 'twas rashly done,
Will this excuse me from presumption?
Besides their words are very dirt and trash,
That would affirm that Lovers vows are rash,
That love is surely too too hot to last,
That at the first sight is so firm^ly placed,
To move a contract in two Lovers so,
To kn(...) the knot and after it undo.
Children (...) inconsiderate fools do use,
To do and undo and themselves abuse,
But Lover, should be wiser and so wise,
Not to do any thing without advise.
The fourth Lesson.
THe conscience being stretched, God offended,
The maid suborned and the man suspended.
Closely she marries, and he ^all not know
The time when he receives his mortal blow,
She that never thought to do him so much harm,
Now keeps another bed and bosom warm,
And all upon persuasion of some friend:
Whose connsell proves as poison in the end,
The guilty conscience never taking rest,
But night and day the offender does molest,
Strange apparitions sometimes does appear,
Unto the party filling her with fear,
With strange Aspect^ she is perplexed a nights,
In dreams and visions which she terms sprites.
Sometimes she thinks she sees him whom she wrongs,
Coming to her with ^ry burning tongue,
To pull that t^ngue out that did falsify,
A spotless faith with foulest purgery.
Sometimes she thinks men in white sheets she sees
Covered with white from head below the knees.
And then she thinks although the sight be sained,
How white her conscience was before 'twas stained?
And though between her husbands arms she rest,
The thought of her first love does her molest,
Her conscience stings, her troubled heart does smite her,
And dreadful dreams does night by night affright her.
The fifth Lesson.
THe news being brought to the forsaken Lover,
As time will at the length all things discover,
His love so truly placed must be removed,
From her which heretofore so well he loved,
That which he did must be again undone,
The hardest task that's underneath the Sun,
A man as soon a mountain may displace,
As remove that his inward thoughts embrace,
Or say that he will straight way take in hand,
To separate the Ocean from the sand,
For nature will be nature, sense be sense
And weakness unto both has reference,
Poor man take Reason she must be thy Bride
And in this matter let her be thy guide:
But O why do I talk of reason so,
Lovers have no such Bride: nor none such know
For if they ruled were by her directions,
Then might they learn to rule their own affections,
I wish distressed Lovers such a bliss,
To understand and know what reason is,
But all in vain, love in another kind,
By violence thrusts reason from the mind.
O grief to think you heavenly powers (...)
Show us the way but how to rule this love
Or if it be a thing must govern us,
Why are we brought to inconvenience thus?
Pity him O his friends in such a fit,
In whose behalf these lines of grief (...) writ,
And let his sufferings in a cause so right,
Be thought upon when he is out of sight,
Who being crossed, himself engaged has,
To cross the Seas from her that broke her faith,
That being gone he might not see the shame,
That's drawing on upon so false a Dame.
Three years a faithful friend to her he was,
Three years contract before this came to pass,
And now a three year Voyage is he going,
And all because he will not see her ruin.
Maidens be faithful, yongmen, he that can,
Bridle affection, he is the wisest man.
The Sonet of Dido and Eneas.
After the Virtues they had played their parts,
Error came in to alter Lovers hearts.
DIdo was a Carthage Queen,
That loved a Trojan Knight,
Which wandering many a Coast had seen,
And many a dreadful fight,
As they a bunting rode, a shower
Drove them in a lucklesse hour,
Into a darksome (...).
Where AEneas with his charms,
Locked Queen Dido in his arms,
And had what he did crave.
Dido Hymen's rites forgot,
Her Love was winged with haste,
Her honor she considered not,
But in her breast him placed:
And when her love was new begun,
Love sent down his winged son
To fright AEneas sleeping,
Who bad him by break of day
From Queen Dido stoale away
Which made her fall a weeping.
Dido wept, but what of this?
The gods would have it so,
AEneas nothing did amiss,
For he was forced to go.
(...) to keep,
With false loves, but let them weep,
It Is folly to be true,
Let this lesson serve your turn,
And let twenty Didoes mourn,
So you get daily new.
He or she that fancies wrong,
May be ruled by this Song.
A kind husbands advice to his Wife.
MY love, my bosom friend, to whom I owe
My best respects if you but this did know,
That your cursed and unadvised words
Does pierce my heart, like daggers, knives, and darts,
The reason is, because I well respect you,
It would not be so, did not I affect you.
My Lord my God provides all needful things,
As well for me as for the greatest Kings,
And under God I carefully provide
Meat for my children, and my wife beside.
If you or they for whom I pains do take,
Deny obedience, cause my estate is weak,
It is sign, small love to me you bear,
As by your disobedience may appear:
For if you will not love me for my self.
You shall not love me, for I have no wealth.
If you on wealth so much did cast your eye,
Why did you marry one so poor as I?
I had small wealth when first with thee I married,
Nor do I wish that I unwed had tarried.
Since I am richer then I was before,
And who can justly say that I am poo^?
Since God some children unto me hat^ given,
That may for ought I know, be Saints in heaven
These are my riches and my chief content,
Glory to God that me such riches s^nt.
Many a rich man that goe^ fine and b^ave,
Would give a thousand po^nd one child to have
Gold cannot get a child, O if it could,
Then rich men would have children made of gol^
If gold be counted riches, then have I
Many good things that gold can never buy.
Then I am richer far then some that have
Gold in their purses, land^ and livings bra^e.
Yet I enjoy these blessings but in va^,
Because I love, and am not loved again.
O would I did not love thee half ^o well,
I Would nere regard that firebrand of hell,
I mean your tongue that ^oth afflict my heart,
For if a stranger should but act thy part,
I would not care, I am of this belief,
Where is great love, the greater is the grief,
If that it be repulst by evil speeches,
By a cursed dame that striven to wear the breeches
Consider what I ^ay, and be advised,
Silence in women kind is highly pris'd.
How can thou say thou love me with thy har^
Thy tongue does show thou love me but in pa^
It will be so, unless you rule your tongue,
That member that has done me so much wrong.
Those women love their husbands well indeed,
That to their humors are so well ag^eed.
That though their hu^ands never so cross appear,
They silent are, because they love them dear^.
I do not wish I such a wise embra^.
But wish that such a tongue in thee were plac'^,
For such as they may have worse faults then the
And such as they are sure no wives for me.
Only I wish thee silent as they are,
And then none of them shall with thee compare,
So well I do est^em of thee sw^t heart,
That nothing but thy tongue shall us two part:
Nor can I say that I in haste did choose
One that good counsel s^orn'd, and did refuse:
For I did never find thee obstina^,
That I should think my words are out of date,
Or that I speak now out of time or place,
Unto a woman wanting wit and grace:
For wit I know thou have, and that is this,
To know what should be done, and what is amiss.
And if this wit with grace together j^yn,
Thou art more dearer, and more nearer mine.
For though for wi^ we bot^ may go to school,
Yet I do know thou art not such a fool,
But that this thing thou well do^ understand,
That thou do know th^rt under my command,
Unless you will say, the Priest in vain did say,
That you must cherish honor, and obey;
Which if you do deny, you do herein
Against your conscience, and your knowledge si^
Should you do so, I think it not unfit,
To say that you have neither grace nor wit:
Which God sorbid, for you have read I know,
That after God on man did life bestow,
He made the woman out of Adams side,
Not his commander, but his loving Bride.
It is not good that man should live alone,
This the Almighty said, this think upon.
So now you cannot choose but understand,
Woman was made to comfort, not command.
They are sweet comforts both at board and bed;
Always provided they are not misled
By evil company, or by the tongue
To do their husbands and their neighbour^ wrong
But if their tongues like, thunder trouble men,
They may be said to be Commanders then.
Sara obeyed Abraham, and did call
Him Lord and Master, mark this women all.
O ^mes how are you changed! we poor men
Can hardly find one Sara among ten.
A shrew that has a sair and comely face,
Proves no decay in nature, but in grace.
If nature do decay in any part,
I wish it in the tongue, not in the hea^.
O let the tongue decay of my fair Bride,
That the more love may in the heart abide.
Dear heart regard me, and the cause remove,
That hinders the conjunction of our love.
O let it not be said, that thou have bin
One that did move thy husband for to sin,
One that did move me to impatiency.
And add affliction unto misery.
If you do know wherein I do offend,
Tell me my fault, and I will quickly mend.
And why should thou not deal as well by me,
Since all good women labor to be free
From all occasions that may make them ill,
Nor do they ever st^ive to have their will,
Because they know the husband is the head,
Which all confess, but such as are ill bred.
And such who must to sha^e and ruin run,
As to my knowledge some of them have done.
O if in thee remain true woman-hood!
Then take advise by this my counsel good:
And do not think that thou the power can have,
To make thy bosom friend to be thy slave.
For though I scorn over thee to tyrannize,
Because I ^ear the Lord that rules the skies,
Yet I will ever bear my fathers mind,
I scorn as much to stoop to women kind;
For if I should, then all men would me hate,
Because from manhood I degenerate.
And surely I should have the love of no man,
If I were such a slave unto a woman:
Which to prevent, and to avoid ill speeches,
I Will look that thou shall never wear the breeche
Gall wa^ cast out from (...) sacrific^,
To show no strife 'twixt man and wi^ should (...)
All bitter anger must be banished
From married folk, and from the marriage bed
Cast out this gall, swe^en what is bitter made,
Call reason in, that long from thee has strayed
Examine well thy self, and thou shall find
How thou have wronged me by b^ing unkind
It is reported that there is a stone
Which if so be it in the fire be thrown,
That hea^ it does receive, it will retain,
And never after will be cold again.
I am that stone, and thou the fire art,
Such heat at first to me thou did impart,
That my affection never will be cold,
Though we should live ^ill both of us were old
Nay, though old time should crop thy beauty (...)
And in thy cheek^ deep wrinkles should appea^
Yea, though I say thy beauty fair should fail,
Thy red rose cheeks by want of blood look (...)
Yea though I could not give, nor thou receive,
Those comforts which we being young may ha^
Yet I would love thee then, as I do now.
And thou may live to ^ince my saying true.
There is an herb as Aristotle says,
That cures and kills, such properties it has:
Even so it lies in a woman's will,
By kind or unkind words, to cure or kill.
Look on the female creatures, beasts or foul,
Which of the^ do their mates cross or control?
O cast thine eye upon the turtle Dove,
Why should that bird outstrip thee in thy love?
Is woman worse then is the senseless creature,
That Is only guided by the light of nature?
Woman out-strips them all for excellence,
And should outstrip them for obedience.
It is I say the glory of your sex,
To love and to obey, and not to vex
Your husbands by ill language, it is unfit,
And those that do so, want both grace and wit.
Rule but thy tongue, my love shall never sover,
For where I loved at first, I love for ever.
GOd is the God of orde^, and each creature
Is ruled by him in its proper nature:
The Sun, the Mo^n, the Sea keeps their bouds,
The tide observe^ in order on the Downs:
Only untutord men and women, they
More then all other creatures run astray^
Can I obedience to my Maker show,
That no good will unto my neighbor owe,
Can God obedience then from you expect,
If you your husbands counsel do reject,
If we like children do not know our places,
But ignorant of divine and humane graces?
Women grow mankind, men effeminate,
And the world turned upside down by fate:
Let Hercules then keep at home and spin,
And send his wife to wars where he has bin.
If women find themselves that they be able,
Men shall feed Chickens underneath the table:
Always provided if they go to war,
They shall not lose what men so labor for,
Or basely yield that castle of defense,
Where Chastity has her chief residence.
Admits no entrance unto any man,
But the right owner, such a woman can
Behave her self most bravely in the wars,
Without receiving any privy, (...)
Obnoxious to her reputati^n.
To bring her husbands forehead out of fashion:
O such a woman's worth her weight in gold,
If it were so that she were to be sold.
But I had rather thou should stay at home,
Then with such Amazons abroad to rome,
And wisely learn, if thou to fight be prone,
To fight against thine own corruption.
O happy conquest, if thou conquer those,
Thy strong temptations, homebred inbred foes,
More lasting glory thou shall gain hereby,
Then bravest Champions by their chivalry.
The end.



