COLLECTIONS OVT OF S. Augustine, AND SOME FEW OTHER Latin Writers upon the
first part of the Apostles Creed.

By John Crompe, Master of Arts of C. C. C. in Cambridge, and Vicar of Thornham
in Kent.

First preached in his Parish Church; and now enlarged (as here follows) for
more public use.

1 John 5.4. This is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our Faith.
August. Sermon. 38. De Tempore. Omnis rationalis Anima, aetate congrua, discat
Fidem Catholicam; maxim populi Praedicatores Christiani, and Ecclesiarum Dei
Doctores; ut possint veritati contradicentibus resistere; and Catholicam
amantibus pacem prodesse. LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for William Lee, and
are to be sold at his shop, near the Miter Tavern in Fleet Street. 1638.

PErlegi has Collectiones in Symbolum Apostolicum, in quibus nihil reperio
sanae Doctrinae contrarium, quominus cum utilitate publica imprimantur.

Rmo. in Christo Patri, ac Domino D. Arch. Cant. Sacellanus Domesticus GUIL.
BRAY.
Dat. Lambethae Maii ult. 1638.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE KATHERINE, Lady STANHOPE Dowager. The Author wishes,
as well the Graces spiritual, as the Blessings temporal of this life, and the
Glories eternal of the life to come.
GOod Madam; I should be very ungrateful, if I should not dedicate the first
fruits of any public labor of mine, how great or small soever, unto some of
your Noble Family: from whence I have received, not only the first, but all
the fruits of my present maintenance in the world. And amongst these that do
now survive, there is none can challenge so great an interest as your Honor:
not only, as you are the present Patroness of my Living; but in many other
personal and particular respects; by which I, and mine, stand more obliged to
your Ladyship, than to any others. May you therefore please to accept of this
poor paper present: not as a satisfaction, but an acknowledgement only, of my
so many great engagements: And withal to let it pass under your Honorable
Name and countenance unto the world: it shall much more increase my debt unto
you: which seeing I shall have no better means and opportunities to pay, I do
hereby promise that the failings and deficiencies thereof, shall be supplied
with prayers, for the health and happiness, not of your self alone, but of
all your noble issue also; together with the rest of your Family, by him that
truly honors, and faithfully serves your Ladyship in the Lord:

JOHN CROMPE.

THE APOSTLES CREED.
I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, etc.
THis Creed, or Sum of Christian Belief, is commonly called and known by
the name of the Apostles Creed; because indeed, as Antiquity affirms, it was
made and agreed upon by the twelve Apostles themselves, to continue and abide
as a sure rule of faith, to be derived and conveyed to all posterity thorowout
the Christian world, in after ages, comprehended according to their
Apostolical number in twelve articles, and called the Creed, or Belief,
because thereby all true Believers should be guided and directed, how to
continue and remain in the Catholic Unity and Verity: And withal, enabled
to convince and reprove all heretical pravitie and falsehood, that should
afterward spring up and arise in the Church of God; either by the subtlety and
malice of the Devil, or the weakness and wickedness of man.

It is derived and delivered unto us by our Ancestors and Forefathers of the
Church (says S. Augustine) Ser. 181. De temp. Praefat.
that after the Ascension of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ unto his Father
in Heaven: when as by the coming of the Holy Ghost, his Disciples were so
inspired and inflamed, as that they spoke to all nations in their own proper
and peculiar tongues and languages: and so fitted and prepared, were shortly to
depart one from another, to preach the Gospel and Word of God in all coasts
and countries of the world: Normam prius sibi futurae praedicationis in commune
statuerunt, etc. They concluded first between themselves, to set down such an
order and rule of their after-preaching, that when they were locally separated
and divided one from the other, they might not preach a diverse and different
doctrine one to another, to those that they should invite and call to the faith
of Christ. All therefore being met and placed together, and filled with the
Holy Ghost, after conference had, every one delivered his opinion of what he
thought fitting, as necessary to be the subject of their preaching to the
Church and people of God. And having concluded upon it, this they appoint to
remain, as a rule of faith and belief, and even Summa credendorum; as the
sum and substance of Christian Doctrine to all Believers for ever after: So
far S. Augustine.

For as they were all of one heart and of one soul, Acts 4.32. so they would
manifest unto the universal world, that they were of one faith and belief
too. Not like the Stellae erraticae, the wandering Stars, instable Humorists,
and giddie headed Novellists of our times, that having one Catholic and
Orthodoxall Religion established in our old England (for which we are ever
bound to bless and praise the holy name of God) yet must run into a New
England, to erect and set up another; nay twenty other: For, Quot homines, tot
sententiae; Look how many men there are (especially that take themselves to be
Leaders and Masters among them) so many minds they are of, as one a Brownist,
another a Familist, a third an Anabaptist, and all Separatists from the true
Church of God. But the holy Apostles, though (according to their charge given
them by their Master, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Matthew. 28.9.) they
went to all nations, preaching and teaching the word of God: ^uffinus.
as S. Matthew to Aethiopia; S. Mark the Evangelist to Egypt, Lybia, and the
Africans thereabouts; S. James to Spain; S. Andrew to Thracia, and Scythia
Europaea; Philip to Scythia Asiatica; Bartholomew to Armenia, and the hither
parts of India; Thomas to Media, Parthia, Persia, and (as some say) to the
Brackmannes and the Bactrians, Eusebius.
and the farthest parts of India; John the Evangelist to Asia; S. Peter to
Pontus, Galatia, Bythinia, Cappadocia; S. Paul to all the countries interjacent
and lying between Jerusalem and Illyricum; and lastly, Joseph of Arimathea (as
some) but as Nicephorus, Simon Zelotes, to our British I Will: yet they spoke and
preached still, but unum and idem, one and the same verity in unity, in how
many different, and how far distant regions soever they became. Thereby
giving the world to understand, that there is, or at least ought to be, but one
faith, but one religion, not only thoroughout all the countries; but also
thoroughout all the ages of the world, which is therefore called Fides
Catholica, the Catholic Faith and Religion, because of the universalitie of it
in all places and at all times. For, Id vere Catholicum, quod ubique, quod
semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est: says Vincentius Lirinensis: That only
is truly Catholic, Cap. 3. cont. haereses.
which all places and all persons have received and believed with full and
unanimous consent in all times. And therefore the Apostle says; There is but
one faith, Ephesians. 4.5. and that one faith is the ground and foundation but of
one religion. For true religion was never but one, Semper eadem, always the
same from the beginning of the world till our days: and so must and shall
continue from henceforth till the end of the world again. In so much as all
our forefathers, Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob: or in more general
terms, all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors,
Professors and Believers, as well under the Law as Gospel; as well in former
as in our times, have and must all be saved by one and the self same faith;
yea, in one and the self same religion; howsoever in form and manner some
ways and at some times in show different: yet in substance still one and the
same.

As for example: There is only this difference betwixt the true Believers
before Christ his coming and since: Quod illi crediderunt in Christum
promissum; nos in Christum exhibitum: They believed in Christ promised, and as
yet to come; we in Christ exhibited and come. And I believe it will be no hard
matter to prove out of the Books of the Old Testament, that Gods children in
the time of the Law, did believe all the Articles of this our Apostles Creed as
well as we, with this distinction of present and to come; though darkly and
obscurely: because, Vmbram tantum futurorum habebat Lex: The Law had only the
shadow of things to come; says the Apostle, Heb. 10.1. The proofs which I
shall fetch from the Old Testament, in the prosecution of this subject, for the
confirmation of each several article, will manifest and declare as much. In
the mean time take notice first of the unity and accord of the holy Apostles,
in framing this Sum and Symbol of their Christian Faith and Belief. And let
all true Christians, but especially their successors, in any the least
Ministerial Function, learn by their example, to leave all civil, uncivil
jarres and contentions in matters of Doctrine, that so we may be all of one
mind in one house, I mean the Church and house of God; and to speak and
preach but one thing, as S. Paul exhorts his Corinthians; that so there may
be no divisions amongst us; but that we may be all knit together in one mind,
and be of one judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. which counsel, whosoever do not readily
and willingly put in practice and submit themselves unto; but delight in
renting and tearing asunder the seamlesse coat of Christ, ( Quam scindere non
fuit carnificibus consilium; says Alexander Bishop in Theodoret. Hist. lib. 1.
cap. 4. which the very Executioners of Christ were so far from doing, that
on the contrary, Joh. 19.24.
they consulted how to keep it whole and entire) through their distractions
and divisions in matters and points of Doctrine, from their Orthodoxall
brethren, and Catholic Church in which they live; whatsoever they think to
the contrary of themselves: yet indeed and truth, they are rather
Apostaticall, than Apostolical men.

For in the Apostles time, the multitude of Believers were all of one heart and
of one soul; as before, out of Acts 4.32. And therefore the same S. Paul to
the Romans, bids the Church mark them diligently, which cause division and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them: for
they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies:
and with fair speech and flattering deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans
16.17, 18. In which words I should desire and advise the refractarie and
contentious spirits of our times, that are never satisfied and contented,
either with the doctrine or discipline of our Church (if they were but capable
of advice, which it is to be feared most of them are not) to consider and
observe what esteem and opinion the Apostle Paul had of such in his time.
First, in that he would have them to be diligently marked; that so secondly
they may be avoided; his reason thirdly, because they serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own bellies; and lastly, that how fair and smooth soever
their voice and outside be, yet within they are no better than hypocrites;
their speech being only flattering to deceive the hearts of the simple. As
also I could wish, that their followers, that is, such as are led and seduced
by them, would but mark what opinion the same Apostle had likewise of them,
when he styles and calls them simple. And yet these think themselves the
wisest people in the world. But the Spirit of God knows you better than your
selves. And therefore be not too highly conceited of your own wisdom, seeing
God himself does call you fools and simple. Et utinam rudiores essent quam
qui poterant decipi; It were well for you if you were so simple, that you could
not be deceived by the subtle and sly insinuations of those that creep into
your houses, and lead captive simple women laden with sins, and led with
diverse lusts, which are ever learning, and yet never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, as the same Apostle still speaks of them, 2 Timothy 3.6.

For (that I may crave leave for this only digression) let them tell me; are
they not women, and simple ones too, that they most prevail withal in these
their madnesses and follies? I mean, simple in respect of divine knowledge and
spiritual understanding; but not in respect of condition and quality in the
world. For, according to the subtlety of the Serpent, as well themselves, as
all their brood and brotherhood, I mean all Heretics and Schismatikes
whatsoever, have ever been so wise in their generations, as not much to mind
or regard the meaner sort, whether they sided with them or not, but for women
of wealth and some fashion in the world, by whom not only credit and
countenance to their cause, but maintenance also to their persons (though many
times to the great loss and detriment, if not the undoing of their husbands)
might be procured and obtained. For these I say especially, have their hooks
and baits been ever laid, their plots and projects still guided and directed
above all others. And they have in all ages prevailed so far with this wea^^r
sex, that some of all sorts and ranks in the world, have always been ready to
take their parts against the truth: as Townes-women and Merchants wives of the
City, Gentlemen's wives, nay Ladies of the Court, and Noble-women, have been
caught and entangled in their snares, being seduced and drawn away by them. To
instance in one for all the rest.

Constantia, the widow of Licinius, and sister to Constantine the Emperor, to
whom (as Ruffinus speaks) it happened to grow acquainted with a certain
Priest, latenter partibus Arrii favente, closely and underhand favoring the
Arrian faction, who notwithstanding out of cunning, at the first would bewray
nothing of his mind unto her; ubi vero multa familiaritas copiam tribuit,
paulatim sermonem caepit asporgere: but when much familiarity afforded him
license and opportunity to speak; by little and little he began to sprinkle
as it were, and cast some speeches abroad, tending to his purpose: as that it
was for the envy only, and some private quarrels of the Bishop, that Arrius
was cast out of the Church, and banished his Country; and not for any just
desert of his own: the people thinking little or never the worse of him, but
that he was dear unto them still, and in their good esteem, notwithstanding
such injury offered unto him. With which and the like speeches often suggested
and whispered into the ears of the said Constantia, he made her so fast and
firmly his own, that she, with a great deal of earnestness and zeal more
than discretion, made it her last suit unto her brother the Emperor, lying
upon her deathbed, ut Presbiterum in familiaritatem reciperet, that he would
receive this Priest unto his favor, and not only so, but that he would hear
him also in those things which he should suggest and deliver unto him, tending
to his good and welfare: which he accordingly did: and upon the said Priests
instigation and persuasion, calls home Arrius from banishment, and puts such
further trust and confidence in him, that when he draws near his end also
himself, he made choice of him above all others, to commit the custody of his
last will and testament unto; with special charge to deliver it to none but
Constantius himself, which was to succeed him. By the performance whereof, the
said Priest gained him, the said Constantius also to the Arrian faction, which
bred much unrest and unquietness to the Orthodoxall servants of God for a long
time after, as the Ecclesiastical histories do report at large.

And therefore considering the danger that has, does, and may come to the
Church of God, through their weakness and wilfulness; let all women, of what
rank and condition soever they be, in the name and fear of God, keep
silence: not only in the Church, as S. Paul commands, 1 Cor. 14.34. but also
in all Church causes; it being a shame for them to be medlers and sticklers in
businesses of that nature, as there follows. And therefore I permit not a
woman to teach, says he elsewhere, viz. 1 Timothy 2.12. But if they will learn
any thing as before, 1 Cor. 14.35. whereby the Apostle (me thinks) seems not
to require or expect such sufficiency and fullness of science in women as in
men: as fearing more danger belike to Gods Church, than good, by their much
knowledge. Yet if they will needs do it; why then, let them ask their
husbands at home, and learn in silence with all subjection, 1 Timothy 2.11. and
he gives his reason too: because Adam was not deceived, but the woman was
deceived, verse. 14. And indeed, it has so come to pass ever since, that in
all such deceptions, plures inventae sunt foeminae quam viri, more women are
found than men, as Alphonsus a castro speaks. For that malignant enemy of
ours the Devil, knew from our very first cteation, that the woman was more
easy to be seduced than the man; Tenacius amplectique malum cui semel
adhaeserit; and that she would the more firmly and stiffely embrace that evil
unto which she did once adhere. And yet farther: It must needs be a means to
breed errors and heresies in the Church of God (says he) cum vulgus, etc.
when the common people will not be contented only with the reading of the
Scriptures: but will undertake also to discuss and dispute of the sense and
meaning thereof: and that with such confidence and boldness many times, that
very lewd fellows will not be ashamed to provoke the learned, and contest
with them about the understanding of Gods sacred Word. And that which is worst
of all (as he goes on) Non solum haec a viris fiunt, sed etiam a foeminis;
These things are done not only by men, but by women also. S. Paul verily
(says he) does not permit a woman to teach, and yet in these times women are
not afraid, nor ashamed neither to teach and dispute too, even in matters of
faith; Atque adeo prot^rve, ut facilius centum viros ab errore revoces, quam
mulierem unam: And that with such obstinacy and perverseness, that ye may
more easily reclaim an hundred men from their errors than one woman. Thus far
Alfonsus.

Now whether this were just matter of complaint in his days or no, God knows.
But that it is so in our days, not only God, but also our Church knows: in
which a great part of the distractions and divisions, under which she at this
time groans, proceed only from hence; that all Recusant Priests, whether
Popish or other Sectaries, find so great a shelter under this sex: and that
their venomous doctrines and pestiferous positions, which with sly
insinuations, they broach and preach unto them, are so easily admitted, and so
eagerly defended by them.

For diverse of the men, I doubt not, of both sorts, I mean as well of Papists
as Sectaries, would return again under the roof of our Church, if it were
not for the stiffnesse and wilfulness of their wives. But this is not the way,
by which they of that sex must save their souls, viz. first by yielding prompt
and ready ears and assent unto, and then wilful and obstinate defense and
supportation of, those erroneous doctrines, which by subtle insinuations, they
have received and sucked in from a sly seducer in either of these kinds; Qui
Doctoris nomen ambiens, maluit magister fieri erroris, quam discipulus
veritatis; as it was said of Tatianus the Heretic: who ambitiously aspiring to
be accounted a great Doctor and a learned Rabbi, chooses rather to become a
master of error, than a Disciple of truth. But their souls shall be saved
(says the Apostle) through bearing of children, if they continue in these
ensuing virtues (which are far more befitting their sex, than disobedience to
their mother the Church) viz. Faith, and love, and holiness with modesty, 1 Timothy 2.15. either of which I am bold to say, they cannot truly have, so long as
they continue refractarie and rebellious back-sliders from the received
doctrines and discipline of our Church, in which they have been educated and
instructed: and from which in their baptism they received and sucked in the
first life and breath of Christianity and Religion. And therefore for
conclusion of this point, let me entreat all men (especially of reason and
religion) to show themselves to be men, and to take the staff again into
their own hands: considering that the husband is the wives head, unto whom she
ought to be in subjection in all things, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.23,
24. and if in all things, then much more in the service and worship of God. For
if it be (as S. Augustine says) but, Perversa domus, ubi foemina habet
imperium super virum: A disorderly and ill-governed family, where the wife will
take upon her to rule all, though in household affairs, then much more when it
is so in Church affairs. And those men that suffer it in their houses to the
breach of the unity of the Church of God (as it is to be feared many do)
shall be sure to answer for it, it being a powerful and unresistable reason,
urged by the Apostle, why inferiors should obey them that have the oversight
of them, and submit themselves unto them; because they watch for their souls,
as they that must give an account, Heb. 13.17. And therefore in the name and
fear of God, let me persuade all masters of families, that they permit neither
themselves, nor any others of their household, to be carried about with diverse
and strange doctrines, because it is a good thing that the heart be established
with grace: as the same Apostle in the same chapter exhorts, verse. 9. But let
every one say with Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15.
and that in the unity of the Church of God, in which we have been nourished
up in the faith of God, and particularly of the Apostles Creed, the subject of
our discourse at this time. And this suffices for the first circumstance; the
unity of the holy Apostles, in composing and compiling of this Sum of
Christian Belief.

In the second place, in this title, The Apostles Creed; we may take notice
also of the antiquity and universal consent, which has been given to the
doctrine in the same contained in all ages. So that as a Council says, Conc.
Fer. Sess. 10.
Patet neutiquam licuisse ab Apostolorum Symbolo quicquam dimovere: It is
evident, that it is not lawful by any means to depart a jot from the Symbol
or Belief of the Apostles. Which may teach us to grow suspicious of all
novelties in matters of faith; and to keep our selves close, only to this
needful and ancient truth, according to Gods own direction by his Prophet.
Stand in the ways and behold, and ask for the old way, which is the good way,
and walk therein; and ye shall find rest unto your souls, Ierem. 6.16. For
if our souls cannot find rest in this anci^nt and so long received truth;
they will never be able to find it, I am confident, in the new created Creeds
of these latter times: I mean that of the Trent Council, and the like; of
which Sir Humphrey Line has given a true verdict, saying; Epist. Dedic. before
The Safe way.
I am sure that those twelve new coined articles, declared by their grand
Council of Trent, and published by Pope Pius the fourth, with straight charge
to be received of all men, are so far from the knowl^dge of Antiquity, that
as yet they are scarce understood amongst their own Disciples for articles of
faith: and their best learned Romanists profess openly, that most of them were
unknown to former ages. So far he. Which as he has truly averred, so as
learnedly and fully proved in his Treatise called The safe way: whither I
refer you, To which purpose also of discovering the noveltie of Popish
Tenets; you may s^e a Treatise called, The Old Religion, written by that
reverend and learned Prelate, Dr. Joseph Hall, now Lord Bishop of Exon; as
likewise another Treatise called, Credo Sanctam Catholicam Ecclesiam, written
by Dr. Chaloner.

Now if the faith of the Papists he so new, it cannot be true, for Primum
verum, as Tertullian has well observed: In divinity and matters of religion,
the first must needs be truest, as being nearest to the fountain of all truth,
which is God himself; and his son Christ, the stream issuing from the said
fountain, even truth it self, as Ioh. 14.6. It being a rule and received
maxim in nature; that, Quo res magis appropinquat fonti and caussae alicujus
perfectionis, eo plus recipit: The n^erer any thing approches to the fountain
or original of any perfection, so much the more it does participate thereof.
As the nearer any thing comes to the fire, it is the hotter; to the Sun, the
brighter; to the water, the colder; to the truth, the truer. And therefore our
Apostles Creed flowing so immediately from the fountaine-head of truth, Christ
Jesus the righteous; must needs be far more worthy of all men to be received
(as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 1.15.) than that which is of a far later
Edition. For whatsoever comes at the second hand, as being brought in by man's
invention, must needs savor of man's corruption. And therefore, I say, Sermon.
181. de temp. Praefat.
let us keep our selves fast and close to this: which howsoever (as S.
Augustine speaks) Breve sit verbis, magnum tamen est Sacramentis: It be brief
and short in words, yet it is very large and long in sense: containing
whatsoever is requisite and necessary to be believed toward salvation. Yea,
let every one, as well old as young, as well men and women, as children, be
diligent and careful to learn, and hold, and understand; and when time is, to
make confession too of this, which contains the sum and substance of the
Catholic faith, which except a man believe faithfully he cannot be saved; but
without doubt he shall perish everlastingly. As Athanasius in his Creed.

And therefore it stands every man upon, as much as the saving of his soul
comes to, to believe, and know, and understand this, which every ordinary
person can hardly do without a guide, as the Eunuch told Philip, Hieron. ad
Paulin.
Acts 8.31. because, Singula in eo verba, plena sunt sensibus: There is not a
word in it, but has its weight.

Wherefore I shall endeavor for your farther benefit and instruction herein,
after a short, plain, and familiar manner, to make interpretation thereof unto
you, out of the holy Scriptures and Word of God. For it is not fitting (as
Cyrill says) either for me to deliver, Catech.
or for you to hear and believe any thing, concerning the divine and holy
mysteries of faith, without demonstrations and proofs thereof, out of the same
the holy Writ. For the very safety of our faith does not depend upon a
subtle and devised disputation; but upon plain and evident probation out of
the Word of God. And therefore that I may show my self, Vt opinione, sic and
dictione Christianum, that is, As in believing, so in speaking and writing a
right Christian; you must not expect: Pet. Nannius de Athanasio.
Me, mysteria regni coelorum, aut furtis Aegyptiis, aut Gentilibus fucis, aut
comptelis exoticis ornare: That I should strive to set forth these deep
mysteries of our Christian faith and Kingdom of Heaven, with any jewels
stolen from the Egyptians, or fabulous fictions of the Gentiles, or sorraine
and far-fetcht dresses of humane Arts and Sciences: neither with any other
strong and strained lines, and the like: Sed tantummodo Evangelicis verbis
enunciare: But fairly and smoothly to derive my proofs and interpretation
thereof only from the sacred foun^aines, as I said before. For as S. Jerome
says, Fides pura and aperta confessio non quaerit strophas and argumenta
verborum: that is, Subtle and Scholasticall disputes, or other verbal
arguments, are no whit requisite in the pure and public profession and
confession of our Christian faith. And this suffices for the title.

Now to the words themselves.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE Apostles Creed. Credo in Deum Patrem omnipotentem,
Factorem Coeli and Terrae, etc. That is, I believe in God the Father Almighty,
Maker of Heaven and Earth, etc.
WHere first we are to take notice of the first word, Credo, I believe; which
shows (as S. Augustine says) Quod non debemus discutere divina judicia, sed
credere; In locum, Sermon. 181.
nec rationem requirere; sed fidem simpliciter and immobiliter exhibere: That
we ought not to question or dispute of divine mysteries, but to believe them:
nor so much to require a reason of them, as simply and undoubtedly, yea,
immovably and without staggering, to submit our faith and credence unto them.
For there are many things belonging to the salvation of Gods children, which if
every plain and simple man were driven to find out a reason for, upon the
pain of his damnation, he were never able to do it, and so consequently
could never be saved. Nay, the most learned, and chief pillars of the Church
of God themselves, have been at a stand in some of them; which made S. Paul to
cry out; Oh the deepnesse of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God; how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? Romans
11.33. And therefore, Succumbat ratio fidei and captiva quiescat: Humane sense
and natural reason must yield and submit themselves when faith comes in place.
For faith is the evidence of things not seen; says the Author to the
Hebrews, Chap. 11.1. that is, not perceived or understood by the eyes of the
body; no, nor of the mind neither, but only believed to be so; because God,
which cannot lie, has said it is so. So that, Fides incipit ubi ratio desinit:
There is no place, no room for faith, till reason can go no farther. For if
we could comprehend the deep mysteries of God by reason, then it were
knowledge, and not faith, that should apprehend and lay hold upon them.

Now our knowledge in this life is imperfect (says S. Paul) but in the next
life, we shall know even as we are known, and see face to face as we are
seen: For then that which is perfect being come, that which is imperfect shall
be done away, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10. But now in this life abides faith and hope, as
there follows, verse. 13. which gave occasion to S. Augustine, so often in his
works, to call this life, Tempus fidei; The time of faith and believing:
answerable to that of S. Paul elsewhere, Nunc per fidem ambulamus, etc. Now we
walk by faith, and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7.

Again, if by knowledge only men might attain unto salvation, then none but
the great Clerks and learned Rabbis of the world should be capable thereof:
and the illiterat and ignorant poor man, such as S. Peter and S. John were
before their calling, Acts 4.13. should be quite excluded from all hope of
grace and mercy. But God, whose mercies are above all other his works, has
otherwise provided; that now by the means of faith and belief, the mean as
well as the mighty, and the poor as well as the rich, may be made partakers
of salvation. And therefore for use and conclusion of this point, let us not
strive so much in this life to know, as to be strong in faith, and firmly to
believe: for if we believe now, we shall know hereafter. For too great a
desire to know has wrought our woe: it being the only occasion, first of our
sin, and secondly of our misery: Quod homo voluit scire antequam crederet,
says Cusanus, That man would know before he did believe. For by this means,
Arbor scientiae complures privavit arbore vitae: The tree of knowledge has
deprived many of the tree of life. And never any but heretics did, Concludere
fidem intra limits humani intellectus; as Alfonsus a Castro speaks: that is,
Shut up their faith within the narrow lists and limits of man's shallow and
simple understanding: but it is the part and property of a true Christian,
Captivare intellectum in obsequium Christi: To captivate and subdue his
understanding unto the doctrine of Christ.

Secondly, this word, Credo, I believe, tells us, that we must not only not
dispute in matters of faith; but so far subject our reason unto faith, that we
do it also without doubting, without staggering. For, Dubious in fide infidelis
est: It is scarce faith at all, if there be any doubting in it: as appears by
that speech of our Savior unto his doubting Apostle Thomas: Put thy finger
here, and put it into my side; and be not faithless, but believe, Ioh. 20.27.
And, Vt aliquid fides vere appelletur, certitudinem exigit, and firmitatem in
eo qui eam tenet; says the former Alfonsus; that is, Whatsoever is properly
and truly called faith, has certainty in it, and steadfastness of belief in
him that holds it. Otherwise (says he) if assurance and stabilitie be
wanting, and any the least scruple arising; it is not to be accounted faith,
but doubting only or opinion. This being the difference between faith and
opinion: Quod qui credit tenaciter adhaeret: That he which believes sticks so
close unto his Tenet; that no man, or means shall be able to withdraw him from
it, or to wry him another way: whereas he that does but hold opinion only:
Sic accedit suae sententiae, ut aliquantulum haesitet and mobili intellectu
assentiat: He comes but doubtingly, and with an uncertain assent unto it: As
to the opinions of the Philosophers, which were truths only of consequence,
upon supposed grounds still disputable, and therefore still uncertain. Whereas
our doctrine, the doctrine of Christians, is a truth of foundation, without
question, and therefore not disputed, but believed, and thoroughly settled in our
hearts, by the operation and power of him, who is both the Author and the
Finisher of it, as the Scripture speaks. And therefore in these fundamental
grounds of our Christian faith, away with doubting and hesitation. For he that
doubts and wavereth in these, is like a wave of the sea, tossed of the wind,
and carried away, as S. James says, Iam. 1.6. But let every one amongst us,
not only men, but women also, yea and children too, according to their
capacity, say with firmness and fastness of faith, as the holy Apostles
here, every one for himself: Credo, I believe. A word or two of the person,
Ego, I believe: and so I will end this point.

When we pray we are directed to say, Our Father, not my Father alone; because
every one ought to be so charitable, as to pray for others, as well as
themselves: wi^h a desire likewise that they should do the like for him; and
with a confidence and assurance that he shall fare and speed the better for
such the prayers of his neighbors and Christian brethren. As Saint James
says, Confess your faults one unto another, and pray one for another, that
ye may be healed: For the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much, James 5.16. But when we come to make profession and confession
of our faith: then it must be I; not We believe, because we cannot believe
one for another; but every one (when he is come once to years of discretion,
and capacity to understand) must believe for himself, and be saved by his
own, not another faith; according to that of the Prophet; The just shall live
by his faith, Habacuck 2.4. that is, his own faith; not another man's. I say,
when he comes to years: For the Church of God is so charitable toward
inf^nts, which having no sins of their own committing to answer for, but
only that original guilt, which is by natural propagation derived thorowout all
Adams posterity from one generation to another: that as they have sinned only
in another, Vt qui peccavit in altero, credat in altero, Aug.
so they should believe also by another: that so they might be made capable of
the Sacrament of Baptism (which is the first step to salvation) by the faith
and belief of those that bring them thereunto, that is, their Godfathers and
Godmothers, that make profession of faith at the Font for them, which they as
yet are not able to do for themselves. But yet the benefit and use of this,
shall endure no longer for their avail and profit, than while they are young
and incapable of doing it themselves: but if when they come to age, they do
not in their own persons make good and perform those promises of faith and
repentance, which they have made for them: but run wicked, faithless, and
desperate courses of life, contrary to the said promises made in their
behalf; why then they lose and deprive themselves of the benefit and comfort
of that holy Sacrament and Covenant, and become in as bad, if not a worse case,
than if they had never been partakers thereof at all. And therefore let every
one look to his own faith in particular, and so furnish and strengthen
himself with the grounds and principles of faith out of the Word of God; that
he may be able upon all occasions to apply God unto himself by his own
personal faith: and to say with the holy Apostles here, Credo, I believe. For
otherwise he must never look to save his soul; but, Toll meum, toll Deum.
Take away the particular application of each man's right and interest in God and
his Son Christ Jesus, and you were as good take away themselves to. For what
comfort can I find in a Savior, except I may be assured that he is mine own?

Credo in Deum: I believe in God. This teaches us first to believe that there
is a God; for he that comes to God, must believe that God is, says the
Apostle, Hebr. 11.6. There being none, but the fool, that ever said, either
with his heart, or with his mouth, There is no God, Psalm. 14.1. Secondly, this
teaches us also to believe, that this God is one; because it is said, God, in
the singular number; not gods in the plural: For howsoever the foolish Heathen
out of their ignorance and simplicity, imagined and devised to themselves many
gods; even so many, as they saw there were kinds of things natural in the
world (calling him that they supposed to be the god of the Sky, Jupiter; of
the Air, Juno; of the Water, Neptune; of the Earth, Vesta; and sometimes
Ceres: of the Sun, Apollo; of the Moon, Diana; and such like) yet we, to whom
the Lord has revealed himself more pa^ticularly by his holy and heavenly
Word, do acknowledge and confess but one only God and guide of all agents
natural, alone to be blessed, adored, and honored by all for ever. For behold
(says God himself) I, even I am he; and there is no gods with me, or besides
me, Deuteronomy. 32.39. neither is there any that can deliver out of my hands; as
there follows. Therefore the Nicene Creed expresses this unity in these
words, saying, I believe in one God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and
earth, etc. Raymundus de Sabunde, Lib. Creat. Tit. 4.
proves the unity of the Godhead four ways; or by four reasons, viz. 1.
Vnitate ordinis creaturarum: 2. Per contrarietates in uno subjecto: 3. Quod
omne inferius tendit ad usum superioris: 4 Quo propius ad Deum, eo fortior and
magis est unitas: i. e. First, by the unity of the ord^r of the creatures:
Secondly, by the contrarieties in one and the same subject: Thirdly, because
every inferior thing bends and tends to the use of the superior: And lastly,
because the nearer any thing approaches unto God, the stronger and greater is
the unity of it. And from hence he further inferres, that the unity in God is
far greater than that in man: Quod homo unus est in specie tantum: sed Deus
and in specie, Tit. 5.
and in numero: Because man's unity consists only in his species or kind: but
God is one, not only in species, but in number too. And in the end concludes;
Quod unus sufficit Deus, plures non sunt necessarii: That one God is sufficient
for the guiding and governing of one world; so that there is no need of more.
But the best proofs of divine verities, are taken from divine authorities: and
therefore let us see some few Texts of Scripture to confirm this the unity of
the Godhead; and so conclude this point. And we will begin with that in
Deuteronomy; Audi Israel, Dominus Deus tuus unus est: Hearken O Israel, the
Lord thy God is one, Deuteronomy. 6.4. To which purpose see also Deuteronomy. 32.39. cited
before. Next, let us hear Naaman the Syrian, healed as well of the leprosy of
his soul as body, confessing and magnifying this one God, saying: Behold, now
I know that there is no God in all the world, but in Israel, 2 Reg. 5.15.
Thirdly, David, who says; Quis Deus praeter Dominum, etc. Who is God besides
the Lord; and who is mighty save our God, Psalm. 18.31. And again, Thou art
great, and do wondrous things; Thou art God alone, Psalm. 86.10. To which
purpose, see also Esaias 45.5, 6, 14, 18, 21, 22, verses. And likewise Sap.
12.13. And because some heretics, as Cerdon, Manichaeus, and the like, have
rejected the testimony of the old Testament; therefore a place or two in the
new Testament will not do amiss. To which purpose then, hear Saint Paul in
his first Epistle to the Corinthians, saying, We know that there is none other
God but one. For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in
earth (as there be many gods, and many lords) yet unto us there is but one God,
which is the Father; of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6, verses. And in
another place; A mediator is not of one, but God is one, Gal. 3.20. And yet
farther, There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all,
which is above all, and through all, and in you all, Ephesians. 4.5, 6. verses. And
so much for the unity of God. I believe in God, etc.

Now if any be over inquisitive to know what, or who this one God is; I answer
with Saint Augustine, That the supereminencie of this Deity passes man's
utterance; so that melius cogitatur quam dicitur; we can better think than
speak of God. And yet our deepest thoughts also, come far short of
apprehending that incomprehensible Majesty, because, Secretissima res est Deus
(as Alphonsus speaks) and quae omnium intellectus maxim fugiat: God is so
secret a thing, that all man's understanding cannot pierce nor pry into him;
which constrained a great Prophet to cry out and say, Vere tu es Deus
absconditus: Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self, or an hidden God,
Esaias 45.15. And no marvel, seeing, (as Saint Paul says) Habitat lucem
inaccessibilem; He dwells in the light that none can attain unto; whom
never eye saw, neither can see, 1 Timothy 6.16. which made the Prophet Eliah, when
the Lord went by him (and a mighty strong wind, renting the mountains, and
breaking the rocks before him) to cover his face with his mantle, 1 Reg.
19.13. as knowing that his humane sight could not endure the great luster and
brightness of the divine Majesty. For if the children of Israel could not
endure the splendor and brightness of Moses face, after God had talked with
him in the mountain; as Exodus 34.30. How much less shall humane understanding
be able to endure the Majesty of God himself; when it shall seek to
penetrate and pierce into the deep mysteries and secrets thereof; proprii
ingenii acumine; only by the strength and perspicacitie of their own wit and
reason. And therefore there is nothing wherein we ought more to captivate and
subdue our understanding; in obsequium Dei, in obedience unto God, than in the
knowledge of God himself, Quoniam ad investigandum supremum illud unitatis and
Trinitatis mysterium, nullus intellectus, fide destitutus sufficit; as
Alphonsus goes on, because for the finding out of that high and hidden mystery
of the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, there is no understanding
destitute of faith, that is sufficient. For indeed, the knowledge of God, is
profundum sine fundo (as one says) it is a depth without a bottom. So that if
any ask (says another) quid sit Deus; what God is: I must answer him; Si
seirem, Deus essem: I should be a god my self, if I knew, or were able to tell
him. Nam Deum nemo novit; nec quid sit, quisquam scit, nisi solus Deus, says
Cardan. For none knows what God is, but God alone. And S. Austen says, De
Deo loquimur: quid mirum si non comprehendis? Ser. 33. de verbis Dom. ^.
si enim comprehendis, non est Deus: When we speak of God, it is no marvel if
we do not understand; for if the best of humane capacity and properties,
whether of body, or mind, or both, were able to comprehend him, he were no
God. And therefore as the holy Father goes on: Sit pia confessio ignorantiae,
magis quam temeraria professio scientiae: Let us rather make an humble
confession of our ignorance, than a proud and rash profession of our science in
this point. Nam attingere aliquantum te mente Deum, magna beatitudo est;
comprehendere autem omnino impossible: It is a great happiness for sinful
and mortal man, to be able to attain to some small glimpse and smackering of
knowledge concerning the immortal God; but to comprehend him thoroughly, it is
altogether impossible. And therefore it is dangerous for the feeble brain of
man to wade far into the secret depths of the Majesty of the most high God;
whom although to know be life; and joy to make mention of his Name: yet our
soundest knowledge is to know, that we know him not as indeed he is, neither
can know him; our safest eloquence concerning him, is our silence; when we
confess with one confession, that his glory is inexplicable, his greatness
above our capacity and reach. He is above, and we upon earth: therefore it
behooveth our words concerning him to be wary and few. For whosoever shall go
about to search into the secrets and essence of God; opprimetur a gloria; shall
be confounded by the glory of it, as the vulgar Latin reads it, Prove. 25.27.
so that fear and shame shall be his covering, as elsewhere. And therefore to
such curious searchers, who to get themselves a name above other men, will
seem to be wise as God, nay, beyond God, and become his counselors, I commend
the sage advice of Jesus the son of Syracke, Seek not out the things that
are too hard for thee; neither search the things that are above thy strength;
but what is commanded thee, think thereupon with reverence, etc. Ecclus. 3.
about the 21 and 22 verses; see that which follows, the place is excellent to
this purpose. For behold, God is great and excellent, and we know him not,
says Elihu, Job 36.26. Incomprehensibilis cogitatu; our very thoughts cannot
comprehend him, as the vulgar Latin makes Jeremy to speak, Ier. 32.19. No
but his very ways are past finding out; as S. Paul says, Romans 11.33. And
therefore that we be not, illicite curiosi, unlawfully curious, let us abstain
from searching into such depths and secrets concerning God, as he has reserved
unto himself.

But yet that we be not, damnabiliter ingrati, as S. Ambrose speaks, condemned
for ingratitude; let us use our best diligence to understand what God has
revealed of himself. For howsoever the secret things belong unto the Lord; yet
things revealed belong unto us and our children for ever, says the Scripture,
Deuteronomy. 29.29. And therefore such things we are bound to know, as well as
believe; neither can we be ignorant of them without sin: there being as well
sins of ignorance, as of error and infidelity: which made the kingly Prophet
to pray, Delicta juventutis meae and ignorantias meas ne me mineris; as the
Latins read it: in our 25. Psalm. about the 7. verse, i. e. Remember not, O
Lord, the sins of my youth, nor yet my ignorances. And our Church prays in
the Letany, that it would please God to forgive us all our sins, negligences,
and ignorances; which should never be done, if ignorance were not reputed and
accounted sin. And if ignorance in general be to be so esteemed; then
ignorance of God much more: which appears plainly by that fearful judgment,
which S. Paul threatens, saying, When the Lord Jesus shall show himself from
heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them
that do not know God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. And David to the same purpose; Power out
thy wrath upon the heathen, that have not known thee, Psalm. 79.6. And
therefore howsoever we may not inquire, neither can know, quid sit Deus: the
quidditie, as I may so speak, i. e. the nature and essence of God: (of which
only the former speeches and passages are to be understood:) yet quis sit Deus,
and qualis, and quae ejus voluntas, as Zanchy speaks: i. e. who God is, and
what manner of God he is, and what the will of God is: All these we must and
are bound to know; neither can we be ignorant of them without great and
fearful sin: (as I said before.)

First, quis; who he is, that thereby we may be enabled to distinguish and
discern between the true God and false gods; and so keep our selves within
the compass of right religion, by serving and worshipping only the true God;
and not fall into the dangerous downfals either of superstition o^ ^dolatry, by
worshipping and serving those as gods, that are no gods, contrary to the first
Command: Thou shall have none other gods but me: as S. Paul manifestly proves,
the Gentiles in the time of their ignorance to have done, saying, That even
then, when they knew not God, they did service unto them, which by nature are
no gods, Gal. 4.8. No gods indeed. Nay, some of them have been so far from
gods, as that they were scarce good men, but such as were defiled, stupris,
libidinibus, adulteriis, aliisque enormibus sceleribus: With rapes, incests,
adulteries, unnatural lusts, and diverse other enormous wickednesses: as
Tertullian and Lactantius have observed; non ex poetarum solum, verum etiam
philosophorum scriptis; not out of the writings of fabulous Poets only, but
also of grave and learned Philosophers. Nay, some of them have grown to such
an height of madness in this kind, as to give divine honor, not only to dead
men, but even to inferior creatures also; vilissimis quidem and abjectissimis;
even the most vile and contemptible; as to oxen, dogs, cats, crocodiles; yea,
and very mice and rats too; and that with such violence and earnestness, as
that a multitude of Egyptians could hardly upon a time be restrained, neither
by the command of their own Governor, nor the fear of the Roman power, from
rushing into the house, and laying violent hands upon a certain citizen, qui
Felem imprudenter occiderat, Epistola ante And. Hiperii methodum Theolog.
which by misadventure only and unawares, had killed a cat, one of their
supposed deities: as Cicero is reported by mine Author, some where to have
related. Others have adored the Sun, Moon, and Stars, together with the
whole host of heaven; yea, and the very elements also: quae and facta sunt,
and sensu carent; which are not only creatures themselves; but which is more,
insensible. Nay, some stooping yet lower, have taken the very garden-herbs; as
the Garlike, the Onion, and the Leeke, into the number of their gods: which
gave Iuvenal occasion to give them this jerke in his Satyrs; saying, O sanctas
gentes, quibus haec nascuntur in hortis Numina: O holy nations, that have such
deities growing in their gardens. But what need we go so far from our own
profession: when as the divine oracles of truth yield us such plentiful
proofs of men's madness in this kind: as of Gods own people Israel offering
up sons and daughters unto Idols, devils; and worshipping gods made with hands,
as of gold and silver, wood and stone, and the like; molten, graven, and carved
images. For the Smith (says the Prophet Esaias) takes an instrument and works
in the coals, and fashioneth it with hammers; and works it with the strength
of his arms, etc. and the Carpenter stretches out a line, he fashioneth it
with a red thread; he planeth it; and he pourtrayeth it with the compass, and
makes it after the figure of a man; and according to the beauty of a man, that
it may remain in the house, etc. And all this of a piece of wood; whereof he
burns part in the fire; and upon another part thereof he eats flesh, he
roasteth the roast and is satisfied; also he warmeth himself, and says, Aha,
I am warm, I have been at the fire. And the residue thereof he makes a god,
even his idol; he boweth unto it, and worshippeth: and prays unto it; and
says, deliver me; For thou art my god, Esaias 44.11, 12, 16, 17, verses: But oh,
what gods are these? gods void of being;
(Save by their hands that serve them) gods unseeing.
New upstart gods, of yesterdayes devise,
To men indebted for their deities.
Gods made with hands; gods without life or breath.
Gods which the rust, fire, hammer conquereth.
But our God's the Lord; th'invincible alone:
The All-seeing God; the everlasting one.
As Du Bartas divinely.


And thus you see, what fearful and horrible effects have proceeded from the
want of the knowledge of the true God. To prevent which amongst our selves, our
first and chief care ought to be, especially since we profess to believe in
God, to join to our faith, knowledge, and learn, quis sit Deus, who this true
God is.

Secondly, Qualis; it is necessary also for us to know, not only who he is,
but what manner of God he is, of what qualities, of what conditions; which is
to be done by his attributes, which are so termed, because they are terms or
titles truly attributed and given unto him; Ad ipsum magis hominibus
declarandum: that thereby men may the better and the more easily (according to
their capacities) conceive and understand something of him. And they are of two
sorts; either within him, or without him. Without him, is his name only, so
often spoken of, and so much magnified in many places of the Scripture: as
Exodus 9.16. where it is said of Pharaoh: I have appointed thee to show my power
in thee, and to declare my name thorowout all the world. And again: The Lord
is a man of war, his name is Jehovah, Exodus 15.3. When they shall hear of
thy great name, and of thy mighty hand, and stretched out arm, etc. 1 Reg.
8.42. And of the house that I have built for thy name: says Solomon, verse. 48.
of the same chapter. Yea, the Lord of Hosts is his name; says the Prophet Esaias
51.15. I am a great King (says the same Lord of Hosts) and my name is terrible
among the Heathen, Mal. 1.14. To which purpose our Savior Christ himself has
taught us to pray unto God, saying; Hallowed be thy name, Matthew. 6.9. Secondly,
within him: in which sense, an attribute of God, Est divinae and simplicissimae
essentiae, Dudley Fenner, Theolog.
pro diversa agendi ratione, diversa and vera nobis (...), and conceptio
expressa: as mine Author speaks: that is, It is a true, but diverse form or
manner of expression or appearing of the divine, and most simple essence of God
unto us, and our conceit, in regard of its diverse manner of working and
operation: as that he is true, just, merciful, long-suffering: yea, full of
compassion, slow to anger, and of great kindness: as David expresses him,
Psalm. 103.8. That he is powerful, patient, pitiful, loving, liberal, and a
rewarder of them that seek him: as the Apostle, Heb. 11.6. That he is wise,
strong, all-sufficient, righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works:
as the Psalmist, Psalm. 145.17. That he is invisible, immortal, immutable:
Immo immensus Deus, intra omnia sed non inclusus; and extra omnia sed non
exclusus: as an ancient Father: that is, A God so great and immense, as being
within all things, yet he is not included or enclosed; and without all things,
yet not excluded or shut out. And that which is yet more, that he is not all
these things in the concrete or adjective only; but in the abstract also and
the substantive, as Truth it self, Justice it self, Goodness it self, Love,
Kindness, Mercy, and the like. As if you would abstract all, or any of these
from all other things, and consider it in it self alone: as a man may say;
Bonum bonum, or a good goodness; why this is God, and so in all the rest. All
these qualities being indeed so essentially, and in their perfection in him; as
that they must not, no not in the very least of our imaginations, and most
retired thoughts, be separated or divided from him. As for instance, Bonitas
est essentia Dei erga omnes creaturas benefica: Gods goodness is that
essential quality in him, whereby he does manifest his bounty and
beneficence toward all his creatures, making his Sun to arise on the evil
and the good, and sending rain on the just and unjust: as our Savior himself
declares him, Mat^h. 5.45. which is an effect only of his goodness. To which
purpose, you may see also if you please, 1 Timothy 4.10. and Psalm. 34.90. and
diverse other passages and places in holy Writ; expressing the same in this
large patent. And to this quality of goodness in God, appertain also other
qualities respecting his creatures, either simply as creatures, as his Love and
Grace: or as wretched creatures and in misery, as does his Mercy. The love of
God first, being, Essentia Dei omnes creaturas immerito diligens: Such an
essential quality in him, as whereby he shows and expresses sundry effects
of his said love to all his creatures, even without their desert: according to
that of the Apostle: When the bountifulness and love of God appeared toward
man, not by the works of righteousness which we had done, etc. Tit. 3.4. And
the grace of God next, such another essential quality in him, Qua omnes
creaturas immerito favet: Whereby he is favorable and indulgent toward them
also, though they be never so rebellious toward him. Which quality of his,
David expresses, when he says: The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give
them meat in due season: thou openest thy hand, and fillest all things living
of thy good pleasure: Psalm. 145.15, 16. Now this good pleasure is nothing else,
but his graciousnesse toward them. And what is of grace is not of works, says
Saint Paul, Romans 11.6. And lastly, Gods mercy is likewise an essential
quality in him; Qua omnium creaturarum miseriis aliquo modo succurrit: Whereby
in one kind or other he succors and releeves all his creatures, that are in
misery and distress, according to that in Exodus; The Lord strong, merciful,
and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and in truth; reserving
mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, etc. Exodus
34.6.

And what has been thus said and showed of these few, of the attributes of
God, may be likewise proved and affirmed of all other his qualities and divine
properties whatsoever. Which are things very necessary to be well known and
understood by all true Christians, and such as profess to believe in God. For
without this knowledge they must needs fail, and come short of many Christian
virtues necessarily required to their souls health. As for example: The
knowledge of his justice serves to beget in us a fearfulness to offend him,
and an awfulnesse and dread of his most holy name: as also to strengthen the
faith and confidence of the poor afflicted, and such as suffer wrong: in that
they know, that in good time the Lord will revenge their injuries for them,
punish their oppressors, and cause them to see their desire upon their
enemies, because he is just. The knowledge of his mercy serves to raise us up
in hope; that though we have committed sins, and remain still full of
weaknesses and infirmities: yet that in time upon our repentance and amendment,
they shall be forgiven us. The knowledge of his truth serves to beget in us a
lively and steadfast faith in his promises: and the knowledge of his love, to
inflame and stir up our love toward him again. And lastly, the knowledge of
his goodness, kindness, bountifulness, patience, long-suffering, forbearance
of us, and the like, serves to renew many other virtues in us, answerable to
each of these qualities in him, which otherwise would be ready to languish and
dye: but especially to procure our gratitude and thankfulness toward him, for
all such favors, as from time to time he has in these several kinds
conferred and bestowed upon us: who indeed desires rather that we should
thankfully remember what he has been unto us, than curiously to affect what
he is in himself. So that in these respects and sundry others, which might be
spoken of, you cannot choose but see and perceive, how necessary a thing it is
for all true Believers to know, Qualis sit Deus, What manner of God the true
God is, which is the second circumstance.

The third and last follows: Quae fit ejus voluntas: What the will of God is.
Now concerning this, you must know, that in God there is said to be a twofold
will: Voluntas beneplaciti, and Voluntas signi; as the Schoolmen distinguish
it: that is, the will of Gods good pleasure, and the will of the sign of it;
or an antecedent and a consequent will; as some of the Fathers: or an
omnipotent and powerful will, and a will less powerful; as S. Augustine: or
an absolute will, and a will conditional; as others. All which divisions teach
us (as a learned Doctor of our own Church has in former times well observed)
that there be parts, some revealed, some secret, Dr. Covell.
of that; which yet is no more diverse or many, than it is possible for the
essence of the Godhead to be more than one: not that he is contrary in his
will, but that his will as yet is not wholly revealed. So far he. 1 Samuel
6.19. Numb. 4.20. Exodus 19.13.


Now the first part of this will, that is, the secret and reserved part, is
shut up within the closet of Gods own sacred bosom: as the Ark that must not
be pried into: the mountain, that neither man nor beast may prefume to touch:
the brightsome Sun, that with the rays of his glorious luster, dazles the
eyes of curious beholders: the way of an Eagle in the air, Prove. 30.19.
and the path of a ship in the waters, whose track may not be espied, nor
enquired after; but only admired and adored afar off. For of this, has God
pronounced, O homo, in quis es? Romans 9.20. O man, who art thou that do, that
dare ransack the bowels of my privy Councels? seeing my judgments are like
a great deep: as Psalm. 36.6. that is, so deep, so bottomless, as that they
are not to be sounded or fathomed by thy shallowness. The other part of Gods
will is open and revealed, divulged and proclaimed in a full Court and assembly
of men and Angels to all the world: and that is his will revealed in his Word.
And this challenges and exacts, both a distinct knowledge, and an entire
obedience; yea therefore our knowledge, that it may be obeyed: for as affected
knowledge in the former is dangerous; so affected ignorance in this latter is
damnable.

Now then, if we must do this revealed will of God, then likewise know it, yea
and know God too, in and by it, as well as by his attributes, or any other his
works whatsoever: otherwise without this latter, Epist. 4.
it is impossible to attain unto the former. For, Qui Deum nescitis, vias ejus
quomodo novistis? says S. Ambrose: If you do not know God, how can you either
know the will, or walk in the ways of God? And therefore God himself, upon
his reconciliation, and promise of a new covenant with his people Israel, tells
them, first that he will put his Law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts: and then as a confirmation of the said covenant, he adds: That
they should not need to bid one another to know the Lord: For they shall all
know me (says he) from the least of them to the greatest of them, Ierem.
31.33, 34. which is as much as if he should have said; That until men know
God, they cannot have his Law written in their hearts: and so neither submit
their understanding to the belief and knowledge of it, for matter of doctrine;
nor subject their wills and affections to the obedience and practice of it in
their lives and conversations. And therefore for these reasons before
expressed, let us be persuaded to use our best diligence and endeavor to
attain unto the knowledge of the three former circumstances concerning God.
For this is life eternal, that men know thee, the only true God, and whom
thou have sent Jesus Christ, says our Savior himself, Ioh. 17.3. From whence
learned Zanchy our Protestant Schooleman inferres, that if it be life to know
God, it must needs be no less than death, not to know him, or to be ignorant
of him.

To conclude then: as a curious searching into those secrets of God, which are
not revealed, serves but to breed a contempt of those things which are
revealed unto us; in regard whereof, it is greater piety to believe them, than
to strive to know them: so on the other side, to be absolutely either ignorant
or careless of those things that concern us, and which God has revealed unto
us, is a plain evidence of our sloth, and negligence of our own salvation. In
the former whereof, it is not so much to be lamented, that we search and
cannot comprehend; as that in the latter, we might comprehend, if we would
but take the pains to search. For, Qui quaerunt invenient: They that seek
shall find, Matthew. 7.7. even the knowledge of the true God and of his ways.

Now then God has revealed and made himself known to his Church and children
after a threefold manner, viz. Operando, Loquendo, Spirando, that is, by his
works, words, and Spirit; by his works in the creation, and conservation of the
world: by his Word in his holy Scriptures; by his holy Spirit, in testifying to
our spirit, by his secret working and inspiration in our hearts and souls, not
only that he is God, but that he is our God also in particular, so that we
may and must rely and depend upon him, and none but him, upon all occasions
whatsoever.

Now these heads are too large and long to be handled to the full, by way of
Catechism: and therefore for this time, you must be satisfied with that, which
the words of our Creed testify, and declare concerning him; that is, That he
is the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth. Vide Act. 17.24. And here
you see, that the first attribute or title, that is given unto God, is, that he
is called Father. I believe in God the Father, etc. And that may be in this
place, in a twofold respect. First, in respect of creation; and so he is the
Father of the world, and all that is therein, and therefore here is subjoyned,
Maker of Heaven and Earth: Secondly, in respect of natural generation; and so
he is the father of Jesus Christ alone. And therefore follows that, And in
Jesus Christ his only Son. Concerning the first, it is said by the Prophet,
Have we not all one Father? has not one God created u^? Mal. 2.10. And again,
Is not he thy Father that has made thee? Deuteronomy. 32.6. And not only of man,
but of all other things he is said to be the Father by creation, as in the
book of Job: Who is the father of the rain, or who has begotten the drops of
dew? out of whose womb came the ice, or who has ingrendred the fr^st of
Heaven? I^b 38.28, 29. thereby insinuating that God only is the father of these
things: and therefore well may we say, I believe in God the Father. But most
especially in regard of his natural fatherhood to his Son, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, whom he did beget in the womb of eternity, before all worlds,
according to that of the Psalmist; Ex utero ante luciferum genui te; as the
Vulgar Latin reads it, Psalm. 110.3. that is, I have begotten thee in my womb
before the morning light: or in the words of Esaias, Before the day was, I am. To
which purpose S. Augustine does here take occasion wittily to observe against
the Arrians: Quod cum Dei Patris, nomen in confessione conjungitur: That when
the name of Father, is in this Creed and Confession of faith, joined unto the
name of God: Ostendit, quod non antea Deus esse coepit and postea Pater: sed
sine ullo initio, and Deus semper est, and Pater est: It shows (says he) that
God was not first and Father after, but that without any beginning, even from
all eternity, he was both God and Father: and therefore it is said: I believe
in God the Father: so that when thou hear God styled Father, acknowledge,
confess, and believe, that he has a Son truly begotten; in regard of whom
he is as truly and justly called Father, as he that possesses any thing is
called an Owner, or he that rules over any thing is called a Lord. So that the
word Father in this place, is a word of a deep and secret mystery. The word
only and truly being the Son, where God in this sense is the Father. And
therefore says S. John; In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God, and the Word was God, Ioh. 1.1. God of God, light of light, very God of
very God, begotten of his Father before all worlds: as the Nicene Creed
professes.

Neither let any be so saucie, as to enquire how this Father could, or did
beget this Son (as Saint Augustine goes on) seeing the very Angels thereof
are ignorant: and it is a secret not revealed to the Prophets. Whence Esaias
cries out, Generationem ^jus quis enarrabit? Who shall d^clare his generation?
Esaias 53.8. And therefore let it not enter into our cogitations, how this or
that can be effected, or come to pass, but only believe; seeing the next word
tells us, that God is Almighty: and therefore if he be Almighty, nothing can
be unpossible unto him. I believe in God the Father Almighty. And that he is
Almighty, that is, able to do whatsoever he will, yea and more than he will
too, it is manifest as well by his words as by his works. By his word first; as
where he declares as much of himself by his faithful servant Abraham, saying;
I am God all-sufficient, or Almighty, Genes. 17.1. And again, I am Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was,
and which is to come, even the Almighty, Revel. 1.8. And as his Word thus
declares him, in the first and the last books of the same, and indeed all over
it; if proof were wanting; so his works speak the like of him, even from the
very beginning to the ending of the same book. And in particular, where they
express him to be the Maker of Heaven and Earth: that is, of all things the
universal world does contain, as well above as below; as well heavenly as
earthly; as well spiritual as corporal. Which is especially in the first of
Genesis, but seconded and confirmed in many passages and places of Scripture
besides: as in the Psalms: When I behold (says David) thine heavens, even the
works of thy fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained: and how
thou have made man little lower than thy self, and crowned him with glory and
honor: Thou have made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands, etc.
Psalm. 8. all over the Psalm. To which purpose see also Acts 17. about verse.
24. and so forward: which made Saint Augustine to cry out unto him; Omnipotens
manus tua semper una and eadem, creavit in coelo Angelos, in terra vermiculos,
non superior in illis, non inferior in istis: that is, The strength or power of
thy hands is omnipotent, yea, and always one and the same; which as it created
the glorious Angels in heaven, so likewise the little worms in the earth:
neither is it any whit greater in those, or lesser in these: but, Deus ita
artifex magnus in magnis, ut non sit minor in minimis: But his power and might
appears as much in the least, as in the greatest of his creatures.

And this may serve first to strengthen us in our faith, and trust to God, and
to make us with the more confidence to have recourse unto him, by prayer and
supplication, because we know and believe that he is Almighty: and therefore
as the Leaper said; Master, if thou will, thou can make me clean, Matthew.
8.2. So we may be sure, that what promises of mercy or goodness soever the
Lord has made unto us in his word, he will make good in his due time: because
we believe, he which has promised is able to do it; as S. Paul speaks,
Romans 4.21.

Secondly, this teaches us also, that as God is able to succor us, and provide
for us, because Almighty: so likewise to defend us, that no enemy, ghostly or
bodily, is able to prevail against us to our destruction or confusion. And
therefore that in all our troubles we put our whole trust and confidence in him
and his mercy, as well for the salvation of our souls, as the preservation of
our bodies: this being the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith,
says S. John, 1 Ioh. 5.4. And indeed, this is the true and proper sense of
this Article: I believe in God the Father Almighty, that is, I do depend and
put my trust in him: for as S. Augustine (whom I undertook at the first to
follow, especially in this discourse) has rightly observed, the article does
not say, Credo Deo, or Credo Deum, but only Credo in Deum, that is, it does
not say, I believe God, or I believe that there is a God: but only, I believe
in God. For to believe God, is to believe that what God says is true, which
many wicked men and very reprobates may do: again, to believe that there is
a God, and that he that made heaven and earth, is that God: Hoc and daemones
possunt: why even the very Devils do the same: Credere vero in D^um, soli
noverunt qui dilligunt illum: but to believe in God, they only know how that
love him, and are become the children of God, by the grace of adoption, and by
their faith and belief in God: and therefore because they do truly and
sincerely love God, they are emboldened to say, I believe in God the Father
Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, etc.

And here I might take occasion to show you, how that in this little
Preposition, In, this small word consisting of two of the smallest letter, i,
n, does consist the whole sum and substance of our Christian Religion. Lib.
1. de Relig. cap. 13. page 256.
Tota pietas totusque Dei cultus atque religio: as Zanchius speaks. For who
ever did truly and uprightly worship and serve God, but out of trust in God?
who ever did awfully and filially fear God, but because he did trust in God?
who ever did unfainedly and sincerely love God, but it proceeded from his trust
in God? who ever did make conscience of his ways, by avoiding and declining
evil, but through hope and trust in God? who ever was careful to obey God,
and walk in the ways of God, by a Christian conversation, but that he did
believe and trust in God? what makes the difference between Saints and sinners,
between the reprobate and the righteous, between Judas and Peter, but only
trust and want of trust in God? wherefore was the world, and all that therein
is, at the the first created, but only to make men trust in God? How came it by
the fall of men and Angels to be corrupted, but only because they forsook
their trust in God? and wherefore was it again redeemed at the last, but only
to renew men's trust in God? wherefore are all those many and manifold
blessings, soli and poli, as well of earth as heaven, conferred and bestowed
upon the children of God, but only because they trust in God? and wherefore
are all Gods curses and heavy judgments, both of this world and that which is
to come, inflicted upon the wicked and enemies of God, but only because they
have refused to trust in God? would we then avoid and decline the heavy wrath
and vengeance of God, prepared for the Devil and his angels, let us trust in
God; or would we be invested with the glorious liberty of the sons of God, and
made partakers of the plentious redemption that is in Christ Jesus: why then
let us trust in God. Credere Deum, to believe that there is a God, cannot do
it; for this the devils do believe, and yet they tremble. Credere Deo, to
believe that God is just and true, comes likewise short of it, for this the
wicked may do, nay, they shall do, not only believe, but find and feel
too, the truth of Gods judgments and threatenings against them for their sins,
to their greater terror and confusion. But Credere in Deum: This little
Monosyllable, In, added to it, only shall and can effect it.

Lo, here then is the little cloud that arose out of the sea, no bigger than a
man's hand; out of which, notwithstanding, did fall a great rain, 1 Reg. 18.44,
45 verses. Lo here is the little well, that grew into a great river, and
flowed over with great waters, Esther 10.6. in the Apocripha. Lo here not only
the Iliades, but the Odisses too of Homer; nay, the works and writings of the
whole world, as well sacred as profane, within the shell of a nut: For what
good use is to be made of them all, but only to cause men to trust in God?
which service, if they do not in some sort or other promote and advance
forward. They shall burn in the end like stubble, and vanish like chafe
before the face of the wind, as being lighter than smoke or vanity it self.
If then the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, may fitly be counted
and called the Compendium of the whole Bible, and this the Apostles Creed, the
abridgement of the Gospel: then likewise our little, In, here; may not unfitly
be styled the epitome of the Creed. For whereas there may be said to be two
parts of the Creed, viz. A duty required, and rewards proposed for the
faithful dispatch and performance of the said duty: This, In, does fully
perform the duty, in believing in the Father, in the Son, and in the Holy
Ghost; and so consequently, not only entitle us to, but invest us with the
rewards, (and they are rich rewards too) by making us members of the holy
Catholic Church, and partakers of the Communion of Saints, forgiveness of
sins, resurrection of the body, and life everlasting. And therefore if we were
wont to wonder, when we were children and schoole-boyes, at the dexterity of
him, that could write the Pater noster within the compass of a penny (pardon
the lowness of the comparison) then much more may we now admire the infinite
wisdom of God, that could contrive the whole substance of his own will, and
our worship, into so small a volume as two small letters; and yet this, as you
have seen, is fully and at large p^rformed. And this may serve to check and
condemn our dullness, and backwardness in Gods service; that having so small
a lesson to learn, and to take forth, we are so long in learning it, and so
hardly brought to put it in practice and execution. For who it there that truly
believes and puts his trust in God, as it behooves a Christian man to do?
But some put their trust in chariots, and some in horses, as the Scripture
speaks: Some in the strength of their own arms, and others in the invention
of their own brains; some in the fatness of their own fields, and fertility
of their own soyles; and others in their own policies, in their own pains,
in so much as they offer sacrifice to their nets, and burn incense to their
yarne; as the Prophet complains of them, Habacuk 1.16. So that we may justly
take up David's complaint, and say: Lo these are the men that take not God for
their strength, but trust to the multitude of their riches, etc. Psalm. 52. But
these are but vain things for vain men to put their trust in: which made Job
to protest against such vain confidence, saying, If I have made gold my hope,
or said to the wedge of gold, Thou art my confidence, Job 31.24. As knowing
that, Sperando pereunt, qui sic sperant: such hypocrites hope shall perish: as
himself may be said to translate it, Job 8.13. Yea their confidence shall be
cut off, and their trust shall be but as the house of a Spider: They may well
lean upon their house, but it shall not stand: yea, though they hold fast by
it, yet shall it not endure, as there follows, verses 14, 15. For cursed is
that man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and with-draweth his
heart from the Lord, Ierem. 17.5. And therefore Solomon advises us to trust in
the Lord with all our heart, and not lean so much as to our own wisdom,
Prove. 3.5. For blessed are all they, said David, that trust in him, Psalm. 2.12.
Which if it be so (says S. Austen) that they are blessed that trust in the
Lord: Tunc miseri sunt qui confidunt in se: They must needs be wretched and
miserable that trust only to themselves; as the justiciaries, and all that
boast of their own righteousness do. But S. Paul says, Qui gloriatur, in
Domino glorietur: He that boasts, let him boast in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.
vltimo. For as S. Augustine goes on: Nihil in te placet Deo, nisi quod habes ex
Deo, etc. There is nothing in man that can be or is acceptable unto God; but
that which he has received from God: and therefore seeing there is no good
thing in man, but what he has received from God: Why does he glory, as though
he had not received it, 1 Cor. 4.7. Seeing then there is nothing in man,
whether our selves or others, worthy of our trust or dependence on him; let us
be persuaded, as well for the salvation of our souls, as the preservation of
our bodies, to take fast hold of our former preposition, In, and to say with
the holy Apostles in this place, Credo in Deum etc.

I might be much more plentiful in uses on this subject; but that I promised
and intended brevitie: and therefore this shall suffice.

Luther said well, that there was much Divinity in Pronounes. And here you
see, that there is some also, and that not a little, even in prepositions.

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, etc.
WHere we may first observe, as S. Augustine speaks, Quomodo in Patrem, sic
and in Filium credendum est: That as we are to believe and put our trust in God
the Father: as I showed unto you the last day: so likewise are we to do the
like in the Son too. And in Jesus Christ his only Son etc. which shows him
to be God as well as man, because we are to put our trust and belief in none
but only God. And therefore, Si Deus non sit Filius, sed creatura; non ergo
colendus, nec adorandus; as the Father goes on. If the Son were only man, and
not God, he were not to be worshipped and adored; neither were we to invocate
and call upon his Name, no nor yet to believe and put our trust in him; but
being God of the substance of his Father, as the Nicene Creed professes: The
Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, being all one, the
glory equal, the Majesty coeternall, as Athanasius Creed has it: therefore
we must worship this one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither
confounding the Persons, nor dividing the substance; and as we said, I believe
in God the Father, so likewise must we say, I believe in God the Son; yea, and
in God the Holy Ghost too: as I may have occasion to show more at large, if I
ever come to the handling of that Article, I believe in the Holy Ghost.

Now this doctrine of believing in the Son, and of his Godhead, and the like,
teaches us with the more confidence and boldness to rely and depend upon him
in the matter of our redemption, and to have recourse unto him in any our
necessities and troubles, whether of body or soul; because he is God, and
therefore able to accomplish and bring to pass whatsoever he has undertaken,
and finds to be necessary and needful for us. And indeed to whom else should
we go, as Saint Peter says; seeing he only has the words of eternal life,
Ioh. 6.68. And therefore, Come unto me, says he himself, all ye that are
heavy laden, and I will refresh you and ease you, Matthew. 11.28. But this
doctrine and use comes to be handled almost in every Sermon, and therefore I
proceed. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. Where you see the next
circumstance is the two names of this sacred Person, that we ^rofesse to put
our trust and belief in; first Jesus, then Christ. And in Jesus Christ.

His first Name Jesus, was the name appointed him by the Angel Gabriel, which
was Gods messenger sent unto his Mother, the Virgin Mary, before he was
conceived in her womb, Luke 1.31, 32. where it is said by him unto her, Fear
not Mary, for thou have found favor with God: and behold thou shall conceive
in thy womb and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus: The reason
also of the Name being set down in Saint Matthewes Gospel, viz. because he
shall save his people from their sins, Matthew. 1.21. For the word indeed
signifies a Savior and Deliverer; and therefore is a name fitly given to our
Lord Christ; because the work of our salvation both from sin and punishment,
is wholly and only wrought by him. Wholly, because, as the Apostle says, He
is made unto us of God, Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, yea,
and Redemption too, 1 Cor. 1.30. And therefore he is able also to save them to
the uttermost, that come unto God by him; seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them, Hebr. 7.25. Yea, and only too: For there is no salvation
in any other, neither any other name under heaven whereby men can be saved,
Acts 4.12. And therefore he says of himself, I am the way, the truth, and the
life, and no man comes to the Father but by me, Ioh. 14.6. So that he that
believes in the Son has everlasting life; and he that believes not the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, Ioh. 3.36. Because as
there is but one God, so but one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. So that he may justly say, as in the Prophet, Torcular
calcavi solus, I have trodden the wine press alone, and of all the people there
was none with me, Esaias 63.3. For howsoever there have been many Iesusses in
ancient times, as Jesus or Joshua the son of Nun, Moses successor, Acts 7.45.
Jesus the son of Iosedecke, Ecclus. 49.12. Jesus the son of Syrach, Ecclus.
50.27. also Jesus, one of Saint Paul's work-fellowes, called Iustus, Coloss.
4.11. And these, or some of these, have had their names also given them by
reason of saving and delivering: yet their deliverances have not been like
this; from which, this JESUS, the Son of God, which we profess here to
believe in, does deliver those that put their trust in him: But their
deliverance have been only corporal, this spiritual, theirs temporal; this
eternal, theirs from bondage, slavery, or some pressures of the body; this
from the most dangerous and fearful sin and sickness of the soul. He shall
deliver his people from their sins; ut supra. And therefore as I can never be
weary of writing or speaking of this saving Name Jesus; but when I think I
have written and spoken enough, could enter into a new discourse of it, and
begin again: so be you never weary of hearing, reading, and believing in it:
seeing that through this Name, all that believe in him shall receive remission
of their sins, as all the Prophets witness; as it is said, Acts 10.43. yea,
and rejoice in it too; saying with Saint Augustine, O Jesu nomen dulce, nomen
delectabile, nomen comfortans: O how sweet, how delightful, how comfortable is
thy saving name Jesus unto me. For here is fuel indeed to kindle the fire and
feed the flame of joy to keep it ever burning on the altar of our hearts, that
we can say, I believe in Jesus, i. e. the only Son of God, and Savior of the
world. This is that joy, which when we have once truly entertained, no man can
take from us, as our Savior himself says, Ioh. 16.22. wherewith compare what
pleasure soever, and it is but grief; all sweet is sour unto this, and there
is nothing that may delight, but it seems troublesome and offensive in respect
of this, as devout S. Bernard has well observed. But this is odor sanitatis,
says the Apostle, a sweet smelling savor unto God, Ephesians. 5.2. Dulcedo animae
and sanitas ossium, says Solomon, Sweetness to the soul, and health to the
bones; as Prove. 16.24. which makes the very lips gracious, and the feet
precious of those that bring but the tidings of it, says the Propher, Mel in
ore, melos in aure, jubilum in cord; As honey sweet unto the mouth, as melody
pleasant to the ear, and a jubilee triumph to the heart; so that, nil canitur
suavius, nil auditur jucundius, nil cogitatur dulcius quam Jesus Dei Filius,
says an ancient Hymn of the Church; there is nothing sun^ that is so sweet,
nothing heard that so much delights, nothing ^^^^ght on that is so pleasant
as is this the name of Jesus, the Son of the most high God. And here I might
take occasion to speak of the public rejoicing of this time, for the birth of
this our Savior Jesus, and show you, as Leo says, how that non fas est locum
esse tristitiae ubi natalis est vitae; at the coming and birth of life, there
ought to be no mourning, as in the days of death no man being secluded,
excluded from the partaking of the public joy of this time: but that the
righteous ought to rejoice, quia appropinquat ad palmam; because he draws
near to the reward of his well doing, and the sinner may rejoice, quia
invitatur ad veniam; because he is offered a pardon for his ill doing: but I
forbear to proceed any farther in this way, because it belongs rather to the
Preacher than the Catechist thus to handle it; only before I end this point, I
am bold to invocate this our sweet Savior, that propter semetipsum erit nobis
Jesus, even for his own names sake he will be pleased to save us from our
sins, by granting us so much faith and trust in him, that we may rely wholly
upon him, and none but him, for the salvation of our poor and sinful souls;
for if we should miss of him, our blessed Savior and Redeemer, it were better
for us a thousand ways that we were dogs or toads, than men, for death to
them is the end of all their woe, but the death of a man without a Savior, is
but the beginning of all his misery and unhappiness, to endure for ever and
ever; and therefore let us still be sure to believe in Jesus.

And in Jesus Christ: Where ye see that our Savior, our Deliverer, our
Mediator and Messiah, is not known altogether by the name of Jesus, but
sometimes also by the name of Christ: and therefore Saint Matthew styles his
Book, The Book of the Generation of JESUS CHRIST, Matthew. 1.1. And S. Paul
says, that Jesus Christ is come into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.
And the Apostles here teach us to say, I believe in Jesus Christ: So that Jesus
may be said to be his proper name, and Christ his Nomen appellativum, or
Surname, as Tertullian speaks; or Jesus his name of Nature, and Christ of
person, place or dignity, as other Divines: for as I have shown before, as his
name Jesus signifies to save and deliver, intimating his nature; so his name
Christ, signifies Messiah, or Anointed, intimating his Office, which is to be
anointed with the oil of gladness above his Fellows, as the Psalmist
speaks. And therefore Andrew said unto his brother Simon concerning him; we
have found the Messiah, which is by interpretation the Christ, that is, the
Anointed one, Ioh. 1.41. And the woman of Samaria said, I know well that
Messiah shall come, which is called Christ, Ioh. 4.25. Now the reason of this
name is, because as the three great Officers of the world in former times, viz.
King, Priest, and Prophet, were wont to be made by anointing; so he being to
bear these three parts in his own person, for the benefit of his Church and
chosen, was likewise to be anointed by the Holy Ghost, and indeed to be called,
o Christos, the anointed, as by way of excellency above all that were anointed
before him, or should be ever after him.

Now if you desire proofs that these three Officers were consecrated and m^de
by anointing, attend to that which follows: First, Kings were s^ m^de, for so
said God to Samuel, when he had chosen David to be King, Ari^e, anoint him, for
this is he, 1 Samuel 16.12. And so Solomon, concerning whom, his Father David
said, Let Zadock the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet, anoint him their King over
Israel, and blow ye the trumpet, and say, God save King Solomon, 1 King. 1.34.
And indeed the first King of all that Nation Saul himself was so ordained, as
it is said, That Samuel took a violl of oil and powered it upon his head, and
kissed him and said, is it not because the Lord has anointed thee to be
captain over his inheritance? 1 Samuel 10.1. Thus much for Kings.

Secondly, Priests were also so made, for God commanded Moses to consecrate
Aaron to that Office, saying, Thou shall take the anointing oil, and power it
upon his head, and anoint him, Exodus 29.7. And in the third Chapter about the
23. verse, it is showed how that anointing oil should be made too, even of
principal and costly spices, as is there to be scene: And therefore David calls
it the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even
Aarons beard, and went down to the skirts of his clothing, Psalm. 133.2.

Thirdly, Prophets likewise, and Elisha the son of Shaphat shall thou anoint to
be a Prophet in thy room, 1 Reg. 19.16. And therefore says David, Touch not
mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.15. So that our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ being to become all these unto us, and that after a more
excellent manner he is called the Christ, or anointed, as I said before; For
God, even his own God has anointed him with the oil of gladness above his
fellows, says David, Psalm. 45.7. yea, even above them, for their offices
lasted only during the time of this life, and in some of them not so long, but
Christ is anointed to be an everlasting King, Priest and Prophet over his
Church, even for ever and ever. A King first to protect us, so says David, I
have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, Psalm. 2.6. for the Lord shall give
him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house of
Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1.32, 33. For
all power is given unto me both in heaven and in earth, says he himself,
Mat. 28.18. Secondly, a Priest, to offer up even himself a sacrifice upon the
Cross for our sins; as in the Psalm, The Lord has sworn and will not
repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedecke, Psalm.
110.4. yea, because he continues for ever, he has an unchangeable Priesthood,
Heb. 7.24. who needs not daily, as those high Priests, to offer up sacrifice
for his own sins first, and then for the people, for this he did once when he
offered up himself, as there follows verse 27. see also the ninth Chapter of
the same Book, to the same purpose, verse. 24, 25. etc. And thirdly, a Prophet,
to teach and instruct us in the way of godliness and salvation, for of him was
it said, I will raise them up a Prophet among their brethren like unto thee,
and I will put my words into his mouth, and unto him shall they hearken, Deuteronomy.
18.15, 18. Yea, the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, says the Prophet Esaias of
him, because he has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek, to bind up
the broken hearted, Esaias 61.1. And therefore it is likewise said of him, This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him, Matthew. 17.5. And
therefore seeing he is thus anointed to become all these things unto us, let us
faithfully believe and put our trust in him, in this anointed one, and we also
in an enlarged sense shall be made with him, and by him, spiritual Kings,
Priests and Prophets our selves, for he being Prince of the Kings of the earth,
and loving us, and washing us from our sins in his blood, has made us also
Kings and Priests unto God his Father, Revel. 1.5, 6, verses. First, Kings to
bear rule over our own hearts, and to master our own rebellious thoughts,
wills, and affections, that so sin may not reign in our mortal bodies, nor we
obey it in the lusts thereof, as Saint Paul speaks, Romans 6.12. but as kings
and conquerours may fight a good fight, and overcome the corruptions of our
own hearts, that without resistance will in the end destroy our souls.
Secondly, Priests to offer up to God many spiritual sacrifices: As first of
Prayer, for so says David, Let my prayer be directed in thy sight as incense,
and the lifting up of mine hands as an evening sacrifice, Psalm. 141.2.
Secondly, of thanksgiving, as the Apostle, Let us therefore by him offer the
sacrifice of praise always to God, that is, the fruit of the lips, Hebr.
13.15. Thirdly, of Alms, which is an acceptable sacrifice, and pleasing unto
God; as the same Apostle affirms in the very next verse, viz. 16. And
therefore S. Paul elsewhere calls an offering and contribution of the
Saints, an odor that smells sweet, and a pleasant and acceptable sacrifice
unto God also, Phil. 4.18. Fourthly, of broken and contrite hearts and souls
unto the Lord, which, as David says, are sacrifices unto God, such as he will
not despise, Psalm. 51.17. And lastly, to offer up our whole souls and bodies
to the service of God, as S. Paul exhorts, saying, I beseech you therefore
brethren by the mercies of God, that you give up your bodies a living sacrifice
holy and acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable serving of God, Romans
12.1. And after we have thus been Priests in offering up all these pleasing
and acceptable sacrifices unto God; we shall in the last place become Prophets
also in applying that knowledge we have to the benefit and good of others, as
S. Peter was commanded, when he was converted himself to strengthen his
brethren, Luke 22.32.

And therefore seeing we have all these great and special benefits and
blessings by this anointed one Christ Jesus, let us comfort our selves, and
rejoice in this name too; accounting it the greatest honor unto us, that could
befall us, to be called and styled Christians according to it, for what is that
else but anointed ones, that is, men set apart and consecrated to these high
and honorable offices in the Church of God before expressed. And therefore let
us be sure to carry our selves in our lives and conversations answerable to
this name by our careful performance of the former duties, lest otherwise it
be said of us as of the Church of Sardis; Thou have a name that thou live,
but thou art dead, Revel. 3.1. But if we walk worthy of this name, which we
have taken upon us, why then we have great cause to comfort our selves and
rejoice in it, as Theodosius the Emperor did, who thanked God more for that
he was a Christian, than f^r that he was an Emperor; because (as he said)
the glory which he had by the one would vanish, but the benefits he enjoyed by
the other, he knew would continue for ever: and this suffices for the two
names, as they are distinguished, first Jesus, then Christ.

One observation more from them, as they are conjoined, and then I have done,
and that shall be this, that Jesus is an Hebrew, and Christ a Greek name,
which may intimate unto us, that he came into the world, as well to be a light
unto the Gentiles, as to be the glory of his people Israel, as old Simeon
prophesied of him in his Nunc dimittis, Luke 2.32. The Greek name Christ
belonging to the Gentiles, and the Hebrew name Jesus to the Jews: so that now
all nations may challenge an interest in the worlds Messiah, none excluded,
none exempted: for the whole world of people were anciently divided, but into
these two names and nations, of Jews and Gentiles. They only being termed
Jews, which were of the seed of Abraham; and all nations else, that derived
not their pedigree from this line, were called and accounted by a more general
name, Gentiles; as might be plentifully proved out of many passages of the holy
Scriptures, if it were a thing to be doubted or questioned. Now then (I say) in
that the Messiah being borne of Jewish parents and kindred, according to the
flesh, had yet a Gentile name conferred and bestowed upon him, it shows
plainly (his very names significantly speaking so much) that he is come to be
a Savior and Redeemer unto all nations, even to the one as well as to the
other, to the Gentile as well as to the Jew, bringing salvation with him unto
all men, as S. Paul speaks, Tit. 2.11. which was very happy and welcome
news brought into the world at the incarnation and birth of Christ: for before
this time, the golden scepter of grace was not stretched forth to all nations,
nor to all countries, nor the Chancerie Court of mercy holden generally in all
the world, but in a corner as it were, and in one family or kindred of the
Jews alone, till the fullness of time came, in which this Jesus Christ was
conceived of the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Marie: for from the
calling of Abraham out of Urre of the Caldees, it was only in that one family,
increasing sometimes in Canaan, sometimes in Egypt, sometimes in the
wilderness traveling; and last of all, in Canaan again settled, where it
grew till it had filled indeed that whole land: but yet still it was confined
within that nation and people of the Jews, and within that little Kingdom of
Canaan (which was scarce an handful in respect of the whole world) whose
Metropolitan City was Jerusalem, the glory and joy for the time of the whole
earth; for there it pleased the great King of heaven and earth to reside only,
and to keep his Court: therefore is Jerusalem called the City of the great
King, so that in Jewrie only is God truly known and worshipped; at Salem was
his Tabernacle, and his dwelling at Sion, the place which he had chosen to put
his name there; during all which time the Gentiles, that is, all nations,
except the foresaid Jews or Israelites, were not in any general account the
people of God, but were parted from them with a wall of separation, strangers
and aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Covenants of Grace made with
Abraham only and his seed, suffered to live in the sinful state of their
inbred corruptions, to walk in the blindness of their darkened
understandings, without the knowledge of his Law, without all saving knowledge
of himself, without Christ the ground of hope, out of the Church the place of
hope, without the Covenant the reason also of all our hope and believing. (...)
in hoc mundo, without God in this present world, barbarous and brutish, both
in their minds and manners, as the Apostle draws their character, Ephesians. 2.12.

But Beloved, there was a fullness of time set in the determined counsel of
God, when this partition wall should be broken down, and they should again
become utraque unum, both Nations should be made one, and the despised
Gentiles, as well as the Jews, be received into grace and mercy by a new
Covenant: For I will call them my people which were not my people, and her
beloved which was not beloved, says God by his Prophet, Hos. 2.23. Yea, the
people that walked in darkness have seen a great light; they that dwell in
the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined, says another
Prophet, viz. Esaias 9.2. and to show what light he means, he subjoynes within
a few verses after, To us a child is borne, to us a Son is given, etc. verse.
6. So that this was from everlasting decreed, that as God divided all Nations
out of one root, the first Adam, so to gather them again under one head,
Christ the second Adam: that as by that one man came death over all, by a
natural propagation; so by this one, life and righteousness might abound to
all by a spiritual regeneration.

And the accomplishment of this decree is now in these days and times of the
Gospel, wherein our Jesus Christ has been conceived of the Holy Ghost, and
borne of the Virgin Marie: for now (as the former Prophet Esaias foretold) may
the Gentiles flock and gather unto God from all Coasts and Nations be they
never so barbarous, never so savage, the flocks of Kedar, the Rams of Nebayoth,
the Isles and ships of the Ocean, shall bring their sons and daughters from
far, and they shall come night and day, thick as a cloud, and as Pigeons
about their windows, Esaias 60. For behold now the holy City, new Jerusalem is
come down out of Heaven, and the Tabernacle of God is with men (men in
general) and he will dwell with them, Revel. 21.2, 3. and heaven is after a
sort on earth, by the presence of God in his Church in the ministry of the
Gospel. And this City of God is built fouresquare, where the great King
keeps his Court of grace with open gates night and day, toward the four
coasts and corners of the world, holding forth the golden scepter daily, to
invite all that will come, and welcome all that do come, of all kindreds, of
all nations whatsoever: Which latitude and extent of Christ's saving grace, as
it was well and wittily observed by S. Cyprian, to be employed in his name of
the second Adam; the Greek letters whereof do severally signify all the
quarters of the earth, as (...), the East; (...), or (...), the West; (...),
the North; (...), the South: so likewise may it be raised, and that not
unfittingly, neither from his two usual and ordinary names here spoken of in
the Creed, Jesus Christ: Jesus speaking him a Savior to the Jews, and Christ
Anointed also for the Gentiles.

Well then, to draw toward an end of this point, let us now behold how true it
is (yea and ever was, but yet now it appears more than ever) that there is no
respect of persons with God, but in every nation they that fear him, and
work righteousness, are accepted with him, as S. Peter said, Acts 10.34, 35.
for in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision, nor uncircumcision avails any
thing, but a new creature: Tros Ticiusque mihi nullo discrimine agetur: says
the Poet. Neither Jew nor Grecian, bond nor free, male nor female, Barbarian
nor Scythian, but they are all one in Christ Jesus, as S. Paul says, Gal.
3.28. As the river Nilus, running but within his own seven channels, moystens
but his own banks, and the things that grow thereon; but overflowing the
country at certain seasons, makes the whole land of Egypt fruitful as the
garden of God: so the floods of grace once flowing, especially within the land
of Canaan, made that only the fruitful land flowing with milk and honey, as
the Scripture speaks of it. But as God once in severe judgment and truth,
opened the windows of Heaven, and rained down a flood, that drowned and
destroyed the whole world, except eight persons, Noah and his family: so in
this last age, wherein the everlasting Gospel is sent to all nations, God has
in mercy and truth opened the windows of Heaven, once more to rain down
that shower of grace, that shall save all the world, except such as have built
themselves a Babel, and enclosed themselves wilfully within the walls of their
own works, that these waters of grace may not come at them; for surely there
is salvation near all them that fear him (says the Scripture) that salvation
may dwell in our land, yea, in all lands that this wide world contains. Was
there ever then such a golden age and world, as the Poets conceited and
described; Flumina jam lactis, jam flumina Nectaris ibant,
Flavaque de viridi stillabant ilice mella.
When as floods of milk and Nectar flowed in every street, in every
channel. Why surely such have been the poetical fictions and conceits,
whereas we have Prophetical truths, fore-speaking far greater happiness under
the Gospel of God, and the Kingdom of Christ, when Christ himself shall be
the Shepherd of his people, to lead them in the paths of righteousness, that
he may make them rest in the fresh pastures by the still waters, Psalm. 23.1, 2.
Yea, when with joy all nations shall draw water out of the wels of salvation,
as Esaias 12.3. And therefore for use and conclusion, Be joyful in the Lord all
ye lands, serve him with gladness, and come before his presence with a song,
Psalm. 100.1. For now we that were no better than dogs before, may at the last
feed on the crumbs that fall from our Masters table, and we that have been
ruled but with an iron rod in the time of the Law, able to break all the
kingdoms of the earth to powder, have now the golden scepter of grace
stretched out over us, to guide us through the paths of righteousness in this
world, unto the land of everlasting happiness in the world to come. And
therefore let us praise the Lord all we Heathens, and sing unto him all we
nations, because Jesus Christ, that is, the Anointed Savior as well to us
Gentiles, as to the Jews, is conceived by the Holy Ghost, and borne of the
Virgin Marie: and this suffices for his two names Jesus Christ.

It follows: His only Son our Lord. Where you see, that every good
Christian professes to believe, how that Jesus Christ is first the Son of
God: secondly, his only Son: and thirdly, our Lord: of these in order. And
first of the first, his Son. First, he is the Son of God, which when you
hear, Beloved, you must take heed that you do not understand it only as he
was man, conceived by the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Marie; as
follows afterward to be handled in the description of his manhood, when we
shall come to those articles; for so he is usually styled the Son of man, as
well as of God, but here he is to be believed the Son of God from the
beginning, before ever he became man, or ever man was, or indeed before the
world was. A Son, Qui non in temporibus esse coepit, sed ante saecula
sempiternus, incomprehensibiliter a patre genitus: as Cyril speaks: Which had
not his beginning in transitory and fleeting time, but was begotten by his
Father before all worlds, as it is in the Nicene Creed; God of God, light of
light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with
the Father, by whom all things were made, as there follows: so that as the
Father is eternal, so is the Son eternal too, as says Athanasius in his
Creed.

Now if any should be inquisitive to know, Quomodo aeternus aeternum, as S.
Augustine speaks, how one eternal should beget another, seeing according to
our natural reason, that which begets is before that which is begotten; I
might answer, as in my former Catechism about the name of Father, Generationem
ejus quis enarrabit? Who shall declare his generation? Esaias 53.8. seeing the
Angels thereof are ignorant, and it is unknown to the Prophets, and therefore,
Non a nobis discutiendum, sed credendum, as S. Augustine: It is rather to be
believed, than disputed or inquired into too far: but yet because the Lord
has given us many earthly comparisons, both in his word and works, by which
we may make some resemblances, and attain unto some glimpse of knowledge in
those things that are heavenly: therefore with the same Father we will
express it, as plainly as we can to your apprehension and conceit, entreating
you with him, that if there be any thing that you cannot thoroughly and plainly
understand, that yet you would believe, considering, as the Prophet says, That
until you believe you cannot understand, as S. Augustine reads it, Esaias 7.9.
Intellectus enim est merces fidei, as he further says, Understanding is the
reward of faith: and therefore seek not to understand, that thou may
believe; but believe first, that thou may understand afterward. Nay, thou
shall understand, if thou firmly beleevest, if not in this life, yet in that
which is to come, when thou shall see face to face, and know as thou art known.

Well then, Quomodo aeternus aeternum? say thou, How does one eternal beget
another? S. Augustine shall answer for me, Quomodo flamma temporalis generat
lucem temporalem: Even as a temporal flame or fire does beget a temporal
light, where the begotten light is coequall in time to the begetting flame,
neither being before nor after other: so that where there is a flame, you may
be bold to say there is light, and where you see such a light, there you may be
sure is also a flame or fire: so that, Ex quo incipit flamma, ex illo incipit
lux: Look where the flame begins, then also the light even at that very
instant of time. And therefore as S. Augustine goes on, Da mihi flammam sine
luce, and do tibi Deum Patrem sine Filio: Show me a flame without light, and I
will believe that God the Father may have a time to be without a Son, but not
else; but as the light from its very first beginning begets shining, so God
the Father from all eternity has begot this Son, which in some places of the
holy Scripture is called the Word of God: In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was God, etc. Joh. 1.1. In other places, Sapientia Patris, The wisdom
of the Father, as Luke 11.49. Sometimes Virtus and potentia Dei, The virtue and
power of the Lord: other times, Brachium and fortitudo Domini, The arm and
strength of the Lord: and the like. All which show him to have his very
essence and being with and from God, from the very beginning of eternity,
even before all times, in this only to be distinguished from the Father, that
the Father is of none, whereas the Son is of the Father, and the Holy Ghost
is from them both, being but one God, howsoever three persons: so that as
learned Mr. Hooker says; The substance of God, with this property to be of
none, does make the person of the Father, the very selfsame substance in
number, with this property to be of the Father, makes the person of the
Son; the same substance having added unto it the property of proceeding from
the other two, makes the person of the Holy Ghost: so that howsoever in the
Godhead there be three persons, yet we acknowledge but one God; for the
Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, and yet not three Gods
but one God, as Athanasius in his Creed: and therefore this one God, howsoever
but one in substance and essence, when he was to make man, seems to
distinguish himself into persons, by saying within himself, Let us make man
in our image, according to our likeness, Genesis 1.26. in which words, and those
immediately going before, Et divinitatis unitas and personarum pluralitas
aperte ostenditur: The unity of the Godhead and plurality of persons is
plainly and evidently shown: For whereas the next words before are, And God
saw that it was good; he presently added, saying, Let us make man, etc. which
adding of a verb of the plural number to a noune of the singular number,
shows plainly as well a plurality of persons, as singularity of essence in
the Godhead. And so likewise do the two nounes of the singular number, Image,
and Similitude, show evidently, Non in Deo esse plura exemplaria, That there
are not in God more patterns and samples to be resembled than one, according
to the image and similitude whereof man was made; but adding a pronoune of the
plural number to these nounes of the singular, as our image, and our
similitude, it clearly demonstrates a plurality of persons, as well as the
other did but one God; for if there were but one person, as the heretic
Sabellius would infer, he had not said our image, but mine; nor our
likeness, but only my likeness.

The same likewise, viz. the plurality of persons in the Godhead, is further
proved in another place of the same book of Genesis, and that is chap. 19.
verse. 24. where it is said, Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrha
brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven: now if there were but one
person in the Godhead, what Lord should this be that should thus rain fire
and brimstone from the Lord; but Lord being twice named, it does plainly show
the Son to be he that rained; Quoniam a Patre genitus, Because he is
begotten of his Father. And the Father to be him from whom he rained, because
he is not a Domino sed ingenitus, not from the Lord being unbegotten; but the
Lord raining from the Lord, must needs be the Son from the Father, who a quo
habet esse ab illo habet and operari; look from whom he has his essence,
from him also he has his operation; and therefore it is said, that by him
were all things made, Ioh. 1.3. And yet further, Ego and Paterunum sumus, I and
my Father are one, says Christ himself, Ioh. 10.30. And again, this is life
eternal, to know thee to be the only true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus
Christ, Ioh. 17.3. both which places show plainly a plurality of persons,
though but one God. But you will say, that howsoever these places and the like
may be sufficient to prove a Dualitie, or that there are two persons in the
Godhead, as Father and Son, yet they do not prove a Trinity, or that there
are three persons in the same, as we are farther taught to believe; and
therefore you desire proof of this also, for the better strengthening of your
faith in that point, which I am content to yield unto, though it were more
proper when we shall come to that article, of believing in the third person of
this blessed Trinity, that is, the Holy Ghost.

But if this be sufficiently proved, now that labor may be spared, then
hearken therefore for you farther satisfaction in this point, to that which
follows: when Abraham sat in his tent door in the plain of Mamre, in the
heat of the day, it is said, that the Lord appeared unto him, and he lift up
his eyes and looked, and lo three men stood by him, and when he saw them, he
ran to meet them from the rent door, and bowed himself to the ground, and he
said; Lord, if I have now found favor in thy sight, go not I pray thee from
thy servant, Genesis 18.1, 2, 3. Here you see three appeared, yet Abraham speaks
but as to one, saying, Lord, and thy, and thee, all in the singular number.
Yea, the Text it self expresses these three to be but one Lord, saying, That
the Lord appeared, verse. 1. and yet three appeared, verse. 2.

Secondly, the Prophet David says, God even our own God shall bless us, God
shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth shall fear him, Psalm. 67. ult.
where he names God thrice, to show a Trinity of persons, and then concludes
with, All shall fear him, expressing these three persons to be notwithstanding
but one God.

Thirdly, the Prophet Esaias, speaking of the Seraphims, praising the Lord says,
they did it after this manner, saying, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of
hosts, the whole world is full of his glory, Esa. 6.3. where by crying thrice
holy, they demonstrate a Trinity of persons, and by saying Lord God, and his
glory, in the singular number, they declare also the Unity of the same. And
these proofs shall serve out of the Old Testament: in the new likewise we
find sundry to the same purpose, and we will begin with S. Paul first, who
says, That of him, and through him, and for him, are all things: to him
therefore be glory for ever, Amen, Romans 11. ult. where having named him
thrice, he shows the three persons; and adding to him, and not to them, be
glory, he likewise manifestly teaches but one God. And again, he shows the
Trinity in another place very plainly, though not the Unity, viz. when he
says, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, 2 Cor. 13. ult. where the three
persons are expressly named, which is as much as we look for at this time,
having plentifully proved the Unity before. S. John likewise says, There are
three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost,
and these three are one, 1 Ioh. 5 7. where both Trinity and Unity are
apparently expressed: as also in the Revelation, Holy, holy, holy Lord God
Almighty, which was, and which is, and which is to come, Revel. 4.8.

And lastly, our Savior himself likewise to manifest the same unto his Church
in after ages, commands his Apostles, at his last farewell from them on earth,
to go unto all Nations, and to baptize them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19. which should never have been
done, if these three Persons had not been one and the same God. Now then to
finish this point, if you understand these things, give praise and thanks unto
God that has made you capable of such high and hidden mysteries, by enabling
you so to do, if you do not understand, yet faithfully believe, and it may be
a means to save your souls: And in particular for the present Article in
hand, believe the confession of Saint Peter which he made unto Christ
himself, demanding of his Disciples who he was, Simon Peter answered for all
the rest; Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, Matthew. 16.16. So say you
every one for himself, I believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God.

The next circumstance is, that he is unicus, his only Son; And in Jesus
Christ his only Son: So that he is to be believed not only to be his Son, but
his only Son too, for thus the holy Scriptures declare him, and therefore it
is our parts so to believe him. As first, where it is said, The Word was made
flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the
only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth, Ioh. 1.14. And
again, No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in
the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, verse the tenth of the same
Chapter. But if Christ be Gods only Son, how then are we also called his sons?
will you say unto me, yea, and the Angels likewise are termed his children, Job
1.6. To which I answer, that Christ is called Gods only Son, because he alone
is his Son by nature and eternal generation, and none but he; whereas the
Angels are his sons but by creation, as indeed are all the creatures of the
world besides, and his elect and chosen children by a more special grace of
redemption and adoption, as it is said; As many as received him, to them he
gave power to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in his Name, Ioh.
1.12. And again, When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son
made of a woman, and made under the Law, that he might redeem them which are
under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons, Gal. 4.4, 5 verses.
And therefore, as S. John says, Behold, what love the Father has showed on
us, that we should be called the sons of God, 1 Ioh. 3.1. So that, as I say,
we are sons indeed by grace and adoption, but Christ is his only Son by nature
and eternal generation, as I said before, and none but he. And therefore
unicus dicitur, quia nec comparationem recipit cum creaturis, nec
similitudinem: as S. Augustine speaks; He is called Gods only Son, because
there is neither comparison nor resemblance betwixt his Sonship, and that of
the creatures: He being a Son of Gods own substance; for ex ore altissimi
prodi^i, I came out of the mouth of the most high, primogenitus, being the
first borne of all creatures, as Ecclus. 24.5. and unigenitus, the only
begotten Son of God, as before out of Ioh. 1.18. A Son then begotten, not
created, not of grace, but nature; before, not in time, as all the creatures
are, and therefore an only Son. Hereupon, himself taking his farewell of his
Disciples, Ioh. 20. (as Mr. Hum. Sidenham has well observed) he shows them
this intervallum and distance between his generation and their adoption, in
saying, I go to my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God; not
to our Father, but to mine and yours. This separation implies a diversity, and
shows that God is his Father indeed, but our Creator; and therefore he adds,
my God and your God; mine, by a privilege of nature; yours, of grace; mine out
of the womb (as it were) of everlastingnesse, yours out of the jaws of time.
And therefore seeing Christ only is properly and truly Gods Son, and none but
he, it may serve thus far to be a comfort and consolation unto us, yea, and
to strengthen our trust in God, in that the love of God has been so
wonderful, and his mercy so unspeakable toward us, as that he has not
spared his own and his only Son for us, as it is said, God so loved the
world, that he has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life, Ioh. 3.16. sufficit pro unico.

The third and last circumstance is, that he is called our Lord, And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord: So says S. Paul to us, There is but one God
which is the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.6. And therefore he
says of himself to his Disciples, Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say
well, for so I am, Ioh. 13.13. For God has made him both Lord and Christ: this
Jesus whom ye have crucified, says S. Peter, Act. 2.36. Now this is as S.
Augustine says, because Spoliavit antiquo hostem, singulari dominio suo
asciscit nos; He having vanquished and overcome our old enemy the Devil, and
spoiled him of all principality and power, he now rules and reigns over us
himself, by the power of his Word and holy Spirit, guiding and directing us in
all our ways, and protecting and defending us in all our dangers, so that our
spiritual enemies shall no more be able to prevail against us. As also in
regard of our redemption, because he has purchased us to himself, being
before captives and slaves of the Devil, and therefore may justly challenge a
lordship and dominion over us. And this may serve first to comfort us, That he
being our Lord, and we abiding under his protection, we need not fear what any
enemy, whether spiritual or temporal, whether Devil or wicked men can do
unto us: For if God be on our side, who can be against us, says Saint Paul,
Romans 8.31. And therefore let us not fear them which can kill only the body,
but rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell; as
it is said, Matthew. 10.28. And indeed in the second place, his Lordship over us
ought to beget a fear in us toward his holy name, according to that of the
Prophet, If I be a Lord, where is my fear, Malac. 1.6. For howsoever, as he is
a Savior, he most truly deserves our love, yet as he is Lord both of heaven
and earth, and Judge both of quick and dead, he as justly requires our fear.
Now both these titles, as ye see, are here ascribed unto him, and given him
even in this one Article of our Creed; for as he is in this last clause of it
styled and called our Lord, so before he was called Jesus a Savior: here
Dominus, which is nomen Majestatis, a name of fear and Majesty, there Jesus
which is nomen benignitatis and amoris, a name of benignity and love. This
shows him to be an eternal being, and a giver of being to all his creatures:
That that he is the Author of our well being, that had made our selves in a
miserable being; so that it had been better for us never to be, than to be in
such a miserable estate as either we were all by nature, or they all shall be,
that are and shall be without this Jesus, this Savior: uterque hic profitetur
and Dominus and Salvator; he is here professed to be both, both Lord and
Savior; ut pro potestate qua omni suae creaturae dominatur, jure metuendum
ostenderetur, pro bonitate vero qua misericorditer quosdam salvat, dignum
dilectione demonstraretur; as S. Augustine speaks, i. e. that in regard of his
power, whereby he rules over all his creatures, it might be shown that he
ought worthily to be feared; and in regard of his goodness, whereby he saves
some, he might be demonstrated to be worthy likewise of all love; but as one
says, Many are willing and ready to embrace Christ as Jesus, to save them,
who yet like not to have him urged upon them as their Lord to govern and
command them; sufficit pro hoc atrticulo.

Which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary.
THese two circumstances of the conception and birth of Christ, express to the
full the manner how he took our humane nature upon him, and became man, for as
all mankind is so generated and brought forth into the world, first by
conception in the womb of a Mother, and then by production and bringing forth
from thence, according to the time of life, which the Lord has appointed by
his wise and all-guiding and governing providence and decree; so he being to
take our true and perfect humane nature and shape upon him, that therein he
might perform all that righteousness which the Law of God does require at the
hands of mankind, and so satisfy the rigor of the Law, and the wrath of God
in man's person, for man's sins, according to that first promise and prophecy of
him: The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. Therefore
it was requisite, that after the manner of all other persons and people
whatsoever, he should be propagated and produced into the world, as well by
conception as by birth, that so the Enemy of mankind might have nothing to
object against the justice of God, as if true and perfect man had not truly and
perfectly fulfilled the whole Law, and so quit himself from the danger of the
breach of that first Command, of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou
shall not eat, for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the
death, or surely die, Genesis 2.17. Therefore, I say, our Savior Christ being to
become a perfect man, it behoved him in all things (sin only excepted) to be
made like man, as well by conception, as by birth from a carnal and na^urall
Mother, in regard whereof it is here said, He was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
and borne of the Virgin Mary.

First, of his conception, He was conceived by the Holy Ghost, for so the
Angel Gabriel told Mary his Mother, when she doubted and demanded, saying, How
shall this thing be, seeing I know not a man? Luke 1.34. And the Angel
answered in the next verse, saying, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the power of the highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing
which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God, verse. 35. And in
S. Matthewes Gospel it is said, She was found to be with Child of the Holy
Ghost, and that which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost, Matthew.
1.18.20. That is, says S. Augustine, Cujus conceptionis solus author fuit
Spiritus Sanctus; of whose conception the Holy Ghost only was the Author: and
yet not so the Author neither, Vt caro ista formata sit citra interventum
propriae essentiae Filii Dei, as Athanasius speaks; as if the flesh were
formed without the intervention of the proper essence of the Son of God. Absit,
ea enim est men's Pauli Samosatensis et reliquorum haereticorum; as he goes on:
Far be it from us so to imagine, this being the mind and conceit of Paulus
Samosatensis, and other Heretics: but we believe and speak, secundum
orthodoxorum dogmatum rectitudinem, according to the rectitude and
straightness of the Catholic Tenets, that the blessed Virgin was filled
indeed with the power and virtue of the Holy Ghost, Tum ut corpus ejus
sanctificaretur, tum ut salutarem illum foetum concipere possit; as well for
the sanctification of her body, as the enabling of her to conceive that saving
and life-bringing fruit in her womb, and so at the last after these fitting
preparations the divine nature of the Word it self, that is, the second person
in the sacred Trinity descended; Et ibi suum tabernaculum eligens in ea
incarnationem assumpsit and homo factus est; as Athanasius still: and choosing
there the place of his residence for a time, assumed his incarnation and
manhood in her; so that for us men and for our salvation himself came down
from heaven, was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made
man, as the Nicene Creed teaches; for by the salutation of an Angel, says S.
Gregory, the Word entered the womb, and straight the Word in the womb by the
working of the Holy Ghost became flesh; for if she had conceived by the
ordinary way of propagating mankind, i. e. by the carnal knowledge of man,
whether Joseph her husband, or any other, why then that which should have been
borne of her, could not have been without sin, and so not capable of the
Mediatorship betwixt God and man, nor of satisfying the Law and wrath of God
for man; but now being made man, not after the ordinary course of nature, but
of the sanctified flesh and blood of his Mother, through the miraculous working
of the Holy Ghost in her womb, he is capable of doing all that belongs unto
our redemption, for by his most holy conception, our sinful birth and
conception is sanctified, and his holiness of life serves as a cover to hide
our manifold actual corruptions from the eyes of God: For, for their sakes
(says Christ) do I sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified
through the truth, Ioh. 17.19. which shows that Christ's holiness is ours; so
that this is the name whereby we may call him, The Lord our righteousness,
says Jeremie, Chap. 23.6. Neither let it be incredible to any (as S. Augustine
speaks) that he should take the whole and perfect nature of man only from his
Mother the Virgin; Nulla sementina carnis origin operante; Without any
operation or assistance of carnal seed, seeing that the hand and power of God
wrought and effected it; quae primam mulierem potuit de costa formare; which
was able, and did make the first woman that ever was, only of a rib of the
first man her husband: And therefore he that was thus able to make a perfect
and entire woman only out of the flesh of man, without any other help or
assistance, let us not doubt, but steadfastly believe that he is as able to
make a perfect and entire man only out of the flesh of woman, so that he shall
become as perfect God, so likewise perfect man, of a reasonable soul, and
humane flesh subsisting, as Athanasius: for if it be possible (as S. Augustine
says) for a worm to be engendered and framed a living creature out of the mud,
or clay, or dirt, or dung, and the like, only by the Suns working, heating and
reflecting upon it; then much more for the flesh of Christ to be conceived of
the Virgin Mary, by the only overshadowing, illustrating, and sanctifying power
of the Holy Ghost.

He was conceived of the Holy Ghost. And here we may take notice of four
manner of births, i. e. ways or kinds of producing or bringing mankind into
the world. The first, Nec de viro, nec de femina; neither of man nor woman,
which was Adam made only by the Almighty hand and power of God, out of the
dust and clay of the earth, Genesis 2.7. The second, De viro sine muliere: Of the
man without the help of woman, and this was Eve, who was made only of the rib
of man, Genesis 2.22. The third, De viro and muliere; Both of man and woman, as we
are all ordinarily propagated by carnal generation. The fourth and last, De
muliere sine viro; Of the woman without the help of man, and this was Christ
conceived only by the Holy Ghost.

Borne of the Virgin Mary, is the second circumstance of his humanity: First
borne, secondly, of a Virgin; of the first, the meaning is no more but this,
That in the ordinary time of travel, according to the course of nature, he was
brought forth into the world by a woman called Mary, whom the Lord had selected
for that purpose, that his only begotten Son, the second Person in the sacred
Trinity, might take his humane flesh and nature of her, and so become that
promised seed of the woman which should break the Serpents head, spoken of
before out of Genesis 3.15. according to that also of the Apostle; For as much as
the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part
with them, that he might destroy through death, him that had the power of
death, that is, the Devil, Hebr. 2.14. For he in no sort took the Angels
nature, but he took the seed of Abraham, as there follows, verse 16. Now then,
if we do once truly and firmly believe his conception, there is no great
doubt or difficulty to be made concerning his birth, because all mankind,
after they are conceived in the womb, do by the ordinary course of nature in
due time of procreation, i. e. after nine months space proceed to a birth into
the world, and so likewise our Savior Christ: only hence arises a
difference, and the difficulty, that whereas all other mothers, after they
have once conceived with child, cease to be, and to be accounted Virgins; the
Mother of Christ continued what she was before, a Virgin still, yea, and so
remained unto her lives end: And therefore is said, Borne of the Virgin Mary.
Whereupon S. Augustine says, He that came to renew the corrupted and depraved
nature of sinful mankind, novam legem voluit habere nascendi, would be borne
after a new and unusual manner: Ius enim non erat ut virginis violaretur
integritas per Christi adventum qui venerat sanare corrupta; It being not meet
that he which came to heal that which was corrupted and broken, should by his
said coming violate and break that which was whole, i. e. the virginity and
integrity of his Mother: and therefore all antiquity have concluded and
determined of her that she was a Virgin, ante partum, in partu, post partum,
before her travel, in her travel, and after her travel, so remaining even to
her dying day, as I said before.

First, before her travel, to fulfill that prophecy which had foretold that a
Virgin should conceive and bear a Son, and that his name should be called
Emanuel, which is, God with us, Esaias 7.15. which name agrees with none but our
Savior Christ, which was both God and man; and therefore the said prophecy is
said to be fulfilled in him, Matthew. 1.23.

Secondly, in her travel, that he which was borne of her might be without sin,
for all others must say as David; Behold, I was borne in sin, and in iniquity
has my mother conceived me, Psalm. 51.5. Only the Mother of Christ, because
she had conceived without the carnal knowledge of man, might say, as S.
Augustine makes her to speak, Quinatus de ventre meo me mat^em dimisit
intactam; He that is borne of me, has indeed made me a Mother, but yet he
has left me without any unclean touch of carnal contagion or contamination:
At implevit ventrem meum divinitate, and uterum meum non evacuavit castitate:
So that howsoever he have filled me with his Divinity, yet he has not robbed
or spoiled me of my chastity; Sola impregnata, nec vitiata, exonerata, nec
vacuata; but I, I only, of all the women in the world, have been found with
child, without deflowring, and delivered of a child, without defiling, because
as the Angel Gabriel, Paranimphus Christi, the Paranimph of Christ, as Saint
Augustine styles him, saluted me: I have been freely beloved, and the Lord
has been with me, so that I am bless d amongst women, Luke 1.28. Now then, as
the same holy Father still speaks, Considero conceptum tuum, beata virgo, and
expavesco: intucor partum, and contremisco: adoro filium tuum, and revivisco;
When I consider thy conception, O blessed Virgin, I am astonished: when I behold
thy delivery, I stand amazed; but when I come to adore thy Son, I am revived,
seeing he that at the first created thee, has honored thee so far as to be
borne of thee; Borne of the Virgin Mary: And as she was a Virgin before, and
in her travel, so likewise after, even to her lives end; Posterior enim
concupiscentia minuisset fidem prioris virginitatis: For her after
concupiscence and carnal longings, if she had any, would have diminished the
credit and belief of her former virginity; and indeed it was not meet that
the only Son of God, that was borne of a Virgin and without sin, should come
afterward to have had a carnal brotherhood, which must needs have been
conceived in sin, which might have fallen out, if she had had carnal knowledge
afterward of her husband Joseph. And therefore Jovinianus, Helvidius, and all
Heretics of that strain, which have so affirmed, are to be detested and
avoided for many reasons. First, because it would have derogated from the
perfection of Christ to have had such brethren, who as he was the only
begotten Son of his Father in heaven; so was it meet that he should be the
only S^n of his Mother here on earth. Secondly, because Mary in the after
carnal knowledge of her husband Joseph should have done wrong and injury to
the Holy Ghost; Cujus sacrarium fuit uterum virginis; Whose virgin womb had
been sanctified and consecrated by him, as it were, unto the Lord, and
therefore ought not to be defiled, Per virilem commixtionem, by any unclean
touch and commixture of man. Thirdly, because she would have been thought
very unthankful and ungrateful unto God, if she had not been contented with
such a Son. Fourthly, and lastly, because it would have been too great a
presumption in Joseph, Si polluere attentaret virginem; If he should have
offered once to violate the virginity of her, of whom the Lord was borne: and
therefore there is no doubt but we may safely hold and believe her a Virgin as
well after, as in and before her travel, and say, I believe in Jesus Christ
conceived by the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary: for as a Star sends
forth its beam without any detrime^t, or corruption to it self; Sic virgo
Filium Christum; as Bernard speaks: So might the Virgin Mary her Son Christ
without any wrong to her virginity: which the Fathers also prove by many
allusions from the sacred Scriptures and Word of God, applying some mystical
passages of the same to the conception and birth of Christ: of this blessed
Virgin, Rubus Mosaicus, virga Aaronica, vellus Gedeonis, clausa Ezechielis
porta, Virginem parituram sine detrimento virginitati suae designant; says
one: Moses bush that burned and was not consumed, Exodus 3.2. Aarons rod that
budded and blossomed, and bare ripe Almonds, when it was withered and dry,
Numb. 17.8. Gedeons fleece that was full of dew, that one might wring it when
all the earth was dry besides, Judge. 6.38. And Ezekiels gate which was shut,
so that none should enter by it, because the Lord God of Israel had entered by
it, Ezech. 44.2. do all in some sort or other express the conception and
birth of the Son of God, without any detriment to the virginity of his
Mother: and indeed the last of these Ezekiels shut gate, is nearly applied by
S. Augustine himself in his eighteenth Sermon De tempore, to this purpose,
where he says, Quid est porta in domo Domini clausa nisi quod Maria semper
erit intacta, etc. What is meant by the gate in the house of the Lord, which is
always shut, but only this that the Virgin Mary shall ever remain untouched
and undefiled: Et quid est quod homo non transit per eam nisi quia Joseph non
cognovit eam: And what is meant by that, that no man shall enter by it, but
this, that her husband Joseph shall not carnally know her: Et quid est quod
Dominus solus intrat and egredietur per eam nisi quia Spiritus Sanctus
impregnavit eam; And what by that, that the Lord God of Israel only shall go
in and out thereat, but this, that she has conceived by the Holy Ghost: Et
quid est clausa erit in aeternum, nisi quia erit Maria virgo, ante partum, in
partu, post partum: And what by this, that it shall be shut for ever; but this,
that Mary shall be a Virgin before, in, and after her delivery of her said Son
Christ Jesus, as I said before* in so much as she may say of her self, as he
goes on, Porta facta sum coeli, janua facta sum filio Dei: I am made the gate
of heaven, and am become a door to the Son of God, because he vouchsafes to
go in and out by me, and that without either opening or shutting of my
sanctified womb, whereby my virginity should be impaired in the least degree,
as after his resurrection he entered in among the midst of his Disciples, when
the doors were fast shut, Joh. 20.19. And therefore we need not fear to
believe him borne of the Virgin Marie.

And thus you see, Beloved, how Christ the Son of God took our humane nature
and shape perfectly, and entirely upon him, and so became also the Son of
man; first, by being conceived, and then borne of the Virgin Marie; which
howsoever it may seem strange and almost miraculous unto us, yet to God that
did work it, it was both facile and easy; for that God that has written
wondrous things in his Law, is able also to work wondrous things for us in his
Gospel; Quid autem sunt mirabilia nisi quae hominibus sunt impossibilia:
Augustine. And what, I pray you, is wonderful, but that which seems to us
impossible. As for example, the very writing of the Law in Tables of stone,
without fitting instruments, is it self a very wonder of the Law. Again, the
earths yielding bread in the wilderness, without either plowing or sowing, as
Exodus 16.15. is another wonder of the same. And thirdly, Aarons rod spoken of
before, which having been withered many years, as S. Augustine says,
beginning to revive without water, to flourish in the Tabernacle, and to bring
forth nuts or almonds, when it was enclosed under the dry roof of an house,
is a third wonder also of the Law of God. Now then (as S. Augustine applies it)
if we have read these things in Gods Law, why do we not understand them and
believe them, when we see them, or the very like to them acted and performed,
even to our comfort and consolation in these days and times of the Gospel:
for he that writ the stony Tables without an iron pen, by the same power and
skill could cause the Virgin Marie to conceive with child by the Holy Ghost,
without the help of man. And he that brought forth bread in the wilderness,
without breaking and plowing up the earth, was able also to bring a Son from
the womb of the Virgin, without violating or wronging her virginity. And he
that caused the dry rod to bud and blossom, and the like, without moisture;
Ipse fecit filiam David sine semine generare: He made this daughter of the
house of David to bring forth this blessed fruit of her womb, even without
seed.

And therefore doubt not, but steadfastly believe that Christ was an entire and
perfect man, howsoever he was not conceived, nor borne after the usual and
ordinary manner of bringing mankind into the world; but conceived of the Holy
Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Marie: for this birth of his, after this manner,
shows him to be what indeed he was, and what he ought to be, seeing he came
to be a Mediator betwixt God and us, viz. it shows him to be both God and
man: for in that he was borne and took flesh of a woman, it shows him to be
true man: but in that he was borne of a Virgin, Se Deum docet, qui partus Deum
decet; as S. Ambrose speaks; It shows him to be likewise God, for such a
birth becomes none but the Son of God. And indeed there are many reasons, why
Christ should be borne of a pure Virgin; as first, for the greater honor and
dignity of God the Father that sent him, that so he only might be his Father
on earth, that was his Father in heaven: and therefore says S. Augustine, Non
quaesivit quidem nisi matrem in terra, quod jam patrem habebat in coelo: He
sought but only for a mother on earth, because he had a Father before in
heaven. Secondly, for the honor also of the Son himself that was sent, who as
he was the Word of God from the beginning, so he might be the Son of God to
the end. Now as the Word is conceived without any corruption of the heart from
whence it does proceed, so ought he to be without any corruption of his mother.
Thirdly, for the greater credit of his humane nature, in which there ought not
to be the least stain of sin, seeing he came to satisfy Gods wrath for
man's sin, which could not have been effected by any other birth than only
of a pure Virgin. Fourthly and lastly, for the end of his incarnation, which
was to regenerate and beget men anew unto the Lord, that so as many as would
receive him, might have power given them to become also the sons of God: but
how, not by being borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God, Ioh. 1.12, 13.

And therefore much more he, to the intent he might beget virgin members to
be of the same body whereof he was the head, that is, a pure and glorious
Church or Congregation, not having spot or wrinkle, was himself to be borne of
a Virgin Mother; and therefore we may safely say and believe, that Christ
howsoever he were the only Son of God, begotten before all time, yet that
also in time he was borne man of the Virgin Marie: in so much as S. Augustine
speaks, De creatura sua Creator omnium procreatur, de rivulo suo ^^ns magnus
exoritur, radix omnium de virgulto suo nascitur, and vitis vera palmitis sui
fructus efficitur: that is, The true Vine is become the fruit of its own
branch, and the root of all things is sprung from its own sprig or sien, the
great fountain is risen from its own rivulet, and the Creator of all things
is borne of his own creature: and Maria is become Theotocos Deipara, or Dei
genetrix, that is, the Mother of God, as Vincentius Lirinensis styles her,
according also to certain old English verses, which I have read to that
purpose: A virgin and a mother bears a Son,
The creature her Creator on her knee;
From all beginnings, yet but now begun,
Servant to time, Lord of eternity:
Earths weakness, and heavens power in him do dwell,
Which is both God and man, Emanuel.
And again: Qui regit sydera, sugit ubera.

Who sits in heaven upon his Throne of State,
Sucks here on earth the milk of infancy:
Who rules the stars, and guides the stern of fate,
Sustaines the yoke of humane misery,
Eats, drinks, wakes, sleeps, and weeps as mortal man,
In whom immortal happiness began.
For as in the first creation of mankind, man was created after the image and
similitude of God: so in the restitution and repairing of the same mankind
again after his fall, it was requisite that God should be made after the image
and similitude of man, that so he might be a fit Mediator unto God for man,
not as God: for so he is able by his own authority, to take away and forgive
sins, according to that, Who can forgive sins but God only? but as man, that
so he might satisfy for man's offenses, in the same nature in which the breach
and offense began, as the Apostle speaks; God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, and made under the Law, that so he might redeem those that were under
the Law, Gal. 4.4, 5. which he could not have done, if he had not taken the
very nature of man upon him; and therefore was he in no wise to take the
Angels nature upon him, but only the seed of Abraham, as I told you before,
out of Heb. 2.16. Quia Angelus nullum habuit consortium cum homine qui
peccaverat: Because the Angels had no society or fellowship with that nature
of man which had transgressed; neither was the whole Angelical nature lapsed
and fallen as man's was, but only in part: for though some fell, yet others
abode steadfast, and are so established for ever. Thirdly, because the Angels
fell of themselves, by their own proper pride and malice, without any
inticement, or external provocation of another; but man fell through
infirmity, and by the subtle suggestion and allurement of the serpent, the
instrument of Satan; therefore was it meet that the Son of God should be made
the Son of man, that so he might be a perfect Mediarour betwixt God and man;
God that he might satisfy, and man that he might suffer: Nam si bomo non
vicisset inimicum hominis, non just victus esset inimicus: says Irenaeus: For
unless man had overcome the enemy of man, he had not been justly vanquished.
Nam posterius debet reduci ad perfectionem, per id quod prius est in eodem
genere: as say the Logicians: That which is latter cannot be reduced to
perfection, but only by that which was before in the same kind. And
therefore, that God may redeem man, God must become man, that so we may be
made the adopted sons of God; Per eum qui naturalis est, by him that is his
son by nature: and as by a man came our death, so by a man also might come
our resurrection from the dead, as S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 15.

And thus have you at large heard related and dilated unto you, how in the
incarnation and birth of Christ, God is become man, by being conceived of the
Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Marie, who although he be God and man, yet
he is not two but one Christ, one not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh,
but by taking of the manhood into God; one altogether not by confusion of
substance, but by unity of person: as Athanasius. Which is likewise well
expressed by Vincentius Lirinensis when he says that in Trinitate there is
alius atque alius, non aliud atque aliud; but in Christ there is aliud and
aliud, non alius and alius: that is, as there is in the blessed Trinity a
diversity of persons, as God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost;
but not a diversity of things, natures, substances, because they are all but
one God: so in Christ on the other side there is a diversity of things,
natures, substances, as Deity and humanity; but not of persons, because these
two natures are become but one person in him, Sicut in homine aliud caro, and
aliud anima, sed unus idemque homo anima and caro: as he goes on. Which our
Liturgy shall translate; As the reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so God
and man is one Christ; which example of two distinct natures substances
spiritual and corporeal, soul and body concurring, to the composition of one
whole and entire person, Man does so fully express to my understanding the
manner of the union of the two natures, Godhead and manhood in one Christ,
that the weakest and shallowest capacity being able to consider of the one,
may conceive the other. And therefore I will proceed no further in proof and
declaration of it; but only desire God (for conclusion of this Article) that
we may so firmly and steadfastly believe in this blessed seed, and Son of the
blessed Virgin, that as he of her has taken our nature upon him, and is
become the son of man; so we by him may be so renewed in soul and spirit, as
that we may become the sons of God, and as members of that body, whereof he
is the head, may ascend with him our elder brother into the land of the living,
whither he is ascended with our flesh and humane nature before us, to provide
places and eternal mansions for us. Which the Lord of his infinite goodness
vouchsafe to grant us, even for the same Jesus his sake, Amen.

FINIS.

