An Apology, or Defense, of those English Writers and Preachers which
Cerberus the three headed Dog of Hell, charge with false doctrine, under the
name of Predestination.

Written by Robert Crowley Clerk, and Uicare of Saint Giles without
Creplegate in London.

Imprinted at London, in Paternoster Row, at the sign of the black boy, by
Henry Binneman.

Anno. 1566. Octobris. 14.

To the Reader.
BEing openly defamed, in writing set abroad by one that has no name: I
suffered y^ same, long time to delight himself in his own blindness, and to
boast himself among his secreto maintayners, being in y^ mean while better
occupied, tha^ in wrestling with such a one as is ashamed to set his name to
the book he writes, and causes to be imprinted.

I thought that the writings of such one, could not have been hurtful to the
estimation that I and others of my calling, should of right have among the true
professors of Gods Gospel: because such have enough alredie in print, and in
the English tongue, to answer all such blind barking dogs as this is. But
perceiving that some men which profess the Gospel, will rather credit such a
Rayler, than take the pains to read that, wherein they might have wherewith to
be able to answer for us that are rayled upon, because the same was written,
before this Hell Dog began to bark: I have now written a short Apology, or
defense of my self and others of my calling, whom this Hell hound does so
egerly bark at: willing the Christian reader, to read it with indifferent
judgment, neither inclining to the one nor the other, till he have read both.
And because none shall have cause to complain: I have set down in writing all
that this Dog has written, and then defended that which he finds fault
withal, so that every matter has it manifest defense joined unto it, that
the Christian Reader, may have wherewithal to bring himself out of doubt. And
least any should be offended, for that I term mine adversary by ye name of
Cerberus or Hell dog: I would all men should consider the cause. He has taken
upon him to reprehend the teachers of the truth, and those, which are or should
be, the light of the world: and yet, as one that would not be called to an
account of his doings, he hides his name. Wherefore, I have given him such a
name, as is meet for him: till he put his name to that he writes in the
reproach and discredit of such as fear not openly to teach the truth, and
when they write it, to subscribe their names to the same. When this Hell hound
therefore shall set his name to his book: I will use none other name but that
which by his own writing shall appear to be his. In the mean while, let him
and his friends be contented that he bear such a name, as his doings do
deserve. Cerberus as ye Poets do feign, is a Dog with three heads, which
watches Hell gates, whose barking is horrible, for he barketh with chree
mouths, and his hairs are snakes. His name by interpretation does signify a
deuourer of bodies. Wherefore, it is not a name vile enough for this Hell dog,
whose property is to devour souls, and the good names of such as he is not
able to accuse of any crime. And with his barking he goes not about to trouble
the Kingdom of Hell (as Cerberus did) but the Kingdom of Heaven, which is the
Church of Christ, which by faith in Christ, is assured of her eternal
Predestination to everlasting glory after this life, and in this life to
deliverance from all evil. Of which comfort this Cerberus labors by his
barking to spoil her: as shall more plainly appear in the Apology of those,
whom he seeks by his barking to dash out of countenance.

But least I should trouble thee Christian Reader, with over many words
before the matter: I cease to write any more. Farewell in Christ Jesus. And
pray to God for the presence of his holy spirit, to lead thee in the reading
of this Apology. Amen. Finished the first of March Anno. 1565.

Roman. 8. Those whom God knew before: them has he predestined to be made
like unto the Image of his son, that he might be the eldest among many
brethren.
An Apology of Crowley and others.
Cerberus. THE Copy of an Answer, made unto a certain letter: wherein the
Aunswerer purges himself and other, from Pelagius errors, and from the
error of free will or justification of works: wherewithal he seems to be
charged, by the said letter: And further he shows, wherein he differs in
judgment, from certain English writers and Preachers, whom he charge with
the teaching of false doctrine, under the name of Predestination.


Crowley. IT had been very well done of Cerberus to have set down in writing
the copy of the letter that he says he Answers, and the name of him that
wrote it: so might those that he names in his answer, have had some way to
have found out the Auctour of the Answer, that this matter being debated
priuatelye between them, a mean might have been found for the ending of the
controversy and the satisfying of such as by this answer are not only
brought into doubt, of the truth of Gods everlasting Predestination: but also
have conceived an evil opinion of such as be the teachers thereof. But if I
shall speak that I think: I must needs say, that I think there was no
such letter written. But Cerberus has sayued this, as a ground to set his
foundation upon. For otherwise it should have seemed too too maliciously done,
upon none occasion to write and set abroad in print to the disfamation of
public Preachers and writers: such matter as in this answer he charge
them withal. But grant there were such a letter written: yet was not that a
just occasion for Cerberus to charge by name, me or any other, which knew
not of the writing of it. Well, he purges himself and other, he says, of
diverse errors wherewith he seems to be charged in that letter. It had been
well, he had not in purging himself charged other, that must fall to purging
too. But that was to show what spirit he is of. Not of that spirit which in
love seeks the reformation of other men's errors: but of that spirit that in
malice seeks to maintain his own errors by the defacing of other, which
nevertheless, will in the end, be the defacing of himself. For such as use
to dig pittes for others to fall into: do commonly fall into the same
themselves first of all.


Cerberus. I desire of God by his grace and mercy, to settle, strength, and
stablishe you in the truth of his holy Word for ever. Dearly beloved, where
you write unto me, that you have often heard, that I and other, should hold
the errors of Pelagius: whose errors you say are almost unknown unto you
what they are. And where further it is reported of us (as you say) that we
should deny the predestination of God: and seek a justification by free
will, and by deserving of works, which matter you do both understand, and
have also found good proof (as you suppose) that we are guilty in the same,
laying the whole foundation of your proof, upon this saying set forth in print.

Although there be but few on earth, that rightly thee deserve:
Yet thou, O Lord, for their good life, the residue preserve.
With which filthy saying, to burden me and other whom ye name: I marvel
greatly that you could be so much abused, not considering by whom it was
written, and set forth in print: for by the titling you see, it was printed
beyond the seas, in Queen Mary's time, for that it is entitled, A prayer to
God for his afflicted Church in England, and as it there appears manifest,
it is the work of W. Samuel, which is a man unto me of very small
acquaintance: but a Preacher he is. And as for his saying, that a man may
deserve God. etc. Which you desire me to prove if I can: it is a doctrine so
abominable and blasphemous: as I am sure neither Papist, nor Pelagian, nor any
other Heretic, either old or new, has written or maintained, a more filthy,
and execrable saying. For it is the flat and manifest denial both of God the
Father and of his Son Christ Jesus: neither does it require any confutation to
him that does but confess, that there is a God: and as for my self, I assure
you: I do not love my life so dearly, as I hate this vile saying deadlye. But
wonder it is, that such a sentence, containing the very filthy dregs, of all
Pelagius errors, could so long stand printed, and neither be forbidden, nor
by any man written against.


Crowley. I like very well, the Prayer that Cerberus begins his Oration
withal: but his purpose in praying (which appears to be, to deceive the
simple) I do like nothing at all. The foundation of his friends proof of
that he charge him with (as he says) is but slender: for it is but a fault
in the print, as every man may see that will read but two verses going before
in ye same prayer, and six immediately following. And that the indifferent
reader may be satisfied, I will write down those verses, because it will be
hard for men to find the books wherein the Prayer is printed.

Of all the Sons that thou have had, but one thou do regard:
And for his sake thou art content, that we shall be preserude.
So, though there be but few on earth, that rightly thee deserve:
Yet thou, O Lord, for their good life, the residue preserve.
If ten in Sodom had been found, the City still had stand:
And had remained without fall as did the other land.
And let not now thy mercies slack, but be thou always one:
And have respect unto all those, that trust to thee alone.
Those, whom thou have in prison laid, for breaking of thy law.
Deliver them and give them grace, to live in better awe.
If any of Cerberus friends had been Auctour of this Prayer: he would sone
have espied the printers fault, and would have read those two verses thus.

So, though there be but few on earth, that rightly thee do serve:
Yet thou, O Lord, for their goodlyfe, the residue preserve.
And so should the saying have been no more filthy, than was the saying of
Abraham to the Angel, when he entreated for the City of Sodom, and said:
What if there lack five of fifty, will thou destroy the whole City for lack
of sieve? Or the saying of the Angel, when aunswering Abraham he said: If I
find but ten just Gene. 18.
men in the City, I will spare it for their sakes. But Cerberus was so bent to
bark at the Preachers of prevestination, that he could not have leisure to
read more than ye title and those two verses, which being corrupted in
printing, seemed to serve his purpose. And surely, I do not yet believe that any
man could be so mad as to charge him with those verses. But this I believe,
that he has written them otherwise than they were printed. For the first verse
beginning thus: So, though. etc. he has written it thus. Although. etc. which
argues that either he never saw the book that Samuel made, or else, he
supposed that none should come to the sight of it, but such as do favor his
faction. And in very deed some of them have made very strange to show that
book. But how so ever ye matter go otherwise, he has shamefully deceived
himself in triumphing over poor Samuel, as over him whom he compares with
the most wicked Heretics that ever were.


Cerberus. And although I deny not but some other there are, which
(maintaining the power of man's freewil, and the meritorious worthiness of man's
deserving) do deny the free gift of Gods grace in Christ Jesus, and for his
only sake, comprehended in the eternal predestination, and foreordinaunce of
God, and declared unto us in his most holy Word, yet because I see, there are
many in these days, wrongfully and falsely, accused to be enemies of that
blessed Predestination, to be Pelagians, iustifiers of themselves, and such
like: And with those bitter terms, are in open Auditories defaced, and brought
into contempt, among the multitude (who being deceived with giving ouerhastie
credit, unto such men, not thoroughly understanding the matter, do use to give
sentence, before the cause be heard,) I have thought it good therefore, most
dearly beloved, not to them which take more delight in the defamation of
other, than in knowing the truth themselves, but to thee, which art willing to
understand the matter, before thou justify or condemn either party: in as
few words as I possible can, to show what shameful doctrine, under the name
and color of Gods Predestination, is now adays set forth and taught of many,
which both I and many other mislike, and have diverse times with some of them in
private and friendely talk, persuaded to leave, both by cause we judge the
doctrine to be false, and also the destruction of all virtue to follow
thereupon. For which cause, as the manner is of them that fear not so much the
shipwreck of a good conscience, as they do the loss of worldly estimation,
least any such diffauorers of their fantasy, should hap to have some credit
among the people, with boystrous breath, they blow abroad, that the mislikers
of this their doctrine, are enemies to Gods holy Predestination. But right well
know they, that those whom they now so specially accuse, to be such haters
of Gods Predestination, are in deed, most entire lovers of the same. And many
of those whom they accuse to be popish Pelagians and Iustifiers of themselves:
have bestowed both their goods and lives, against that filthy and detestable
sect And as for those errors which Pelagius that old heretic, with
Celestinus and Iulianus his adherentes, did hold, and also revoked the same in
the Judicial counsel of Palaestine: I think it good to rehearse them: first
in Latin and after in English, as they are gathered together by Augustine.
And the^ to show, according to your request, what part of their doctrine
which they teach under the name of Predestination, my self and other do
mislyke. To the end that you and other may the better judge, who are in deed
worthy to be called Pelagians: and whether some part of their doctrine, be not
for just cause misliked.


Crowley. Here Cerberus uses all his Retorique at once, to persuade his
dearly beloved friend, whose letter he says he answers, that he and other
of his mind be falsely and wrongfully accused to be enemies of Gods holy
predestination. etc. And to this end he will in as few words, as possibly he
can, set forth what shameful doctrine is now taught. etc. But first he will
set forth both in Latin and in English, those errors which the old Heritike
Pelagius, with other did hold and also revoke. etc. That men may the better
judge, who are in deed worthy the name of Pelagians, (for he thinks that he
has proved that we against whom he writes, are those that should be called
Pelagians) and whether some part of our doctrine be not for just cause
misliked. Now let us see how he notes Pelagius errors out of Augustine, first
in Latin, and then in English. Which when we have weighed, we shall see who
are most like Pelagius, he and his, or I and mine. For this is his purpose, I
am sure, for that he touches me first by name, and sets himself and such as
he is against al such as I am, affirming that whereas we accuse them as enemies
of Gods Predestination, they are in deed ye most entire lovers and we the
enemies thereof. My chief labor therefore in this Apology, shall be to make the
truth hereof to appear plainly to all the indifferent hearers.


Cerberus. The words of Austen are these. Episto. 106. tomo. 2. Obiectum est
enim eum dicere. Quia Adam sieve peccaret, sieve non peccaret, moriturus esset.
2. Et quod peccatum eius, ipsum solum laeserit, non and genus humanum. 3. Et
quod infantes, in illo statu sunt, quo Adam suit ante praeuaricationem. 4. Et
quod neque per mortem vel praeuaricationem, ^de, omne genus humanum moriatur,
neque per resurrectionem Christi, omne genus humanum resurgat. 5. Et diuites
baptizatos nisi omnibus abrenuntient, si quid boni visi fuerint facere, non
reputari illis, nec eos habere posse regnum Dei. 6. Et gratiam Dei atque
adiutorium, non ad singulos actus dari, sed in libero arbitrio esse, vel in
lege atque in doctrina. 7. Et dei gratiam secundum merit a nostra dari. 8. Et
silios Dei non posse vocari, nisi omnino absque peccato fuerint effecti. 9. Et
non esse liberum arbitrium, si Dei indiget auxilio, quoniam in propria
voluntate habet vnusquisque, facere aliquid vel non facere. 10. Et victoriam
nostram, non ex Dei adiutorio esse, sed ex libero arbitrio. 11. Et quod
poenitentibus veni a no^ detur secu^dum gratiam and misericordiam Dei: sed
secundum moritum and laborem eorum, qui per poenitentiam, digni suerint
misericordia. Haec omnia Pelagius anathematizauit.

The first of Pelagius errors which Augustine here cites is, that Adam
should have died whether he had sinned or not sinned. This is as you hear,
one of Pelagius wicked errors, that sin is not the cause of Reprobation, or
casting away, death sprung out of Gods ordinance, or some other way and came
not of man's sin (says he) whether man had sinned or not sinned, yet should
he have dyed, contrary to the manifest Scripture which says, that by one man
sin entered into the world, and death by the means of sin. Roma. 5. b. And
the wise man says, that God Romans 5. b.
created man to be undestroyed. And again he says. Sapiae.
God has not made death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the
living, he created al things that they might have their being, yea all the
people of the earth has he made, that they should have health, that there
should be no destruction in them, and that the Kingdom of Hell should not be
upon earth, for righteousness is everlasting and immortal, but
vnrighteousenesse brings death. Wicked and abominable therefore was this
error of Pelagius which affirms, that whether man had sinned or not sinned:
he should have dyed.

And here in the very beginning of Pelagius errors: I report me to
themselves, even to themselves (I say) that blow the trumpet of defamation
against other, with the terms of pestilent Pelagians, whether those, whom
they so accuse now to be Pelagians, hold this error, or whether they
themselves which would take some mote of error out of other men's eyes, have
not this Pelagius beam sticking fast in their own, let they themselves be
judges, or let their own doctrine judge, both in print and preaching, whereof
some part shall be hereafter rehearsed. Yea let all the world judge, which
have heard the doctrine of both parties: who they are that in this point ought
worthily to be called Pelagians.


Crowley. After Cerberus has set down in Latin certain of Pelagius errors,
to ye number of.xi. he repeteth ye first in English, that is, that Adam should
have dyed, though he had not sinned. And because his purpose is to prove that
we are those that hold this Pelagian heresy: he understands Pelagius
meaning to be, that sin was not the cause of Reprobation, or casting away,
but that heath sprung out of Gods ordinance: And so at the last he concludes,
that Pelagius and we are all one in this point: for we teach the same
doctrine. What moved Pelagius to teach that doctrine, I know not, neither did
I at any time so much as once think to hold or desende it. And I think I may
be bold to say in the name of all that have written or preached the doctrine
that Cerberus misliketh: that not one either has or will teach it. Although
Cerberus do boast, that hereafter some part of our doctrine shall be showed,
whereby all men may be able to judge that we are al one with Pelagius in this
point. For mine own part I will put all men out of doubt, that I believe, and
have, do, and will (if God permit) wache, that if Adam had not sinned, he had
never dyed. And that God did create man to be undestroyed. And that God made
not death as the wise Sapi. 2.
man writes. But by one man sin entered into the the world, and by sin,
death. And I can not see that any of my breathren have or do teach any
otherwise, either in writing or preaching. Wherefore Cerberus does us open
wrong to join us with Pelagius in this error. As for the doctrine that I have
written, and Cerberus wresteth top his purpose against me and my brethren:
shall (by Gods help) be defended in the place where it is produced against us.


Cerberus. The second error which Austen rehearses, is, that Adams sin did
only hurt himself, and not the whole generation of man. This is an other vile
and detestable error which Pelagius held, that the sin of Adam brought not
misery and death upon all his posterity, contrary to the open Scripture,
which says, that by the sin of one, condemnation came upon all men. And the
holy man Esdras Roma. 5. 4. Esdr. 6.
says: O Adam, what have thou done? for though it was thou that sinned, yet
thou art not fallen alone, but all we that come of thee.

The third, depending also upon the second, is this: That Infantes being new
borne, are in that state, that Adam was in, before his transgression, which
error seems only, or chiefly to extend to the innocence of children. For
if his mind were, that in all points infantes were in Adames estate, then
should it be over brutishe. For who sees not, that babes new borne, suffer
of tentimes pain and grief, which Adam did not before his transgression. But
to affirm, that Infants are not borne and conceived in sin, is to deny
Original sin, which is an old and a devilish error, and utterly against
the Scripture, which says plainly: Behold, I was borne in wickedness, and
in sin has my mother Psalm. 51.
conceived me.


Crowley. In these two Articles can Cerberus find nothing to burden us
withal. For we teach that by their first birth all Infants are enheritours of
that possession that our common father Adam purchased by his first
transgression or sin. That is, of bodily travail and misery in this life,
and everlasting death after this life. And that even as the children of bond
slaves, can enjoy none other thing by birth than that bondage which their
parents are in: so the children of Adam can by nature enjoy none other thing
but that which belonged to their first father, who by his first transgression,
made bath himself and all his posterity, bond slaves to death, hell, the
devil and damnation. Well therefore we shall not be Pelagians in this point.
But if I would deal as straightly with Cerberus, as he does with Samuel: I
could charge him with breaking of Priscians head, in the second Article,
where he writes leseret for leserit. Which though it be but a small fault, yet
is it as great a fault as that which Cerberus makes so much of in Samuels
rymes. And the printers were to blame for both, I am sure. And therefore I
would not y^ either Samuel or Cerberus, should bear any blame with them. Who
so Iusteth to confer the copy of this answer which was first cast about in
the streates of London, with this y^ is written in this Apology: shall easily
see that I have amended many such faults, without noting of them to any man's
reproach.


Cerberus. The fourth error is, that neither by the death and transgressio^ of
Ada^, all the generation of man dies, nor that by the Resurrection of Christ,
all the generation of man does rise again. I do not understand that Pelagius
did here speak of the last Refurrection at the day of judgment, as though he
had, after the manner of the Saduceis, denied the Resurrection of our souls and
bodies in the last day, for then were all them disputation in vain, of the
manner how we should be saved, whether by the grace of God, or by the deserving
of man, if salvation or Rosurrection had on either part been denied
altogether. Neither does the Scripture attribute the last Resurrection unto
Christ, as though the souls and bodies of men, should have died like beasts
and not have risen again unto judgment, if Christ had not come. Yea no doubt,
all men should have risen again, and that to the judgment of everlasting
damnation, if Christ had not come. But I understand that Pelagius in this
Article, denied the generality of Redemption by the death of Christ, by which
we do, as it were arise from death, because of the state of life and
salvation, whereunto we are bought in Christ by Redemption, like as we were in
the state of death and damnation in Adam by sin. Not that any man is purged
from the corruption of sin, unto the innocence of Adam: but because the
sin is covered in Christ, and pardoned for his sake. And further here is to
be noted, that the first part of this error, is manifestly, the very same,
which is in the second and third error, before rehearsed, and by the same
Scriptures plainly condemned. But to make the latter part of this error more
aparant, it was necessary and thought good of Augustine, to rehearse the first
again: that by the comparison of condemnation in Adam, and Redemption in
Christ, it might the more plainly be perceived that Christ was not inferior
to Adam, nor grace inferior to sin. And that, as all the generation of man
is condemned in Adam: even so is all the generation of man, Redeemed in Christ.
And as general a Savior is Christ by redemption: as Adam is a condemner by
transgression. Which comparison is taken out of S. Paul his Epistle to the
Romans, where he says. Likewise then as by the sin of one, condemnation
came upon all men: even so, by the justifying of one, comes the
righteousness that Roma. 5.
brings life upon all men. Yet shall not all men be condemned by Adam
eternally: for there is ordained of God again, away unto life, which way is
Christ. Neither shall all be eternallye saved by Christ: for there is of God
declared a way again unto death, which way is sin, and the wilful
contempt of Gods mercy in Christ. But this appears to be one of Pelagius
damnable errors: That Christ was not a general Savior, that Christ offered
not up the sacrifice of redemtio^ for all the whole world, contrary to the
manifest Scripture which says. He 1. John. 2.
it is that obtained grace for our sins, and not for our sins only, but
also, for the sins of the whole world. The same is also manifestly declared
in these Scriptures following, and many other. John. 1. a. 6. f. and 12. g. To.
5. d. and 14. c. 1. Cor. 8. d. 2. Cor. 5. c. Hebr. 2. c. and 2. d. 2. Pet. 2.
a. And here it is worthy to be noted again, how justly this error of
Pelagius, reboundeth into the bosom of those, which so falsely accuse other to
be guilty in the Pelagians errors. Be indifferent, dearly beloved in the
Lord, I beseech thee, and way the matter as it is. I desire no more.


Crowley. When Cerberus has framed this fourth Article of Pelagius to his
purpose, and persuaded himself that it reboundeth into the bosoms of those
that accuse him and his sort to be guilty of Pelagius errors: he concludes
that he desires no more, but that his dearly beloved: whose letter he
answers, would be indifferent and would waighe the matter as it is.
Surely, if I may do any thing with the same party, my hearty request to him
shall be, that he will grant Cerberus his request. And further, I will be an
humble suitor to all that shall read this Apology, that they setting all
affection a side, will weighe both his answer, and this Apology, even as
they are, and none otherwise, and then have I enough also. The Article is, that
all the generation of man, does neither die by the sin and transgression of
Adam, neither rise again by the Resurrection of Christ. That is, that neither
Adam was by his sin, a general condemner of himself and all his posterity:
neither Christ by his Resurrection, a general restorer of all mankind. For so
does Cerberus interpret Pelagius meaning. I will not dispute about Pelagius
meaning. For I know it could not be good, since he denies a truth, plainly
affirmed by S. Paul and Esdras both, as Cerberus has truly affirmed upon the
second Article. But that S. Roma. 5. 4. Esdr. 6.
Paul meant in that place, as Cerberus does understand him: I do slatly venie.
And will by Gods help prove, both by the Scriptures and judgment of ancient
writers. And that the matter I go about may be the more plain to the reader: I
will first set down in plain words, what meaning Cerberus gathers of those
words of Paul. He gathers, that Paul should mind to teach by those
words, that Christ restored as many, as Adam lost. Which gathering is very
false, and that may be proved by the very circumstaunce of the place it self.

First, Paul's purpose is, by comparing Christ with Adam, to show that as Adam
was able by disobedience, to make himself and all his posterity bonds slaves
to Satan: so was Christ able by obedience, to deliver the same from that
bondage, and to make them the free children of God. Now for the manner of
speech that he uses in comparing these two together, we must beware that we
understand it not so, that we make Christ and Adam like in all points. For
then shall we be enforced to grant many inconveniences, whereof this is one.
That as Adam lost himself by disobedience: so Christ restored himself by
obedience. Whereof should follow that filthy error of them that affirm that
Christ dyed for his own sins as well as for the sins of the people,
contrary to the whole course of the Scriptures, which teach that he was
without spotte of sin, and therefore was able to satisfy to God ye Father for
sin. Another inconvenience is, yt there should be repugna^cie between this
place of Scripture and other, (wherein both S. Paul and our Savior Christ, do
teach, that not all mankind, that is, not every particular person of
mankind, but a certain elected and chosen number, are by Christ restored into
ye favor of God) which thing may not be granted. For in the Scripture there
is no repugnaunce at all. And the third inconvenience should be, that only
original sin, (that is ye sin that we have of our parents, even in our
conception) is put away by the blood of Christ, and not our actual sin. So
that we must either satisfy for that our selves, or else perish,
notwithstanding Christ's death and sufferance. Which is such an inconvenience
as cutteth of from Christ as many as dye not in Infancy, before they commit
any actual sin. These inconveniences considered, we must seek to find
another meaning in S. Paul's words, when he compares Christ with Adam, than
that which the bare words seem to give. His meaning is not to make Christ
like unto Adam, but to prefer Christ before Adam, and to show that grace is
more abundant in Christ, than sin was in Adam. Which thing appears in
Paul's very words in the same chapter, where he says. Sed non sicut delictum
ita and donu^. Si enim vnius delicto multi mortui sunt: multo magis gratia Dei
and donum, in gratia vnius Roma. 5.
hominis Jesus Christi, in plures abundauit. That is to say, But the gift was
not like unto the sin, for if many dyed by ye sin of one: much more has
the mercy and gift of God, in the grace of one man Jesus Christ, abounded unto
many. If these words of Paul should be understand of the number that were
lost by Adam, and restored by Christ: then must we grant, ye more were
restored by Christ, than lost by Adam. For he says that the grace or mercy
has abounded unto more. Which words, being understand of ye number restored,
must be spoken in comparison, of the many that were lost by Adam: and so must
it follow that more were restored by Christ, than were lost by Adam. Which can
not be, unless we will say that Christ restored more than all. For Adam lost
all. The meaning of Paul is therefore, that as ye sin of Adam being but one
man, was a sufficient condemnation to himself and all his posterity which are
many: even so, yea and much more was the grace or free mercy, and gift of God,
in Christ being but one, a sufficient restitution of all the chosen Children of
God, although ye same were never so many. And that this is the meaning of
Paul, does well appear by his words that follow in the same chapter, where
he says. Et non sicut per vnum qui peccauit, ita and donum. Nam condemnatio
quidem ex vno, in condemnationem: gratia autem ex mult is delictis, in
iustificationem. Si enim vnius delicto, mors regnauit per vnum: multo magis,
abundantiam gratiae and donationis and iustitiae accipientes, in vita
regnabunt, per vnum Iesum Christum. That is to say. And the gift is not so, as
is that which entered in by one that sinned. For the condemnation came by one
sin, into condemnation: but grace or free mercy, was of many sins into
righteousenesse. For if by the sin of one man, death have reigned, by the
means of one man: much more, shall they which have received abundance of free
mercy or grace, and of the gift and righteousenesse: reign in life, through
one, which is Jesus Christ. Here does Paul plainly express his meaning.
Which is, that they which have received abundaunce of grace, and of the gift
and righteousness, are those many, that are restored by Christ Jesus, in whom,
through the same Christ, lyse shall reign. Those are not the whole posterity
of Adam. For the same Paul says in the.xj. chapter of this Epistle, Quod
quaerebat Israel non est consecutus, electio. aute^ consecuta est. Israel
has not obtained ye thing that he sought for: but the election has obtained.
Meaning that the carnal Israelites obtained not righteousenesse, much less
did ye whole offspring of Ada^ obtain it. But the election, that is the
elected and chosen children of God, whether they be of the stock of Israel or
no, have obtained righteousenesse through Christ, which is forgiveness of al
their sins by his blood sheading, and righteousness, and everlasting life by
his resurrection. According to ye saying of Paul, Traditus est propter delicta
nostra, and resurrexit propter iustificatione^ nostra^. He was delivered unto
death Romans 4.
for our sins: and he rose again for our justification.

But Cerberus and his fellows, do urge the universal sign, Omnes. All. Sicut
per vnius delictum in omnes homines in condemnationem: sic and per vnius
iustitiam in omnes homines, in iustificationem vitae. That is. Even as by one
man's fault, sin entered into all men, to condemnation, so by the
righteousenesse of one man, is righteousenesse entered into all men, to the
justification of life. This universal sign must needs streatche it self to
all Adams posterity, and therefore all must be made righteouse by Christ.
These men will not see how such universal signs are used in the Scriptures.
They can not perceive how this universal sign should in the first sentence
streatche it self to all the generation of the first Adam that sinned, and in
the second sentence to all the generation of the second Adam, which is
Christ. The generation of ye first are all that have or shall be borne of
flesh and blood, and the generation of the second, are al they that be borne
of God. If we should in all places of Scripture, streatche this universal
sign all, so far as Cerberus does streatche it here: we should make as good
a piece of work as ye Nonne did, which read in s. Paul Omnia probate, prove
all things. And therefore having a 1 Thessalonians. 5.
mind to sir John, the Chaplen of the house, she proved what it was to lie
with a man. And being with child, the matter came to the knowledge of the
Abbas: she excused her self by Saint Paul, who bids us prove all things.
If a thief that takes another man's goods, should excuse himself with Omnia
mihi licent, I may do 1. Corin. 3. 1. Corin. 6.
all things, or Omnia vestra sunt. All things are yours: It would not be found
that these universal signs should either make it leeful for him to take
another man's goods, or to have right to that that is not his by some just
title. I would wish Cerberus and his fellows therefore, to weigh this matter
better before they triumph over us in such sort as he does in this his
answer. And I would wish him to consider well whether saint Austen in the
Epistle where these Articles of Pelagius be written, do not write clean
contrary to this judgment of his. For in the very place that he cites to make
for his purpose, S. Austen says thus. Infantes nuper nati, non sunt in illo
statu in quo Adam fuit ante praeuaricationem, vt ad ipsos pertineat quod
breuiter ait Apostolus. Per vnum hominem mors, and 1. Corin. 15.
per vnum hominem resurrectio mortuorum. Sicut enim in Adam omnes moriuntur: it
a and in Christo omnes viuisicabuntur. Vnde sit, quod Infantes no^ baptizati,
non solum regnum coelorum, verum etiam vitam aeternam habere non possint. That
is, Infantes that be lately borne, are not in that state that Adam was before
he sinned, that that thing which the Apostle does in few words affirm, might
partaine unto them. By one man came death, and by one man came the resurrection
of the dead. For even as in Adam all dye: so in Christ shall all be made
alyne. Whereby it comes to pass that Insants which are not baptized, are not
only unable to enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven, but also life everlasting. These
words me think, are very plain against that which Cerberus would maintain by
Paul and Austen. For if Infants unbaptized can not have the kingdom of God
nor everlasting life: how does this saying In christo omnes viuificabuntur: All
shall be quickened in Christ: pertayne to all the posterity of Adam? unless he
will say, that Infantes that dye before baptism be not of Adams posterity?
Better matter can I not wish for against Cerberus, than that which hangs to
the foundation that he himself builds upon. It were for my purpose to
aduau^ce the authority of this Epistle, because it helps me very much
against this Hell Dog Cerberus: but because I would not have the Reader to
conceive such an opinion of S. Austen, as to think that he should be of such
mind as the Auctour of this Epistle does show himself to be in certain
points: I will cite the judgment of Erasmus concerning this Epistle and all
other of this title. That is, Ad Bonifacium. To Boniface. Speaking of ye Book
of Epistles, where, in this Epistle. 106. is written, he says. Nonnullae
simplicitor confictae, quod genus sunt illae Bonefacij ad Augustinum, Augustini
ad Bonifacium. Some of those Epistles (says he) are altogether feigned. As are
those of Bonifacius to Augustine, and of Austen to Boniface. Now judge gentle
Reader what this Cerberus means, that leaving the good and sound works of
Austen, where he writes very well of this matter: sets his foundation upon
such rotten patches as some such as he is, have put forth in Austens name. No
marvel though Cerberus be ashamed to set his name to his book. This might
suffice for our defense against Cerberus his assault in this point. But I will
add one Scripture or two, and so the judgment of some learned writers, that
he take not occasion of a new calumniatio^, because I promised more than I have
yet performed. Saint Paul writing to Timothe in his second Epistle and
second chapter, says 2. Timo. 2.
thus. Sed firmum fundamentum Dei stat, habens signaculu hoc. Cognouit Dominus
qui sunt sui. The foundation of God, stands firm and sure, having this sure
seal. The Lord knows who be his. By which words it is manifest, that S.
Paul understood not that all mankind were elected in Christ, and so restored
by Christ: but a certain number, which though they be unknown unto men, yet
does the Lord (whose they be) know them well, and will not suffer them, no
nor any of them, to perish. Wherefore he exhorts all such as call upon the
name of the Lord (that is all Christians) to depart from iniquity. For in a
great house (says he) there be, not only vessels of Gold and Silver, but
also of Timber and Earth: some to serve for honorable uses, and some for vile
uses. I know how some do wrest these latter words of S. Paul, to prove that
it is in man's power to depart from iniquity, because Saint Paul does will
Christians so to do. And especially those words which follow, which are
these. Si quis ergo, emund. iuerit se ab istis, erit vas in honorem
sanctificatum, and vtile domino, ad omne opus bonum paratum. If any man
therefore, shall cleanse himself from these men: he shall be a vessel
sanctified unto honor, and profitable for the Lord, being prepared and made
ready for every good work. These words do manifestly declare, say they, that
it is in man's power to cleanse himself, and to make himself a vessel meet
for the Lords use and service. These men will not understand that
commandments, admonitions, exhortations, and councelles be to any purpose:
except those to whom they be given, be able to do the things, that they be
commanded, admonished, exhorted, or councelled to do. And so shall the
commandments of God be to no purpose. For who has been, is, or shall be
able, to do that God commands, when he says. Thou shalt love the Lord
thy God, with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. And
thy neighbor as thy self? Does not S. Paul say that we are not able of our
2. Corin. 3.
selves, so much as to think a good thought. And is not this according to yt
which Christ himself teaches when John. 15.
he says to his Disciples: without me ye can do nothing? But these men will
not understand that the use of these things is, to cause the chosen children
of God, to acknowledge their own inhabilitie, and humblye to beg at Gods
hand his help that thereby they may do yt which is commanded or taught: and
that the reprobate^ may be without excuse, yea or pretense of excuse. Saint
Austen, whom Cerberus would feign have to take his part, does understand
this place of Paul, clean contrary to Cerberus his purpose: As appears in
more places then one of his best writings. Namely in the. viz. chapter of
the.xx. book De Ciuitate Dei, that is of the City of God, (which is, the
Church of Christ) where speaking of that Church called from among all the
nations of the world: he says thus. Has enim elegit Deus ante mundi
constitutionem eruere depotestate tenebrarum, and transfer in regnu^ silij
claritatis suae, sicut Apostolus ait. Nam seducere illum gentes De Ciuitate
Dei. lib. 20. Cap. 7.
etiam nunc, and secum trabere in aeternam po^nam, sed non praedestinatas in
aeternam vitam, quis sidelis ignorant? Nec moueat, quod soepe Diabolus seducit
etia^ illos, quiia^ regenerati in Christo, vias ingrediuntur Dei. Nouit enim
Dominus qui sunt eius, ex hijs in aeternam damnationem, neminem ille seducit.
Sic enim nouit eos Dominus, vt Deus, quem nihil latet, etiam futurorum, non vt
homo, qui hommem ad praesens videt, sic tamen videt, cuius cor non videt,
qualis autem postea sit futurus, nec seipsum videt. Ad hoc ergo ligatus est
Diabolus, and inclusus in abysso, vt iam non seducat gentes, ex quibus constat
Ecclesia, quas antea seductas tenebat antequam essit Ecclesia. Nec enim dictum
est, vt non seduceret aliquem: sed vt non seduceret, inquit, iam gentes, in
quibus Ecclesiam proculdubio voluit intelligi. That is to say. God did before
the beginning of the World, choose these nations, that he might deliver them
out of ye power of darkness, and translate them into the kingdom of the son
of his own brightness, as the Apostle says. For what faithful man knows
not, that the Devil does even now, seduce nations, and draw them with himself
into everlasting pain: but not those nations which are predestined into
everlasting life? Neither let it trouble any man, that the Devil does
oftentimes seduce even those, that being already regenerated in Christ, do walk
in the ways of God. For the Lord knows who be his: of them does the Devil
seduce none, to everlasting damnation. For the Lord does know them, as God
knows, from whom nothing is hid, no not of the things to come. Not as a man
knows, who does for the present time see a man, but yet so, as whose heart he
sees not, yea, he sees not himself so, that he can tell what manner a man he
himself shall be hereafter. To this purpose therefore, is the Devil bound, and
shut up in darkness: that he do not now seduce the nations of whom the
Church does consist. Which nations he did before hold still in error, before
the Church was. For it is not said, that he should not seduce any man: but
that he should not now seduce (says he) ye nations, in which nations, no doubt
he would have the Church to be understand.

This Book was Austens own without all doubt, and therefore, we may be bold
to affirmo that this is Austens mind, not only upon this place of Scripture,
but also upon this matter, that is, that not all mankind, but a certain chosen
sort, are restored again by Christ. And that none of those that are so
restored, can perish, although God do sometime suffer them to fall.

Again, the same Austen writing against the Donatists, August. li. 5. de.
bapt. capit. 27.
in his fifth book De Baptismo, that is of Baptism, says thus, in the.xxvij.
chapter of the same Book. Numerus ergo ille iustorum, qui secundum propositum
vocati sunt, de quibus dictum est, Nouit dominus qui sunt eius: ipse est ortus
conclusus, fons signatus, puteus aquae viuae, paradisus cum fructu pomorum. Ex
hoc numero, quidam spiritualiter viuunt, and supereminentem viam charitatis
ingrediunter. Et quum praeoccupatum hominem in aliquo delicto, instruunt in
spiritis lenitatis: intendunt ne and ipsi tententur. Et cum forte and ipsi
praeoccupantur reprimitur in eis aliquantulum, no^ autem extinguitur,
charitatis affectus: rursusque resurgens and inardeseens, pristino
cursuirestituitur. Norunt enim dicere. Dormitauit anima mea praetaedio,
confirma me in verbis tuis. That is. That number therefore, of the righteous,
which are called according to Gods purpose, concerning which it is said, that
the Lord knows who they be that be his: is the same that is the fensed
garden, the sealed fountain, the pyt of springing water, and the paradisefull
of the fruit of Apples. Of this number there be some that live spiritually,
and walk in the excellent way of charity. And when they do in the spirit
of leuitie, instruct a man that is overtaken with any fault: they do take good
heed least they themselves be tempted also. And when it happens ye any of
them be overtaken: the affection of love is something repressed in them, but it
is not utterly quenched. And when it rises again, and waxes fervent: it is
restored again to his old course or raze. For these men can say. My soul
did ^^omber for very weariness, do thou make me strong in thy words.

And again in the same chapter, Saint Austen says thus. Sunt etiam quidam ex
eo numero, qui adhuc nequiter viuant, aut etiam in haeresibus, vel in gentilium
superstitionibus iaceant: and tamen etiam illic nouit dominus qui sunt eius.
Namque in illi ineffabili praescientia Dei: multi qui foris videntur, intus
sunt, and multi qui intus videntur, fores sunt. Ex illis ergo omnibus, qui, vt
ita dicam, intrinsecus and in occulto intus sunt: constat ille hortus
co^clusus, fons signatus, puteus aquae viuae, paradisus cum fructu pomorum.
That is. There be also some of that number, which do yet live wickedly, either
do lie in Heresies or in ye superstitions of the Heathen: and yet the Lord
does even there know, who be his. For in that unspeakable foreknowledge of
God: many that seem to be without, are within, and many that seem to be
within, are without. That enclosed garden therefore, that sealed fountain,
that pyt of springing water, and that paradise of the fruit of Apples: does
consist of all those, that be inwardely and secretly within, if I may so
speak.

And again the same Austen says in the.xlv. treatise upon John. Et oues vocem
eius audiunt, and proprias oues vocat August. Tract. 45. in John.
nominatim. Habet enim nomina eorum scripta in libro vitae. Proprias oues vocat
nominatim: hinc dicit Apostolus. Nouit Dominus qui sunt eius. That is. And his
sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by name. For he has
their names written in the Book of Life. He calls his own sheep by name.
Hereof comes it that the Apostle says. The Lord knoweeh who they be that he
his.

What should I cite any more places of this Auctour for this purpose? If these
will not satisfy Cerberus: let him bark still till his throat be horse. I
know these may satisfy all that be not wilfully blind. For in three several
places, S. Austen has cited these words of S. Paul. (The Lord knows who
be his) even in the same sense that I have done.

One other Scripture I will cite also, which is written in the.xvij. of S.
John's Gospel. The words were spoken by our Savior Christ himself, in that
Prayer that he made to his Father the night before he suffered, and they are
these Non pro mundorogo, sed probus quos ded^sti mihi, quia tui sunt. I do not
pray for the world (says Christ, but for those that thou have given unto
me, because they be thine. And that Cerberus may know what is meant here by the
word World: he shall see what S. Austen writes in his. 107. treatise upon
John, concerning August. tractat. 107. super Ioh.
this text. Mundum vidt modo intelligi, qui viuunt secundum concupiscontiam
mundi, and non sunt in ea sort gratiae, vt ab illo eligantur ex mundo: non
vtique pro mundo, sed pro hijs quos ci pater dedit, rogare se dicit. Per hoc
enim quod cos illi pater iam dedit, factum est, vt non pertineant ad cum
mundum, pro quo nore orat. Deind^, subiungit. Quia tui sunt. That is. He would
now have us understand, that those men be the world which do live according
to concupiscence or lust of the world, and are not in that state of grace
that they might be by him chosen out of the world: He does not therefore say
that he does pray for the world, but for them that his father gave unto him.
For by that, that his father has already given them unto him, it comes to
pass, that they pertain not unto that world, that he prays not for. And
after this he adds. Because they be thine. If Cerberus were not to
obstinately blind, he could not but see and confess, that S. Austen is full
against him. For what other cause does s. Austen allege, why those that
Christ prayde for, were not of the world, but only, that the Father had given
them unto him? And what cause does he allege why Christ might not choose them
out of the world that he prayed not for: but only that they were not in that
state of grace or mercy, that they might be chosen out of the world? And the
text it self, might persuade any man but Cerberus and his fellows, that there
is a number that be not restored by Christ. For would Christ deny to pray
for any of them y^ are restored by him? I trow not.

But to bring Cerberus from Hell gate, if it will be: I will cite yet one place
of S. Austen, wherein he speaks as plainly as any man can devise to speak,
concerning this matter. In his first book that he writes of the deseruings,
and forgiveness of sins, and of y^ baptism of Infants, we read thus in
the.xv. chapter. August, de peccatorum meritis and remissione


Ob hoc etiam dictum est, omnes, and omnes: neque enim qui generantur per Ada^,
ijdem ipsi omnes, per Christu^ regenerantur, sed hoc recte dictum est, quia
sicut nullius carnalis generatio, nisi p^r Adam: sic spiritales nullius, nisi
per Christum. Nam si aliqui possent carne generari non per. Adam, and aliqui
regenerari s(...)tu, non per Christum; non liquide omnes, sieve hic, s(...) ibi
dicer tur. Eosdem autem omnes, posteannultos dicit. Possunt quipp^ in aliquare,
omnes esse qui p(...)ci sunt. Sed multo(...) ^bet generatio carnalis, multos
and spiritalis, (...) multos haec spiritalis, quam illa carnalis. Verunt (...),
quem (...)dum illa omnes habet (...)s: sic ista omnes iusto^ homines. Quia
sicut nemopraeter illa^ homo, sic nemopraeter ista^ iustus homo, and in
vtra(...) multi.

After S. Austen had said, that it is not the only imitation of Christ, that
can make a man righteous, but the free mercy which does regenerate by the
spirit, so is it not the imitation of Adam only that makes us sinners, but
the punishment which engenders by the flesh: he adds the words above in
Latin, which are in English thus. For this cause also, is it said, all, and
all: for not the same all y^ are begotten by Adam, are by Christ regenerated.
But this is well said, that even as the carnal generation of no man, is
otherwise than by Ada^: so is the spiritual generation of no man otherwise
than by Christ. For if there might be some men begotten in the flesh, and not
by Adam, and some men regenerated in the spirit, and not by Christ: we might
not say plainly all, either in the one place or in the other. And afterward,
he does say, that the same all, are many: for (...) some certain thing, those
which are but few, may be all. But the carnal generation has many, and the
spiritual has many also: although this spiritual have not so many, as has
that carnal. But yet for all that, even as that has all men: so has this all
just men. For as without that, no man is a man: even so without this no man is
a (...)st man, and in each of these are many.

Now let Cerberus and his fellows, bark at Austen. For he has made the same
interpretation of S. Paul's words, that I have made before. Whereby it is
manifest, that that Epistle that Cerberus builds upon, is not Austens own,
but fained by some such as Cerberus is, and put forth in Austens name.

But because I promised before to prove mine affirmation as well by the
judgment of Ancient writers, as by Scripture: I will add the judgment of
one or two more, whose authority and antiquity is not to be despised. Of the
which Ambrose shall be one. Writing upon the Epistle to the Romans, he says.
Sicut per vnius delictum in omnes homines in condemnationem: sic and per vnius
iustitiam Roma. 5.
in omnes homines, in iustificationem vitae. Hoc est, sicut per vnius delictum,
omnes condemnationem meruerunt, similiter peccantes: ita and in iustitia vnius,
omnes iustificabuntur credentes. Si qui autem condemnationem hanc, generalem
esse putant: simili modo and iustificationem generalem accipient. Sed non est
verum, quia non omnes credunt. Sicut enim per inobedientiam vnius hominis,
peccatores constituti sunt plurimi: ita et per vnius obedientiam iusti
constituentur multi. Quos supra omnes dixit: hic plures and multos significat.
Plures enim delictum Adae secuti sunt praeuaricando, non omnes, and multi iusti
constituentur, non omnes. Non ergo in eos regnauit mors, qui non peccauerunt in
similitudine preuaricationis Adae. That is to say. Even as by one man's sin,
giltinesse came upon all men to condemnation: so did justification of life come
upon all me^ through the righteousenesse of one man. That is, even as by the
sin of one man, all men that do sin as he did, have deserved condemnation:
even so all that do believe, shall be justified in the righteousenesse of one
man. And if any do think that this condemnation is general: let them in like
manner take the justification to be general. But that is not true, because all
men do not believe. For even as by the disobedience of one man, many were made
sinners: so by the obedience of one man, many shall be made righteous. The
Apostle does here call those same, many, that he did before call, all. For many
have in sinning followed the sin of Adam, but not all: and many shall be made
righteous, but not all. Death therefore has not reigned over them, which have
not sinned in like sort as Adam did. These be the words of Ambrose. Which
though at the first sight, they seem to incline to the error of Pelagius: yet
when they be well weighed, they give a good and sound meaning. That is, that
sin never reigned in any of Gods elect. For although the elect of God, in as
much as they be the children of Adam, be partakers of Adams sin, and in Adam
condemned: yet are they by Christ delivered from that condemnation, so that
sin has in them no dominion at all: Which thing appears in them by the
faith in Christ, which when they come to knowledge, they do both by words and
works declare. That this is the meaning of Ambros, does very plainly appear,
by that he says, that all the beleuers shall be justified. For what needs
justification, where no condemnation was? Thus much I thought good to write
concerning y^ simple meaning, of this ancient Father, least any man of
simplicity mistaking his meaning, might think yt he should deny ye Elect to be
conceived and borne in original sin, from which never any that was borne
(Christ only excepted) could be free. But this is his meaning, that in the
Elect and chosen Children of God, this sin has no dominion, as it does
appear by their obedience that they show in believing the Gospel: but in the
Reprobates, it bears rule still: For Christ has not killed it in them.

And to make an end of this matter: Saint Paul says thus in his eight
chapter to the Romans. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It
is God that does justify, who is it that shall condemn? If all mankind,
then, be elected in Christ (as Cerberus says) then shall no sin be laid to
any man's charge. For who dare accuse Gods chosen children? And so shall
Cerberus doctrine be the destruction of all virtue, as he has before affirmed
of the doctrine we teach of Predestination.

As for that which Cerberus cites out of the second chapter of S. John's first
Epistle, and the other places that he sends the Reader unto: I do now pass
over, as sufficiently answered, by that I have written concerning S. Paul's
meaning in the fifth to the Romans.


Cerberus. The fifth of Pelagius errors was, that rich men being baptized,
except they did utterly renounce and forsake their riches, though they seem to
do some good, yet is it not accepted, neither can they have the Kingdom of
God. A filthy, and an abominable error, directly repugnant, both to the state
of the common wealth, and also to the word of God, which says. Charge them
that be rich in this 1. Timoth. 6.
world, that they be not exceeding wise etc. And that they do good and be rich
in good works. etc.

The sixth error is, that the grace of God and the help of God, is not given
to every one of our works, but that it is in free choice, in the law, and in
doctrine This error is exceeding wicked and execrable, that man by the law, by
doctrine, and by free choice, is able to do any manner of good work,
whatsoever it be, without the grace and help of God. For as S. Paul says;
we are not sufficient of our selves, to 2. Corinthians. 3.
think any thing, as of our selves: but our ableness comes of God. And
again. It is God that works Phillip. 2.
in us, both the will and the deed, even of good will.

The seventh error is, that the grace of God is given according to our
deserving. Vile and abominable is this error also, and contrary to the
manifest mind and words of the Apostle, which says. If it be of works, then
is it no more grace, for then Roma. 11.
were deserving, no more deserving.

The eight error is, that none can be called the children of God, except they
be all together made without sin. This error is like wicked with the rest,
directly repugnant to the open Scripture, where it is written. If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. For as S.
James 1. John. 1. Jacob. 3.
says of himself and of all other. In many things we sin all.


Crowley. In these four errors, Cerberus can find nothing to charge us with
all: and therefore he goes about to get himself credit among the simple
Christians, by calling these errors, filthy, and abominable, exceeding wicked
and execrable, vile and abominable, and like wicked with the rest. But if a
man might come to reason with Cerberus: I think it would fall out in the
end, that he is not so clear of the sixth error as he would seem to be, when
he calls it exceeding wicked and execrable. For if he were asked: why feared
he to translate Saint Paul's words, according to his meaning, when he said to
the Philippians. Deus est qui operatur in vobis and velle and perswere, pro
bona voluntate. That is. It is God, that works Phillip. 2.
in you, both the will and the performance thereof, according to his good will
or pleasure. Cerberus can not away with Gods good will. And therefore he
translateth S. Paul's words, even of good will. He fears, by like, that some
man would conclude, yt it is Gods good will, that by such malicious doings, as
his is, in strowing of his staunderous writings: some of them that be
slaundered thereby, should take occasion to open his subtlety, both in the
detesting of these errors, and also in the cyting of Scriptures to the
contrary of that which is affyrmed in them. Which is nothing else, but to
blind the eyes of the simple. But such as have had to do with such as he is,
do know, that as he says here, that man is not sufficient of himself to
think any thing, so he thinks, and will say if he be urged; that man has
power of himself to withstand the good motions of Gods holy spirit, so that
God can not draw such as he will, but only such as he finds willing to be
drawn. And to avoid the error of giving of grace according to merits or
deserving, he says that it is given to all mankind indifferently. Let all men
thersore, beware of his subtlety: for he minds to disceiue.


Cerberus. The ninth error is, that there is no free choice, if a man have
need of Gods help, seeing it is in a man's own will to do a thing, or not to
do it. This was also the wicked opinion of Pelagius: that if it be granted,
that a man has need of Gods help: then must it needs follow (says
Pelagius) that he has no choice in doing of things, but whatsouer a man does,
that must he needs, and cannot choose but do. This is the Devils only way,
above all other to lead men to destruction, not to suffer them to walk in the
plain path of the Lord, but to turn them to some extremity, either on the
left hand, or else on the right, either into the blind path of crooked
superstition, or into the wide way of leude liberty, either to seek
justification by deserving of works, or by an only faith, not mighty in love
by operation. Such like extremity does the Devil use in this point of
Doctrine, either driving men into the doubting dreams of destenie, or into the
absolute freewill of Papistrie. Either affyrming all things so to be ordained
of God, that whatsoever a man does, be it good or evil: he must needs, and
can not choose, but of mere necessity, by the ordinance of God, commit the
same. Or else affirming, that man by freewill, or natural strength, can do the
will of God, and walk in his law without the continual help and grace of
God. Which two extremities, Austen does very plainly condemn, in these words
following.

Liberum sic consitcmur arbitrium, vt dicamus nos semper Dei indigere auxilio,
and tam illos errare qui cum Manichaeo dicunt hominem peccatum vitare non
posse, quam illos qui cum Io(...)iano asserunt, hominem non posse peccare.
Augustinus de verbis Apostoli, scrmone. 192.

We do (says he) so confess free choice, that we say a man has always
need of the help of God. And that as well they err, which say with
Manicheus, that a man can not eschew sin, as also they which say with
Iouinian, that a man can not commit sin. Thus says Augustine

To conclude therefore, this is numbered among the wicked errors of Pelagius,
that if a man have free choice, then has he no need of the grace or help of
God, contrary to the manifest and open Scripture, which says by the mouth of
S. Paul. I can do all things, through the help of Christ, which Phillip. 4.
4. Esdr. 9.
strengthens me. And Esdras says They that have abhorred my law, whilst
they had yet freedom and open room of amendment, and conversion, and
understood not but despised it: the same must know it after death, in pain.

And here, yet once again, I desire thee to mark who they are, which with
Pelagius fall into this extremity to affirm, that if a man have choice, then
has he no need of Gods help: or if he have need of Gods help, then has he
no choice at all. And who they are, which on the other side, with Auste^
against Pelagius, do affirm and confess: that man so has fredom or choice,
that nevertheless, he has continually, need of the help and grace of God Who
they are, I say, which in this point also, ought worthily to be called
Pelagians, let all men judge. The case is so clear, that no lack of knowledge,
but only wilful blindness, may help to cloak the matter. I will therefore
pass forward.


Crowley. Now Cerberus thinks he has won the field. This case is so
plain (says he) that no lack of knowledge may help to cloak it, but wilful
blindness. And what is the case. Forsooth that he and his fellows be cleared
of Pelagian heresy: and I and my fellows proved to be of one mind with
Pelagius, who said that if a man have choice, he needs not Gods help: or if
he need it, he has no choice at all. And where has Cerberus found that
Pelagius said so? Not in the ninth Article, written in the 106. Epistle (for
there he says but thus: If our will or choice, have need of the help of God
it is not free: for by free choice, every man has in his own will, either to
do any thing, or to leave it undone) but he finds it in the. 191. Sermon De
tempore, that is, of the time. Not as the words or opinion of Pelagius, but as
the words of Manichaeus. Here is pretty packing. To make blind men believe,
that there is no difference betwixt Pelagius opinion in his ninth Article, and
us that now write and preach of the eternal predestination of God: Cerberus
brings out one of the opinions of Manichaeus, and says, that forasmuch as we
agree with him in that point, and he and his fellows do not, therefore, we be
Pelagians, and he and his company are enemies to Pelagius and us to. But as
Cerberus has requested his friend, whom he answers: even so must I desire
thee (gentle Reader) yet once again to mark how Cerberus handles his matter,
that he may seem to purge himself and to charge me and other with Pelagian
heresy.

I will not deal with Cerberus, as he has done with Samuel: for if I would, I
might say that he had shamefully belyed S. Austen, when he cites his words
out of his. 192. Sermon De verbis. Apostoli, y^ is, upon the words of the
Apostle, whereas saint Austen writes but. 35. sermons of that (...)e. Neither
are the works that he cites found in the. 19^. sermon De tempore, that is, of
the time: but in the. 19^. But as I have promised before, I will ascribe all
such things to the negligence of the Printer, although therbe just cause to
ascribe this in Cerberus him self. For it appears by the copy that came to
my hands, that he had read it over after it was imprinted, and before it was
strowed in ^^e stroates: for he has emended some faults with his pen, but
this fault remains untouched. Wherefore it seems that he took it for no
fault at al. Whereof I gather that he never read the place in S. Austen him
self, but had it in some of the patrons of Pelagius error, and had no leisure
to seek it in S. Austens works, and therefore mistoke both the title and
number. Which if Cerberus might find in ^e, should be a matter of some thing.

Well, to the purpose. Cerberus has belyed both Pelagius and us. For he says
that we affirm, that if man have choice, then has he no need of Gods help,
or if he have need of Gods help, then has he no choice at all. Let us see
the words that are written in the Epistle. 106. even as saint Austen (if that
Epistle be his) wrate them in Latin. Et non esse. li(...) arbitrium* si Dei
indiget auxilio, ^uo(...) in propria voluntate habet vnusquisque, facere
aliquid, vel non (...)e. Now let us see how: Cerberus him self does english
this Latin. The ninth error (says he) is, that there is no free choice, if a
man have need of Gods help, seeing it is in a man's own will to do a thing, or
not to do it. Now how agrees this with y^ which he charge Pelagius withal?
Has Pelagius said that man has no choice at all? Or can man have no choice
at all, unless the same be free to do what it lusts? I think all men do see
that he charge Pelagius with more than ever he spoke or wrote in this point.
And as touching the former part of his Article, which being truly translated,
are thus much. And y^ choice is not free, if it have need of Gods help. Who
is able to speak against this? Understa^ding Liberum, or Free, to signify
that which is not under the power of any other. And I trow saint Austen will
say no less in the. 13. sermon that he wrate De verbis Apostoli, of the words
of the Apostle. Thus says saint Austen. Cum dico tibi, sine adiutorio Dei
nihil agis, nihil boni dico. Nam ad mala agendum, habes sine adiutorio Dei,
liberam voluntatem, quanquam non est illa libera: A quo enim quis deuictus est,
huic and seruus addictus est. Et omnis qui facit peccatum, seruus est peccati.
Et si vos filius liberauerit, tunc very liberi eritis. That is to say. When I
say unto thee, that thou do nothing without the help of God: I mean, no good
thing. For thou have a free will to do evil without the help of God,
although the same be not free. For look of whom a man is overcome, to y^ same
is he made a slave, and every one that does commit sin, is become the servant
of sin. And if the son shall make you free, then shall ye be free in deed.

Now if Cerberus will conclude that Pelagius denies that man has any choice,
because he says, it is not free, if it have need of Gods help: then let him
so conclude upon saint Austens words in this place. For he says that man's will
is not free, no not in doing evil. For it is subject unto sin, and can not
but obey that tyrant. And shall we think then that saint Austen would say
that it is free in doing good? I think not. For he has said that in that
which is good, we can do nothing without Gods help.

But least Cerberus should take a new occasion to calu^niate, because saint
Austen does often times grant that he denies not the freedom of man's will,
and so set Austen against Austen: I will in few words show how both saint:
Austen and we, do understand man's will, both to be free, and not free.

As man's will is not regenerated, so is it free from y^ spirit, and bond to
that corruption that entered into all mankind by the sin of the first man,
which corruption saint Paul calls the law of the members, the wisdom of
the flesh, the old man and the flesh, so that it cannot once list up it self
to any thing that is not agreeyng to that corruption.

Contrariwyse, man that is regenerate, so far as he is regenerate, has his
will, freed, and set at liberty, from that corruption, so that it cannot lead
him further than the spirit of God will suffer him to go; for he is now
freed from corruption or sin, and made the ^^ndman of of y^ spirit, so that
he has now in that regenerated part, no delight in any other thing than the
law of God. Yea he cannot have any delight in sin. But as saint Paul
says. As touching my inward man, I have a delight in Romans 7. Romans 8.
the law of God. And again. Such as are led by the spirit of God, are the
children of God. They are therefore called spiritual, and new creatures.

Again, as man is a reasonable creature, so is his will called, Arbitrium, that
is, Choyso, and because the same cannot be enforced by any humane or man's
power, it is called Liberum, that is, Free. And so is it Liberum Arbitrium,
Free Choice. For though man have power over man to restaine y^ actions of his
will, yet has he not power to restayne the will it self. As for example.
Simion, being imprisoned in Egypt, had a will to be with his Genes. 42.
Father and brethren in the land of Canaan, not withstanding that his body was
kept in prison and restrained of liberty to execute his will. For Joseph had
no power upon the will to turn it, or restrain it. But Simion had, yea, he
could not but have his will at liberty, notwithstanding any thing that Joseph
either did or could devise to do. For to turn or stay the will of man, is
the work of God only. And therefore S. Paul says. I have planted, and Apollo
has watered, but God gave y^ increase. 1. Corinthians. 3.
And S. Austen says. Qui plantat, and qui rigat, for inseeus operatur: qui
vero dat incrementu^, intrinsecus opitulatur. He that De verbis Apost. Ser. 4.
pla^teth, and he that waters, do work outwardly: but he that gives
increase, does help or succor withinforth. And this is not done by any bodyly
force, but by that inward drawing that Christ speaks of when he says. No man
comes unto me, except my Father draw him. John. 6.
This drawing is not a forcible drawing: but a working of the power of God,
whereby the will that strove against, is made ready to follow the drawer. An
example whereof we have in Paul. Who willing to go to Act. 9.
Damasco to persecute Christians, is upon a sudden made willing to preach
Christ. This was not wrought by the striking him down to the ground (for then
should the like have been wrought in the Jews that came to take Christ, for
when he said, I am, they al fell to the ground) John. 18.
but it was wrought within by the power of the spirit. Saint Augustine
therefore, says very well. Qui fecit te De verbis Apost. Ser. 15.
sine te, non te iustificat sine te: Ergo fecit nescientem, iustificat
volentem. He that made thee without thee, does not justify thee without thee,
therefore he made thee, when thou knew not: but he does justify thee being
willing. To this do the words of Saint Paul agree when he says. Deus est
qui operatur in vobis and velle, and operari. Phil. 2:
It is God that works in you both the will and the work that is according to
the will. But first the will. So that before we follow the drawer, we are by
the same drawer made willing to follow. Thus does S. Austen, and so do we
(that Cerberus barketh so at) understand the will of man to be free.

To conclude this matter and to see what man's freewil is able to do: see what
S. Austen says. Creatus est primus De verbis Apost. Ser. 11.
homo in natura sine culpa, in naturae sine vitio, creatus est rectus, no^ se
fecit rectu^. Quid se autem ipse fecerit, notum est. Cadens e manu Figuli,
fructus est. Regebat enim cum ipse qui fecerat, voluit deserere a quo factus
erat, permisit Deus tanqua^ dicens. Deserat me, and inueniat se, and miseria
sua probet, quia nihil potest sine me. Hoc modo ergo oste^dere voluit Deus
homini, quid valeat liberum arbitrium sine Deo. The first man was created in
nature without blame, in nature without fault, he was created upright, he did
not make himself upright. It is known what he made himself. Falling out of
the hand of the Potter, he was broken. For he y^ made him did govern him, but
he was willing to forsake him that had made him. And God suffered him so to
do, as it were saying thus. Let him forsake me, that he may find himself,
and that he may by his misery prove, that without me he can do nothing. By
this mean therefore would God show unto man: what free will is able to do
without God. This may suffice to as many as will be satisfied. But I fear me
that Cerberus and his fellows are none of them.

By this it appears that we run not into the extremities as Cerberus says
we do. For we neither teach fatal destiny, nor popish will liberty, but
we affirm that man has a choice, and that in some meaning the same is free,
and yet notwithstanding, Gods forknowledge, predessination, and election, to be
infallible. As shall more plainly appear when I shall come to the place
wherein I am by Cerberus charged with the setting forth of such a doctrine as
is worthily mysseliked of many.

In the mean while I must say something of y^ wherein I with others be charged
and plainly affirmed to be Pelagia^s. And that it may appear whether we be so
or no: it shall be needful that we set down the opinion of Pelagius, as we
find it written by S. Austen in a book of more authority than is that
Epistle that Cerberus builds upon.

Saint Austen being requested by one named Quod vult Deus, to write a Cataloge
of heresies: he satysfieth his request. And thus he writes of Pelagius
heresy. Pelagianorum est heresis hoc tempore omniu^ recentissima, a Pelagio
Monacho exorta. etc. At this time (says he) there is the heresy of the
Pelagians, which is the newest of all, and sprang out of one Pelagius, a Monk.
Which master one Celestius did in such sort follow, that their followers are
also called Celestines. These men are such enemies to the grace of God (whereby
we are predestined to be adopted or chosen to be his children through Jesus
Christ, and whereby we are delivered from the power of darkness, that we may
believe in him, and be translated into his kingdom, for which cause he said: No
man comes unto me except it be given unto him of my Father: and whereby,
Charity is poured out in our hearts, that faith may work by love) that they
believe, that man is able without it, to do all the commandments of God,
whereas if that were true, it might seem that the Lord had in vain said,
Sine me nihil potestis sacere. Without me, you can do nothing.

Whether we be of this mind with Pelagius or no: let all the world that sees
our writings or hears our doctrine, judge. Or whether Cerberus and his
fellows be like to be of this mind, which find fault with our doctrine,
because we teach that there is an elected and chosen number to whom God has
given faith, and has poured out love in their hearts, so that they may come
unto Christ, and by their works of obedience to Gods will, show forth the lively
faith in Christ, that in their election they have received freely at Gods hand.

Let all the world, I say, judge betwixt us. We say that there is a certain
chosen number, which in mercy are chosen to be the children of God images of
the son of God Jesus Christ, and inheritoures of his kingdom. And that none
can be of this number, but those only to whom it is given freely without any
manner deserving, either past, present, or to come. And that they being thus
chosen and predestined, must always acknowledge, that it is God that works
in them, and that of them selves they are not able so much as to think a good
thought. And yet assure them selves, that Hell gates can not prevail against
them, that is, that the power of the Devil shall not be able to hurt them.
And that though they be still sore assaulted, and sometimes sore wounded: yet
they shall never be overcome, but shall overcome in Christ, and triumph with him
in immortality for ever.

But Cerberus and his company, say that al mankind is elected, and that there
is no reprobation at all, and consequently, no election. For if there be none
resused, then is there none election, but a general acceptance. And this
their election they say is so uncertain, that no man can thereby be certain
of his salvation, but al men must still remain in doubt of damnation by
sin, whereas S. Paul has said, that there is no damnation to them Romans 8.
that be grassed into Christ. And Christ himself says, that it is not possible
that the elected sort should be seduced. Math. 24.
They say also that the power of man's Free will is to receive or refuse the
grace of God which is indifferently offered unto al. Which if it be true, then
must he be able also of himself to do that God commands, which is the
plain error of Pelagius. Well, I leave these two opinions to the judgment of
the reader, to consider which of them is most like to be that which Pelagius
held.

But to give a little more light to the Reader, I will note one sentence more
out of that that S. Austen writes concerning the heresy of Pelagius. Illam
vero gratiam Dei, sine qua nihil boni possumus facere, non esse dicunt nisi in
libero arbitrio, quod nullis suis praecedentibus meritis, ab illo accepit
nostranatura, ad hoc tantum ipso adiuuante per suam legem atque doctrinam, vt
discamus, quae facere, and quae sperare debeamus. Nos autem ad hoc per donum
spiritus sancti, vt quae didiscerimus esse facienda faciamus. That is. They say
(says Austen) that the grace of God, without which we are able to do no good
thing, is not otherwise than in Frewil; which our nature has received of him,
not by any deseruings that was in the same before, he only helping us hereunto
by his law and doctrine, that we may learn what we ought to do, and what to
hope for. But we say to this, that through the gift of the holy Ghost, we may
do those things that we have learned to be meet to be done. Here it is plain,
that Pelagius makes the grace of God nothing else but an help to the Free will
of man. Whether Cerberus and his fellows do so too, or not, let the^ judge
that read his words that are written in his answer to this letter, and do
weygh them with indifferent minds.

Now as touching that place that Cerberus cites out of the sermon De tempore,
that is of the time. 191. Although I know what Austen himself writes of all
his Epistles and his sermons, saying that he had not perused or retracted the^
when he set forth his two books of Retractations, Retract. 2. in fine.
neither does it appear in any of his writings, that ever he did retract
them: Yet I will not reiecte it as none of Austens words, for the doctrine is
sound if it be rightly understand. It is possible for man by the power of God
to be preserved from Actual sin, although he can never be without the sin
of concupiscence so long as he lives in mortal flesh. So is it possible also,
yea it can not be chosen, but unless God do by his grace stay man, he shall
commit Actual sin after his regeneration, and of him self man is not able to
stay him self from Vide. Lib. 2. De pecc. meritis and remiss. Cap. 6. 7.
it. But what make Austens words against us? We confess with Austen, that man
has always need of Gods help, and we say with the same Austen, that they do
err, which say that man can not avoid sin, but yet as I have said before,
being stayed by the power of God. For otherwise these words of Austen should
be contrary to his own words in his. 13. sermon De verbis Apostoli, Of the
words of the Apostle. Where he says thus. In hoc agone cum constigimus, Deum
habemus spectatorem, in hoc agone cum laboramus, Deum poscimus adiuterem. Si
enim nos ipse non adiuuat, non dico vincere, sed nec pugnare poterimus. That
is. When we sight in this battle, we have God to behold and look upon us,
when we are in danger in this battle, we do pray unto God to help us. But
if he do not help us, I say not that we shall not overcome, but that we shall
not be able so much as to fight.

We will not therefore set Austen against him self, but take that meaning of his
words in one place, that may agree with his words in another place. And so
are we with Austen, and not against him, as Cerberus lays to our charge.
Neither do we hold with Pelagius in any untruth, but if he do in any point
confess truth, then do we agree with him, although S. Austen should say to
the contrary. Look better upon your conclusion therefore (good master Cerberus)
and learn to apply Scriptures better than you have applied the words of S.
Paul to the Phillippians, else men will say ye understand not Phil. 4.
S. Paul, for S. Paul does not there go about to ascribe any thing to the
power of his own Free will: but altogether to set forth the exceeding great
mercy of God toward him who did stay him from falling both in adversity and
in wealth. As it may well appear to all that will with judgment read the
place.

Your sentence also cyted out of Esoras: you should 4. Esdr. 4.
know it not to be of such authority, that it might serve in the trial of
such a cause as this is. But grant it were of the greatest authority. What
can it make against us which deny not that man has a choice which in some sort
is free (as I have declared) but do confess that man which despises the
warnings and long sufferings of God in this life, shall after this life, in
pains learn to understand what they did then. But proceed as you said you
would.


Cerberus. There follows the tenth, and the eleauenth errors, which are
these: That our victory comes not of Gods help, but of free choice, and
that remission of sins is not given to the^ that repent, according to the
grace and mercy of God, but according to the deserving and labor of them, which
by repentance are worthy of Gods mercy. O blasphemy intolerable, O filthy
puddle, and sincke most execrable: full of stinking errors, full of damnable
presumption, like to the pride of Lucifer most abominable: the detestable
vileness whereof is such, that rather by exclamation, I have thought it good
to renounce it, than with Scripture or reason to confute it. All reason, and
all Scripture, gives all glory unto God. And this blasphemous error, takes
away all the glory of al goodness, from the father of all mercy, and God of
al consolation, and gives it unto vile and wretched man, which has of him
self nothing that is good, but does altogether receive it from the mercy and
goodness of God. Here concludes Austen with the errors of Pelagius, and
says, that all these errors he revoked, or renounced in the general Counsel
of Palestine.


Crowley. I have not sworn to find fault with all that Cerberus writes in
this his answer, as it may seem that he has, to reprove and deprave, all
that I and other that have, or do write or speak of Gods predestination, do or
have affirmed. I will therefore join with Cerberus in this detesting and
renou^cing of these Pelagian errors, as one that does abhor them no less
than he does. And because man can see no further than these things that be
outward: I do with all mine heart wish that he would make it known unto men by
such means as may be most to his glory: whether we, or Cerberus and his
fellows do in y^ heart detest and abhor these errors most. I will not enter
into judgment: but there is cause to suspect that Cerberus and his sort be
not so clear, as by these wordess they would seem to be. But let God be Judge.


Cerberus. Thus have I set forth in English these errors of Pelagius
together, that thou which art willing to know the truth, and understand the
matter even as it is, may be able to judge, who they are that hold of any
of these errors, and not to credit the malice of certain, which to cloak
their own false opinions, accuse other to be Pelagians, who in deed, from
their very heart and soul, abhoral these wicked opinions, and have been many
years willing to bestow their lives against all these abominable errors.

Yet is there one thing whereunto Pelagius was compelled to subscribe, which I
have not rehearsed among the errors before said, because the denial thereof,
is of all our Gospellers (as I suppose) received for no error. The Article is
this. Quod Infantes non baptizati, non solum regnum coelorum, verum etiam vitam
aternam habere non passint. Hereunto did Pelagius subscribe. That infantes
which are not baptized, can not have the Kingdom of God nor eternal life.
Which cruel opinion, that all unbaptized children are damned, Austen in many
places of his works does boldly and vehemently maintain. But Calvin says,
Explodendam esse illorum glossam palam est, qui oes non baptizatos, aternae
morti adiudicant. It is clear (says he) that their gloss is worthy with
hissing or clappyng of hands, to be driven out of the doors: which condemn
unto everlasting death, all those, which are not baptized, and because Calvin
is with so many of us, which are Gospellers, in authority fully sufficient to
encounter with Austen: I think it good (for shortness) in this article to say
no further.


Crowley. Cerberus, minding to enter into that which he promised before (that
is to show what part of our doctrine he missliketh) does conclude with his
friend to whom he seems to write this answer: as though he being willing
to know the truth, and understand the matter, could no more give credit to
any that writes or speaks contrary to that which he has here written.
Whose doyngs therein, it pleases him to term malice, and the accusing of such
as are of sound belief, that thereby they may cloak their own false opinions.

But if it shall please that friend of his (if any such be) or Cerberus
himself, to read this my simple Apology with indifferent minds: it may be
that they will be of another mind then Cerberus does in this answer show
himself to be, understanding that our doyngs are neither malicious, nor yet
the clokings of any false opinions, but the true travail of them that seek
the glory of God, and the salvation of his people, by the setting forth of the
truth of his eternal and everlasting Predestination. Let God give the increase
at his good will and pleasure.

Yet one thing he would not seem to have forgotten, but rather of purpose to
have deferred to this place, that he might not seem to agree with Pelagius in
any point that might seem to be erroneous. For he has said before. Here
concludes Austen with the errors of Pelagius. Subtillye handled of Cerberus.
For though he consent to that which Pelagius has by his subscription
confirmed: yet he agrees not with Pelagius in his error, for he was enforced
thus to subscribe, and did afterward return to his old errors again, as
S. Austen affirms in his Cataloge of heresies. And if he deny it, yet
consents he not to Pelagius error: but to John Calvin, and us Gospellers,
and to make us believe that he is one of us in this point: he calls that a
cruel opinion that Pelagius was constrained to subscribe unto, that is, that
Infantes which are not baptized can not have the kingdom of God, nor eternal
life. And to knit up the knot withal, he sets John Calvin against S.
Austen, affirming, that for as much as in the opinion of very many of us
Gospellers (for now Cerberus is one of us) John Calvin is in authority fully
able to encounter with S. Austen: he will for shortness sake, say no further
of this article. I would I had none occasion here to think y^ Cerberus uses
a figure, which learned men call Ironia. For what a frumpe is this? That Calvin
is in authority fully sufficient, to encounter with Austen. Surely Cerberus
may be a Gospeller, as he terms him self: but no Papist could devise to
give a more kindly mock to Calvin and us Gospellers, than this is. For who
knows not, that the authority of writers, is judged to stand chiefly in
the auncientnesse of their writings, and then there is no comparison to be made
betwixt Calvin and S. Augustine, who lived.x. hundredth year and more before
this day. And Caluins modesty was never so little, as to compare him self
with Austen, but in all his writings he does reverence the judgment of that
learned Father, and does allege his authority in confirming of truths, so
far forth as the same does not dissent from truth. And Austen never desired to
have his judgment in matters to be otherwise received, than the same should be
found to be sound, and according to the Scriptures. As appears in his. 7.
Epistle, and in the Proeme of his third book De Trinitate. Of the Trinity.
Whose words concerning this matter, being many, it shall suffice to note this
short sentence. Noli meis litteris quasi Scripturis canonicis instruire, sed in
illis, and quod non credebas cum inueneris, incunctanter creed: in istis autem,
quod certum non habebas, nisi certum intellexeris, noli firmiter retinere. That
is. Be not bound unto my writings, as unto the Canonical Scriptures: but when
thou shall find in the Scriptures that which thou did not believe, believe it
without any delay or doubting: but when thou find that in my writings, which
thou did not know certainlye before, except thou shall certainlye understand
it, do not stisfely affirm it.

I am sure that John Calvin did always observe this rule in reading S. Austens
works. And if he were now living would give Cerberus the hire of a mocking
Parasite, thus to set him against S. Austen. Yea, it might have becommed
Cerberus very well, either to have been shorter, and have written no word of
this matter: or else to have uttered his judgment of this article, in such
sort that the reader might have understand thereby the truth of the article,
and how Calvin and we that be Gospellers do hold this article, not setting our
selves against S. Austen, but for good cause dissenting in Judgment, both from
Pelagius and Austen. And yet having a reverend opinion of the one, do detest
and abhor the error of the other.

Well, I may not be so short in this matter as Cerberus is, but I think it
my duty, having this occasion, to do what shall lie in me, to let the reader
understand that S. Austen is not so much to be blamed for this cruel opinion,
as Cerberus would have men to think that John Calvin does reckon him to be.
Neither does ye worthy instrument of God, mind to make the name of Austen
odious to the Christian reader, as it seems that Cerberus would make the names
of both those men of God.

Mark therefore, gentle reader, what might cause Austen some thing to swerve
from the truth in this article. He had to do with such a one as denied
Infantes to be spotted with Adams sin, and that therefore they neded no
regeneration, and so consequently no sacrament of regeneration. The
abomination of this error caused Austen to fly so far on the other side,
that he had not such a consideration of the promise of God, as he should have
had. And so affirmed more than once, that all that die with out baptism must
needs be damned. Let us be contented that God has by this error showed Saint
Austen to be a man. And let us give him thanks for the abundaunce of good
doctrine that this man has left in writing, not doubting, but that that
merciful Lord whom he served, would not suffer him to end his life in that
error (no more than he did in the Manicheis heresy, which he did sometime
stoutly defend) although it have not pleased him to suffer it to appear in
writing, that ever he did acknowledge it to be an error.

As touching the opinion, that Calvin and we Gospellers do hold concerning
Infantes that die without baptism: it differs something from Austen, but
more from Pelagius. Yea, we do as much abhor the error of Pelagius, as
Austen did. For we affirm, and are able by the Scriptures to prove, that al
Adams natural children are dead through Adams sin, and that none of them
can be quickened and revived again, otherwise than by Christ. And that so many
as are not given unto Christ, do still remain in that sin, and cannot be
saved. So far off are we from this Pelagian heresy.

Now that it may appear how we differ from S. Austen: I will cite some
matter out of the works of master John Calvin. Not as Cerberus does, to set
him directly against Austen, but to show how God has revealed unto his
servant John Calvin, that secret that he had not revealed unto his servant
Austen so fully: so far forth as we can find written in his books. First, we
read in the book of master John Caluins Institutions in the title of
Pedobaptisme or baptising of Children, these words following. Sed omissis
cauillis, tenenda simplex est interpretatio quam attuli: neminem, donec
renouatus fucrit aqua viua, hoc est spiritu, posse ingredi in Regnum Dei. Iam
est ex eo, explodendum esse eorum commentum palam est: qui omnes non
baptizatos, aeternae morti adiudicant. That is. But, all subtilties set a side,
the simple interpretacio^ that I have made, must be holden, that is: that none
can enter into the kingdom of God, til he be renewed by liuelye water, that
is, the holy ghost. Now therefore, even hereof it is manifest, that the false
opinion or fantasy of them that condemn to eternal death, all that be not
baptized, is to be driven out with hissing and clapping of hands.

Again, the same Calvin says in his Comment upon the sift Chapter to the
Romans. Vt misera peccato haereditate potiaris, satis est esse hominem,
residet enim in carne and sanguine. Vt Christi iustitia fruaris, sidelem esse
necessarium est, quia side acquiritur eius consortium. Infantibus peculiari
ratione communicatur. Habent enim in soedere ius adoptionis, quo in Chrissti
communionem co^ptantur. De piorum liberis loquor, ad quos promissio gratiae
dirigitur. Nam alij a communi sort nequaquam eximuntur. That is. To enjoy the
miserable enheritaunce of sin: it is enough to be a man: for if dwells in
flesh and blood. But to enjoy the righteousness of Christ, it is required of
necessity, that a man be faithful, for the company or fellowship of Christ is
obtained by says. To Infants, it is after a certain peculiar manner
communicated. For they have in the covenant, the right of adoption, whereby
they are adopted into the communion of Christ. I speak of the children of the
godly, unto whom the promise of mercy is directed. For others are not
delivered from that lot, that is common to all men.

By these words of Calvin, it appears how we differ from Augustine, for we
are of one mind with Calvin, who denies not, that the children of the
unfaithful that dye without baptism, do remain in the same state that the
sin of the first man brought all mankind unto. We differ therefore, only in
that we affirm that the children of the godly do appertain to the covenant
of God, and therefore do not perish though they be prevented by death. Whether
Austen continued to the end in that mind that he shows him self in
certain of his writings concerning this matter: it is uncertain, for in his
Retractations there is no mention thereof. But if he did, this only is the
difference betwixt him and us, that we ascribe that to the covenant, promise,
and election of God, that he ascribes to ye sacraments. And as it appears in
his. 3. book of questions upon the old Testament, he him self teaches the
same doctrine that we do. His words be these, in the. 84. Question. Proinde
colligitur, inuisibilem sanctificatimem quibusdam adfuisse, atque profuisse,
sine visibilibus August. lib. 3 Questi. vete. test. Quest. 84
sacramentis, quae pro temporum diuersitate mutata sunt, vt alia tunc fuerint,
and alia medo sint: Visibilem vero sanctificationem, quae fieret per visibilia
sacramenta, sine ista iuuisibili posse adesse, non posse prodesse. Nec tamen
ideo sacramentum contemnendum est: nam contemptor eius, inuisibiliter,
sanctificari nullo modo potest. Hinc est quod Cornelius. etc. That is to say.
We do therefore gather, that certain men have had the invisible sanctification,
and have been benefited thereby, without the visible Sacraments, which are
according to the diversity of the tune changed, so that then they were of one
sort and now of another: And that the visible sanctification, which should be
wrought by the visible sacraments, may be present without this that is
invisible, but can not be profitable without it. And yet is not the sacrament
therefore to be contemned: for he that contemns it, can by no means be made
holy inuisibly. Hereof it came, that Cornelius and those that were with him,
when they were perceived, to be inuisiblye sanctified by the holy Ghost that
was poured into them, were notwithstanding baptized. etc.

These words of S. Austen, do plainly declare of what mind he was when he
wrate these questions. And this book of questions, with the reast, he has
retracted and Retractat. lib. 2. cap. 55.
perused again, allowing this sentence of his therein as it appears in the.
55. chapter of his second book of Retractations. Cerberus had no cause
therefore, to set John Calvin against Austen, for we take that to be
undoubtedly the doctrine of Austen, which we find in his Retractations, and
not revoked.

But Cerberus purpose was, craftily to cause all that would harken unto him, to
esteem both Calvin and us, as most arrogant heretics, that will not stick to
compare one of our time with that ancient Father, and to accept his judgment,
without either reason or learning, directly against the judgment of him, whom
all the Church of Christ has these many hundred years worthily reverenced. For
who sees not, that Cerberus can not be one of those Gospellers that do account
Calvin to be fully sufficient in authority to encounter with Austen: since he
writes so bitterly, against all the^ that either write or preach that, that
Calvin has in writing most evidently proved and defended: Yea, he alleges
Austen against Caluins doctrine, and would seem thereby to triumph over him
and all that be of his mind.

As for the place that he cyteth out of Calvin, I leave for Cerberus to seek
out at his leisure, and when he has found it, to note where it may be sound^.
But I believe it will be hard for him to find in Caluines works, that sentence
in those words.


Cerberus. There remains then, as before I promised, briefly to note those
things, which I think worthy to be reproved, about the doctrine of
Predestination, as it is now a days taught of many. Wherein least I should seem
to speak without assured ground, and because words in preaching, in talk,
or disputation (whereof I have heard great abundance in this matter) may rashly
pass with small aduisement, and either easily be denied or soon forgotten: I
am determined to touch nothing but their very words, which are set forth in
Print. And because the taking and aunsweryng of their whole books were a
matter long and tedious, being commonly stuffed on the one side, with an heap
of opprobrious and outrageous words against such private persons as they take
in hand to write against: and on the other side filled, rather with obscure
subtelties, than with plain affirmations, I have thought it best therefore, to
take certain sentences which contain manifest affirmatio^s, out of diverse
late printed English books, wherein the sum and effect of this doctrine
(which many do for just cause mislike, is fully, plainelye, and simplye
declared.


Crowley. Now Cerberus begins to grow to the performance of his promise,
in noting those things in the doctrine of predestination now preached, as seem
to him mete to be reproved. And by the way, he will not taunt us, but thus he
says, that in preaching, talking, and reasoning, words may pass us rashly
and with small aduisement, and be either easily denied, or sone forgotten:
Wherefore he will touch nothing but that which we have written and set forth in
Print. Well, contented, but yet I would Cerberus should know that we neither
preach, talk, nor dispute with such rashness or small aduisement, but that
we are able, and will, by Gods help, stand to all that we have spoken
therein, and he is able to charge us withal. As for the outrageous words that
we use toward them that we write against, shall be found modest enough, when
they shall be compared with the words that in this his answer he uses toward
us. Let him therefore proceed in noting those things that he misliketh.


Cerberus. I read in an English book set forth by Robert Crowley, and
entitled, the confutation of.xiii. Articles. etc. these words. Adam therefore,
being so perfect a creature, that there was in him no lust to sin, and yet so
weak, that of himself he was not able to withstand the assault of the subtle
serpent: no remedy, the only cause of his fall, must needs be the
predestination of God.

Thou see, dearly beloved, in the conclusion of this sentence one point
declared, wherein the controversy does consist. For where he plainlye
affirms, that Gods predestination is the only cause of Adams fall, which is
the sountayne of all sin: other having a much more reverend opinion of God
and of his holy predestination, do set their foot, or rather their heart and
soul, against their said conclusion. Estemyng it far better to be torn in
many thousand pieces, than to think or say, that Gods foreordinance or
predestination, is the cause of any sin or evil. I beseech thee, let not thine
eyes be blinded, or thy mind musfled with malice, either against the one
party or the other, but in the balla^ce of upright judgment, way the
difference. The one says (as in this conclusion manifestlye appears, and as
afterward, yet more plainly he affirms) that the predestination of God, is
the only cause of Adams sin, and so consequently of all evil. The other
affirms directly contrary. That God or his predestination, is the cause of no
sin or evil, but the only cause of all goodness and virtue. And herewyth
agrees the holy and divine Apostle Saint John in his Epistle saying. All
that is in the world, as the 1. John. 2.
concupiscence of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is
not of the Father. Al good things that are in the world, are no doubt of God
our heavenly Father: but whatsoever in the world, is concupiscence, lust,
sin, evil or wickedness, the same is not of God our heavenly Father: S.
John does piainly and precisely affirm. The like playnenesse uses also the
holy man Jesus the son of Sirach, in these words. Say not thou it is the
Lords fault, Eccle. 15.
that I am gone by, for thou shall not do the thing that God hates, say not
thou, he has caused me to go wrong, for he has no need of the ungodly. The
very same thing is plainly declared, in these Scriptures following, and in
other places almost innumerable. Psalm 5. Pro. 19. Jeremy. 7. and. 19. Oseae.
13. Job. 34. and. 36. Romans 7. 1. Corin. 14. Jacob. 1. Exodus 34. Deuteronomy. 5. 2.
Reg. 14. Psalm. 81. and. 144. Prou. 1. Sap. 1. and. 2 11. 12. 15. Eccles. 2. and
18. Esaias. 5. and 30. 55. and. 65. Lament Iere. 3 Ezech. 18. 24. and. 33. Joel.
2. 4. Esdr. 1. 2. 7. and. 8. Math. 23. Act. 17. 1. Timoth. 2. and. 4. 2. Pet.
3. The same says Austen also plainly in these words. Non ergo casus
ruentium, nee malignitatem iniquoru^, neque cupiditates peccantium,
praedestinatio Dei, aut exitauit aut suasit, aut impulit: sed plane
praedestinauit iudicium suuin, quo vnicuique retributurus est pro vt gessit
sieve bonum, sieve malum, quod Iudicium futurum non esset: si homines Dei
voluntate peccarent. Neither the falls of them that fall, nor the wickedness
of them that be wicked, nor the lust of them that offend, has the
predestination of God, either provoked, moved or compelled, but without doubt
he has forcordeyned his judgment, whereby he will recompense every man,
according as he has done, whether it be good or evil, the which should be
no judgment, if men did sin by the will of God.


Crowley. I do acknowledge that this English book, that Cerberus says he has
read, was of my writing. I acknowledge also, that Cerberus has cited the
words truly, even as I wrate them. But that I meant by them as Cerberus does
conclude upon them: I utterly deny. For he concludes that I have affirmed,
that Gods predestination is the only cause of all evil. Which I never meant
to teach, neither do my words, duly considered, give any occasion of such
conclusion.

I grant, my words might have been more explaned, and my meaning set forth
more at large, and all occasions of such calumniations cut off, if I had seen
that before I wrate that book, which I thank my Lord God, I have seen since.
Wherefore I mind by the help of God to do that now ye I was not so well able to
do then, that the Reader may perceive, that I have with Austen profited in
writing. My words that Cerberus cites, are these. August. prol. 1. lib.
Retract.
Adam therefore, being so perfect a creature, that there was in him no lust to
sin, and yet so weak, that of him self he was not able to withstand the
assault of the subtle serpent: no remedy, the only cause of his fall, must
needs be the predestination of God. Cerberus finds no fault with any of these
words, till he comes to no remedy. And then no remedy, I must be condemned
as one that affirms Gods Predestination to be the only cause of Adams
sin, and so consequentlye of all sin. But I have not said that Gods
predestination was the only cause, or any cause of Adams sin. My words be
that Gods Predestination is the only cause of Adams fall. Now Cerberus can
not see how Adams fall may be good, and therefore he says that it is the
fountain of all sin, and that to be the cause of that fall, is to be the
cause of all sin. But such as have eyes to see, do see, that as Gods
predestination is the cause of Adams fall: so Adams fall is good. For it is the
mean whereby God has shut up all under unbelief, that he Romans 11.
might have mercy on all. And the mean whereby the Galath. 3.
Scripture shuts up all under sin, that the promise which is of the faith
of Jesus Christ, might be given to the faithful.

I write therefore now, as I wrate before in my Consutation of Shaxtons
Articles: that for as much as there was in Adam nothing to move him to sin
(for lust to do contrary to Gods will, was not yet entered into him) and Satan
the enemy had no power then, neither has any power yet, over any creature of
God, further than God does limit and appoint him: it must needs follow, that
the only cause that Adam was assaulted and overthrown by Satan, was the
predestination of God, which is ever all one with his unsearchable will and
counsel. The fall of Adam thus considered, neither is, nor can be counted
sin: for it is the performance of Gods purpose, which is ever good, although
unsearchable by man's feeble understanding. And yet I do not deny Adams fall to
be sinno in Adam himself: for it was Factum co^tramandatum Dei. A deed done
contrary to the commasidentent of God. And so it had a cause in Adam himself,
which was the power of his will, whereby he consented to ye enticement of Satan,
who used the woman as his instrument therein. Of this will and the power thereof,
Saint Austen writes thus: De libero arbitrio, lib. 3. Cap. 18. Cum autem de
libera voluntate recte faciendi loqui(...): de illa silicet in qua homo factus
est, loquimur. When we speak of the will that is free to do well, we speak of
that will wherein man was made. And again in his book De natura and gratia,
Cepite. 43. speaking of man, he says. Quis enim eum nescit, sanum and
inculpabilem factum, and libero arbitrio, atque ad just viuendum libera
potestate constitutum? Who knows not that man was made found and unblameable,
and that he was ordained with free choice, and free power or liberty to live
righteously? And again in his book De Correptione and gratia. Cap. 11. Istam
gratiam non habuit homo primus, qua nunquam vellet esse malus: sed sane habuit
in qua si permanere vellet, nunquam malus esset, and sine qua etiam cum libero
arbitrio, bonus esse non posset, sed eam tamenper liberum arbitrium deserere
posset. Nec ipsum ergo Deus esse voluit sine sua gratia, que^ reliquit in suo
libero arbitrio: quoniam liberum arbitrium ad malum sufficit, ad bonum autem
nihil est, nisi adiuuetur ab omnipotenti bono: quod adiutorium si homo ille per
liberum non deseruisset arbitrium, semperesset bonus: sed deseruit and desertus
est. Tale quippe erat adiutorium quod desereret cum vellet, and in quo
permancret si vellet, non quo sieret vt vellet. The first man had not this
grace, whereby he should never be willing to be evil: but yet he had that
grace, whereby he might have been always preserved from evil, if he would
have continued therein, and without which also he could not by free will, be
good, but yet he was able by free will to forsake it. God therefore would not
have him to be without his grace, who^ he had left in his own freewill. For
freewil is able enough to do evil, but to do good it has no power at al,
except it be holye^ by the almighty goodness: which help, if that man had
not by freewill forsaken, he should have been good for ever, but he did
forsake, and was forsaken. For the help was such, that he might forsake it
when he would, and such wherein he might remain if he would, not such
whereby it might come to pass that he should be willing.

By these places of S. Austen, we may see of what mind he was concerning the
free will of man before his fall. It was such that he might consent to what
he would. But the grace to be willing to consent to nothing but that which
was good, was not given unto man, that man might have experience of the power
of his own will, and so for ever after ascribe all the glory to him that works
all in all.

The cause of Adams fall therefore, even by the judgment of S. Austen (of whom
Cerberus makes such boast) was not in himself: For God had fore appointed,
that by that means man should have experience of himself, and so learn to
trust in one stronger than himself. But the cause that made his fall sin, was
in himself. For he did willinglye consent to the persuasion of his wife, who
also had in like manner consented to the persuasion of the Serpent.

If Cerberus could consider the fall of the first man after this sort: he would
never conclude, that I teaching that the Predestination of God was the only
cause of man's fall, should withal conclude, that it is the only cause of all
sin and evil. For I do not teach that it is the cause of any evil or sin
at all.

In vain therefore, does Cerberus make his Antitesis or comparison of
contraryes, when he says. The one affirms that the Predestination of God is
the only cause of Adams sin, and so consequentlye of all evil: And the
other affirms directly contrary, that God or his Predestination is the cause
of no sin or evil. And much more vain is it, that he cites so many
testimonies of Scripture to that purpose. For I affirm that which he would
make men believe I deny, and deny that which he would have men to think I do
affirm.

But one thing I would gladly learn of Cerberus. That is, where he finds,
either in Scripture, or in ancient writer, that Adams fall is the fountain of
all evil. We may manifestly prove by Scripture, that sin was before Adam
fell, otherwise there could have been no tempter to entice him to sin. For
God tempts no man to evil. And man had in himself no concupiscence Jacob. 1.
or lust to sin: therefore evil was before Adam fell. And consequently, Adams
sal was not the fountain of al evil.

Saint Austen in the.ix. Chapter of his first book of Retractations says,
that when he with others had diligently searched from whence evil might
spring: it was agreed upon amongst them, that it had none other fountain than
the free choice of the will. Man's fall can not then be the fountain of all
evil: for there was evil in Angels before man was made, and that sprang out
of the free choice of the will that was in the Aungelles.

But grant, that the fall of man had been the fountain of all evil: might
not Gods predestination be the cause of man's fall, but it must straight way
follow consequentlye that the same is the cause of all the evil that springs
thereof? Then tell me (master Cerberus) how it may be, that Gods predestination
is not the cause of all the evil that springs of the free choice of will.
For this ye will not deny, I am sure, that God has predestined, both men and
Angels to have the free choice of will. And his will alone, according to which
he has predestined all things, is the cause why men and Angels have the
free choice of will. Shall we say therefore, that consequently it is the cause of
all evil? because it is the cause of that whereout all euilles do spring? No
thou hell hound, not so. God is altogether good, and the fountain of all
goodness, and from him can spring nothing that is not good. All those things
therefore that spring out of the free choice of the will, are exceeding good, as
God, or his predestination is the cause of them, and the evil that is in them,
comes of the instrument whereby God does work those things. I pray you
therefore, look better upon your consequently. etc.

As for the sentence that Cerberus cites out of S. Austen: Non ergo casus
ruentium. etc. I think if a man should upon a Month warning, require to see
the place where S. Austen writes those words: it would be hard for Cerberus
to show it him. And therefore I blame him not, though he have not quoted the
place. But to do him a pleasure, I have sought it in S. Austens works and
found it In decimo. articulo falso Augustino imposito. In the x. of those
articles that were falslye ascribed to S. Austen. Of what authority that book
of S Austen is, may easily appear to them that will read his Retractations:
for it is not mentioned among the books that he retracted, and reformed in
such points as he himself misseliked. But lest master Cerberus should say
(as the Papists use to say of the Protestants, and as some Free will men have
said of us that teach the doctrine of predestination) that this is the common
shift of all heretics and obstinate defenders of untruths, to diminish the
authority of Scriptures and sayings of Doctors that are alleged against
them, by saying that the same are not autentike, or that they may be suspected
not to be the writings of them in whose name they be set abroad: I will admit
this saying of S. Austen as his own, and that therein he meant as he wrote, and
that his meaning is true. Let us weigh the words of S. Austen therefore, and
see how his meaning may be true, and yet agree with the doctrine that we
teach. The predestination of God (says he) has neither stirred up,
counseled, nor enforced, the falls of the^ that do rush down headlong, nor
the malignitie of them that be wicked, nor the desiers of them that do sin:
but doubtless he has predestined his judgment, whereby he will reward
every man according to his doings, whether the same be good or evil. Which
judgment should not be, if it were the will of God that men should sin. I
have translated these words somewhat otherwise than Cerberus does. But whether
of us both better express the meaning of S. Austen, let the learned judge. And
whether I have not translated them so that they may serve better for Cerberus
purpose, than as they are translated by himself. Let us therefore look to the
meaning, and how they make with us or against us.

Saint Austen teaches that Gods predestination, does not stir up, entice or
enforce any man to sal, to be wicked, or to have a desire to sin. And which
of us does teach ye contrary? Even you sir (says Cerberus) when ye say that ye
Predestination of God, must needs be the only cause of Adams fall. To this I
have sufficiently answered before, if any answer will satisfy Cerberus. But
yet for further answer I say now, that I have not at any time said or
written, that Gods predestination did stir up, entice or drive Adam to fall.
Wherefore I have not taught contrary to S. Austen in this point. But Cerberus
will say that our meaning is not alone with S. Austens. Let us therefore
examine S. Austens meaning. I understand his meaning to be, that when man does
fall, is wicked, or desires to sin: his will is not by Gods Predestination
stirred up, enticed or compelled thereunto, but does freely consent thereunto
being stirred up, provoked and driven forward by the tempter, and by none
other mean, if we speak of the first man, for in him was not, before his
fall, that concupiscence that is now in us, and was in him after his fall.
Whether this be ye true meaning of S. Austen or no, let the learned judge. And
why may not the same meaning be gathered of my words, when I say, that Adam
being so perfect a creature, that there was in him no lust to sin, and yet so
weak, that of himself he was not able to withstand the assault of the subtle
serpent: no remedy, the only cause of his fall must needs be the
Predestination of God. I say not, that Gods Predestination did stir, provoke,
or drive him forward to fall: And why may I not mean as S. Austen does in the
eleauenth chapter of his book, De correptione and gratia, where he says (as
I have cited before) Nec ipsum ergo Deus esse voluit sine sua gratia, quem
reliquit in su^ libero arbitrio: quoniam liberum arbitrium ad malum sufficit,
ad bonum autem nihil est, nisi adiuuctur ab omnipote^ti bono: quod adiutoriu^,
si homo ille, per liberum non deseruissaet arbitrium, semper esset bonus, sed
deseruit, and desertus est. Tale quippe erat adiutoriu^ quod desereret cum
vellet, and in quopermaneret sivellet, non quo fieret vt vellet.

God therefore (says Austen) would not suffer him to be without his grace, whom
he had left in his own free choice: for free will is able enough to do evil,
but to do good it has no power at all, except it be helped of the almighty
goodness: which help, if that man had not by his free will forsaken, he should
have been good for ever, but he did forsake and was forsaken. For the help was
such that he might forsake it when he would, and such wherein he might
remain if he would, not such whereby it might come to pass that he should be
willing.

Does not S. Austen affirm here, that the help of God which Adam had, was not
such, that by it he might be willing never to forsake it? And what other cause
of this can you find: tha^ the Predestination of God, which is according to his
everlasting will, unto the which all things are and must be subject.

If Cerberus will not be satisfied with this: let him remember the saying of S.
Paul, which S. Austen does Romans 11.
so often use, to stop the mouths of the vnaunswereable enemies of Gods free
grace and predestination. O altitudo diuitiarum, sapientiae and scientiae Dei.
Quam incomprehensibilia sunt iudicia cius, and inuestigabiles viae cius? O the
depenesse of the richesse of the wisdom and knowledge of God. Now
incomprehensible are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? Stay
here, master Cerberus, go no further I charge you, lest ye be thrust headlong
into hell for your proube presumption.


Cerberus. And although there be some places of Scripture, whereupon they would
ground this opinion, that men should sin by the will of God, or that God
should predestinate or ordeyne men to sin, as where it is said, that God
hardened the heart of Pharao, and such like: yet partayneth it nothing to that
purpose, if it be wayed with the rest of the Scriptures. For as Austen says.
Ipse quasi cos indurat, quia iusto iudicio indurari sinit. Lib. de essentia
Diuinitatis. He does (says Austen) as it were harden them, because, that with
his just judgment, he suffers them to be hardened. And in his book, De
libero arbitrio and gratia. Cap. 21. he says: Where at any time we read in
the scripture, that me^ be seduced, or their hearts hardened of God: there may
we not doubt, but that their wicked deseruings went before, lest ye run
(says he) into the saying of Solomon. Insipientia viri violat vias cius. Deum
autem causatur in cord suo. The foolishness of a man defiles his ways, but
he says in his heart, God is the cause of this hardening of heart.

Melancthon, in his common places, speaks very plainly, saying: Nec figure
illae verborum offendunt. etc. Neither, says he, do these figurative speeches
offend. As I will harden the heart of Pharao and such like. For it is certain,
that in the Hebrew phrase, they signify a permission or suffering, and not an
effectual will of God, as, Lead us not into temptation, that is to say, Suffer
us not to be led into temptation. These are Melancthons words. And mark what
he says of the Hebrew phrase, for all men know him to be a man learned. But to
be short, it is surely to be marvelled at, that although they do thus accuse
Gods Predestination, to be the only cause of Adams fall (which is in deed, not
only sin, but also the very welspring of al wickedness, and the filthy
fountain of all our vnclea^nesse) yet they dare affirm themselves to be the
only friends and lovers of Gods Predestination, and al others to be the
enemies of Gods holy Predestination, which do not subscribe to this their
fantastical imagination. Moreover, if it should be said, that they make God
the Author of sin, they would cry nay, and say they were slaundered. But,
whether God be not the author of that, whereof he is the only cause: let the
uncorrupted heart judge. Also to say the truth, when they see their time and
place, they are bold inoughe, yea, even to use the term Author, in that same
manifest sense, as in a book set forth by John Knox, against an adversary of
Gods Predestination (as he calls him) where, in the. 158. pagine he says
thus.

Therefore, whatsoever the Ethnickes and ignorant did attribute unto Fortune,
we assign to the providence of God. And straight way he says. We shall judge
nothing to come of fortune, but that all comes by the determination of his
counsel. And further, it displeases him when we esteem any thing to proceed
from any other, so that we do not behold him and know him, not only the
principal cause of al things: but also the auctour, appointing al things, to
the one part or to the other by his counsel.

Mark well his words, and the very sense thereof. All comes of God, says
he, God is the principal cause, and God is the auctour of it whatsoever it be.
God appoints al things, both to the one part and to the other, both to the
wicked and to the godly all things, nothing is excepted, as well damnation as
salvation, as well sin as virtue, as well wickedness as holiness, yea, if
it happen to be murder it self, for that a little before he rehearses.
Whatsoever it be, it proceeds from none other (says he) but from God, God so
has appointed it. God is the principal cause of it. Yea, and not only the
principal cause: but also the auctor of it. Here see thou those plain
terms, which sometime for a little nice lispyng, they can not, or will not
speak, that God is the auctour of all murder and mischief. As for fortune, I
know it to be an Heathenish fable, but where he says, that God is not only
the principal cause, but also the auctour of all things, without any
exception: and that whatsoever the Ethnickes attributed unto fortune, that same
we ought to ascribe to the providence of God: it is such a wide wandering and
large blasphemye, as has not been lightlye heard. For who knows not, that
unto fortune the Ethnickes ascribed treason, and crafty conspiracy. As where
they call her Insidiosa, Persida and Malesida. Unto fortune they ascribe cruel
murder, and tyrannical mischief. As when they call her Aspera, Dura, Saeua,
Truculenta. Unto fortune they ascribed filthy lust and impudent bawdrye: as
when they call her Lenocinaus, Bruta and Impudens. Unto fortune they ascribed,
scornful pride, and vain glory, calling her, Imperiosa, Procax and Superba.
Unto fortune they ascribed, beastly blindness, and rude ignorance, calling
her Coeca, and Exoculata. To conclude, unto fortune, the Ethnickes ascribed all
perverse and pestilent wickedness, and all abomination detestable, calling
her Nefaria, Abhominanda and Improba. Yet say these professors of destiny:
whatsoever the Ethnickes ascribed unto fortune, that same ought we to attribute
to the providence of God: yea and God is the very auctor, the principal cause,
and the only cause thereof.


Crowley. Cerberus supposes now, that he has pulled from us y^ foundation of
our faith. For he says, that those scriptures that we would ground our opinion
upon, appertain nothing to that purpose, when they be weighed with the rest of
the scriptures. For the trial of this matter it shall be mete for me at this
time, plainly to set down in writing, what the opinion is, that I and other of
my mind in this matter of Predestination, do hold. And then, what those
Scriptures be that Cerberus means of, conferring the same with as many other
places of scripture, as have any show of a contrary meaning: so shall it
appear what Cerberus has won by that he cites out of Austen and
Melancthon. First, we hold that what soever has been from the beginning, is
now, or shall be to the end and for ever: was in Gods purpose without
beginning, and predestined or foreappointed to be in the time and order that
it has been, is, or shall be: so that nothing has, does or shall come to pass
otherwise than he has without beginning purposed and foreappointed the same.
The reasons that we stay upon, are these. Gods power is absolute, so that what
he will do, he is able to do, and what he will have done, can not be let by
any contrary power, and what he will not have done, can not by any power be
done. But his power could not be absolute. etc. if ought might be done
otherwise tha^ he has purposed and appointed. Therefore, all things come to
pass, even as he has without beginning purposed and appointed the same.
Another reason is thus. Gods wisdom is most perfect; so that whatsoever he
does, is so done, that the doing thereof cannot be repented: But if ought that
he does, might fall out otherwise, tha^ he meant it should, when he did it, it
should follow that his wisdom were not most perfect, for it is not y^ point of
a wise man to say, I thought not that it would have so happened. Therefore
nothing has, does, or shall happen otherwise than he meant it should, when he
did first ordeine it. The third reason is; that his foreknowledge can not be
deceived, but even as he did foresee, and know before hand, that things should
come to pass, so they have, be, and shall be brought to pass. But this could
not be, if things should be done, otherwise tha^ by his appointment. Therefore
al things have, are and shall be done by his appointment. These be the chief
reasons that we stay upon. The scriptures that we do most stay upon, are these.
Conuenerunt enim in ciuitate ista, aduersus sanctum filium tuu^ Iesum quem
vnxisti, Herodes and Pontius Pilatus, cu^ gentibus and populis Israel: ad
faciendum quaecunque manus tua and consilium tuum prius decreuer Act. 4.
unt fieri. There gathered together even in this City, against thy holy child
Jesus, whom thou haste anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with y^
Gentiles and peoples of Israel: to do whatsoever things thy power and counsel
had before decreed to be done. Acts the iiij. Chapter.

Again in the.vij. of Exodus it is thus written. Dixitque Exodus 7.
Dominus ad Mosen. Ecce constitui te Deum Pharaonis, and Aaron frater tuus erit
Propheta tuus. Tu loqueris ei omnia quae mando tibi, and ille loquetur ad
Phamone^, vt dimittat filios Israel deterra sita. Se dego indurabo cor eius, et
multiplicabo signa and ostenta mea in terra Egypti, and non audiet vos. And y^
Lord said unto Moses. Behold I have appointed thee to be Pharaos God, and Aaron
thy brother shall be thy Prophet. Thou shall speak unto him all those things that
I shall command thee, and he shall speak unto Pharao, that he let the
children of Israel depart out of his land. But I will harden his heart, and
will multiply my wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and he shall not
hearken unto you.

Moreover, in the.xix. Chapter of the.iiij. book of the 4. Reg. 19.
Kings, we read thus. Venerunt ergo serui Regis Ezechiae ad Isaam, Dixitque
eis Isaas. Haec dicetis domino vestro. Haec dicit Dominus. Noli timere a facie
sermonu^ quos audistis, quibus blasphemanerunt pueri Regis Assyriorum me. Ecce
ego immittam ei* spiritum, and audiet nuntium, and reuertetur in terram suam,
et deijciam eum gladio in terra sua. And in the end of the same Chapter it is
written thus. Cumque adoraret in templo Nesroch Deum suum: Adramelech, and
Saraser filij eius, percusserunt eum gladio. etc. The servants of King
Ezechia came unto Esaias. And Esaias said unto them. Thus shall ye say unto your
Lord. Thus says the Lord. Be not thou afraid of the words that ye have
heard, wherewith the servants of the King of the Assirians have blasphemed
me. Behold I will put a spirit into him, and he shall hear a tidings, and he
shall return into his own country, and in his own country will I overthrow
him with the sword. And in the end of the same Chapter it is written thus. And
when he was in the Temple worshipping Nesroch his own God: Adramelech and
Saraser his own sons slew him with the sword. etc.

Furthermore, in the.xlv. of Genesis, we read thus, Genes. 45.
Praemisitque me Deus, vt reseruemini super terram, and escas ad viue^dum
habere possitis. Non vestro consilio, sed Dei voluntate missus sum: qui fecit
me quasi patrem Pharaonis, and Dominum vniuersae domus eius. etc. God sent me
before, that you might be reserved upon the earth, and have food to live by.
It was not by your advise or counsel, that I was sent hither, but by the will
of God, who has made me to be as a Father unto Pharao, and Lord of all his
house. etc.

To conclude, in the last chapter of the same book, we read the matter
repeated after this sort. Nolite timere, number Dei possumus resistere voluntati?
Vos cogitastis de me malum: sed Deus vertit illud in bonum. etc. Fear not, are
we able to resist Gods will? you did devise evil for me: but God did turn it
to good.

By these Scriptures it appears plainelye, that all those things that
Herod, Pilate, and the Jews did to Christ: that Pharao did in the hardness
of his heart: that the sons of Sinacharib did to their Father: and that
Iosephes brethren did unto him: were all done by the determinate purpose and
Predestination of God. Whereupon, it seems to me, that we may conclude that all
other actions are done according to the same purpose and predestination.
Otherwise, we must needs confess, that God is either disapointed of his
purpose oftentimes, or else that he creates many things, not knowing before
what shall become of them. Which obsurdities may in no case be granted.

Now what those Scriptures be, wherewith Cerberus would have these and such
like scriptures to be weighed, we must guess: for Cerberus cites not so much
as one, I will therefore guess as nere as I can* what scriptures those be that
he means of. One as I suppose, is written by Saint Paul to Timothe. The
words are these. Deus vult omnes homines saluos fieri, and ad agnitionem
veritatis 1. Tim. 2.
venire. God would have al men saved and come to the acknowledging of the
truth. Let us first weigh this place with the other before cited, and see how
this may make the other to serve nothing to y^ purpose that we allege them
for. God would have all men saved, and to come to the acknowledging of the
truth: But if he did foreappoynt Herod, Pilate, and the Jews, to accuse and
condemn his son Christ, and did harden Pharaos heart, kill Sinacharib with
the sword of his sons, and send Joseph into Egypt by the trecherye of his
brethren: he would not have all men saved: for the reward of these works is
damnation: therefore God never appointed any of these things to be done. I am
sure Cerberus can not apply this place better to his purpose, than it is in
this argument applied. Now let us see what may be said to the contrary,
without either denying or wresting of S. Paul's words. First, S. Austen does
interpret these words of S. Paul after this sort. Libro de voluntate Dei,
Cap. 2. Occurrit enim, cur pereant ex hijs aliqui, quum omnipotens Deus, omnes
homines saluos fieri velit, and in agnitionem veritatis venire. Deinde, cur
rursus induret alios, misertus alioru^, aut quomodo omnes saluos fieri velit
homines, quum ipse nonnullos, ne saluentur induret? Hoc quantum ad humanam
iustitiam videtur iniustum: sed quis ita desipiat, vel potius quis ita
blasphemet, vt dicat de iustitia Dei, lege humanae iustitiae disputandum? Quae
profecto, si iustitiae Dei aduersatur, iniusta est. Ab illo enim qui sum
iustus est, omne quod qualitercunque iustum est, manare manifestum est. Quis
ergo crit, qui incommutabiliter manentem, and omnia quae sunt condentem,
regentem, atque seruantem Dei sapientiam, pendit humanae sapientiae arbitrio?
De qua idem Apostolus dicit, Quia sapientia carnis, inimicae est Deo. Et alibi.
Sapientia huius mundi, stulititia est apud Deum. Non est ergo de illa maiestate
diuinae sapientiae, humanae vanitatis arbitrio disputandu^. That is to say. For
this is objected. Why should any of these perish, seeing that God that is
almightye, is willing that all men should be saved, and come to the
acknowledging of the truth? Moreover, why does he on the contrary part, harden
some, taking mercy on other some: or how is he willing that all men should be
saved, when he himself does harden some, least they should be saved? As
touching human justice, this thing seems unjust. But who would be so
foolish, or rather who would so blaspheme: as to say, that we should reason
of y^ justice of God, by the order of y^ justice of man? which no doubt, if it
be against the justice of God, it is unjust. For it is manifest, that
whatsoever has in it any justice at all, does spring from him that is just
in the highest degree. Who shall it be therefore, that will weigh by the
arbitriment of man's wisdom, the wisdom of God, which remains immutable,
and has made, does govern and preserve al things that be? Of which wisdom,
the same Apostle says. That the wisdom of the flesh, is enemy unto God. And
in another place. The wisdom of the world is foolishness with God. We may
not therefore, by the arbitriment of man's vanity, dispute of that ma(...)y of
the wisdom of God.

Again, in his book De spiritu and litera, Capite. 32. the same Austen says.
Si credemus, vt impetremus hanc gratiam: (...) vtique voluntate credimus, De
hac quaeritur, vnde sit voluntas. Si natura, quare non omnibus: cum sit idem
Deus omniu^ creator? Si dono Dei, etiam hoc, quare non omnibus, cum omnes
homines velit saluos sieri, and ad agnitionem veritatis venire? Prius igitur
illud dicamus and videamus, vtru^ huic satis faciat quaestioni, quod liberum
arbitrium naturaliter attributum a creatore animae rationali: illa media vis
est, quae vel intendi ad fidem, vel inclinari ad insidelitatem potest. Et ideo,
nec istam voluntatem, qua credit Deo, dici potest homo habere, quam non
acceperit, Quandoquidem vocante Deo, surgit de libero arbitrio, quod
naturaliter cum crearetur, accepit. Vult enim Deus o^nes homines saluos fieri,
and in agnitionem veritatis venire. Non sic tamen, vt eis adimat liberu^
arbitrium, quo vel been vel male vterites, iustissime iudicentur. Quod cum fit,
infideles quidem contra voluntatem Dei faciunt, cum eius Euangelio non credunt:
nec ideo tamen eam vincunt, verum scipsos fraudant magno and summo bono,
malisque poenalibus implicant, experturi in supplicijs potestatem eius, cuius
in donis misericordiam contempserunt. Ita voluntas Dei semper inuicta est.
Vinceretur autem, si non inueniret, quod de contemptoribus faceret: aut vllo
modo possent euadere, quod de talibus ille constituit. That is. If we do
believe, to the end that we may obtain this grace, and do also by the consent
of our will, believe: hereof a question is moved, whence we have this will. If it
be of nature, why is it not in all me^: seeing one God is the creator of all men?
If we have it by the gift of God, why is it not given to all men: seeing he is
willing that all men should be saved, and come to the acknowledging of the
truth? Let us therefore affirm the first, and see whether it may satisfy this
question, because freewill, which the Creator has naturally given to the
reasonable soul: is that indifferent power, which may either be bowed to
faith, or inclined to infidelity. And therefore, it can not be said, that man
has not received this will, whereby he believes in God, because, when God
calls, it rises of freewill, which he received when he was naturallye
created. For God is willing that all men should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth: and yet not so, that he would take from them freewill,
whereby they may be justly judged, when they use it well or otherwise. In which
doing, the Infidels do work contrary to Gods will, because they believe not his
Gospel. And yet do they not therefore overcome it, but they do defraude them
selves of the great and most excellent goodness, and do entangle them selves
with euilles, wherewith they are punished, and shall in the punishments have
experse^ce of his power, whose mercy they did in his gifts contemn. So is
the will of God always unconquered. But if he could not find how to use
these despisers, or if they could by any means escape that which he has
appointed to become of such: then should his will be overcome in deed.

Again, in his book entitled Enchiridion ad Laurentiu^. Capite. 103. he
says thus. Ac per hoc, cum audimus, and in sacris litteris legimus, quod
velit omnes homines saluos furi: quamo uis certum sit nobis, non omnes homines
saluos sicri, non tamen ideo debemus omnipotentissimae Dei voluntati aliquid
derogare, sed ita intellegere quod scriptum est: qui vult omnes homines saluos
ficri: tanquam diceretur, nullum hominem fieri saluum, nisi quem saluum fieri
ipse voluerit: non quod nullus sit hominum, nisi quem salitum sicri velit, sed
quod nullus siat, nisi quem velit, and ideo sit roga^dus vt velit, quia necesse
est suri si voluerit. De orando quippe Deo agebat Apostolus vt hoc diceret. Sic
enim intelligimus id quodin Euangelio scriptum est: Qui illuminat omnem
hominem: non quia nullus est hominum qui non illuminetur, sed quia nisi ab ipso
nullus illuminator. Aut certe sic dictum est. Qui omnes homines vult saluos
fieri, non quod nullus hominum esset, quem saluum sicri nollet, qui virtutes
miraculorum facere noluit apud cos, quos dicit actitros fuisse poenitentiam, si
facisset: sed vt omnes homines omne genus hominum intelligamus per quascunque
differentias distributum, Reges, priuatos, nobiles, ignobiles. etc.

That is to say. And hereby when we hear and read in the holy scriptures,
that he is willing yt all men should be saved, although we know assuredly that
all men are not saved? yet may we not therefore derogate any thing from the
almightye will of God, but understand that which is written, on this sort. Not
that there is no man, but that he would the same should be saved; but that
none ca^ be saved, but such as he will have saved. And that therefore he ought to
be prayed unto, that he would be willing, because it must needs be, if he be
willing that it should be. For when the Apostle spoke these words, he was in
hand with the prayers that are to be made unto God. And after the same manner
we understand that which is written in the Gospel. Which lightneth every
man. Not that there is no man that is not illumined, or lightened: but for that
there is none illumined, otherwise than of him. Or else undoubtedly the words
have this meaning. Which is willing that all me^ should be saved, not that
there should be no man whom he would not have saved, which would not work
his miracles among them that he says would have repented, if he had done so:
but that we should understand by all men, all sorts of men, by what
differences so ever the same be severed, Kings, private persons, noble persons,
and ignoble. etc.

And again in his book. De correptione and gratia. Cap. 14. S. Austen says
thus. Cum autem homines per correptionem in viam iustitiae seu veniunt, seu
reuertuntur, quis operatur in cordibus eoru^ salute^, nisi ille, qui quolibet
plantante atque rigante, and quolibet in agris atque arbustulis operante, dat
incrementum Deus, cui volenti saluum facere, nullum hominum resistit arbitrium?
Sic enim, velle vel nolle, in volentis aut nolentis est potestate, vt diuinam
voluntatem non impediat, nec superet potestatem. De hijs enim qui faciunt quae
non vult, facit ipse quae vult. Et quod scriptum est, quod vult omnes homines
saluos fieri, nec tamen omnes salui siunt: multis quidem modis intelligi
potest, ex quibus in alijs opusculis nostris, aliquos commemorauimus, sed hic
vnum dicam. Ita dictum est. Omnes homines vult saluos sicri, vt intelligantur
omnes praedestinati, quia omne genus hominum in eis est, sicut dictum est
Pharisaeis. Decimatis omne olus, vbi non est intelligendum, nisi omne quod
habebant. Neque enim omne olus quod erat in toto terrarum orb decimabant.

That is to say. When men do by chastisement, either come or return into the
way of righteousness, who is it that works health in their hearts, but he
who gives the increase, when any man planteth or watreth, and when any man
works in the fields or orchards, which is God, against whom, being willing
to save, no man's free will does make resista^ce. For to be willing or
unwilling, is after such sort in the power of him that is willing or unwilling,
that it be not a let to the will of God, nor do overcome his power. For of them
that do those things that he wills not, both he make those things that he is
willing to make. And where as it is written: that he is willing that all men
should be saved, and yet all be not saved: it may be understood many ways,
whereof we have in our other little works made mention of some, but I will now
speak of one more. This is the saying. He is willing that all men should be
saved, that thereby, all that be predestined might be understand, for that
among them are men of all sorts. As it was said to the Phariseis, ye do pay
the tenth of every garden herb. Where we may not understand, ^oe than all
that they had. For they did not give the tenth of all the herbs that be in the
whole circle of the earth.

By these places of S. Austen may Cerberus see, how this place of scripture
(God is willing that al men should be saved. etc.) being wayed with the places
that we build upon, does make that they serve nothing to our purpose. For in
expounding of these words of S. Paul, God is willing that al men should be
saved and come to the knowledge of the truth: S. Austen does affirm as much as
we do, as may well appear to as many as will way these places of his, with
indifferent judgment.

One other place for this purpose, is written in the. 33. Chapter of Ezechiell.
The words are these. Viuo ego dicit Dominus. Nolo mortem impij, sed vt
conuertatur impius a via sua, and viuat. Conuertimini, conuertimini, a vijs
vestris pessimis, and quare moriemini domus Israel? That is to say. As truly
as I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of the ungodly, but that the
ungodly be converted from his own way and live. Be converted, be converted
from your most wicked ways, why will ye die, O you house of Israel?

Saint Hierome expounding this place, begins at Super. Ezech. Cap. 33.
these words in the same Chapter. Tu ergo fili hominis, dic ad domum Israel:
sic locuti estis dicentes. Iniquitates nostrae and peccata nostra super nos.
etc. Therefore thou son of man, speak thou to the house of Israel and say:
thus have ye spoken, saying: Our iniquities and sins are upon us. etc. By
occasion of which words, S. Hierome says thus. Sinegligenter legamus,
videtur nobis eadem prophetia esse quae supra, in qua dicitur. Nunquid volens
cupio mortem iniqui dicit dominus: nisi conuerti eum a via sua mala and viuere?
Et in fine eiusdem propheti^e. Conuertimini and redite ab vniuersis
impietatibus vestris, and non erunt vobis in tormentum iniquitates. Ibi enim ad
eos sermo fit qui volunt agere poenitentiam, and iustitia peccata delere, vt
cum fiducia conuertantur, and pleno animo agant poenite^tiam. Hic autem ad eos
loquitur, qui magnitudine peccatorum, imo impietatum suarum desperant salutem
and dicunt: Iniquitates nostrae and peccata nostra super nos sunt, and in ipsis
tabescimus, quomodo ergo viuere poterinites? Et est sensus. Cum semel nobis
mors proposita sit: and vulneribus nostris nulla medicina possitrestituere
sanitatem: quid necesse est laborare and frustra consumi, and praesentem vitam
non cum desperatione transigere, vt saltem hac fruamur: quia futuram
perdidimus? Quibus respondet Deus, non velle se mortem impij, sed vt reuertatur
and viuat. Et Apostropham sacit ad impios despera^tes: co^uertimini a vijs
vestris pessimis. Atque vt sciamus, qui sint impij ad quos loquitur, seque^s
sermo demo^strat, Quare moriemini domus Israel? Vita autem and mors in hoc loco
non haec significatur, qua omnes communi cum bestijs, lege naturae, vel
viuimus, vel morte dissoluimur: sed illa de qua scriptum est. Placebo Domino in
regione viuentium.

That is to say. If we read this negligently, it seems to be the same
prophecy, that is before, wherein it is said, do I willingly desire the death
of the ungodly, says the Lord: or, but that he be converted from his own
evil way and live? And in the end of the same Prophecy: Be ye converted and
come back again from all your vngodlinesses, and your iniquities shall not
turn you to torments. For in that place he speaks unto those which are
willing to repent, and by righteous life, to blot out their sins, that they
might with sure confidence return unto God, and with full minds repent. But
in this place he speaks unto the^, that through the greatness of their own
sins (yea their own impieties) do despair of salvation, and say. Our
iniquities and our sins are upon us, and in them do we consume away: how
can we therefore live? And this is their meaning. Seeing that death is once set
before us, and no medicine is able to heal our wounds: what need we labor and
be consumed, and not pass over this life with desperatio^: so, that at the
least way we may enjoy this life? For the life to come we have already lost.
Unto whom God makes answer, that he wills not the death of the ungodly:
but that he be converted and live. And he turns his speech to the desperate
ungodly ones: saying, turn you from your own ways, which are most wicked.
And that we might know who those wicked ones were to whom he spoke, the
words that follow do declare. O ye house of Israel, why will ye dye? And that
life and that death, whereby we do by the order of nature, with the brute
beasts either live or die, is not in this place signified: but that life
whereof it is written. I will please the Lord in the land of the living.

By these words of S. Hierome: it appears, that he understood not the
words of Ezechiell, in such sort as Cerberus would have us to understand
them, that is, that by them is taught a doctrine contrary to that which we
teach, and so consequently, the places that we build upon, proved to make
nothing for our purpose. For Hierome says, that in the.xviii. Chapter of his
Prophecy, Ezechiell speaks to them that be penitent, and would by righteous
life blot out their sins past. These does he there encourage, with bold
courage and assured hope of forgiveness at Gods hand, to go forward with their
repentance begone, saying: Be ye converted, and return again from all your
vngodlinesses, and your iniquities shall not turn you to torment. But in this
place, in the 33. of his Prophecy (says S. Hierom) the Prophet speaks to
the desperate people of y^ Jews, which said: Our iniquities and sins are
upon us. etc. Giving them selves to continue in wickedness, as those that
dispayred of forgiveness of that which was paste, although they should from
thenceforth endeavor amendment. To these (says the Prophet) speaks God,
saying: Turn from your own most wicked ways. Why will ye die, O ye house of
Israel? The greatness of our sins can be no cause why we should despair of
Gods mercy. Wherefore we teach with Ezechiel, Jeremy, Esaie, and the rest of
the holy Prophets, that God is ready to receive to mercy as many as by
repentance and amendme^t of life turn to him, believing the promise that he
has made in the death and bloudshedding of his only son Jesus Christ. I
conclude therefore that this place makes for our purpose, and not against us.
And least I should trouble the Reader over much, with such places as this: I
(...) refer all such places to the answer I have here made, not doubting
but the diligent Reader, who seeks nothing but the simple truth, shall be
therewithal satisfied.

Now, as touching the places of S. Austen, which Cerberus cites out of his
book: De esse^tia Diuinitatis: And De libero arbitrio and gratia: I will first
rehearse all the words that S. Austen writes in those places, concerning this
matter, and then weigh them, that we may see how they may serve for Cerberus
purpose. The words are these. Indurare dicitur Deus quorundam malorum corda,
sicut de Pharaone Rege Egypti scriptu^ est: non (...) omnipotens Deus,
ppotentia^ Augusti. De essentia Diuinitatis.
sua^ corda little induret, quod est impiu^ ita credere: sed exege^tibus coru^
culpis, quam duritia^ cordis, qua^ ipsi sibi mala perpetrando nutriu^t, non
ausert: quasi ipse cos induret, quia iusto iudicio indurari sinit. That is to
say: It is said that God does harde^ the hearts of certain evil men, as it
is written of Pharao King of Egypt: not that the Almightye God does by his
almighty power harden their hearts, which thing to believe, is an ungodly
thing: but when their faults requiring the same, does not take from them that
hardness, which in committing euilles, they themselves do nourishe to
themselves: he does as it were himself harden them, because he does, by his
just judgment, suffer the^ to be hardened.

If Cerberus would have weighed these words well: he would never have applied
them against us. For we teach not, that the almighty God, does by his almighty
power harden men's hearts, for we know that it were an ungodly thing so to teach
or believe: but we teach as S. Austen does, that their sins requiring the
same, he leaves them in the hardness of their hearts, which by committing of
euilles, they do nourish unto themselves. For by the sin of the first man al
men's hearts are hardened, and of them selves they can do naught else but
nouryshe that hardness, and Gods hardening of their hearts, is nothing else but
the withholding of the deawe of his grace from them, without which they can not
be softened. And this he does in just judgment, for the sin of our first
Father has deserved no less in us all. But here I must let the Reader
understand, what places Cerberus pycketh for his purpose. Erasmus supposes,
that rather Hugo Victorinus than S. Austen should be y^ Author of this book.
Well, I will not strive with him for the matter. But let him consider it better
before he apply it against us again.

The words of the other place that Cerberus cites out of the.xxj. chapter of
S. Austens book. De gratia and libero arbitrio: are as faithfully handled as
y^ other. Cerberus August. De gratia and libero arbitrio. Cap. 21.
feared to set down to many of Austens words, least the Reader should see
that they make with us against Cerberus and his fellows. I will therefore set
down so many of his words as may make his meaning known to the diligent
Reader. First, in the beginning of the same Chapter, he says thus. Quis non
ista iudicia diuina contremiscat, quibus agit Deus in cordibus etiam malorum
hominum quicquid vult, reddens eis tamen secundum merita eorum? Roboam filius
Salomonis respuit consiliu^ salubre Seniorum quod ei dederant. etc. Who would
not (says Austen) tremble at these judgments of God, whereby he does in the
hearts even of wicked men, work what he lusts, and yet rendering unto them
according to their deseruings. Roboam, the son of Solomon, refused the
wholesome counsel of the Elders which they gave him, which was that he should
not deal roughly with the people, and he hearkened rather to the words of
them that were of his own age, giving a rough answer to them, whom he should
have answered gentlye. And so forth, citing many examples out of the
Scriptures, to prove, that God is he, that works in the hearts of evil men,
those things whereby his purpose is performed in punishing of sin.

And toward the end of the Chapter, he says: Hijs and talibus testimonijs
diuinorum eloquiorum, quae omnia comemorare (...)s longum est, satis, quantum
existimo, manifestatur, operari Deum in cordibus hominum, ad inclinandas little
volu^tates quo* cunque voluerit, sieve ad bona, pro sua misericordia, sieve ad
mala, pro meritis little, iudicio vtique suo, aliquando aperto, aliqua^do
occulto, semper autem iusto. Fixum enim debet esse and immobile in cord
vestro, quia no^ est iniquitas apud Deum. Ac per hoc, qua^do legitis in
litteris veritatis a Deo seduci homines, aut obtudi vel obdurari corda little,
nolite dubitare praecessisse mala merita little, vt just ista paterentur: ne
incurratis in illud Prouerbium Salomonis. Insipientia viri, violat vias eius:
Deum autem causatur in cord suo. That is to say. By these and such like
testimonies of holy Scriptures, whereof it were too long to make a whole
recital, it is, as I suppose, sufficientlye showed, that God does work in
the hearts of men, to incline their wills whither it pleases him, whether it
be to good things, according to his mercy, either to evil things, according
to their merits, and according to his own judgment, which is sometime open,
and sometime secret, but always just. For this persuasion ought to be fired
and immovable in your hearts: that there is none iniquity with God. And
hereby, when ye read in the writings of the truth, that God does lead me^ out
of the way, or that he does dull or harden their hearts: do ye not doubt, but
that their evil deserving went before, that they might justly suffer these
things, least ye should run into that Proverb of Solomon, which says. The
foolishness of a man does defile his ways: but in his heart he lays the
blame in God.

If Cerberus would have set down all these words of S. Austen: I should not
have neded to write any answer to that which he did set down. For S.
Austens words are sufficient for answer, when he says that God works in
the hearts of me^ to incline their wills, whether it be to good things,
according to his mercy, or to evil things, according to their deseruings, and
that which way he him self is willing to incline them. Now let Cerberus find
contradiction in S. Austens words, if he can. As form, I can see none. But if
Cerberus can find none, then has he applied S. Austens words against us,
contrary to S. Austens meaning.

Now let us see what Cerberus has found in Melancthons common places.
Melancthon speaks very plainly (says Cerberus) and says, Nec figur^ illae
verborum offendunt. etc. Neither says he, do these figurative speeches
offend. As I will harde^ the heart of Pharao, and such like: for it is certain,
that in the Hebrew phrase, they signify a permission or suffering, and not an
effectual will of God. As lead us not into temptation, y^ is to say, suffer
us not to be lead into temptation. These are Melancthons words, says
Cerberus: and mark (says he) what he says of the Hebrew phrase, for all men
know him to be a man learned. Here Cerberus begins to triumph, and seems
to himself to have won the stelde. Melancthon has said it, therefore it must
needs be so. I reverence Melancthon, and do acknowledge that he was learned:
but let us see whether, in this point, Mela^cthon have not showed him self to
loath to offend such as Cerberus is, and therefore seemed to have given them
vau^tage against himself. In the same book of common places, in the first
title, which is De Deo: he describes God after this sort: Deuteronomy est essentia
spiritualis, intelligens, aterna, verax, bona, pura, iusta, misericors,
liberrima, immensaepotenti^e and sapientiae. etc. That is to say: God is a
spiritual essence, understanding, everlasting, true, good, pure, just,
merciful, most free, and of unmeasurable power and wisdom. etc. Now, if God
do permit any thing to be done which he is not willing should be done, how is
he almightye? Other therefore, as learned as Melancthon, have said, and in my
judgment, truly: that to permit and to will is alone, in him that can not be
enforced to permit or suffer that which he is not willing should be. But as I
have declared before, we affirm not, that the actions, words, and thoughts
of man, as they are willed or permitted by God, are or can be sin. For he
being altogether good, and nothing else but goodness; can not will or permit
any thing that is evil. The evil therefore that is in men's thoughts, words
or actions, comes of the Devil and men's own wills: which God does will or
permit, as a mean, either to set forth his mercy in forgiving, or his justice
in punishing, which in that respect can not be other than good. What Cerberus
has won by citing these words of Melancthon: let y^ learned that have read
other men's writings upon this matter, judge. I have said that I think to be
true.

But now Cerberus thinks to pay us home. To be short, says he, it is
surely to be marvelled at, that although they do thus accuse Gods
Predestination to be the only cause of Adams sall (which is in deed not only
sin, but also the very welspring of all wickedness, and the silthy fountain
of all our uncleanness) that yet they dare affirm themselves to be the only
friends and lovers of Gods Predestination. etc. Cerberus will be short now.
Well let him be answered as shortly. He has all this while labored to prove
that was never denied, that is, that the sin of Adam in his first fall, is
the cause of all the sin that has been, is, or shall be committed by his
posterity. For we hold, that after Adam had once sinned, neither he nor any of
his posterity, being naturallye brought forth in this world, could of them
selves do any other thing than sin. The cause whereof we say, is that
concupiscence and lust to do evil, which entered into him, and from him is
descended into his posterity. But what is this to the cause of Adams fall.
This concupiscence was not in Adam before his fall. It could not therefore be
the cause thereof. And as I have declared before: Adams fall could not be the
cause of all sin: for sin was before Adam fell. We know that sin is not
a creature: but it is a falling away of the creature from that order that the
Creator did command the creature to continue in. But this was in y^ Angels,
Ergo before the fall of man. By y^ fall of man therefore was declared what man's
freewill was able to do. It was able to admit sin, and so by freewill sin
entered into man, and by man into the world, that is into all natural men. And
yet we say not, that either man's freewill or man himself is evil, as he is
Gods creature, and freewill Gods gift. I conclude therefore, that as the fall
of Adam was the performance of Gods purpose, so was it no sin, but exceeding
good, as every performance of Gods purposes must needs be. And so the
Predestination of God being the cause thereof, is no cause of sin. Let
Cerberus marvel as much as he will, how we can grant God to be the cause and
not the Autour of sin. For we do not say that Gods Predestination is the
cause of sin. Much less do we say that he is the Autour, as Cerberus does
charge us by occasion of certain words written by John Knoxe against an
adversary of Gods Predestination.

Although John Knoxe being yet living, and able to defend his own writings, I
might refer Cerberus to his answer: yet I will not stick to write a few lines
in the defense of his doctrine in this point. Cerberus seems to mislike with
Knoxe for two things: one is, for that he says that we assign to the
providence of God, all things that the Ethnickes and Ignorant attributed unto
fortune. And the other is, for that he says that we know and behold God to
be, not only the principal cause, but also the author of all things,
appointing them to the one part or so the other by his counsel. This is
(says Cerberus) such a wide wandering blasphemy, as has not lightly been
heard of. And although Cerberus would have us mark the words, and the very
sense of the^, as though he would set forth the same so plainly, that al men
might easily perceive the meaning of the^: yet with his leave, he shows that
he himself did not see that he would have other to mark. For what mad man
would write words in such meaning, as Cerberus would have us think that John
Knoxe wrate his? That is, to call God deceyisull, unfaithful, and untrusty?
Rough, hard, sierce and cruel? Bawdy, beastly, and shameless? Imperious,
malapert, and proud? Blind, and without eyes? Wicked, to be abhorred, and
altogether naught? Was there ever man so far beside himself, as to write of
God in this meaning? I durst appeal to Cerberus himself (though he be the
dog of Hell) whyther in conscience he do think that it were possible that
any reasonable man may so far forget him self, as to write words in any such
meaning. Let Cerberus therefore, look better upon John Knoxe words, and seek a
better sense in them than this. If he will do so, he shall find that John Knoxe
meaning is, that where as the Ethnickes and Ignorant attributed unto fortune, a
power to give or take away, to preserve or destroy, to help or to hinder. We
which know y^ there is no such power in any other tha^ in God, do assign all
these things to his providence: knowing y^ nothing comes to pass by Fortune
or chance, but that God by his providence does govern and rule all things,
appoynting them to the one part, or the other, by his counsel. And when he
appoints any to that thing which in them is sin (as was the murder of
Sinacharib in his own sons) yet in Gods purpose it is good, for it is the
execution of his just judgment, or the mean whereby his glory shall be the
more advanced in showing mercy. If Cerberus be not certified with this
answer, let him seek for further answer at the hands of him whose writings
he has so maliciously perverted.


Cerberus. But now to return again to Crowley. After that he has written,
that Gods predestination is the only cause of Adams fall, then goes he forth
in the same book, and the same Article, unto the next execrable wickedness,
committed in the world, saying: Now, what say we to Cain: was he not
predestined to slay his brother? No, say the freewill men. Here thou see
dearly beloved, who they are that so odiouslie are noted with the name of
freewyll men. Not only the Papists, against whom he pretends there to write:
but namely all those that say, God has not predestinate any man to commit
murder, or such like wicked abomination. These call they freewill men, these
call they Pelagians. In deed such as so maintayn freewil, that a man by freewyl
without the grace and help of God, may abstain from evil, or do good, as the
blind Papists do, and as before it is proved, that Pelagius did hold, or as
before is rehenrsed, that Willyam Samuel says: that man may deserve God:
those I say, might worthily be called Pelagians, because they hold, either al,
or some part of his errors. But those which teach, that all murder and
mischiese spryngeth out of Gods predestination, or that any mansleaer is
predestinate of God to kill his neighbor, or any adulterer to lie with his
neighbors wife, or any traitor predestinate of God, to conspire against his
Prince, or any rebel to rise against his Sovereign, as these men most plainly
assyrme: they hold in this point the error of the Manicheans, which was as ye
heard before, by the words of Austen. Hominem peccatum vitare non posse. That
a man can not eschew evil, or can not choose but commit sin. These men, I
say, which affirm that Caine was predestinate to murder his innocent brother
Abell. And as in the same book and the same Article also, he says, that the
most wicked persons that have been, were of God appointed to be wicked even as
they were. They hold the error both of the Stoikes, and also of the
Manicheans. That is to say, as Austen declares in the ninth and.xvi. chapter
of the first book of his Retractations: that evil has his original of Gods
ordinance, and not of man's freewil. For if murderers, thieves, adulterers,
traitors, and Rebels be of God predestined and appointed to be wicked eue^
as they are, and can not choose but of mere necessity by the ordinance of God
commit, al such wickedness, even as they do: then what is our life but a mere
destiny, all our doyngs Gods ordynaunces, and all our imaginations, branches
of Gods predestination? And I doubt not, but the Stoikes and Manicheans, would
also temper the matter with a great discretion of words, as these men will
say, that we must speak more reverently of the matter. But seeing they
plainly hold these principles, and when they see their time, speak plainly
thereof them selves, as you may well perceive by that which has already, and
shall yet be more largely rehearsed: I see no cause why it should not of al me^
be plainly declared. Again, if it be a truth, why should it not be plainly
spoken, if it be a truth, that traitors be predestinate of God to conspire the
destruction of their Princes, and Rebels predestinate of God to make
insurrectio^ against their soueraines: If (I say) it be a truth, that God has
so predestined the^, and that they must of necessity, and can not choose but
commit such wickedness: why should it not be plainly spoken? except a man
should be ashamed to speak the truth. But in what Scripture is that written?
Or is it not rather written. For thy life, shame not to say the truth. And
surely to say as Eccles. 4.
it is: I see not well how any man can speak more plainly in this matter
than they them selves do. For what can more plainly be spoken: tha^ that Gods
predestination is the cause of Adams fall? And that Caine was predestinate to
slay his brother? And that God is both the principal cause, and also the author
of all things, both on the one side and on the other, appoynting al things to
al men. And whatsoever the Ethnickes ascribed unto fortune: that same we ought
to attribute unto the providence of God. And that the most wicked persons that
have been: were of God appointed to be wicked even as they were.


Crowley. Here it appears, that the chiese quarrel that Cerberus had, when
he wrate this answer to his friends letter, was against Crowley. If the
spirit of love had led him, he might have had conference with Crowley (for belike
he knows him well enough) and not thus maliciously by setting out his answer
in print, have gone about as much as lies in him, not only to discredit the
doctrine yt Crowley preaches: but also to bring him in displeasure with his
Prince, as one ye teaches thieves, murderers, traitors and rebels, and al
other naughty persons to defend their wickedness by Gods predestination and
ordinance. But Crowley shall by Gods help, be able to clear him self of all
this, and to make the malice of Cerberus so known to al men, that he shall from
henceforth have little credit among such as do not favor the error of our
new Pelagians.

For answer to al y^ Cerberus has in this his return to Crowley, written, I
might refer the Reader to that which I have already written. But least
Cerberus should think that that were but a shift, I will answer to his
Tautologie, or repeticion of the same words and matter that is before written
and answered, and chiesly because he does here infer more plainly that which
before he means to conclude.

I have said, that Gods predestination was the only cause of Adams fall, that
Caine was predestinate to slay his brother Abell, and that the most wicked
persons that have been, were of God appointed to be wicked, eue^ as they were.
For the first, I refer the Reader to that which I have already written
thereof. For the second, I say: that as God predestined Abell to be a figure
of Christ and his Church in suffering, so he predestined Caine to be a
figure of the cruel persecuting Jews and other, that have, do, and shall
persecute Christ and his Church. And as Caine in sleaing his brother Abell was
a figure of the cruel persecutours, so was not the murder evil: but as it was
the execution of Caines wicked will, it was abominable sin, and deserved no
less punishment at Gods hand, than it had in deed. And as concerning the
power of Caines will, whereby he consented to do this deed: it was altogether
bound to the will of Satan, by the sin that his Father Adam had first
committed, and was not delivered from that bondage, because he was none of them
whom Jesus Christ, the son of God had delivered and made free: as does well
appear by that he says: My sin is greater than that it can be forgiven. He
had not received the spirit of Adoption, whereby he might cry Abba, Father.
Wherefore, it is manifest, that whatsoever he did, was abominable in Gods
sight, for he lacked faith whereby men's works are made acceptable before
God. For without it, it is impossible to please God. As it is written. Sine
fide impossible Hebr. 11.
est placere Deo. Without faith, it is not possible to please GOD. And hereof
it came, that is written Ad Cain enim and munera eius Deus non respexit. God
had Genes. 4.
no regard to Caine and his oblations. For even his very oblations which he
offered, were sin in the sight of God, according to the words of Saint
Paul. Quicquid ex Romans 14.
side non est, peccatum est. Whatsoever is not of faith, the same is sin. How
can it be then, but that the murder of his brother must be sin, as it was the
execution of his malicious purpose: but as it is the performance of Gods
purpose, it can not be but good. The like is to be said of the murder y^ the
sons of Sinacharib committed upon their own father, and the rebellion of
Absalom, 4. Reg. 19. 2. Reg. 16.
the whoredom of the same, the theft of the Sabines, and whatsoever
wickedness we read of. For God had said before, that he would slay
Sinacharib with the sword, and that the sword should not depart from David's
house. And Job said: The Lord has taken away. 2. Reg. 12. Job. 1.
In that Cerberus therefore, has taken upon him to write thus maliciouslye
against me and others that teach the true doctrine of Gods everlasting
predestination: he is not by our doctrine justified from sin therein,
although in the purpose of God the same be good (for it is the stirring up of
me and others, to look more diligently to the teaching of that doctrine, in
such sort that the weak Christians be not offended, neither the enemies
occasioned to blaspheme) but when Cerberus and we shall stand before the
judgment seat of Christ together: then shall it appear with what mind we
have both written. For his malice toward Crowley can not then be covered.

And where as Cerberus would know, where it is written that all truth should
not be plainly spoken: let him ask Saint Paul why he would first feed his
hearers with milk, and afterward with stronger meat. And let him ask our
Savior Christ, why he said that old bottles could not hold new Wine, and
that therefore men use to put new Wine into new vessels that both may be
preserved together. And as for his place that he cites out of Sirache, (For
thy life shame not to say the truth) I reser to the Reader to consider and
weigh Eccles. 4.
by the circumstance of the place. Whereby it shall appear how well it makes
for his purpose. Sirach says: For thy life shame not to say the truth, for
there is a shame that brings sin, and there is a sin that brings glory
and favor. Now, how can Cerberus prove by this place that a preacher must
without discretion utter all truth at all times and in all places? It is
manifest that Sirach means to instruct all men, that shame should not stay
us from confessing the truth of our own evil, when we are deprehended
therein: for that shame brings sin. (That is, causes us to lie in hyding
our own faults before committed) but the other shame, that is, to do that
which is not honest, brings glory and favor. Shame therefore says Sirach,
to do evil: but for thy life, shame not to confess the evil that thou have
once done, and art taken withal, or vehemently suspected thereof. But (says
Cerberus) how can any man speak more plainly of this matter, than they
themselves do? For what can be more plainly spoken: than that Gods
Predestination is the cause of Adams fall? And that Caine was predestined to
slay his brother? And that God is both the principal cause and also the Author
of al things, both on the one side and on the other. etc. All this is
sufficiently answered already. But y^ cause, why in our writings we use so
plain words in this matter: is, for that we have not to do with babes that
need milk, but with open enemies, that under color to clear God of
iniquity, go about to take from him the glory of his almighty power, and
liberty, to do what he will do with his own creatures, without check or
controlement: And to ascribe to the power of their own freewil, that glory
that the free mercy of God deserves. We do not this therefore in our common
order of teaching, but being enforced by the malice of such as Cerberus is.


Cerberus. And further, in the same book and the same Article. Yea, I am sure
(says he) that you will grant, that if God do predestinate a man to do
things rashly and without any deliberation: he shall not deliberate at all, but
run headlong upon it, be it good or evil that he does. He makes also an
argument after this sort, saying: Whatsoever God foreseeth and
prededestinateth: must necessarily come to pass (for his prescience and
predestination are infallible) but he foreseeth and predestinateth al things:
Ergo al things must come to pass of necessity. The minor of which Argument is
apparently false. For though God do foresee all things: yet does he not
predestinate all things. For his foresight does extend both to good and
evil: but his predestination is only of things that be good. As the
Scriptures and all ancient writers prove. And here again it is to be noted
also: how plainly they make God the Author of sin. For if this mayor be
true, that God does not only foresee, but also predestinate all things: Yea,
even sin and evil, as the fall of Adam, and the murder of Caine, and the
wickedness of all them that have been most wicked: then may this minor be
truly annexed: That God is the Author of all that he predestinateth. And so
must this conclusion needs follow: that God is the Author of all sin and
evil. The first part, that God: predestinateth all things, or all that he
soreseeth: is a proposition of their own assertion, without any ambiguitie or
doutfull meaning. The second part, that God is the Author of all that he
predestinateth, is mine assertion. Which is so manifest and true, that they
have scarce any manner of color to deny it. For what is it to predestinate any
thing? but first to purpose, decree, and appoint, and ordeine it to be done?
Now, he which first purposes, decrees, appoints, ordeineth, or inue^teth a
thing to be done: is not he the Author of the same? Or is not he rightly to be
called Causa, Origo, Fons: Radix, Principium, Author? The Cause, Original,
Fountain, Root, Beginning or Author of the same? He which first purposes,
decrees, apointeth, and ordeineth an Insurrection or Rebellion to be made
against his Prince: is not he to be apprehended as the very Author of all the
sedition, and worthily and rightly to be judged and called? What man can be so
ignorant: as not to perceive it? For all the world knows, that for none
other cause, one is said to be the Author of any thing, but only, for that
he is either the first inue^tor, or else the first purposer, appointer, and
ordeiner of the same. And also, whosoever is the first inuentor, or else the
first ordeiner of any thing: most properly he is said to be the Author of the
same. Now, mark again the Argument, and see how the conclusion follows.
God predestinateth all things, yea, even sin and evil: And God is the Author
of all that he predestinateth, as has been plainly proved: Ergo, he is the
Author of sin. This must needs follow, if the first proposition be
granted. That God predestinateth or ordeineth al things, or all that he
foreseeth. Wherefore, the old writers, in confutation of the Manicheans,
labored in nothing so much; as to prove, that although God did foresee all
things, both good and evil: yet did he only foresee, and not predestinate
those things which are evil. As by an infinite number of places, out of the
ancient writers, if shortenesse would suffer, I could easily prove. But one
place of Austen, I will rehearse, which does not only resolve clearly this
matter between foresight and for cordinaunce: or between the prescience and
predestination: but also most plainly teaches, all that is to be said of
predestination. Prosper. Ad obiectio. Vince. Rehearsing the words, and
defending the opinion of Austen, where he proves that the Devil can scarcely
be called the Author of sin, by cause it came of man's own will, and asks
by what madness and frensle men do attribute that unto God, which can not be
altogether ascribed unto the Devil. And at the last he concludes with these
words of Austen.

Nihil ergo talium negotiorum Deus praedestinauit vt suret: nec illam anima^
nequiter turpiterque victinam, ad hoc vt taliter viueret praeparauit: sed talem
futuram non ignorauit, and de tali just se iudicaturum esse praesciuit: atque
ita ad praedestinationem eius nihil aliudreserri poiest, nisi quod aut ad
debitam iustitiae retributionem, aut ad indebitam pertinet gratiae largitatem.

Therefore (says he) God has predestined no part of any such doings,
neither the soul, which afterward lived wickedly and filthily, has he
prepared to that end that it should so live: but he was not ignorant that such
a one it would be. And so nothing may be referred to the praedestination of
God: but only that which pertayneth unto the due recompense of his
righteousness, or to the undeserved gift of his grace. These are the words of
Austen. which surely are marvelous full of pith, containing the whole sum of
that which may be said in this matter of Gods predestination, and are therefore
most worthy to be noted, yea, and to be committed to heart, or kept in
perpetual memory. For being thorowely weighed, they do plainly set forth, the
full resolution of all this question.


Crowley. Cerberus is so maliciously bente against Crowley, that he can keep no
order in charging him with that that he has written against Shaxton. For this
(yea, I am sure) wherewith he charge me here, stands in my book more than
eyghte whole leaves after the Argument that he finds such fault with. Yea, it
is part of that which I do infer upon the confession of Shaxton himself,
in his Article that I confute, after I had by many Scriptures proved the minor
proposition of that Argument. But who can hope that Cerberus can with his three
mouths keep order in his barking? Let me (if I can) answer him in order,
unto that wherewith he does so unorderly charge me.

First he says, that I say that I am sure that Shaxton will grant, that if
God do predestinate a man to do things rashly and without any deliberation,
he shall not deliberate at al, but run headlong upon it, be it good or evil
that he does. Now let us see what Cerberus has said to this. He seems to
make a great matter of it: For he begins thus: And further. As though ye
wherewith he will now charge Crowley, is more to be detested than the rest
that is already spoken of. And yet when he has made rehearsal of the words:
he seems by silence to allow them. Wherefore, I will be bold to say to
Cerberus, as I did to Shaxton. I am sure that you will grant. etc.

But as one that unadvisedly had gone about to find fault with words that he
was not able justly to disprove: Cerberus leaves these words, and returns
to an Argument that I wrate well most nine leaves before, and says. He makes
also an Argument after this sort, saying: Whatsoever God foreseeth and
predestinateth, must necessarily come to pass (for his prescie^ce and
predestination are infallible) but he foreseeth and predestinateth al things.
Ergo, all things must come to pass of necessity. Here Cerberus has found
matter to brabble about. The mayor proposition of this Argument he finds no
fault withal. Wherefore I will suppose that he thinks it to be true, that
whatsoever God foreseeth and predestinateth, must necessarily come to pass.
But by Cerberus own confession, God foreseeth and predestinateth all good
things. Ergo, all good things come to pass of necessity. Thus much have we
gotten of Cerberus. So that if it be a Stoicall opinion, to say that al things
come to pass of necessity: yet Cerberus shall not be so clear from it as he
would seem to be.

But my minor proposition must be apparently false. For though God do foresee
al things, yet does he predestinate only those things which are good, as the
scriptures and ancient writers do prove. So that now there remains no more
to be proved by me, but that God predestinateth those things that be evil.
Which thing if I can prove: Cerberus and I are agreed.

Well, If Cerberus would be entreated to believe all that I have written in the
former part of this Apology: then should the controversy betwixt us, sone be
ended. For I have said, that even those things, that are worst in man's doings,
are good in Gods purpose. As the consenting to the persuasion of the Serpent in
the first man: the murder of Abel in Caine, and those wyckednesses that others
have wrought: were in Gods purpose good, although in those that did those
things, they were exceeding evil. For then has Cerberus granted, that God
does predestinate them, and so consequently he has granted that they come to
pass of necessity, as those things that God predestinateth must needs do.
But whether Cerberus will believe that which I have written or no: I will by
Gods help prove that those actions which in man are most wicked, were
predestined by God to be done: And then I trow mine Argument shall conclude
aright, notwithstanding ought that Cerberus shall be able to say to the contrary.

And least we should vary about predestination, as not agreing upon the
definition what it is: I am contented to take that description which Cerberus
him self has made of it. He says, that to predestinate any thing, is first
to purpose, decree, apoynt, or ordeyne it to be done. But God has first
decreed to be done all the evil things as ever were done by men: Ergo, he has
predestined evils. The minor in this argument is proved by that that is
written in the fourth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Conuenerunt enim in
Ciuitate ista, aduersus filium tuum Iesum, quem vnxisti, Herodes and Pontius
Pilatus, cum gentibus and populis Israel: ad faciendum quaecunque manus tua and
consiliu^ tuum decreuerunt fieri. That is to say. In this same City (meaning
Jerusalem) Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Heathen and the people of
Israel, gathered themselves together, against thy child Jesus whom thou have
anointed: to do unto him whatsoever things thy hand and counsel have first
decreed to be done. What those things were, it is manifest in the history of
the Gospels. They called him a Samaritane, they said he had a devil, they
sought to take him in his aunsweres, they went about to stone him to death,
they accused him, they condemned him, and fastened him to a Cross, and then
rayled upon him. What could men do worsse than to use themselves so toward
the son of God? But S. Peter says, that all these things were done according
as the hand and counsel of God had first decreed to be done: Wherefore I think
my minor in my first Argument that Cerberus finds such fault withal, to be
sufficiently proved.

But now Cerberus has made of my minor, a mayor, and framed an Argument for
his purpose, which I must say some thing to, otherwise will Cerberus glory in
his Art.

God does not only foresee, but also predestinate all things, yea, even sin
and evil. etc. But he is Author of all that he predestinateth: Ergo, he is
the Author of sin. The first part (says Cerberus) is their own assertion.
And for my part, I acknowledge it so to be. But not in that meaning that
Cerberus says it. For it is not our hare assertion without proof, but we are
able by plain Scriptures and reasons, to prove that God does both foresee and
predestinate all things, as I have before proved in the confirming of this same
proposition, being the minor in mine Argument. But for more ample proof: the
Reader may consider that which is written in the Psalm 138. where David the
Prophet says thus. Lord, thou Psalm. 138.
have proved me, and have known me. Thou have known my downesitting and my
vprysing. Thou understand my thoughts long since. Thou have searched my path
and my coutch round about, and have foreseen all my ways. For lo, there is
not a word in my mouth: Behold, thou Lord know all things. This is
sufficient for the proof of the first part of this proposition. Which is,
that God foreseeth all things. For the proof of the second part, which is,
that God predestinateth all things: I have cited the words of Peter in the
fourth of the Acts: wherein is affirmed, yt the power and counsel of God did
first apoint those things to be done, which were done to Christ by Herod,
Pilate, the Gentiles, and ye people of the Jews.

Reasons also we have to prove the same, which are these. If God should not
foresee all things, he could not be provident in all things: but it must needs
be granted that he is provident in all things: Ergo, he does foresee all
things. If God did not predestinate all things, then might his providence be
deceived: but his providence cannot be deceived: Ergo, he does predestinate all
things. This may suffice for the proof of our assertion. Now let us see, how
Cerberus annecteth his minor to this mayor, which is this. But God is the
Author of all those things that he predestinateth. And to prove this does
Cerberus make much a do, yea and much more than needs. For we will not
stick to grant him that God is the Author of all that he predestinateth. Well
says Cerberus, then I conclude, that God is the Author of all sin and
evil. I deny that Argument.

It were but folly to reason much with this bawling Curre, about the rules of
Logic: For it seems by his conclusion that he knows no Logic at all.
For if he did, he would not so shamelessely infer a necessary conclusion
upon the granting of pure particulers. For it is a general rule among
Logitians, that A puris particular ribus non necesse est sequi veram
conclusionem. It is not a thing of necessity, that a true conclusion should
follow upon those propositions that be pure particulers. As in this Argument
that Cerberus has made, the mayor and minor are. Again, he concludes more
than is granted in the Antecede^t (which is also contrary to the rules of
Logic) For though it be granted, that God is the Author of all that he
predestinateth: yet is he not the Author, as Cerberus does conclude that he
is: That is to say, the cause, the spring, the fountain, the root, the
beginning and Author of any thing that is not good. For none evil thing can
spring of him that is altogether good and nothing but goodness it self. As I
have said already therefore: so I say again. God is the cause, spring,
fountain, root, beginning and Author of al things that have any being. For he
only has his being of himself: and all other things have their being of him.
And he alone is the worker of al actions: Nam in eo viuimus, mouemur and sumus.
In him we live, move, and have our being. And as these things spring of God the
fountain of goodness, so are they al exceeding Act. 17.
good. And as the actions are wrought by him so are they exceeding good also:
although in themselves they be exceeding evil, as is the Devil and al his
Angels and members, and all those works that are wrought contrary to the
commandment of God. And the words and thoughts that are of the same kind.
As I have sufficiently proved before, by examples taken out of the holy
hystories.

Let Cerberus therefore look upon his Logiek again, and learn to frame a
Syllogismus better. Peradventure being in his mad mood when he wrote this
answer to his friends letter: he had quite forgotten the fourtene moodes of
the three fygures, wherein the Logicians do use to form their Syllogismusses.
To give him occasion therefore, to call himself to remembrance: I will set
down those short memorial Uerses which the teachers of Art use to print in
the minds of their Scholars, to the end that they should not in disputatio^s be
abused by such as Cerberus is, which use to frame Arguments, without either
figure or mood. The Uerses are these.

Barbara, Celarent, Primae, Darij, Ferioque.
Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco, secundae.
Tertia grande sonans, recitat Darapti Felapton
Adiungens Disamis, Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison.
Now, if Cerberus be acquainsed with these Uerses: Let him show in which of
these fygures and moodes his Syllogismus is formed. And if he find it in none
of the^: then let him desire some more skillful than himself, to take this
matter in hand. For his Art will not serve him to go through withal, so
long as he medleth with them that know what Art is.

I know that the matter contained in Cerberus Syllogism, may be brought into
the form of a Syllogism in the first figure, and the third mood called
Darij. After this manner. Whosoever does predestinate any thing, is the Author
thereof. But God does predestinate sin. Ergo, he is the Author thereof. Thus
far I have helped Cerberus to frame his Argument. But least Cerberus should
think that I have framed against my self such an Argument as I am not able to
salute: I will show the fallace of it. First in the mayor, the word Author is
doubtful. For it may be understood either of him that predestinateth or
foreappointeth a thing to be done, or of him that is the doer of the same
thing. And therefore in reasoning it must be explaned and made void of all
amphibologie and doubt. For this is a rule in Logic, that the terms which
are used in reasoning, must be plain and void of all doubtfulnesse. If we will
therefore make a good mayor in this Argument, we must say, that whosoever does
predestinate or foreappoint a thing to de done, is so the Author of it, that
the act or deed done, must be ascribed to him, in as much as it is a deed or
an act done. And then may we add this minor, but God has predestined and
foreappointed the act or deed that is done by the sinner: Ergo, so far
forth as it is an act or a deed, God is the Author of it. Here is not God
charged with the sin that man commits, for that springs of ma^s choice,
which being corrupted and made bond to sin by the sin that the first man
first committed, can not of it self choose to do any thing in such sort, that
the same shall not be sin. For man's wisdom and choice, which S. Paul
calls the wisdom of the flesh, neither is, nor Romans 8.
can be subject to the law of God. And so all that man thinks, speaks or
does in his own wisdom and choice, is against the law and commandment of
God, and so sin by the common desinition of sin, as is mentioned before.

And to make this matter more plain, let us take one example or two, whereof
in the holy Histories and books of the Prophets, we have many, and let us
see how God is the Author of the act or deed, and not of the sin that is in
the act. First in the.xix. Chapter of the fourth book 4. Reg. 19.
of ye Kings, we read, that when Sinacharib had blasphemed God, and Ezechias
the King had made his complaint and prayers to God: the Prophet Esaias was
commanded to say thus unto the King. Be not afraid of the words wherewith ye
have heard the King of the Assirians servants blaspheming me. Behold, I will
change his mind, and he shall hear a tidings, and shall return into his
own country, and I will overthrow him with the sword in his own land. And in
the end of yt same Chapter, the History says thus. And when he was
worshipping in the Temple of Nesroch his God: Adramelech and Saraser his own
sons, slew him with the sword. Here it is manifest, that God according to his
promise made to Ezechias, has killed Sinacharib: but yet by yt sword of his
own sons. The act in this murder is Gods, and so it is exceeding good, for
it is the performance of Gods promise, and the execution of just judgment upon
the wicked blasphemer. But the sin of the act, was theyrs whose hands were
instruments to murder their father. For they minded nothing less than to
fulfill Gods promise, or to execute his judgment upon the blasphemer.

The same example we read in the.x. chapter of Esaias the Prophet, set forth yet
more plainly after this sort. Esaias. 10.
Come Assure, thou rod of my fury, and the staff of my wrath, amongst these
men. etc. And a little after. But he will not think so, and his heart will not
be so persuaded: but his purpose will be to destroy, and to bring many Nations
to naught. etc. Here we see, how God used Sinacharib as his rod in chastising
the Nations: and yet did he sin in those actions that God wrought by him. And
we see also how God used his sons, in destroying him, and yet they sinned in
murdering their Father. So is God the Author of the act, which was good in
him, and they Authors of the sin of the act, which was evil in them.

Another example we have written in the.xii. chapter of the second book of the
Kings, where the Prophet Nathan 2. Reg. 12.
says thus to King David. Thus says the Lord. Behold, I will stir up evil
against thee in thine own house, and I will take from thee thy wives, even
before thy face, and will give them to thy neighbor, and he shall lie with
them in the open sunnelight. Thou haste done this deed in secret: but I will
do this that I have spoken of, even in the sight of all Israel, and in the
open sunnelight. The fulfilling of this is written in the.xvj. Chapter of the
same book. The act whereof wrought by Absolome, was in God, who used Absolome
as his instrument, the just punishment that David's sin, in abusing Uries
wife, had deserved. But the same in Absolome, was abominable and incestuous
whoredom, whereby Absolome minded to make all Israel think, that he abhorred
his father, and that he would utterly root him out.

Let this suffice for the making plain of that which I have said, concerning
that which I have said, touching the act in God, and sin of the wicked act
in man.

Thus much for the matter of Cerberus Argument reduced into form.

Now let us see what may be said to that one place, that instead of so many,
Cerberus cites out of S. Austen. Which does not only resolve clearly this
matter between foresight and predestination, but also most plainly teach all
that is to be said of Predestination.

And first, let us set down all the words of S. Austen, even as they stand in
the place whereout Prosper does cite them. They are written in the eleauenth of
those Articles, which are falsely imposed upon S. Austen. The words of the
Article are these. Quod quando paires incestant Articulo. 11. falls. Aug. imp
silias, and matres silij, vel quando serui Dominos occidu^t, ideo fiat, quia
Deus praedestinauit, vt ita sicret. That when the fathers do abuse their own
daughters, and sons their own mothers, and servants murder their own
masters, the same is done, because God has predestined that it should be so
done. To this Article does S. Austen answer thus. Si Diabolo obijceretur,
quod talium facinorum ipse Author, ipse esset inuentor: puto quod aliqua ratione
hac se posset exo(...)rare inuidia, and talium scelerum patratorem, de ipsoru^
voluntate vinceret: quia, etsi delectatus sit surore peccantium, proharet tamen
se non intulisse vim criminum. Qua ergo insipientia, quaue dementia desinitur,
ad Dei referrendum esse consiliu^, quod nec Diabolo in toto ascribi potest: qui
in peccantium flagitijs, illecebrarum adiutor, non voluntatum credendus est
esse generator? Nihil ergo talium negotiorum, Deus praedestinauit vt fieret,
nec illam animam, turpiter, nequiterque victuram ad hoc vt taliter vi(...)eret
praeparauit, sed talem futuram non ignorauit and de tali se just iudicaturum
esse praesciuit. Atque ita ad predestinationem eius nihil amplius referri
potest, nisi quod ad debitam iustitiae retributionem, aut ad indebitam pertinet
gratiae largitate^. That is to say. If i^ should be laid to the Devils charge,
that he were the Author or inuentor of such wicked deeds: I suppose he might
by some reason unburden himself of this envy, and to prove that the committer
of such wickednesses, comes of the will of those men that charge him withal.
For although he be delited with the outrage of them that sin: yet might he
prove that he had not enforced them to commit the faults. By what folly, or
what madness therefore, is it agreed, that that thing should be referred to
the decree of God, which may n(...) be altogether ascribed to the Devil, which
may be thought to be an helper forward of the prouocations, in the wicked
acts of them that sin, but not the begetter of their wills. God therefore
has not predestined any such things to be done, neither has he prepared
that soul to live filthily and wickedly, of purpose that it should so live:
but he was not ignorant that it would prove such a one, and he knew before
hand, that he him self should execute just judgment upon such a one. And so,
nothing may be referred to the predestinatio of God, more than that, which
appertains to the due reward of justice, or to the undeserved gift of grace
or mercy.

These words (says Cerberus) being thoroughly weighed: do plainly set forth,
the full resolution of this question. It is very true, they do so. And
therefore, I beseech thee good Reader, weigh them well, that thou may by them
be resolved in this matter of Gods predestination. And that thou may so be,
thou nedest no more but to weigh the words of Austens conclusion, wherein he
says, that there can no more be referred to Gods predestination, but that only
which does appertain either to the due reward of justice, or else to the
undeserved gift of mercy.

When Sinacharibs sons slew their own father: was not the act in this
murder yt due reward of justice, for that he had blasphemed God? And had not
God said before, that he would slay him with the sword for that blasphemy? Why
may we not then by S. Austens words, refer this deed to Gods
predestination: When Absalom abused his fathers wives, was not the act of that
incestious whoredom, the due reward of justice, for that David had abused the
wife of his servant Urias? And had not God said before, that he would punish it
so? Why should not the act therefore, in that incest, be referred to Gods
predestination, even by these words that Cerberus cites for his purpose. In
like manner may we say of all other actions, which in the men that do the^ are
wicked, although we know not what sins God does punish by them, whereby the
same deeds in him are exceeding good and just.

If Cerberus would, he might have seen some other places of S. Austen, wherein
this matter is made more plain, than the bare words seem to make it here.
First in his.xviij. book, De Ciuitate Dei. He says thus. Elegit discipulos,
quos and Apostolos nominauit, humiliter natos, inhonoratos, August. de Ciuit.
Dei. 18. Cap. 49.
illitteratos: vt quicquid magnum essent and facerent, ipse in eis esset and
faceret. Habuit inter cos vnum, quo malo vtens been, and suae passionis
dispositum impleret, and Ecclesiae suae tollerandorum malorum praeberet
exemplum. That is to say. He (that is to say Christ) did choose Disciples, whom
he called also Apostles, men borne of poor parents, not called to honor,
unlearned: that he might be and do in them, what so ever they should be, or do.
Among these he had one that was naught, that by using well that evil and
naughty one, he might both fulfill the order of his own passion, and also
give unto his Church, an example how to bear and suffer those that be wicked.

Again, in his first Sermon upon the first part of the. 34. Psalm: S. Austen
says thus: Ille videbat traditorem suum, and elegit illum magis adopus
necessarium, illius August. in Psalm. 34.
malo magnu^ bonum operatus est. Et tamen inter duodecem electus est, ne ipse
duodenarius ta^ exiguus numerus esset sine malo: hoc ad exemplu^ nostrae
patientiae, quoniam necesse erat vt inter malos vineremus. That is to say: He
(that is Christ) did see and know him that should betraie him, and he did the
rather choose him as one necessary for that business, and by the evil of
that traitor he did work a great good work. And yet was the traitor chosen
among the twelve, lest that little number of.xij. should be without a naughty
one: this was done for an example of our patience, because of necessity we
must live among such as he evil. Again in the. 59. tract. upon John he says.
Quod ergo dico, August. in John. tract. 59.
inquit, beati critis, si feceritis ea, non de oi^bus vobis dico. Est inter vos
qui non erit beatus, neque faciet ea, and ego scio quos elegerim: quos? nisi
cos qui beati erunt faciendo quae praecepit, ac facienda monstrauit, qui
efficere beatos potest? Non est igitur traditor Judas electus? Quid est ergo
quod alio loco dicit? Nonne ego vos duodecem elegi, and vnus ex v^bis Diabolus
est? An and ipse ad aliquid electus est, ad quod vtique erat necessarius? Non
autem ad beatitudinem, de qua modo ait, Beati critis si feceritis ea. Hoc non
de omnibus di cit, scit enim quos ad societ atem beatitudinis huius elegerit.
Non est exeis iste, qui panem illius sic edebat, vt super eu^ leuaret
calcancum. etc.

That is to say: Where as I say therefore (says Christ) ye shall be happy, if he
shall do those things: I do not speak those words of you al. There is one
amongst you y^ shall not be happy, neither shall he do those things. And I do
know who^ I have chosen. Who^ has he chosen? None but those, that shall be
blessed in doing those things, that he which is able to make them blessed has
commanded and showed y^ they ought to be done. Is not y^ traitor Judas elected
then? What means that then, that Christ says in another place? Have not I
chosen you.xij. and one of you is a Devil? Was he also elected to some thing,
whereunto even he was necessary? Truly, he was not elected to the
blessedness, whereof Christ spoke before, when he said: ye shall be happy if
ye do those things. He speaks not this of all: for he knows whom he has
chosen to the fellowship of this blessedness. This fellow, which did so eat
Christ's bread, that he did lift up his heel against him, is none of that
fellowship. etc.

Again, the same Saint Austen in the. 62. treatise August. in Job. tract. 62.
upon John says thus. Nisi ergo se traderet Christus, nemo traderet, Christum.
Quid habet Judas nisi peccatum? Neque enim in tradendo Christo salutem nostram
cogitauit, propter quam traditus est Christus: sed cogitauit pecuniae lucrum,
and inuenit animae detrimentum. Accepit mercedem quam voluit: sed nolenti est
data quam neluit. Tradidit Judas Christum: tradidit Christus scipsum. Ille
agebat negotium suae venditionis: iste nostrae rede^ptionis. Quod facis facito
citius, non quia tu potes, sed quia hoc vult qui omnia potest. That is say.
Except therefore Christ would deliver up himself: no man could betraie him.
What was there in Judas more than sin? For in betraying Christ he minded not
to work our salvation, for which Christ was betrayed: but his mind was upon
the gain of money, and he found the loss of his own soul. He received the
reward that he desired: but that reward which he was not willing to have, was
given unto him being unwilling to have it. Judas did betraie Christ: and Christ
did deliver up himself. The one applied his merchandise, the other, our
redemption. That thou do, do quickly (said Christ) not because thou art
able to do it: but because he that is able to do all things, is willing it
should be so.

Again, in the hundredth and.vij. treatise upon John, he says thus: Quos
dedisti mihi custodiui, and nemo ex hijs perijt, August. in John. tract. 107
nisi filius perditionis, vt Scriptura impleatur. Filius perditionis dictus est
proditor Christi, perditioni praedestinatus, secundum Scripturam, quae de illo
in Psalmo Centesimo octauo maxim prophetatur. That is to say: I have kept
those that thou have given unto me, and none of them is perished, save only the
child of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. He that betrayed
Christ is called the child of perdition, because he was predestined to
destruction, according to the Scripture, which in the Psalm. 108. chieflye is
prophesied of him.

Assaine in his questions upon Exodus, and the. 18. question. S. Austen says
thus. Assidue Deus dicit, Indurabo August. lib. 2 Quest. sup. Ex. Questione. 18.
cor Pharaonis: and velut causam insert, cur hoc faciat, and implebo signa mea
and portenta mea in Aegypto: tanquam necessaria suerit obduratio Pharaonis, vt
signa Dei multiplicarentur vel implere^tur in Aegypto. Vtitur ergo Deus been
cordibus malis, ad id quod vult ostendere bonis, vel quod facturus est bonis.
That is to say: God does oftentimes say, I will harden Pharaos heart: and he
does as it were bring in a cause why he would do it, saying: And I will
fulfill my signs and wonders in Egypt: as though the hardening of Pharao
should be necessary to the multiplying and fulfilling of Gods wonders in
Egypt. God therefore, does use well those hearts that be evil, for the
fulfilling of that thing that he is willing to show to them that are good, or
of that which he minds to do for them.

If Cerberus had had eyes to see: he might as well have seen these places of
Austen, as that one place which he thinks so sufficient for the declaration
of the whole matter. And there is not one of these places, that is not of
equal authority with that one place of his. Yea, and the first of these
places is of greater authority, as may appear to them that will read the
books of S. Austens Retractations.

In these places S. Auste^ says, that Christ chose to be his disciples, such
men as were born of poor parentage, not called to honor, and unlearned: that
he migh the and do in them, whatsoever they should be, or do. The actions
therefore, that were done by them, were his actions, and were in him exceeding
good, although the same were in some of the^ exceeding evil. This thing is
made more plain in the other places cited out of S. Austen. First he says:
Christ know him that should betraie him, and he chose him so much the rather,
as one necessary for his business. And again he says, speaking of Judas, was
not he also elected to some thing whereunto he was necessary? And again.
Except Christ would have delivered up himself: no man could have betrayed him.
What was there in Judas but sin? As who should say, the act was Christ's,
but the sin in the act was Iudasses. Yea, he says further: That which thou
do, do quickly. Not because thou art able to do it: but because he that is
able to do all things will have it so done. And last of all he says of Judas,
that he was called the child of perdition, because he was predestined to
destruction.

I suppose if Cerberus had seen and well weighed these places of Austen: he
would not have triumphed so greatly in that one place of his. Neither would he
have derided the judgment of those that ascribing the act unto God, do justly
ascribe the sin of the same act unto sinful man, from whose free choice
consenting unto evil, the sin of the act does spring, and not from God from
whom nothing can come that is not exceeding good (as it comes from him.) But
let us now see how this hell hound plays with his own tail.


Cerberus. But to return again unto those, that contrary to the Scripture,
and all ancient writers: do teach, that God does not only foresee, but also
predestinate both good and evil, as well the murder of Caine, as the holiness
of Abell: and thereby make God plainly the Author of sin. When they perceive
the outrageous blasphemy, to be overmuch apparent and manifest: then do they
sometimes closely roll it up in a riddle again. Which yet for the dark
speech thereof, may serve at the least, to blind the eyes of some. As where
(among many other ways) they plainly make God the Author of sin is, saying
that God is not only the principal cause, but also the Author of al things
without exception, both on the one side and on the other. If they be then urged
with the consequence, that God is the Author of sin: they will answer,
that in all abomination, God is the Author of the fact, but not of the crime,
as of the fact, deed or work of adultery, Sodometrie, murder and Idolatry,
God is the Author say they, but not of the fault or crime. This Enigma have I
heard some men use, and it is also written in a book, entitled, a brief
treatise of election and reprobation, lately set forth and printed in the
English tongue, where he says thus. Though we be compelled to say, that God is
the Author of the fact: yet we must answer, but not of the crime.

Areade, areade, what is that? God is the Author of the very fact and deed of
adultery, theft, murder, and treason: and yet he is not the Author of sin.
And why? The subtilitie of the Riddle is this. That sin is nothing. The
thief is not hanged for the deed that he has committed (for God is the
Author thereof) but he is hanged for the sin, and that is for nothing. For
when they say, God is the Author of all things, then nothing is excepted. But
sin is nothing, and therefore he is not the Author of sin. The thief is
hanged for nothing. The murderer is put to death for nothing. The traitor
loses his head for nothing. The wicked are punished in everlasting fire for
nothing. A marvelous sophistication. A strange Paradox, and cautelous riddle.
But to be short, though many ways, this subtlety might be answered: I will take
only the definition of sin, as I find it written in the same book, where
he says very truly.

The nature of sin, is defined by the authority of Scripture, to be a
thought, word or deed, contrary to the will of God.

Now, because they say, that God is the Author of all evil deeds, though not
of the crimes: let us pase over the evil thought, and evil words, and speak
only of the deed it self, which he himself desineth to be sin, and
contrary to Gods will. If God then be Author of the fact or deed, which deed
is sin, and contrary to Gods will: how can he then say, that God is the
Author of the fact, but not of the fault, soyng he himself sets forth, not
only a thought or a word, but also a deed to be sin? And if God be the
Author of that same deed, which deed is sin: is it not a thing most plain,
that God is the Author of sin?


Crowley. Mark gentle Reader, I pray thee, how this Puppie plays with his
own tail. He imagines that all, eue^ as many as do hold, that God does not
only foresee, but also predestinate al things both good and evil: do therein
hold that God is the Author of all sin and abominable wickedness. The
contrary whereof is in the former part of this Apology, sufficiently proved.
But he has heard, he says, yea and seen in an English book, an Enigma, a
marvelous sophistication, a strange Paradox, and a cautelous Riddle, which is
this. Though we be compelled to say, that God is the Author of the fact: yet
we must answer, but not of the crime.

Areade, areade, what is that? says Cerberus. The Curre can not smell how the
act may be Gods, and the sin that is in the act: his that is the instrument
in the working of the act.

But the subtlety of this Riddle, says he, is this. That sin is nothing.
And then the thief is hanged for nothing, the murderer is put to death for
nothing, the traitor loses his head for nothing, and the wicked are punished
in everlasting fire for nothing. But this is some thing. That Cerberus says
that there is some thing whereof God is not the Author. And so it follows
upon his words, that either there is another being besides God, whereof those
things that God is not the Author of, have their being: or else that those
things have their being of themselves, and are therein equal with God, whose
greatest honor is, in that he is and has his being of himself. But Cerberus
must be borne withal, whatsoever be says. For if he be contraried: all hell
shall ring of his bauling. We may not conclude upon his words as he does upon
ours. But for this once I will be bold to say, that if God be not the
principal cause and Author of al things without exception: then there be some
things, whereof God is not the principal cause and Author. And so must it
needs follow, whether Cerberus will or no, that the words in the beginning of
S. John's Gospel are not true, Omnia per ipsum facta sunt, and sine ipso factu^
est nihil quod factum est. By him Iohannis. (...).
were all things made, and nothing that was made, was made without him. But we
know this saying to be true. Wherefore we are bold to conclude, contrary to
the judgment of Cerberus: that God is not only the principal cause, but also
the Author and maker of all things. And because Cerberus says that we hold a
Paradox contrary to all the ancient writers: let him read that which S. Austen
writes in the. 26. Chapter of his August. lib. Retrac. cap. 26
first book of Retractations. His words be these. Viri(...) Deus Author mali
non sic? vbi videndum est, ne mae intelligatur quod dixi. Mali Author non est,
quia omnium qua sunt, Author est, quia in quantum sunt, in tantum bona sunt. Et
ne hine putetur, non abillo esse poenam malorum, quae vtique malum est ijs qui
puniuntur. Sed hoc ita dixi, quemadmedu^ dictum est. Deus mortem non fecit. Cum
alibi scriptum sit. Mors and vita a Domino Deo est. Malorum ergo poena quae a
Deo est, mala est quidem malis, Sapient. 1. Eccles. 11.
sed in bonis Dei operibus est, quoniam iustum est vt mali puniantur, and
vtique bonum est, omne quod iustu^ est. That is to say: Whether God be not the
Author of the thing that is evil? where men must take heed, that they do not
misco^ster that which I have said, that is: That God is not y^ Author of that
which is evil, for he is Author of all those things that have any being, for
in as much as they be, they be good. Also men must take heed, that hereby they
take not occasion to think, that the punishment of the wicked comes not of
God: which punishment, is also evil unto them that be punished. But I spoke
this, even as it is said, that God made not death. Whereas in another place it
is written. Death and life are of the Lord God. The punishment therefore of the
wicked, which comes of God, is evil unto them that be evil. But yet it is
among the good works of God. For it is right that the wicked be punished, and
every thing that is right, is good.

I suppose that when Cerberus has read and well weighed these words of S.
Austen: he will not say that we hold a Paradox, unless he mind to match S.
Auste^ with us. Which if he shall do, he shall shake his own building very
sore. For it stands well most altogether upon S. Austens ground, although
without Saint Austens consent.

But Cerberus will look, that some thing should be said to the answer that
he makes to our subtle sophisticatio^. For he seems to himself to have
said so much that will we nill we, it must be confessed that God being the
Author of the thing that is evil, he is also the Author of the evil and
sin that is in the thing.

Cerberus saw many ways, whereby the subtlety of our Riddle might be
answered: but he would use only the definition of sin, which he found
written in the same English book that our Enigma is written in. Oh what a
valiant champion is this, he will use none of his own weapons: he will be able
to wound us, yea utterly to beat us down and conquer us with our own
weapons. Uerie truly has that English writer said (says Cerberus) that the
nature of sin, is defined by y^ authority of Scripture, to be a thought,
word or deed contrary to the will of God. And because he will not seem to
take too much vauntage: he passes over the thoughts and words, and takes only
the deeds done against the will of God. And with them he will beat us down
flat to the ground.

The reason that he uses, is this. If God be the Author of that deed that is
sin and contrary to the will of God, how can he say that God is the Author
of the fact and not of the fault? Here is a substantial answer. Because
Cerberus can not tell how it should be so: therefore it is not so, neither may
any man say it is so. And yet I have proved it to be so, both by the example of
Sinacharibs death and other. As Cerberus may see, if he will, in the former
part of this Apology.


Cerberus. And all this their travel is to prove, that the ordinance and
predestination of God, does so carry men even headlong, unto all actions,
though they be never so mischievous: that of necessity they must needs and can
not choose but commit the same. As though Gods predestination were like a
tempest of wind, so blowing in the sails of a man's heart, that by it he is
carried headlong to all things, whatsoever he does, according to the saying of
the Poet, Iam magis atque magis, praeceps agit omnia Fatum. Now, more and more
destiny hurleth al things headlong. But surely, this Stoicall necessity,
makes such a confusion of all things: that let them color up the matter, with
as much cunning as they can, and qualify it with as fair words as may be:
yet shall there never the state of a common wealth in England stand, if this
persuasion may once take root among the people, beside that it is utterly
repugnant to the holy Scripture, and against all the ancient writers, as
shall be hereafter briefly proved.


Crowley. Now Cerberus is bold to affirm, that all that we do, is nothing
else but to prove, that Gods ordinance and predestination does carry headlong
all men into all actions, be they never so mischievous, as a tempest carries
all before it. etc. Surely Cerberus is too bold herein: and does much mistake
the purpose of our travail. If he would, he might see (except ye smoke of Hell
have marred his sight) that our purpose i^, to prove that God in wisdom does
know, foresee and order all things. And that nothing can be done by any
creature otherwise than as by his instruments, which he does use in wisdom,
mercy, and justice, and that so all actions are his, as the chief worker in
all things. And that the same actions, as they are wrought by him, are
exceeding good: although in the creatures that God uses for his instruments,
some of them be exceeding evil. But Cerberus says, we do maintain Stoicall
Fatum or destiny. And that if this persuasion may once take place in the
people: there shall never state of a Commonwelth stand in England. Besides
that, it is contrary to the holy Scripture, and against all the ancient
writers, as he will briefly prove. Well good Reader. Mark I pray thee, how
Cerberus shall prove that he promises to prove: and how he shall be answered
again. And then doubt not but thou shall see how well that blind Curre
stands in his own conceyte, and thinks himself to have a clear sight.


Cerberus. And where they deny this doctrine of theirs to be the Stoicall
opinion, because the Stoikes (say they) feigned, that nature, with such order of
cause as she has tied together, does bring all things to pass by necessity.
But they affirm, that God by his eternal predestination, foreordinance, and
providence, brings all things to pass by like necessity. Thus do the best
learned of them make the difference. But a plain dilusion it is, to blind the
eyes of men withal. For (as Priscianus says) Fatum, (which we call destiny)
is derived of the particple Fatus, which is as much to say, as spoken. Because
it is nothing else (says he) but that which is spoken or appointed of God. As
if a man should say, it must needs be so, for God has spoken the word.
Eusebius also citing the definition of Chrisippus, says, that Fatum is nothing
else but a certain decree, ordinance or determination of God. Which thing (to
make no more rehearsal of many men's sayings) Augustine plainly declared in
his book, De Ciuitate Dei. Lib. 5. Cap. 1. Thus says he is it proved, that
they did call the will of the high God, Fatum. Gods will says Austen, they
called Fatum, or destiny. It is manifest therefore that the Stoikes did not
imagine, that nature by an order of causes brought all things to pass by
necessity. But rather that God, foreordeining and appointing in order all
causes in nature or otherwise: brought all things to pass by necessity. Which
thing together with the order of causes, Tullie speaks of plainly, saying:
Fati necessitas. etc. The necessity of destiny (says Tullie) is that, which
of God is ordained and appointed that it come to pass by an everlasting order
of causes.


Crowley. The Stoikes and we (as Cerberus says) do differ only in this. That
they affirm al things to come to pass by ye necessity of destiny: and we,
by ye necessitio of Gods eternal predestination, foreordinance, and providence.
And this is the difference that the best learned amongst us do make. Who these
best learned be, Cerberus does not tell us. But this I am sure, that none
amongst us that is learned, will say that there is none other difference
between the Stoicall opinion and ours, tha^ that which Cerberus has set down.
For the Stoikes held, that the wills of men are not under the necessity of
their Fatum or destiny, because they could not see how it should so be, and
yet be free also, as it may well appear by that that S. Auste^ writes in
the.x. Chapter of his fifth book. De Ciuitate Dei. where his words are these.
Vnde, nec illa necessitas formidandaest, August. De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 5. Cap. 10.
quam fermidando Stoici laborauerunt: causas rerum ita distinguere, vt quasdam
subtraberent necessitati quasdam subderent: atque in his quaes esse sub
necessitate noluerunt, posuerunt etia^ nostras voluntates, ne videlicet non
essent liberae, si subderentur necessitati. etc. That is to say. Wherefore,
that necessity is not to be feared, the fear whereof caused the Stoikes so to
divide the causes of things, that they pulled away some things from necessity,
and thrust some things under it: and amongst those things that they would not
suffer to be under necessity, they have placed our wills, lest they should
not be free, if they should be subject to necessity. etc. But we hold, that al
things, our wills and altogether, are subject to Gods providence: Ergo, there
is more difference between the Stoikes and us, than Cerberus says that there
is. And it is no dilusion at all that we use in yt we refuse to call it Fatum or
destiny: although we know that Priscianus and Tullie, Eusebius, Chrisippus and
other, do in their sorts speak of Fatum, after such sort, that to the
negligent Reader there may seem small difference between them and us, in the
matter of Gods eternal and everlasting providence and predestination. For we
follow herein S. Austen, whose sentence Cerberus would feign frame against us.
But I pray thee gentle Reader, mark well the words of S. Austen, even in the
same book, out of which Cerberus cites matter against us. Yea and in the
self same Chapter, which is the first of the fifth book: where the words that
he fathereth upon S. Austen, are not found. But these words are found there.
Prorsus diuina prouidentia, regna constituuntur humana. Quaesi propterea
quisquam fato tribuit, quia ipsam Dei voluntatem vel potestatem sati nomine
appellat, sententiam teneat, lingua^ corrigat. Cur enim non hoc primum decit,
quod postea dicturus est, cum ab illo quisqua^ quaesierit, quid dixerit Fatum?
Nam id homines quando audiunt, vsitata loquendi consuetudine, non intelligunt
nisi vim positionis syderum, qualis est quando quis nascitur, sieve concipitur:
quod aliqui alienant a Dei voluntate, aliqui ex illa etiam hoc pendere
confirmant. That is to say. The Kingdoms of this world, are altogether
ordained by the providence of God. Which if any man have given unto destiny,
because he does call the will or power of God it self, by the name of
destiny: let the same continue in his opinion, but let him reform his tongue.
For why does he not at the first say that, which afterward he will say, when
any man shall ask him what he does call destiny? For when men do hear that
thing: they do not by the common manner of speech understand any other thing,
than the force of the position of the stars, as the same is when any is borne
or conceived: which some men do separate from the will of God, and some do
prove that the one does hang upon the other.

In these words S. Austen does plainly affirm, that even Kingdoms of this
world are appointed by Gods providence: and yet he denies that the same should
be said to be appointed by destiny. Wherefore in affirming the one, and
denying the other, we do but as S. Austen does.

How aptly Tullie is cited for the purpose of Cerberus: shall plainly appear in
mine answer to that which here follows.


Cerberus. The same order of causes also, is not forgotten of our me^, that in all points their doctrine might agree with the Stoicall doctrine. As in an
English book, translated out of French, lately set forth in print, and
entitled, a brief declaration of the table of predestination, where he says.
Seeing God has appointed the end: it is necessary also, that he should appoint
the causes which lead unto the same end. As if he should say. Like as God
has appointed some man to be hanged: so has he appointed him also to steal,
as a cause leading unto the same end whereunto he has appointed him. Or else,
it was his destiny to be hanged: Ergo, it was his destiny to steal. Or thus
(which is all one) he was appointed by Gods predestination to be hanged: Ergo,
he was appointed by Gods predestination to steal. For seeing God has appointed
the end (says he) it is necessary also, that he should appoint the causes
that lead unto the same end. As for ensaple. If this be true, which they say,
that God does predestinate all things, or that God does both appoint the end of
all things, and also the causes which lead unto the same end: then does it
follow and may truly be said, that Marten Swarth with his men, was appointed
and predestinate of God to be slain at the battle of Stoke. And further, it
follows, as God appointed Mart and his fellows to this end: so was sir
Richard Symo^ the Priest, appointed and predestinate of God, to pour in the
pestilent poison of privy conspiracy, and traitorous mischief of vain
glory into the heart of La^bert his scholar, as a cause leading to the same
end. Item that the said Lambert, was appointed and predestinate of God, to
consent and agree unto the pestiferous persuasion of his master Sir Richard, in
the pride of Lucifer, to aspire unto the high type of honor, in deposing (if it
possible were) the right and most noble heir of England, and eleuating himself
like a traiterous villain, into the royal throne of the same, and that thus
he was appointed of God to do, as another cause leading unto the same end
which God ordained. Item, that the Irysh men were appointed of God to be
Rebellious traitors against their Sovereign Lord the King of England, and to
maintain the false and filthy quarrel of the said Lambert, as another cause
leading to the same end. Item that the Lady Margret sister unto King Edward
the fourth, was appointed and predestined of God, to be a traytouresse to
England, and to employ all her wit, sorce and power, to the utter destruction
of her natural country, as another cause leading unto the same end. Item that
the said Lady Margret was appointed of God to conduct and hire Marten Swarth
and his men, to invade the Realm of England, as another cause leading to the
same end. Item that the said Marten Swarth, the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord
Louell, the Lord Gerarde, and diverse other Captains of the Rebels, were
appointed or predestined of God, to be of such valiant courage, in
maintayning the false quarrel of traiterous Lambert, that they were slain: on
the other side, many a true English man's blood, at the battle of Stoke, which
was the end of this woeful Tragedy, and by this, their manifest form of
doctrine, was altogether and every part, appointed and ordained of God, both
the end and also the causes above rehearsed, and other innumerable, which did
lead unto the same end.


Crowley. Here are many words and little matter. Great Items and small sums.
A great deal of descant and no good plain song. Seeing God has predestined
the end: it is necessary also that he should appoint the causes which lead
unto the same end, says an English book entitled a declaration of the table
of Predestination. And what has Cerberus said here, to disprove this
consequence? So far as I am able to judge: we may grant him all that he has
said: and yet affirm still, that if God have appointed the end: he has also
appointed the causes that lead to the same end. But I will understand
Cerberus, as I suppose he means: that is, that God does neither appoint the
end, nor causes that lead thereunto. If this be not his meaning: then has he
meant nothing, but to make simple men suppose that he is able to say much. And
see, gentle Reader, how well he agrees with S. Austen, whose authority he
would feign use, both in stead of a sword and buckler. In the eight chapter
of his fifth book. De Ciuitate Dei. S. Austen says thus. Qui vere non astrorum
constitutionem, sicut est eum quidque concipitur, vel nascitur, vel incoatur,
sed omnium connexionem seriemque, causaru^, qua fit, omne quod fit, Fati nomine
appellant: non multum cum cis de verbi controuersia laborandum atque certandum
est: quandoquidem ipsum causarum ordinem, and quandam connexionem, Dei summi
tribuunt voluntati and potestati. Qui optime and veracissime creditur, and
cuncta scire antequam siant, and nihil inordinatum relinquere: a quo sunt omnes
potestates, quamuis ab illo non sint omniu^ voluntates. That is to say. As for
those men, which do call by the name of destiny, not the constitution or order
of the celestial signs, as y^ same is at the conception, birth, or beginning
of any thing, but the knitting together and order of all causes, whereby every
thing that is done, is brought to pass: we need not much to labor and
contend with them about the controversy of that word: because they do
attribute to y^ will and power of God, that order and certain knitting together
of causes, which is very well and truly thought to know all things before
they come to pass, and to leave nothing unordered: of whom al powers have
their being, although all men's wills do not spring of him.

Here may thou see (gentle Reader) how Cerberus falls out with him, whose
authority he would seem chiesly to leave to. Austen says, that whatsoever
is done comes to pass by that knitting together and continual order of
causes which the Stoikes call destiny. But Cerberus will have al set at six
and seven, and that nothing should come to pass by any such order. Auste^
says that it is very well and truly thought, that God does know all things
before they come to pass, and that he does leave nothing unordered. But
Cerberus will none of that. For then must Marten Swarth and his men, Sir
Richard Simon Priest, and his scholar Lambert, the Irish men, Lady Margret,
the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Louell, with the rest that rebelled in King
Edward the fourthes time, be appointed and ordained of God to do as they did.
But rather than it should be so, Cerberus will say with Cotta, that there is no
God at all. For so does S. Austen conclude upon Ciceroes disputation that he
has against the Stoikes. His words be these. Quomodo igitur ordo causarum,
qui praescienti certus est Deo, id efficit, vt nihil sit in nostra voluntate,
cu^ in ipso causarum August. lib. 5 De Ciui. dei. 9
ordine, magnu^ habeant locum nostrae voluntates? Contendit ergo Cicero cum cis
qui hu^c causarum ordinem dicunt esse fatalem, vel potius ipsum fati nomine
appellant, quodnos abhorremus: praecipue propter vocabulu^, quod non in re vera
consueuit intelligi. Quod vero negat ordinem omnium causarum esse certissimum,
and Dei praescientiae notissimum: plus eum quam Stoici detestamur. Aut enim
deum esse negat, quod quidem inducta alterius persona in librii de Deorum
natura, facere molitus est: Aut si esse consitetur Deum, que^ negat praescium
futurorum, etiam sic dicit nihil aliud, quam quod ille dixit insipiens in cord
sur, non est Deus. Qui enim non est praescius omnium futurorum: non est vtique
Deus. That is to say. How does the order of causes then, which is certain to
God that knows them before, bring to pass, that there should be nothing in
our will: seeing (...)wills to bear a great sway even in the order of causes it
self? Let Cicero therefore strive with them that say that this order of causes
is fatal, or rather that do give it y^ name of destiny, which thing we do
abhor: chiefly for the name, which is not accustomed to be understood in
the thing it selse. But where as he does deny that the order of all causes is
most certain and known to the prescience of God: we do detest him more than
the Stoikes did. For either he does deny that there is a God, which thing in
his books concerning the nature of the Gods, he does under an other man's
person endeavor to do: or else, if he do confess that there is a God, whom he
denies to know of things before they come to pass: even so saying, he does
none other thing than did that foolish man which said in his heart, there is no
God For he that does not know before hand all things that are to come,
doubtless the same is not God. If Cerberus had had so much leisure as to read
over this ninth Chapter of S. Austens fifth book, out of the which he would
feign find matter against us: no doubt he would not have bragged so much of S.
Austens authority. But by like he trusted some other men's notes gathered out
of S. Austen, and never saw the books of S. Austen himself. I speak this in
his favor. But see gentle Reader, how well Cicero serves for the purpose that
Cerberus does allege him for. And as thou find him in this point, so trust
him in the rest. Cicero does not only reason against them that say there is a
destiny called in Latin Fatum: but also against all that say there is a God
that has knowledge of things to come. And so consequently he affirms that
there is no God at all. Spoiling God of his foreknowledge (as S. Austen says)
rather than he would suffer August. lib. (...) De Ciuit. 9.
man to be spoiled of his free will. But y^ religious mind (says S. Austen)
does choose both, does confess both, and with the faith of godliness does
confirm both. That is to say, the foreknowledge of God, and the liberty of
man's will. So that whatsoever man does, we say and believe, that he does it with
the consent of his will.


Cerberus. Alas who sees not the destruction of England to follow this
doctrine? who sees not the confusion of all commonweals, to depend hereupon?
What Prince may sit safely in the seat of his kingdom? What subject may live
quietly possessing his own? What man shall be ruled by right of a law: if
this opinion may be perfectly placed in the hearts of the people? But to be
short: thou see here by example, the same which Tullie calls Series
causarum, the continual order of causes appointed of God. And our men even in
like manner, call it the causes appointed of God, to lead unto the same end
which he has ordained. Whereof follows the force of cannot choose, which is
called Fati necessitas, Fatal necessity, or the necessity of Gods
ordinance: for as you have heard, Fatum is nothing else but a decree or
ordinance of God. Which necessity is set forth of some men under the name of
Gods predestination, and now oftentimes the same thing is set forth also by
this word providence. Which name of providence likewise the Heathen Stoikes
used for the same purpose, as Cicero says. Pronoca anus fatidica Stoicorum,
quam Latin licet prouidentia^ dicere. Pronoca in Greek, says he, the old
wise of the Stoikes that sets forth their destiny, which in Latin was
called Prouide^tia, the providence of God. But let them call it providence,
predestination, preordinance, or what they will: this is (no doubt) the very
Stoikes opinion, that God has so appointed and preordeyned all things, that of
mere necessity they come to pass. And whatsoever men do, whether it be good
or evil: they can not chose but do it. Which necessity Seneca also manifestly
declares in these words. Necessitates omnium rerum quas nulla vis rumpat:
fatum existimo. The necessity of all things, says he, which no force or
violence can break: that same I hold to be destiny.


Crowley. Now Cerberus can no longer keep it in. He must needs break out in
an exclamation against the doctrine of providence, predestination and
preordinance. For (says he) it is none other thing than the very opinion of yt
Stoikes, call it what we will. Who sees not the destruction of England? etc.

If God do by his providence govern all things: If God have predestined or
preordeyned all things, so that they shall come to pass in such time and order
as God by his providence, predestination and preordinance has appointed that
they shall: then must no man be so blind as not to see, that England must be
destroyed. Then must all Commonweales come to confusion. Then shall no King sit
safely in his kingdom, nor any subject in his possession. Yea, no man shall be
ruled by the right of a law: but if God do leave the matter to man's discretion,
to use the matter as he shall see cause, and do but put to his helping hand
when he sees that man goes about to bring things to good effect, but in any
case determine upon nothing, till the same shall be by man's wisdom devised
and enterprised: then shall England and all other Commonweales slourish still,
then shall all Princes safely sit in their Kingly seats, then shall all
subjects quietly enjoy their possessions, and every man be ruled by the right
of a law. Thus much follows upon the pityfull complaynt that Cerberus makes
upon the doctrine of Gods providence, his predestination, or preordinance: but
I would gladly know, what Cerberus thinks to be the cause, that in King
Edward the fourthes days, Marten Swarth, Sir Richard Simon, and the rest,
made such a stir in England. Was it for that they were persuaded in this
doctrine that Cerberus seems to make the cause of all such doings? Surely I
suppose there was not one of them that did once dream of any providence of
God. For those that take such matters in hand, are commonly as great enemies to
Gods providence, as is Cerberus himself. And shall Cerberus words make us
afraid, to say that God in his providence had predestined and preordinated
all those things to be done? yea, and that it could not otherwise be, but that
those things must then be done? Surely, I can see no cause why we should fear
so to say: Let Cerberus and his fellows conclude what they will. For I am sure
S. Austen in the x. Chapter of his fifth book De Ciuitate Dei: will take our
part herein. His words are these. Si autem illa definitur esse necessitas,
secundum quam dicimus, necesse esse vt sit aliquid August. lib. 5 10. Cap. de
Ciuit Dei.
velita fiat: nescio cur eam timeamus, ne nobis libertatem auserat voluntatis.
That is to say. If we call that thing necessity, whereby we say of any thing
that it must needs be, or that it must needs be so done, then do not I see
why we should fear, least that should take from us the liberty of our will.
When we say therefore that of necessity Marten Swarth and the rest, must make
such a stir as they did in King Edward the fourthes days: do we take from
them the liberty of their will? No says S. Austen. For they did whatsoever
they did, with the free consent of their wills, and felt no constraynt at all:
But Cerberus is not so satysfied, he will be inquisitiue to know what should
be the cause why God would in his providence predestinate these men to do
these things. I will answer with S. Austen, I can not tell. God does know a
cause: but he has not made Cerberus and me privy to it. Occulta Epist. 59. ad
Paulinum.
causa esse potest, iniusta non potest. That is. The cause may be secret: but
it can not be unjust. Is there any iniquity with God? God forbid. What Seneca
thought of destiny, we pass not. But with S. Austen we say. Omnia vero fato
fieri non dicimus, imo nulla fieri fato dicimus: Aug. De Ciuit. lib. 5. cap. 9
quoniam fati nomen vbi solet a loquentibus poni, id est, in constitutione
syderum, qua quisque conceptus aut natus est: quoniam res ipsa inaniter
asseritur, nihil valere monstramus. Ordinem autem causarum, vbi voluntas Dei
plurimum potest, neque negamus, neque fati vocabulo nuncupamus, nisi forte vt
fatum a fando dictum intelligamus, id est, a loquendo. Non enim abnuere
possumus, esse scriptum in litteris sanctis: semel locutus est Deus, duo haec
audiui: quoniam potestas est Dei: and tibi Domine misericordia: quia Psalm. 62.
tu reddes vnicuique secundum opera eius, Quod enim dictum est, semel locutus
est: intelligitur immobiliter, hoc est, incommutabiliter est locutus, sicut
nouit inco^mutabiliter omnia, quae futura su^t, and quae ipse facturus est. Hac
itaque ratione possumus a fando fatu^ appellare, nisi hoc nome^ iam in aliare
soleret intelligi, quo corda hominu^ nolumus inclinari. That is to say. We say
not that al things do come to pass by destiny: yea we say that nothing is
done by destiny. For we do plainly show, that the name destiny is of no
value, in the place where men use to place it in speaking, that is in the
constitution of the heavenly signs, wherein every man is conceived and
borne, because the thing it self is vainly affirmed. As for the order of
causes, wherein the will of God is of great force and power: we do neither
deny, nor call it by the name of destiny, except it be so as we may
understand Fatum to be derived of the word For faris, that is of speaking. For
we can not deny but it is written in the holy Scriptures: God spoke once,
these two sayings, I my self heard it: that power belongs unto God, and
unto thee (O Lord) belongs mercy: for thou will give unto every man
according to his works. And where as it is said, he spoke once: we understand
that he spoke immovably, that is vnchaungeably, even as he did vnchaungeably
know al things that are to come, and that he himself will do. After this sort
therefore, we may say that Fatum or destiny, is derived a fando, or speaking,
if this name had not now been accustomed to be understood of another matter,
whereunto we are not willing that men's hearts should be inclined.

Now if Cerberus have ought to say against this, let him make S. Austen one of
us. For we are in this point all one with him.


Cerberus. And as for that which the Heathen did attribute to the stars or
planets, they meant none other, but that God ordained the planets in nature to
work such things, as he before had decreed and appointed: Even as we also
judge, that God uses the operation of the planets in sending such rain and
tempest, fair weather or soul, as his pleasure is, let them say therefore what
they ca^ or will. This mere necessity which our men do teach, is the very
same which the Stoikes did hold, which opinion because it destroyed the state
of a common wealth, it was banished out of Rome, as Augustine declares. Lib.
Quest. vet. and no. Test. Where he notably refelleth that opinion in these few
words, saying. Qua ratione nati dicuntur. etc. By what reason (says Augustine)
were they borne which banished Mathematicos, the setters forth of destiny out
of Rome, which law was kept, and they were but Heathen, how were those things
done by destiny which make against destiny? But surely if there be a
destiny, it does nothing against it self, says Aug. For so were destiny, no
destiny, or at the least, destiny fighting against it self: Or to speak the
same in those words, which our men by abuse take out of the Scripture, to
maintain the very same matter. If it be Gods predestination that men should
write and speak against his predestination, as they say some men do, then is
Gods predestination a Kingdom, not only divided, but also fearcely fighting
against it self. O miserable absurdity which any child may perceive must
needs follow, if all things come to pass with absolute necessity by Gods
predestination as they teach. This same doctrine also that all evil springs
out of Gods ordinance, or that Gods predestination was the cause of Adams fall
and of all wickedness, is plainly maintained in an English book lately set
forth and entitled against a privy Papist. etc. where among many open and
plain sentences upon this matter. I find an argument made in these words:
Whatsoever was in Adam was in him by Gods will and ordinance: sin was in Adam,
Frgo sin. etc. was in him by Gods will and ordinance. The mayor of which
argument being understand of Adam after his fall, is manifestly false, and
therefore the conclusion also is false, for if it may be said of Adam after his
fall (as by the minor you well perceive that he so does understand it) then may
it also be said now of any man, that what execrable wickedness so ever is in
any man, that same is in him by Gods will and ordinance. He goth about also to
prove the same by another argument which he makes speaking of the lying
spirit, saying: God commanded him to sin, but God commanded nothing which
he ordeineth not, so he ordained him to sin. Which argument it was marvel
that any man could be so blind as not to see how it might with more strength
and force, and much more manifest truth be turned against him in this sort:
speaking of Adam, yea and of all men saying, God commanded Adam, and does
command all men to abstain from sin, but he commands nothing which he
ordeineth not. Ergo God ordained Adam and all men to abstain from sin. If
God then ordained Adam and all men to abstain from sin, than did he not
ordeyne Adam or any man to commit sin, so was not sin in Adam, or in any
man by Gods will and ordinance, nor Gods ordynance the cause of Adams fall, or
of any man's sin. And therefore their opinion is utterly false: also if God in
his secret counsel do predestinate, appoint, and ordeine man to sin, and yet
give unto him a straight law and commandment not to sin: is not then his
secret will contrary to his open word? and his eternal ordinance, repugnant to
his written law: All their sayre words and sine framed fetches can not avoid
it.


Crowley. Let us say what we can or will (says Cerberus) the mere necessity
that we teach shall be all one with that which the Stoikes held, affirming
their Fatum, or destiny. To this I have sufficiently answered before, showing
plainly by S. Austens words, that we teach none other doctrine herein, than did
S. Austen in the same book De Ciuitate Dei, out of which Cerberus cites
matter against us.

But now Cerberus has found another authority of saint Austen against us,
in his book (as Cerberus says) which he wrate, and entitled: Questiones ex
vtroque Testamento. In the question. 115. he says thus. Qua autem ratione nati
dicentur, qui Mathematicos vrbe Roma prohibueru^t, quod ius seruatum non
ignoratur? Et certe Pagani fuerunt. Quomodo fato fiunt quae contra fatum sunt?
Sed si est fatum, non facit contra se. etc. That is to say. By what order shall
it be said that those men were borne, which did forbydde the Mathematics (that
is to say) ye tellers of men's fortunes, or destinies to come within the City
of Rome. And it is well known that that law was kept. And doubtless these men
were Heathen men. How are those things done by destiny, which are against
destiny? But if there be a destiny, it works against it self. etc. says
Austen. But stay there Master Cerberus: and prove that Austen was Author of
that book. So may it be of some authority with us. But Erasmus has already
proved by su^drie good reasons, that S. Austen did never write it. As may
appear to as many as will read his judgment set forth before the beginning
of this book. Where writing of this part of that book, out of which Cerberus
has cyted the words above written, he says: Disputat contra Mathematicos,
quoque altius ingreditur opus, hoc licentius ineptit. That is to say. He
disputes against the Mathematics, and the deeper he does enter into the
work, the more outragiously does he play the part of a fool.

But Cerberus will not set a Louse by the judgment of Erasmus. He will
conclude upon the words of his Austen, that so destiny should be no
destiny, or at the least, destiny fighting against it self. Nay, he will not
stay there, but as though destiny and Gods predestination were all one thing:
he will conclude, that it is also a Kingdom, not only divided, but also
fiercely fighting against it self. And then knitte up the matter with his
manner of exclaming. O miserable absurdity. etc. Cerberus his heart would have
brust, if he might not have borrowed his fellows babble to fetch one flourishe
wythall. Every child may see (says Cerberus) what absurdity must needs
follow. And every wise man may see (say I) that there can no absurdity follow
upon that necessity that we teach. For it takes away no freedom that man's
will has, or ever had. Neither does Gods predestination sight against it
self, because Cerberus with his fellows, were predestined before the world
was in this time of the world, thus to go about to deface those that do truly
teach, that Gods prescience, providence, and predestination is infallible. For
what wise man will say, that the Potmaker is contrary to himself, because he
makes of his clay some vessels to serve in honorable uses, and some other to
uses clean contrary? Or who will say that God is contrary to himself, because
he has made, and does daily make some of his creatures to be deuourers and
destroyers of the rest: or that nature does fight against it self: because it
does bring forth both helthsome food and poison? Surely I think there is no
man of that mind but Cerberus and his fellows, and that Austen that Cerberus
cites for his purpose. But how worthy credit that Austen is: is before
sufficiently declared.

But Cerberus has found in an English Book entitled against a privy Papist,
two Argumenes: one in these words. Whatsoever was in Adam, was in him by Gods
will and ordinance: sin was in Adam: Ergo, sin. etc. The other speaking of the
lying spirit, in these words. God commanded him to sin: but God commands
nothing which he ordeyneth not: so he ordained him to sin. Cerberus mislyketh
much with these two Arguments. The mayor proposition in the first Argument is
false, says Cerberus. Wherefore, the conclusion can not be true. But S. Austen
in his Enchiridion ad Laurentium: says that the mayor is true: Ergo it is like
that Cerberus says not truly. Saint Austens words be these. Haec sunt magna
opera Domini, exquisita in omnes voluntates eius: and Enchirid. ad L^tur. cap.
100.
tam sapienter exquisita, vt cu^ angelica and humana creatura peccasset.i. non
quod ille, sed quod voluit ipsa secisset: etia^ per eandem creaturae
voluntatem, qua factum est quod Creator noluit, impleret ipse quod voluit, been
vtens and malis tanquam sum bonus, ad eorum damnationem, quos just
praedestinauit ad poenam: and ad eorum salutem, quos benign predestinauit ad
gratia^. Quantum enim ad eos ^^tinet, quod Deus noluit fecerunt: quantu^ vero
ad omnipotentiam Dei, nullo modo id efficere valuerunt. Hoc quippe ipso quod
contra voluntatem Dei fecerunt: de ipsis facta est voluntas eius. Propterea
namque magna opera Domini, exquisita in omnes voluntates eius, vt miro, and
inestabili modo, non fiat praeter eius voluntatem, quod etiam sit contra eius
voluntate^. Quia non fieret, si non sineret: nec vtique nolens sinit, sed
volens. Nec sineret bonus male fieri: nisi omnipotens etiam de malis facere
posset been. That is to say. These are y^ great works of God, sought out,
according to all his wylles: and yet wisely sought out, so that when the nature
both of Angels and man had sinned: that is, had done, not the thing that he
wylled, but that it self wylled, even by the same will of the creature, whereby
that thing was done, that y^. Creator was not willing should be done, he
fulfilled that which he would have done, even as he that is best of all, using
well, even those things that are evil, to the condemnation of those whom he
has justly predestined to pain: and to the salvation of those whom he has
lovingly predestined to free mercy. As touching themselves, they did y^ which
God was not willing they should do: but as touching the almighty power of God,
they were by no means able to bring that to pass. For even in the very same
thing that they did contrary to the will of God: his will was wrought upon
them. For that cause therefore, the works of the Lord are great, and searched
out according to all his wills. So that after a marvelous and unspeakable
manner, that thing that is done even contrary to his will: should not be done
without his will. For if he would not suffer it, it should not be done: neither
does he suffer it being unwilling, but willing. Neither would he that is good,
suffer a thing to be evil done: except the same being almighty, were also
able to work a good effect of those things that be evil.

Thou may see here, gentle Reader, how great cause Cerberus has to mislike
with this Argument. S. Austen says, that after a marvelous and unspeakable
manner, that thing that is done contrary to the will of God, is not without his
will. And thou may be bold, rather to consent unto that which was written
against a privy Papist, having Austen also on thy part: than by Cerberus his
misliking to be persuaded that that writer has taught an untruth.

Of the other Argument, Cerberus says, that it was marvel that any man could
be so blind, as not to see how the same might with much more strength and
force, and manifest truth be turned against himself that made it, in this
sort. God commanded Adam, and does command all men, to abstain from sin:
But he commands nothing which he ordeineth not: Ergo God ordained Adam and
all men to absteyne from sin. But what has Cerberus won by this: I grant
the Argument to be good. But that the conclusion is against us I deny. For we
affirm that when man abstaineth from sin, the same is done by Gods will and
ordinance, as when he commits sin, the same is also by the will and
ordinance of God: as by the words of Austen before written does plainly appear.
As for Cerberus his argument, and the conclusion that he infers thereupon: I
refer to the judgment of all wise men that will weygh the before written
words of S. Austen. Who shall thereby easily perceive, that no such conclusion
can follow upon such premises. But to his, Also if God in his secret counsel.
etc. I must say some thing. Else will Cerberus say that Gods secret will and
eternal ordinance, is contrary to his open word and written law.

When Jonas was sent to Niniue, the open word and commandment of God was,
that he should say unto the^: Yet forty days and Niniue shall be destroyed. The
effect does declare, that his eternal purpose was not to destroy them, for
they were not destroyed. Neither was this commandment contrary to his
eternal purpose: but he did use it as a mean whereby to bring his eternal
purpose to pass, which was to show mercy in forgiving the sins of the
Ninevites.

When Moses was sent to Pharao, the open word and commandment was thus. Say
unto Pharao, let my people go, that they may offer sacrifite unto me. But his
eternal purpose was, that by the stubbornness of Pharao in refusing to do his
commandment, he might have just occasion to show his power upon him, in
pouring out upon him and his people, the manifold plagues that we read of in
the holy Histories, and that thereby his name might be made known in all
parts of the earth. So that this commandment was not contrary to the
eternal purpose, but did concur and run together with it, to that end, that
in the eternal purpose was prefixed.

When Jesus Christ began to preach, the open word was, Repent and believe the
Gospel: but the eternal purpose was, that for his doctrine and miracles, he
should be hated of his countriemen and kinsemen (for the most part) and by
them be delivered to the Heathen to be crucified, and made a sacrifice for the
sins of the world. So that this open word was not against the secret purpose
of God: (...) as S. Paul does term it) it was to them that perished, the
savor of death unto death, and to them that be saved, the savor of life unto
life. For in the one sort it did work belief, and by belief salvation: and
in the other it did manifest and make open the unbelief that was in their
hearts before, and so make them utterly without excuse. As our Savior
himself says: Now have they nothing to pretend for excuse.

The Law and the Gospel are both written and preached, and the open word is,
do this, and thou shall have this: but the eternal purpose of God is, that
those that have cares to hear, should hear and obey, and so enjoy the reward
promised: and that they which lack such ears, should have the just
condemnation of their own consciences. These two therefore be not contrary
the one to the other, but do concur and run together to one end.

Much more might be said to this effect, without either fair words or finely
framed fetches: and so the inconvenience that Cerberus would conclude, clearly
avoided. But I will content my self with one saying of Austen, writing upon
the ninth Psalm. His words be these. Non in toto cord consitctur Deo, qui de
prouidentia eius in aliquo dubitat. Sed quia iam cernit occulta sapicutiae Dei,
quantum sit inuisibile premium cius, qui dicit, gaud(...) in tribulationibus,
and quemadmodum omnes cruciatus, qui corporaliter inferuntur, aut vt exerceant
conuersos ad Deum, aut vt conuertantur admoneant, aut just damnationi vltimae
praeparent obduratos: and sic omnia ad diuinae prouide^tiae regimen
referrantur, quae stulti quasi casu and temere, and nulla diuina
administratione fieri putant, ait. Narrabo omnia mirabilia tua. etc. That is to
say. That man which does doubt of the providence of God in any thing: does not
show himself thankful or praise God in all his heart. But because he does now
see the secrets of the wisdom of God, how great the invisible reward of him
is which says, we rejoice in troubles: and how all afflictions which are
brought upon the body, either to exercise those y^ be converted unto God, or
that they may admonish them to convert, or that they may prepare to the last
damnation, those that be justly made hard hearted, and that so all those things
might be referred unto the government of Gods providence, which foolish men do
suppose to be wrought by chance, at adventure, and by no divine providence: he
says. I will declare all thy wondrous works. etc. We may be bold therefore
(I think) to say, that this which Cerberus has done, in writing this
spiteful answer to his friends Letter (if any such were) was governed by
Gods providence. And yet we are not Genethliaci, or declarers of men's fortunes
or destinies, such as were banished out of Rome: for we say not y^ it is
Cerberus his fortune or destiny to be hanged or drowned, or that he shall die a
natural death before he shall be as great a favorer of Gods predestination, as
he does now show himself to be a mortal foe thereof. But we know, that if God
have predestined any of these things, the same shall undoubtedly come to
pass, in such sort as he has appointed. And yet shall not Cerberus his will be
enforced. But if he hang himself, it shall be with the full consent of his
will. And if he shall be a favorer of our side, it shall be with the free choice
of his own will, governed by the providence of God. As there be some yet
living, that can testify, that once they were of the same mind that Cerberus
is now, and that with consent of will. And now they be of one mind with me:
and that with assent of will also.

We leave Cerberus and his fellows therefore to him that by his providence
governs al things. And yet do we our selves use the means that God in
providence has appointed to be used, and we teach all other to do the same,
committing the success to him that knows what he has determined to work in
all his creatures. And we conclude this matter with Austen, saying: Quapropter,
Aug. De Ciuit. lib. 5. cap. 9
and voluntates nostrae tantum valent, quantum Deus eas valere voluit atque
praesciuit: and ideo, quicquid valent certissime valent: and quod facturae sunt
ipsae, omnino facturae sunt: quia valeturas atque facturas ille praesciuit,
cuius praescientia falli non potest. Quapropter, si fati nomen, alicui rei
adhibendum placeret: magis dicere^ fatum esse infirmioris, potentioris
voluntatem qui eu^ habet in potestate, quam illo causarum ordine, quem non
vsitato, sed suo more Stoici fatum appellant, arbitrium nostrae voluntatis
auserri. That is to say. Wherefore, this is the cause why our wills are able
to do, as much as God would and did know before hand that they should do, and
therefore, look what they are able to do, that are they most certainly able to
do: and what so ever they shall do, they shall in deed do: because he whose
prescience or foreknowledge cannot be deceived, did know before hand that they
should do it. Wherefore if I could allow the name of destiny to be given to
any thing: I would rather say that destiny were a thing belonging to the
weaker, and will to the stronger which has it in his power, than that the
liberty of our will, should by that order of causes, which y^ Stoikes, not
after the common custom, but after their own manner, do call destiny. But
Cerberus is not yet answered. We must yet solue him one other question. Which
now he will propone.


Cerberus. Yet would I further ask them a question, seeing it is the decree,
ordinance, and will of God expressed in his word, that man should not sin, how
crepte they into that secret council, where God ordained, decreed, and willed
the contrary? that is to say, that man should sin. But I hear their answer
already published in print: standing in the third leaf and second page, of
the first Blast in that traitorous trumpet, set forth against the regiment of
women, where Fol. 2. Pa. 2. briefly and covertly touches this close and privy
counsel of God in these words. The secret counsel of God excepted. But in
Fol. 3. Page 2. he says. I am sure that God has revealed to some in this our
age, that it is more than a Monster in nature, that a woman shall reign and
have Empire above man.

This may be the Apocalips of some men in this our age: but sure I am, it is
not the revelation of S. John the Evangelist, nor of any other old Apostle or
Prophet. These new revelations which are revealed unto men of our age out of a
secret counsel, decree, and ordinance of God, contrary to the open word and
commandment of God, are meet for those which delight in the damnable dreams
of some doting destiny, and may well be called inspirations of old Arrians,
revelations of blind Anabaptists, or unwritten verities of superstitious
Papists, rather than the secret counsel of God, revealed unto men of our age.
But to conclude: That Angel or spirit, which contrary to the manifest word
of God, has revealed unto men of our age, that a woman bring right inheritour
to the Crown of a Realm, ought not to be ruler thereof, that same spirit and
Angel of darkness, has revealed unto me^ of our age, that Caine was
predestinate to murder his brother Abel, and the most wicked traitors,
murderers, and thieves that live, are ordained of God, in his secret
counsel, contrary to his open word, to be wicked, even as they are, and to
commit such murder, these and treason, even as they do. The same conclusion
and new revelation, is also plainly set forth in the other late printed
English book before named, translated out of French into English, where an on
after the beginning, speaking of Gods will, he says: By the virtue whereof, al
things are made, yea eue^ those things which are evil and execrable. Yet when
he has plainly affirmed that by the virtue of Gods will evil and execrable
things are made, least the horrible face of Satan should be perceived, in the
burning flame of those terrible words: The matter is afterward trimly covered
with a cloak of unsavory subtlety, for he declares his mind to be, that
those evil and execrable things, which are wrought by the virtue of Gods will,
are not evil and execrable, in that they are wrought by his divine counsel.
As if he should say, though they be in deed evil and execrable things, which
the counsel of God works, yet are they not in that respect or therefore
evil, because God works the^. But for as much (says he) as they proceed
from the Prince of air. etc. Or to speak it in more usual terms, because the
devil or wicked men do work it, which nevertheless, as they plainly hold and
affirm, are the instruments of God appointed her unto, and in doing the same,
do nothing else but that which God has ordained them to do, and so ordained
that they can not chose but do it, eue^ as they do, which opinion Prosper,
defending the sentence of Augustine, writes vehemently against, in these
words. Praedestinationem Dei sieve ad malum sieve ad bonum etc. That the
Predestination of God (says he) d(...) work in all men either unto good or
unto evil it is most foolishly said, as though a certain necessity should
drive men unto both, seeing in good things, the will is to be understand not
without grace, and in evil things, the will is to be understand without grace.
Respo^. ad object. Gal. cap. 6. But that which Prosper, and Aug. do here most
truly call a most folish saying. The same do these men call the most high and
profou^d wisdom, for God say they, predestinateth al things, Ergo al things
must come to pass of necessity.


Crowley. A man might marvel, what moved Cerberus to move that question, the
answer whereunto, he himself says is alredie published in print. But when I
consider, what spirit it is that has moved him in this sort to answer his
friends letter: I leave off that marvel. For I see his purpose is, by this
mean to entangle and trouble us with by matter, neither pertinent to the thing
we have in hand, nor tending to any good end. What have we to do with the
matter of the Blast (which book I never read of) or with Revelations or
Apocalipses? We have the question of Gods Providence, Prescience and
Predestination in hand. To dispute of those matters did neither appertain to
Cerberus in his answer, neither does it appertain to me in this Apology. I
will therefore pass over both those questions: and shape him another manner of
answer to his demand than y^ which he imagines that he has seen set forth
in print. His question is, how we crept into y^ secret counsel, where God
ordained, decreed and willed, that man should sin? He imagines that this can
not be answered otherwise than by an Apocalips or Revelation. But Cerberus
shall well understand, that we can answer him by plain Scripture, and prove
that it is not against Scripture, that God should ordain, decree and will,
that man should sin.

First, S. Paul writing to the Romans says thus. Anno^ habet potestatem
Figulus luti, ex eade^ massa facere, aliud Romans 9.
quidem vas in honorem, aliud vero in contumeliam? That is to say. Has not
the Potmaker power over his Claye, out of one lump to make one vessel to
honor, and another to dishonor? And in the same place he says thus. Nunquid
dicit sigmentum ei qui se sinxit, quid me fecisti sic? That is. Does the
earthen vessel say unto him that made it: Why haste thou made me so? And the
same S. Paul writing to Timothe says. In magna autem domo, non solum sunt
vasa aurea and argentea, sed and lignea and fictilia: and quaeda^ 2. Timoth. 2.
quidem in honorem, qu^dam autem in contumeliam. That is to say. In a great
house, there be not only vessels of Gold and of Silver, but also of Timber
and of Earth: some serving to honor, and some to dishonor. These Alegories does
S. Paul use, to show that there is no iniquity with God, though he do appoint
his creatures at his good will and pleasure, some to honor, and some to
dishonor. To the same purpose does S. Paul cite the words that are written in
the. 33. of Exodie. Miserebor, cuius misercor: and misericordiam praestabo,
cuius miserebor. That is. I will have compassion upon him, on whom I have
compassion: And I will show mercy, to whom I will show mercy. It lies not
in the willer nor in y^ runner, says S. Paul: but in God who takes mercy. For
the Scripture says unto Pharao: Quia in hoc ipsum exitaui t^, vt ostendum in
t^ potentiam meam, and vt annuntietur nomen meu(...) ^n vniuersd terra. That
is. For this cause have I styrred thee up, that I might show my power upon
thee, and that my name might be declared through the whole earth. And then S.
Paul concludes thus. Ergo, cuius vult mi(...), and quem vult indurat. That
is. On whom it pleases him, he takes mercy, and whom he lusts, he makes
hard hearted. I know the common answer to this. Which is: God does not
hearden the hearts of any: but he does suffer them to harden their own hearts.
But it (...) good for them that stand upon this common answer, to consider
what S. Austen writes concerning Gods suffering of things to be done.

Nec dubita^dum est Deum facere been, etiam (...) fieri quae^u^^ Enchirid. ad
Laur. cap. 96.
fiunt (...): Non enim hoc nisi iusto iudicio sinit. Et profecto bonum est omne
quod iustum est. Quamuis ergo ea qu^^ mala sunt* in quantum mala sunt, non sint
bona: tamen, vt non solam bona, sed etiam sint and mala, bonum est. Number nisi
esset hoc honum, vt essent and mala: nullo modo esse sinerentur ab omnipotent^
bono. (...) proculdubio, quam facile est quod vult facere? tum facile est, quod
non vult esse, non sinere. Hoc nisi credamus, periclitatun ipsum nostrae fidei
confessionis initium, qua nos in Deum patrem omnipotentem, credere consitemur.
Neque enim veniciter ob aliud vocatur omnipotens, nisi quia quicquid vult
potest, nec voluntate cuiuspia^ creaturae, voluntatis omnipotentis, impeditur
effectus. That is to say. It is not to be doubted that God does well, yea,
when he suffers to be done, whatsoever things are evil done. For he does not
suffer this, otherwise than by just judgment. And surely, all that is just, is
good. Although therefore those things that be evil, in as much as they be
evil, be not good: yet is it good, y^ there should be things, not only that
are good, but also that are evil. For excep(...)t were good, y^ there should
be things that are evil: the almighty goodness would by no means suffer
them to be. To whom, no doubt, it is as easy a thing not to suffer that thing
to be which he would not should be: as it is to do that which he is willing^
to do. Except we believe this* she very beginning of the confession of our
says, wherein we confess y^ we believe in God y^ Father Almighty, is in
danger and like to be fosid untrue. For he is not truly called Almighty for
any other cause, but for that he is able to do what he will, and the effect of
his will, being Almighty, is not by the will of any creature let.

By these words of Austen it is plain, that God, being Almighty can not be
said to suffer ought to be done, which he is not willing should be done. The
hardening of hearts therefore, and that wickedness that is wrought by the hard
hearted, is not done without his will. And although those things be evil, in
as much as they are done by those evil persons, yet in as much as the same are
done by the will of God, it is good that they be done. By this it is plain,
that when God does ordeyne, decree, and will that man should sin: he does
not contrary to Scripture, which does witness, by the testimony of S.
Austen, that it is good that man should do evil, in such sense as S. Austen
has declared the same.

Moreover, Solomon in his Proverbs says thus. Proverb. 16.
Vniuersa propter semetipsum operatus est Dominus: impiu^ quoque ad diem malum.
That is: The Lord has made all things for himself^^ the ungodly man also
against the evil day.

Esaias the Prophet says. Nunquid gloriabitur Securis co^tra Esaias. 10.
cum qui secat in ea? Aut exaltabitur Ser^ contra eum, a quo trahitur Quomodo
si elevetur Virga contra eleuantem se, and exe altetur baculus qui vtique
lignum est. That is to say: Shall the Are boast it self against him that
heweth with it? Or shall the Saw set by it self against him that draws it?
That were as much as if the Rod should be lifted up against him that lifts
it, and as if the staff that is but timber, should be aduaunted.

The ungodly man, says Solomon, has the Lord made for himself, even
against the evil day: that is, against the day of vengeance, wherein the
ungodly shall have their just reward at Gods hand. By this, not only the
ungodly is justly punished for his ungodliness, but the godly is also
occasioned to acknowledge, that it is mercy alone that does preserve him from
the like punishment. For he sees in himself no cause why he should not suffer
the same condemnation. Thus by the wicked, both the justice and mercy of God
are made manifest unto man. But the purpose of the ungodly is nothing less
than that Gods justice and mercy should be set forth by him: therefore he is
justly punished for his wickedness. And Esaie the Prophet, comparing
Nabuchodonosor to an Axe, a Saw, and a Rod: does plainly teach, that it was
God that wrought all the plagues and destructions that were by that wicked
instrument brought, not only upon the people of the Jews, but upon other
Nations also. And that that bloody and ambitious tyrant, was but as an Axe,
Saw, or Rod in the Lords hand. And therefore when he began to boast of his own
power and policy, as though he had by his own wisdom and strength overcome
kingdoms, and set himself above them: the Lord (to let his people know that
it was not Nabuchodonosors power that could have done, or that should do those
things to them, which the Prophets did tell them should come upon, by the
Kings of Babylon) does tell them by the mouth of the same Prophets, that the
work was his, and that the Kings of Babylon were but his fools or
instruments to work withal.

But this can not Cerberus abide: God must be but a looker on, and no (...) any
of these things. For if God should be a worker, he must needs be the Author
of the sin that is in the deed. For the old Curre has his eyes so blinded
with the filthy ^^dder of Hell fire: that he can not see how God may be the
Author of the fact, and not of the sin that is in it. But when he hears
that saying: he cries (...) Areade, Areade, what is this? In Cerberus his
judgment, either Job must be a liar, or else God must be a thief. For when
word came to Job that the Sabeis had slain his servants, and driven away his
cattle: he said, the Lord has taken the^ away. But to take away Jobs cattle
was felony, Ergo, either God was a Felon, or Job a liar, if Cerberus his
opinion believe.

But how God does work in the hearts of evil and wicked men, and use them as
his instruments, and yet is not partaker of their sin: is sufficiently
declared before, out of S. Austen, De gratia and libero arbitrio.

Now Cerberus will look that I should say some thing to the words of
Prosper. Otherwise he will make reckning that he has the victory. For a little
occasion makes him to brag. The objection that the Frenchmen made against the
sentence of S. Austen, in the place that Cerberus speaks of, is this. Quod
liberum arbitrium in homine nihil sit: sed sieve ad bonum sieve ad malum,
praedestinatio (...) in hominibus ^perctur. That is to say. That S. Austen
should hold that free will in man is nothing: but that Gods predestination
does work in men, whether it be to good or to evil. The answer to this
objection is thus. Liberum arbitrium nihil esse, vel non esse, perperam
dicitur: sed ante illuminationem fidei, in tenebris illud, and in vmbra mortis
ac gere, non recte nog^tur. Quoniam priusquam a dominatione Diaboli per Dei
gratiam liberetur and in illo profundo iacet in quod se sua liberate demersit.
Amas ergo langores suos, and profanitate habet, quod agrotare se nescit, donec
prima haec medela conferati^ aegroto, vt incipiat nosse quod langueat, and
possit opem medici desiderare, qua surgat. Iustificatus itaque homo, idest, ex
impio pius factus, nullo praecedente bono merito, accipit donum, quo medio,
adquirat and meritum: vt quod in illo inchoatum est per gratiam Christi, etiam
per industriam liberi augeatur arbitrij, nunquam remoto adiutorio Dei, sine
quo, nec prosicere, nec permanere in bono quisquam potest. Praedestinationem
autem Dei, sieve ad bonum sieve ad malum in hominibus operari, ineptissime
dicitur, vt ad vtrumque homines quaedam necessitas videatur impellere: cum in
bonis, voluntas sit intelligenda degratia, in malis autem intelligenda sine
gratia. That is. To say that free will is nothing, or that there is no free
will at all, is evil said: but that the same does wander in darkness and in
the shadow of death before it is illumined by faith, is not well denied. For
before it is by the grace of God delivered from the domination of the Devil:
it lies in that deep dongion, into which by it own liberty it did cast it
self. It does therefore love it own sore sicknesses, and does count it health,
not to know that it is sick, until this first medicine be ministered to it
being sick, that it may begin to know that it is sick, and be able to desire
the help of the Physician, whereby it may arise. When man therefore is
justified, that is to say, made godly of ungodly, without any good deserving
going before, he receives a gift, by which mean he may also get merit or
deserving: that that thing which is by the grace of Christ begone in him, may
also by the industry of free will be increased, never without the help of
God, without which no man can either go forward, or stay in that which is good.
But it is most foolishly said, that the predestination of God does so work in
men, either to good or to evil, that a certain necessity may seem to force
men forward unto both: seeing that in good, the will is to be understood to
come of grace, and in evil, the will is to be understood without grace.

Now (gentle Reader) thou see what it was that the French men objected
against: S. Austen. Thou see also what Prosper does answer in S. Austeus
defense. Consider now what occasion Cerberus has to conclude against us as he
does.

The French men object, that S. Austen should hold that freewill in man is
nothing, but that Gods predestination does work in men, whether it (...)to
good or evil. Prosper answers, that it is an evil saying: to affirm that
freewill is nothing, or that there is no freewill at al. And that it is most
foolishly said, that the predestination of God does so work in the hearts of
men, either to good or evil, that a certain necessity may seem to force men
forward unto both. But we do neither say that freewill is nothing, or that
there is none at all: neither that predestination does so work in men, that a
certain necessity may seem to force them forward both to good and evil: No,
we do not affirm that predestination does work in men any thing at all.
Ergo, Prosper has written nothing against us.


Cerberus. And further, Crowley in the said book of confutation before named,
and the same article, using the very same term of driving, he says that Gods
predestination has driven them to it. And yet not therewith content, anon
after he says: We are compelled by the necessity of Gods predestination, to
do those things for the which we are damned, but to repeat the whole sentence.
To this must we answer (says he) in this wise. If God were an inferior to
any superior power, to the which he ought to render an account of his doings,
or if any of us were not his creatures, but of another creation besides his
workmanship, then might we charge him with tyranny, because he condemns us,
and appointed us to be punished for the things we do by compulsion through the
necessity of his predestination.

Mark here by the way, how al rulers be charged with tyranny for punishing of
male factors, first grant this proposition which he affirms: That al
offenders, as murderers, thieves and traitors, commit their offenses by the
compulsion of predestination. Secondly, this assumpted minor (which he also
affirms) that it is tyranny for one which is an inferior power, and not their
creator, to punish them which do commit crimes by such compulsion. Then must it
needs follow, that al rulers are tyrants which punish malefactors, and are no
creators, but inferior powers, because all malefactors could not chose but
commit such wicked offenses, being driven thereunto by compulsion, through the
necessity of predestination.

Woe worth the sinful generation of our age, which has bred and brought forth
such a noisome novelty, and strange Paradox, to whom the hands of Gods
mercy are stretched out all the day long: and yet they are ever defying him to
the face, as the Prophet says. Esaias. 65. Consider I desire thee, not the
persons of them that speak, be they never so high, never so wise, never so
many, but mark the opinion it self: even in thy conscience, and in the sight
of of God, whether any thing may be spoken more repugnant to the nature of God,
more contrary to the word of God, more defacing the justice and mercy of God,
than to say, that God punishes man with the torments of Hell, in everlasting
fire, for doing those things which he himself has predestinate, ordained,
decreed, determined, appointed, wylled and compelled him to do: and that which
a man can not choose but must needs do, by the force and compulsion of his
predestination.

All which things in those plain terms, they most evidently teach in diverse
parts of their wrytings, but of all other this is most odious and horrible,
where they affirm that men sin by compulsion, through the necessity of Gods
predestination.

And the very same says Knoxe in the. 317. side of his book, before named,
affirming likewise in those plain terms: that the wicked are not only left
by Gods suffryng, but compelled to sin by power, and he cites it as the
saying of Augustine against Julian. Lib. 3. Cap. 5. But very falsely (as I
suppose) for I have sought the same place in Augustine, and he has neither
those words, neither any such like, that import the same or any like matter.

Wherefore, till such time as they make better proof: I must think that they
have forged a lie in Augustines name, supposing thereby to give Authority to
falshode. But to conclude, whether it were the saying of Augustine, or not, you
see it is plainly their opinion, not only that men can not choose, but do what
wickedness or mischief soever they do, but also they are compelled with the
power, force, or compulsion of Gods predestination, to commit all those evils
and wicked crimes, for the which they are executed with the temporal sword,
or damned with everlasting torment.


Crowley. It does here manifestly appear, that Cerberus his chief quarrel is
against Crowley. For though there be other that have written as plain, and as
open matter for the necessity of Predestination as I have, and to say the
truth more plain too: yet does Cerberus lay the matter to no man charge so
often and so openly as he does to mine. For this is now the fifth time y^ he
has made plain mention of me in this his short answer to his friends
Letter. No marvel therefore, though the malice of his mind, do sometimes
cause him to misconster my words and writings, as in this place he does,
placing my words so in this his answer, that they seem to have a manifest
meaning far differing from that which they have in y^ place where I wrate
them in mine answer to Shaxton. First he says, y^ using the term of
driving, I have said, that Gods Predestination has driven them to it. Now
(Gentle Reader) I must make thee judge of the meaning of these words, in the
place where they stand written by me.

After I had declared, that the Administration of the common weal by public
Ministers, laws and ordinances, could not be other than profitable, and
always redounding to the glory of God, notwithstanding that the having of
such ministers and ministratio^s, is a thing that comes to pass of
necessity and can not but be: I labored to make the matter more plain by
certain questions, whereof this is one. How could it have been, that so great
and rude multitudes of barbarous nations, should have submitted themselves, to
be under laws and rulers: had not Gods Predestination driven them to it?

Here be the words in that order y^ I first wrate them. Now judge (gentle
Reader) whether Cerberus meant simply, when he cited them thus: He says, that
Gods Predestination has driven the^ to it. Adding such words immediately
after, that it might seem that I had spoken these words in no such meaning:
but rather, that my whole meaning had been, to affirm ye God does by his
Predestination, forcibly drive men to do the things that they are damned for.
For he says, that I say: We are compelled by the necessity of Gods
Predestination, to do those things, for which we are damned. And then to set a
show of indiffere^ce upon his doing, as though he meant nothing less than to
apply my words otherwise than my meaning was, he says, that he will repeat
ye whole sentence, in this manner. To this must we answer. etc. As though the
answer that I make, were but an answer to mine own words, which I have
before affirmed.

But ye thou may see (gentle Reader) what words they he that I do there
make answer unto: I will set them down here in writing, as they stand in my
book against Shaxton. They are these.

Well, here follows yet another inconvenience, and that is this. If all
things be done of necessity: Why should any man be blamed for missedoing? Why
should any man be damned, since all they do is but the ordinance of God, and
that more is, they can not avoid the necessity, whereby they are constrained
to do all that they do. Wherefore if they should endeavor to refrain the evil yt
they do, it were but al in vain, for they are predestined either to do it,
or else to leave it undone. Justly therefore can they not be condemned, because
the evil they do, is not of themselves, but of the ordinance of God.

And then follow the words that Cerberus has cyted. But when he comes to
those words that might some thing show my meaning to be otherwise than he
would have it seem to be: he stays. I will therefore set down those words
which do immediately follow, which are these. But forasmuch as he is subject
to no superior power, and we be all his treatures: so that to what end soever
he have framed us, we are his instruments to do the work that he has
appointed to be done: why should we stand up and reason with him to know his
purpose in creating us, or why he made us to this or that fashion? to this or
that use? to be precious or vils? For this one thing we may be sure of, that
God has by his eternal wisdom, created nothing, nor appointed nothing to be
done, but the same shall redounde to his glory in the end: seem it never so
contrary in ye mean time. Let us hearken to the words of S. Paul to ye
Romans Romans 9.
in this matter. What if God (says he) willing to show. etc.

Here thou may see (gentle Reader) what malice may do. I said that so many
barbarous and rude nations would never have submitted themselves to live under
laws, if Gods Predestination had not driven them to it: meaning that God in
his wisdom and everlasting providence, had appointed that all multitudes of
peoples should be governed by laws and orders, and to bring the^ thereunto, he
used such means, that they were driven to choose rather to live under laws,
and so to continue and flourish, than to live without laws, and so decay and
come to naught. But Cerberus does maliciously conster my words, as though my
meaning were, driven to be under laws, as sheep are driven from the pasture to
the fold. But I spoke of men, and not of brute beasts. We use to say that men
are driven, some by fear, some by friendship, some by affection, some by
infirmity, and some by poverty and need: and yet in all these cases, we
mean not that man has not a will which consents to the thing that he does:
but that the will of man is by these means induced to choose that which it
consents unto, and to leave the other which it refuses to do. Again, in
answering the inconvenience that Cerberus and such as he is, do say will ensue
upon the doctrine of ye necessity of Gods predestination: I said: If God were
an inserious to any superior power, or if we were of another creation, and not
of his making: then might we charge him with tyranny, because he condemns
us, and appoints us to be punished for the things we do by compulsion. Not
meaning (as Cerberus does maliciously affirm that I do mean) that man is
compelled by force without the consent of his will, to do those actions which
God does condemn him for, and appoint him to be punished for: For that were to
deny God to be God, and man to be man. For God is not God, unless he be both
just and merciful. But there should appear in him neither mercy nor
justice, if he should use such compulsion, as Cerberus would have me seem to
teach. And if man should be so spoiled of the liberty of his will, that he
should be compelled to do actions without all consent of will: then were man
spoiled of his principal part, which is his reasonable soul, without which he
is not, neither can be thought to be man.

I am not so beastly therefore, as to speak of such a compulsion. But I speak
of the same that Knoxe spoke of in the place that Cerberus cites, I now, for I
dare not assirm upon his word, neither have I seen the book my self. But the
matter that Cerberus says Knoxe has cited out of S. Austen. I have seen in
S. Auste^, not in the. 3. book and, 5. chapter against Julian: but in the. 5.
book and. 3. chapter against the same. Bylike Cerberus had little leisure and
less lust to read S. Auste^s words. and therefore not finding them at the
first chop, he thought it should be enough for him to say, that he must think
that we have forged a lie in S. Austens name. But to put thee out of doubt,
gentle Reader, that Cerberus his thought is a lying thought: I will set down S.
Austens words in writing, and request thee to read the rest of that Chapter,
wherein I have found them written. And then I doubt not but thou will consent
to that compulsion that I have spoken of.

The words of S. Austen are these. Quid est autem August. lib. 5 Cap. 3.
contr. Julian.
quod dicis, cum desiderijs suis traditi dicuntur, relictiper patientiam
intellige^di sunt, non per potentiam in peccata compulsi: quasi non simul
posuerit haec duo idem Apostolus, and patientiam and potentiam, vbi ait. Sic
autem volens Deus ostendere iram, and demonstrare Romans 9.
potentiam suam, attulit in multa patientia vasairae, quae perfecta sunt in
perditionem. Quid horum tamen dicis esse quod scriptum est? Et Propheta si
errauerit, and locutus fuerit, ego Ezechi. 14.
Dominus seduxi Prophetam illum, and extendam manum meam super eum, and
exterminabo eum in medio populi mei Israel: Patientia est, an potentia?
Quodlibet eligas, vel vtrumque fatearis: vio des tamen falsa Prophetantis
peccatum esse, poenamque peccati. An and hic dicturus es quod ait. Ego Dominus
seduxi Prophetam illu^, intelligendum esse, deserui: vt pro eius meritis
seductus erraret? Age vt vis. Tamen eo modo punitus est propeccato, vt falsum
prophetando peccaret. That is to say: What is the meaning of thy words, when
thou say, that those men that are said to be given over to their own
lusts, must be understand to be left by patience or sufferance, and not
compelled or thrust into sin by power: as though that same Apostle did not
set down both these two, both sufferance and power, when he says. And so God
being willing to show forth his wrath, and to set forth his power, has in much
patience brought hither the vessels of wrath, which were made meet for
destruction. And yet, whether of these things do thou say that that is which
is written? And if a Prophet do err and speak lies: I the Lord have seduced
that Prophet, and I will strotch out mine hand upon him, and I will utterly
root him out from amongst my people of Israel. Is this sufferance, or power?
Which soever thou do choose: or if thou grant both: yet do thou see,
that the false prophecy is sin, and the punishment of sin also. Will thou
here also say, that where he says, I the Lord have seduced that Prophet: it
must be understand, I have left him, that being seduced according to his own
deseruings, he he might err? do as thou will. Yet is he in this sort punished
for his sin: that by prophesying a lie he might sin.

Now, I trow, Cerberus will not say, that Knoxe has forged a lie in S.
Austens name, supposing thereby to give authority to falsehod. And if Cerberus
would take the pains to read the whole Chapter wherein these words of Austen
are written: I doubt not but he should understand how God may by power co^pel
men to sin, and yet punish them justly for their sin, which they commit by
such compulsio^. For they are not compelled without the consent, yea the free
consent, of their own will.

But least Cerberus should think, that not being able to answer that which
he concludes upon my words, I have slily slipped it over: I must say some
thing to that wherewith he charge me. That is, the charging of all
Magistrates with tyranny, for that they, not being Creators, do punysh men for
those offenses that they commit by compulsion. He frames an Argument against
me, the mayor proposition whereof is not affirmed by me (as Cerberus says it
is) for I have not in any place written, that thieves, murderers. etc. do
commit their offenses by the compulsion of predestination: but by compulsion,
through the necessity of predestination, meaning that co^pulsion and necessity
that S. Austen speaks of in the places that I have before cited out of his
works, which is not without the free consent of the will.

The minor (which is, that it is tyranny for one that is an inferior power,
and not their Creator, to punish them that do commit crimes by such compulsion)
I do not in any part of my writings affirm. Wherefore Cerberus does me open
wrong, to conclude that I charge al rulers with tyranny.

The rulers are commanded of God (who is their Romans ^3.
ruler, and to whom they shall render an account of their doings) that they
shall punish the breakers of Gods commandments, and to that end has God
given them a sword. Woe unto them therefore, if they do not punysh such, and
defend the innocent. And when they do punish the offenders, and defend the
innocent: then do they their duty. So far of do I think them to be from the
fault of tyranny.

But Cerberus would feign have the Rulers angry with us, and especially with
Crowley. And therefore he labors to make the^ believe that Crowley says that
which he never thought. The words that Cerberus has cited out of my book
against Shaxton, when they be indifferently weighed, shall be found none other
in effect, than are those words that Esaie wrate in the. 45. Chapter of his
Prophecies, where he says thus: Vae Esai. 45.
contendenti cum sictore suo. Testa cum testis terrae contendat. An dicet lutum
sictori suo, quid facis? and opus tuum manibus destituitur. That is to say. Woe
be to him that does contend with his maker. Let the earthen vessel contend
with the earthen vessels. Shall the claye say unto him that made it: what
duest thou make? and thy work is not made with hands?

What other thing can Esaie mean by these words: but that as it is a thing
far unseemly for a piece of clay to stand up and reason with him that
tempereth it with his fingers, and to say unto him, why do thou fashion me
after this sort: so is it unseemly that man should reason with God, concerning
his purpose in making him after this fashion or that, or to this use or that
use? But if man will reason this matter: let him reason it with him y^ is a man
as he is: so were there some reason in his doings. For although one man have by
Gods ordinance, authority over other men: yet may not that man do with the
rest what he lusts, as God may do with his creatures.

Wherefore, I conclude, that Cerberus his exclamation, with woe worth the
sinful generation of our age. etc. is not worth the weighing, neither would
Cerberus if he had seen thus much before, have thought it worth the writing as
I suppose.


Cerberus. Against which error cries out the word of God in a multitude of
places: manifestly proving, that through the grace and help of God, me^ may
choose, and are neither driven by absolute necessity, nor compelled by Gods
Predestination, to commit murder, theft, treason or any such flagitious
offense, nor any manner of sin or evil, whatsoever it be. As for example:
Moses says: Therefore choose life. Deuteronomy. 30. And Joshua says, choose whom
you will serve. And after when the people promised to serve the Lord only, he
says unto them, you are witnesses unto your selves, that ye have chosen the
Lord to serve him. Joshua. 24. But afterward when the people forsook the Lord
again, and chose other Gods: the Lord says unto them. Go, cry unto the Gods
which ye have chosen. Iud. 10. Christ says, Marie has chosen her that good
part, which shall not be taken from her. Luc. 10. David says: I have chosen
the way of truth: and again in the same Psalm: I have chosen thy
commandments: Psalm. 119. But the Lord says by his Prophet Esaias: They did
wickedness before mine eyes, and chose the thing that pleased me not. Esaias.
65. and in the next chapter he says. Et elegerunt quae ego nolui. And they
have chosen those things which I would not. Esaias. 66.

Thus it is plain, that as choose, and can not choose agree together, so does
their opinion agree with the Scripture, for such direct contrariety is between
choice and mere necessity, between violent compulsion and christian liberty,
that black and white, may with more possibility, be coupled in a subject.

But it is marvel to see, how scrupulous some me^ are in these words of
choice. I doubt whether they dare read these and many such like places of
scripture, which so plainly speak of choice: But perhap they always skip over
that word, or read some other in stead thereof, as the Jews do Adonai in
stead of Jehovah, for surely many are so afraid of freewill, that they fall
as the Proverb says, out of the lime Kell into the cole pit, from high
presumption into deep desperation, fiercely following that old spirit of
wicked Pelagi, as before it is touched in the.ix. of his devilish errors, where
he affirms, that if a man have need of Gods help, then has he no freedom
or choice at all: Thus do they break their ship upon the perilous rock,
seeking to escape the dangerous Hurlepole. For an horrible presumption it was
of Pelagius, to think that a man by nature, had such power to choose good, and
refuse evil, that he needed not the grace and help of God: and a desperate
opinion is this of other, to say that the predestination of God works all
things in man, whether it be good or evil, and that a man can not choose, but
do whatsoever he does. For no doubt, this opinion makes a very disordered
Chaos, and an utter confusion of al things, as it were mixing and thrusting
together, both heaven, earth and hell. Making one confused lump, of God, the
Devil and the world. Of sin, grace, and nature, turning all doings into
dreams, all truth into traunces, all verity into sables, all prayer and
meditation into vain imagination.

For if Gods predestination be the only cause of Adams fall and filthy sin,
and consequently the only cause and worker of all evil, yea even with
compulsion and sorce, as they shamefully and plainly affirm, then will no man
deny, that on the other side: Gods predestination works as violently in all
things that are good.

So then if Gods predestination work all, without all exception, both in evil
and good, then all other things, whatsoever they be, although they appear to
work, and do some thing, yet do they in deed utterly nothing. So that the
Devil does nothing, man does nothing, laws do nothing, doctrine does nothing,
prayer does nothing: but Gods predestination does altogether, and is the
efficient cause, yea and, the only cause of all things.

Against this opinion, the word of God is exceeding plain and manifest, not
only in the places before rehearsed, but also in these following, here briefly
noted, yea and abundantly throughout the whole Scripture. Gene. 4. a. Reg. 24.
b. 1. Para. 21. b. Pro. 3. d. Eccle. 15. c. 4. Esd. 7. b. d. and. g. e. and. 9.
a. Luke 10. d. and. f. Ioa^ 1. b. Act. 5. a. 1. Cor. 7. g. and. 9. a. and. 10.
c. and. 14 f. 2. Cor. 13. c. Phil. 4. c. Heb. 11. Against this evil opinion,
also do all the ancient Doctors with one consent vehemently write, as they by
themselves cannot deny, except only Augustine, which because of his exceeding
obscurity and darkness in diverse places, he is often alleged of both parts.

Also against this opinion, writes earnestly Philip Melancthon the chiefest
and best learned of all the Germans: In like manner does Bullenger, the
chiefest and most excellent of all the Switcers. The same does also Erasmus
Cercerius, and many other of the best learned Protestants, whose sayings were
profitable here to rehearse, but that their judgment in this matter is well
known to all the learned, and my determination is at this present, rather
briefly and simply, to declare what part of doctrine I and many other mislike,
than with long discourse and many authorities to disprove the same.


Crowley. In a multitude of places (says Cerberus) the word of God cries
out against the doctrine of the necessity of Gods Predestination: manifestly
proving that, through the grace and help of God, men may choose, and are
neither driven by absolute necessity, nor compelled by Gods Predestination, to
commit murder, theft. etc. As for example, Moses says. Deuteronomy. 30. Choose
life. etc. Have I said that man is driven by absolute necessity? Or that he
is compelled by the compulsion of Gods Predestination to commit murder, theft.
etc? I am sure Cerberus is not able to show it, in any of my writings. And I
think he has not seen it in any of the writings of them that he writes
against.

But this is his manner, when we speak of such a kind of necessity as
follows upon the prescience of GOD, which can not be deceived: then will he
make y^ world believe, that we affirm an absolute necessity, wherein the will
wresteling and striving to the contrary, is enforced to give place, and
violently driven to do that it would not: And when we speak of that
compulsion, that God uses in delivering the wicked and obstinate sinners into
a reprobate sense, to commit things that are unseemly: that by sinning, their
former sin might be punished: then Cerberus would have men to believe y^ we
mean of a violent compulsion, which man strives against, but is not able to
resist the force and violence of it.

Well, I doubt not but the indifferent Readers of this Apology, will have a
better opinion of us than so. For it does plainly appear by the words hereof,
that we teach no such necessity, violent driving, nor compulsion.

But we say, with the Scripture, and ancient and all sound Fathers: that
Gods prescience, providence, and Predestination, can not be disapointed, but
must needs come to pass, as he has foreseen, and in providence
predestined that it should: and yet not without the consent of the will, in
those whom God did know before would consent, and in foreknowledge did
appoint to consent, and to choose the things which he knew before that they
would choose.

The Scriptures therefore, that Cerberus cites out of Moises, Joshua, Judges,
David and Esaie: are nothing against us, for we confess as much as is taught
by them. We confess also, that man may by the grace and help of God choose to
refuse murder, theft, etc. What is it then that Cerberus has said against us?
He would feign have men think that we teach, that God is not able with his
grace and help to make men able to refuse y^ which is evil, and to choose to
do that which is good. As though we should think no better of our God, than the
heathen Poets did of their Jupiter. Whom they bring in, lamenting that he was
by the destinies let so, that he could not do that good for his dear
children, y^ he would gladly have done for them. But we know, that our God is
able to do what he will do, and that he is present in all places, and does in
all places all that he is willing to do. Yea, we do confess with S. Paul,
that by Phil. 4.
his help that does comfort and strengthen us, we are able to do all things.
So far are we from thinking, that man is not, or may not be able by Gods
help to refuse to commit murder. etc.

But Cerberus says it is plain, that as choose and can not choose do agree
together: so does our opinion agree with the Scripture. And then he sets
mere necessity and violent compulsion, against Christian liberty. That
doctrine may be his own. We refuse it as none of ours. But if Cerberus would
come to talk: a man might ask him in what points the Christian liberty does
consist. Whether he mean that it consists in an absolute power to do what we
will, because he makes mere necessity and violent compulsion, the contraries
to it. If he mean so, then does he not mean as S. Galat. 5.
Paul does mean in his Epistle to y^ Galathia^s, where he exhorts them to
stand in that liberty wherewith Christ has made us free: As may well appear
to as many as will read the Text. Well, I will leave this matter, till I may
know Cerberus and talk with him mouth to mouth.

As for those that be so scrupulous in the words of choice, let them (if there
be any such) answer for themselves. For my part, I can be well contented to
read them and hear them too: but to apply them as Cerberus does, I think no
man can be to scrupulous, that will not agree with Cotta, who would rather
that God should not know of things before they came to pass, than that man
should not have free choice to do what he will. And yet do I not follow the
spirit of Pelagius: as I have showed before upon that ninth Article that
Cerberus speaks of: neither have I, in seeking to escape the dangerous
Hurlepoole, dashed my ship against the perilous Rock, as Cerberus would
have men to think that I and such other have.

But if Gods predestination be the cause. etc. Then, says Cerberus. etc. This
(if) is already answered. I will not therefore trouble the Reader with it any
more.

But if Gods predestination work all: then the Devil, man, laws, doctrine,
and prayer, do nothing. This is the very reason that Cotta and Cicero made (as
S. Austen declares in his syft book De Ciuitate Dei. Cap. 9.) And in the
tenth Chapter of the same book, he does answer this objection, declaring to
what use, laws, doctrine and prayers do serve. His words are these: Male
autem viuitur, si de Deo non been creditur: Vnde, absit a nobis eius August. De
Ciui. Dei. lib. 5. Cap. 10.
negare praescientiam, vt liberi esse velimus, quo adiuuante sumus liberi, vel
crimus. Proinde, non frustra sunt leges, obiurgationes, exhortationes, lauds,
and vituperationes: quia and ipsas futuras praesciuit, and valent plurimum,
quantum illas valeturas praesciuit: and praeces valent ad ea impetranda, quae
se praecantibus concessuru^ esse praesciuit: and iusta premia bonis factis, and
peccatis supplicia constituta sunt. Neque enim ideo peccat home, quia Deus
illum peccaturum praesciuit: imo, ideo non dubitatur ipsum peccare cum peccat:
quia ille, euius praescientia fallinon potest, non fatum, non so^tunam, non
aliquid aliud, sed ipsum peccaturum praesciuit, qui si nolit, omnino non
peccat: Sed si peccare noluerit: etiam hoc ille praesciuit. That is to say.
The life of man is evil, when his belief concerning God is not good.
Wherefore, be it far from us, that we, to ye end that we our selves would be
free, should deny the prescience of him, by whom we are or shall be free.
Therefore, laws, reprehensions, exhortations, commendations, and sharp
rebukes, are not in vain: because that both he did know before hand that they
should come to pass, and also they are of great force, even of as great force
as he did foreknow that they should be. And just rewards are appointed for
good works, and punishments for sins. Neither does man sin, because God did
know before that he should sin. Yea rather, it is therefore out of doubt
that he does sin, when he does sin: because he, whose foreknowledge can
not be deceived, did know before, that it was not destiny, nor fortune, or
any other thing, that should sin, but he himself. Which if he be not
willing: he sins not at all. But if he should not be willing to sin: God
did also know that before.

Here may Cerberus see (as it were in a glass) how far unlike S. Austen he is
in this matter: and how lively he does resemble his old friends Cicero and
Cotta. For fear of granting any necessity to follow upon ye prescience and
predestination of God: he will rather grant that God may be deceived, and that
he is altogether careless, and predestinateth nothing so certainly, but that
man may by the power of his will alter and change it. And this is in effect,
as much as to deny that there is any God at all.

But the word of God is exceeding plain and manifest against this opinion
(says Cerberus.) For Genes. 4. 2. King. 24. etc. are places most manifestly
against it. But al those places I leave to be weighed by ye Reader, who keeping
in mind that which I have written in the former part of this Apology, may
easily understand how they make against that opinion that we hold. And to give
the Reader some occasion to conceive a good opinion of Cerberus in the citing
of his Scriptures for his purpose: I will set down the judgment of his own
Austen, in those questions ex vtroque testamento, that Cerberus and I have
spoken of before: wherein shall appear how that Austen understands the first
of Cerberus Scriptures, which he cites out of the fourth of Genes. His words
be these. Itaque no^ quia obtulit reprehensus est, sed quia indigna obtulit.
Neque ex co damnatus est, sed quia factum noluit emendare co^monitus. Adte enim
ait conuersio cius, and tu dominaberis cius. Hoc est, me non accipiente, ad
tuum dominium conuersum est munus a te oblatum, vt de caetero seiret quid
faceret. That is to say: Therefore he was not rebuked, because he did offer a
sacrifice: but because he did offer those things that were too vile to be
offered. No, he was not condemned for that neither: but because he would not
amend his fact when he was told of it. For he says, thine offering shall return
to thee again, and thou shall be Lord of it. That is, where as I do not
receive thine offering, it is returned again to thine own rule, so that he
might know how he should use the rest.

Now let the indifferent Reader judge, how this place may by the judgment of
this Austen: be applied as Cerberus would here have it to be applied. And if
Cerberus will have this place serve his purpose, he must sight with his own
Austen be he never so loath to do it. But least this Apology should increase
too much, and pass the quantity that I would have it to grow unto: I will
leave the rest of the places that he cites, to the consideration of the
diligent Reader, assuring the same, that not one of those places shall be found
to make against us.

All the ancient Doctors also (says Cerberus) and the best learned of the
Protestants. etc. do vehemently write against our opinion. And Austen only
because of his exceeding obscurity. etc. is alleged on both parts. But when
Cerberus shall cite their words that they have so vehemently written against
us: there shall none of them be found to maintain his opinion. Which is, that
in Christ all mankind is elected. As it appears in the former part of this
Apology. Neither shall any of them be found to write against that which we
maintain, whe^their words and ours shall be well weighed, and our purposes
perceived, as all the learned may well understand and know, though Cerberus be
blind on that side.


Cerberus. Wherefore, to conclude. Take this one note, in this matter of cannot
choose, or of necessity, both for the better understanding of the thing it
self, and also of those which write thereupon.

They commonly speak of two kinds of necessity. The one is, of necessity
absolute, and the other, of necessity of consequence, or mere necessity, and
necessity upon condition, which division, all learned and good Authors do
use, and it is very profitable to be considered. For touching the one, there
is neither reason, law, counsel or doctrine, neither fair promise, nor sharp
threatening, nor any other thing whatsoever it be, which may help or hinder,
add or take away, hurt or profit. Wherefore, there is never any of all the
aforesaid ways or means used in any of all those things, which come to pass
by absolute necessity.

As for example: It is of mere necessity, that the Devil is and ever shall
be damned, that the soul of man shall be everlasting, and not come to an end,
like to the lise of beasts: nor the life of beasts be immortal as the soul
of man, and such like. Wherein it were more than madness, to endeavor, either
by reason, law, or counsel, or any other way whatsoever it were, to alter,
change, withstand or remove any of those things, seeing of mere necessity
they must needs be so, and can not be altered.

For as Auste^ says: Omne enim quod prohibetur, ideo prohibetur, ne (quia
potest sicri) siat. Si autem fati esset, non posset fieri, neque, prohiberetur.
Vet. and noui testament. Quest. 115. Whatsoever is forbidden (says Austen)
therefore it is forbidden, because it might be done, and yet ought not to be
done. But if it were of destiny, then could it not be done, nor should not be
forbidden.

These words of Austen being few, contain much matter, if they be truly
weighed.

Now to the necessity of consequence, or necessity of condition, whereof
Melancthon says: Neque, enim haec consequentia libertatem voluntatis tollit.
Neither does this consequence take away the liberty of the will. And this
necessity is not repugnant to diligence, prayer, laws and doctrine. For
therefore (that I may use again the words of Austen) things are forbidden to
be done, because they might be done, but ought not to be done. And this
necessity grows upon former causes, granted or wrought. As it is of
necessity, or needs must be, that sects and heresies shall grow in the
Church, because the wicked seek their own glory, and Satan stirs their
hearts, to imagine and set forth abominable errors, wherein they serve the
Devil, with all the diligence of their power. Wherefore, it must follow: that
sects and heresies shall grow.

Neither does this necessity prove, that they could not choose but commit such
euilles: but seeing they do refuse the light, and embrace the darkness, this
must necessarily follow, this must needs be the end, that heresy and much
mischief shall spring. Or as when a man presently beholds with his eyes
murder, theft, dru^kennesse, or any other wickedness, it must needs be true,
that such things are committed according to that which a man does see plainly
before his eyes. Yet does it not follow, that those wicked doers could not
choose but commit those outrageous crimes. But seeing that they do commit such
things, it must needs be true by the necessity of consequence, that such
things are committed of them. These two kinds of necessity, does Austen
notably declare, how, and after what sort they spring out of Gods
predestination. Lib. De Praedest. Dei. Cap. 2.

First of all (says Austen) it is horrible iniquity to say, that God does
predestinate any thing: saving only that which is good. But of
predestinations, some be of bynding or of bondage, and other be of condition.
These are of justice, and those of power. And that it may be the more manifest,
it shall be declared (says he) by example, which are of binding and power: and
which are of condition and justice. God created heaven and earth, sun and
moon: Further, he did foreordeyne or predestinate that the heaven should ever
be turned, and the immovable earth should be in place of a center unto the
turning heaven. The Sun and Moon should rule the day and night. The day and
night should succeed one another in certain times appointed. These
predestinations are of power and of bynding. For every one of those things
aforesaid: is so bound unto his work, by the predestination of God, that it
can not be moved from the same. But God created man, and did predestinate him,
that if he were obedient, and did absteyn from the taste of the forbidden apple:
he should live, but if he were disobedient, he should abide the sentence of
death. This predestination is of condition and of justice. For God before the
fall of man, did not by the power of binding so predestinate him to die, that
of necessity he must needs die, but under that condition, if he sinned.
Because therefore man did sin, it was a righteous thing, that he should die. If
he sinned not, he should not be bound to death by any chayn of Gods
predestination.

All these are the words of Austen. And this division, is often repeated and
commended, by the best learned of the Protestants.


Crowley. Now Cerberus will shortly come to an end. For he will conclude with
one note in this matter of can not choose or necessity. etc. And this note is
of the two sorts of necessity, one absolute, and the other of consequence. Or
mere necessity and necessity upon condition. etc.

And to make men believe, that all that we do, is to persuade me^, that al
things do come to pass of mere necessity: he puts for example the
damnation of the Devil, the immortality of man's soul, and the mortality of
the brute beasts. As though the thoughts, words and deeds of men were like
unto these. And therefore it should as little avail, to vsexeason, law,
counsel, doctrine, fair promises or threatenings, to pull men from evil
thought, words or deeds, and so from damnation, which does necessarily follow
upon those doings, as it were by the same means to go about to make the
Devil a saved spirit, man's soul mortal, and the life of a brute beast
everlasting.

But we speak not of that necessity which is mere or absolute: but we speak
of the other, which is of consequence or condition. And therefore his Austens
words are cited out of place (I say his Austens words, because they are the
words of the same Austen that I have noted before not to be the Bishop of
Hippoe) for these words of this Austen are spoken of the thoughts, words and
deeds of men, which, though they do come to pass by a certain necessity, as
God did without beginning foresee that they should: yet does man use the
liberty of his will therein. For he does neither think, speak, nor do any
thing without the consent of his will. And there is no impossibility in man,
but that his thoughts, words and deeds may be contrary to that they are.

As for example. There was no impossibility in Cerberus but that he might have
refrayned, both y^ weiting, and publishing and casting abroad of this answer
to his friends letter. Neither was it impossible for me to refrain from
writing this Apology. And Cerberus and I both have herein used the liberty of
our will. And yet did God foresee and predestinate both his doings herein and
mine. And as he did foresee that we should choose to do as we have done: so did
he also predestinate our doings herein. So that choosing to do as God did
foresee and predestinate that we should choose to do: we have done it by that
necessity that all learned Authors do call the necessity of consequence or
condition.

And God does foresee, whether this Apology shall persuade Cerberus to be of
one mind with us or not. And if it shall be so: then has God predestined my
labors so that end. If not: then shall my labors serve to some other purpose
that God knew before. And yet do I herein use the liberty of my wi^^, and so
shall Cerberus. use his. For neither of us is or shall be enforced to do that
which our will would not have us do.

This is all the matter that the words of Cerberus his Austen do contain,
when they be truly weighed.

As for the sentence of Pelancthon, it makes nothing against us, for we speak
of the same necessity that he speaks of: and we affirm with him, that it
takes not away the liberty of man's will.

The same Melancthon, writing De necessario, in his book which he does entitle
Erotematum dialectices: says that there be four sorts of necessities. One
absolute. As that God is true, liberal, just. etc. Another of desinitions or
demonstrations: as a three cornered stone must of necessity have three
corners, and virtue must needs be a thing that agrees with the rule of Gods
will. The third is natural, in things which are so ordered in nature, that they
can not otherwise be, in and by that order. But this necessity may be altered
at Gods pleasure, as by examples we see it has. As at the red sea when the
water stood still on heaps like hills, and when at the word of Joshua, the
sun stood still and moved not. etc. The fourth and last, is that which all the
business is about. And Cerberus would feign make all men believe, that we make
no difference between this fourth and the first.

Of this necessity, does Melancthon write thus. Quartus gradus est mutabilium,
quae tamen vocantur necessaria, necessitate consequentiae, id est, quae suns
quidem re ipsa mutabilia: sed non mutantur, vel quia sic a Deo decreta sunt,
vel quia sequu^tur ex causis, quae non mutantur, cum tamen mutari potuisse^t,
vel quia cum su^t, contradictoriae simul verae esse non possunt. etc. That is
to say. The fourth degree of necessities, is of those things which are
mutable, which are notwithstanding called necessary, by the necessity of
consequence. That is to say, which are in deed mutable: but are not changed,
either for that they be so decreed of God, or else for that they do follow
upon causes that are not changed, where as notwithstanding they might have
been changed. Or else, for that when they be done, the fiat contraries of
them, can not at the same time be true.

What have I written against Shaxton more than this? The thoughts, the words,
and the deeds of men, are of themselves mutable: but as God has decreed, so
shall it come to pass, in all men's thoughts, words and deeds.

It follows therefore, that though ye teachers of sects, the muderers, the
thieves and the drunkerds, might have withholden the consent of their wills
from those wicked doings: yet God having decreed to punish either them or
others by that mean, the thing must fall out according to that decree: and yet
God remain just, and man's will unconstrained, as I have before sufficiently
declared.

As touching the Text of Austen, that Cerberus cites out of his book De
Predestinatione Dei. Cap. 2. I will first note what Erasmus and the rest of the
learned sort, do think of that book. Hoc opusculum de Praedestinatione Dei,
no^ esse Augustini, vel ipsa breuitas arguit. Deinde, hoc docot, quod
Augustinus fortiter refellit, praedestinationem esse ex operibus nostris.
Videtur fragme^tum alicuius libri, cuius studiosus quispiam, prooemium and
clausulam attexuit. That is to say. This little work of the predestination of
God: is by the very shortness thereof, showed not to be of Austens writing.
Moreover, it does teach that predestination is of our works, which thing
Austen does mightily refell. It seems to be a scrap of some book, whereunto
some man, being desirous thereof, has fastened a proeme and conclusion.

Here thou may see (gentle: Reader) of what authority this book is, that
Cerberus makes so much of. I will not therefore spend any time in aunswering
these words.


Cerberus. Many things do offer themselves in this matter to be spoken, but my
purpose of briefnesse causes me to grow to an end. I have thought good
therefore in few words, to note one point more of evil doctrine, which now a
days is taught, and it springs also out of this foresaid proposition, that
Gods predestination causes all sin and wickedness, and this it is, that
sin is not the cause of Reprobation, nor of Gods hatred toward the wicked
which are damned, which thing in deed, to be short, I grant must needs
follow, if the former conclusion be true, that sin comes of Gods
predestination, or that Gods predestination was the cause of Adams fall, which
was the original of sin. For if sin, or the orignall thereof came of God,
or of his ordinance, and from God comes nothing but that which is holy, just
and good, then is sin, no sin, and cannot be the cause of Gods hatred
toward them that perish, except we should say, that God hates them for that
thing, which is holy, just, and good.

And least I should be thought, through pretense of brevity, to pass over,
without plain proof of that which I say, that this part of doctrine, is also
set forth and taught. I will rehearse one sentence of theirs published in
print, which is so open and manifest, that it may serve as well as a thousand:
I read in the forenamed book translated out of French into English, toward the
latter end of the book, upon this place, thus noted in figures, and these
very words follow. Romans 9. c. 11. 12. 13. He says not only that Esau was
ordained to be hated, before he did any evil: for in so saying, he should not
seem to exclude any thing, but an actual sin and incredulity. But he says
expressly, before he was borne: whereby he excludes original sin, and all
that which might be considered in the person of Esau by his birth from the
cause of hate.

Touching the Text, whereupon it is spoken, assuredly Ink serves not worsse to
make Iuorie white: than these words, to open the mind and sense of the
Apostle, as it were easy to prove, if shortness would suffer to make a
digression, but touching that part of doctrine: thou feast that he speaks of
two opinions: the one that actual sin or incredulity, should be the cause of
Gods hatred toward the wicked: The other, that original sin, is the cause of
Gods hate toward them. This man against them both, takes occasion upon this
example of Esau: to exclude all that is in man, either outward sin or
inward, either original sin or actual, from the cause of Gods hate, so
that (if it be true which they say) God does hate men: neither for their
outward wicked life, nor for their inward devilish lust, but for his own
pleasure only.


Crowley. The purpose to be brief, causes Cerberus to cut of many things that
offer themselves to be spoken. Yet for all the have, he must needs note one
point more of evil doctrine. Which is, that sin is not the cause of
Reprobation. etc.

I would feign know how Cerberus could answer this Argument. All causes are
in order before their effects: but sin was not before Reprobation: Ergo
sin could not be the cause thereof. Cerberus will deny the minor. For he
holds that sin was before Reprobatio^. The minor therefore must be proved
thus. Whatsoever was before Reprobation, is eternal: but sin is not
eternal, Ergo sin was not before Reprobation. If Cerberus will doubt of y^
mayor, it shall be proved thus. Whatsoever was before Election, is eternal: but
Election and Reprobatio^ are of like antiquity: Ergo, whatsoever was before
reprobation is eternal. The mayor is manifest by the words of S. Paul to the
Ephesians. Cap. 1. Sicut elegit nos in ipso ante mundi constitutionem. As he
elected us in him before the world was made. And if Cerberus will doubt of the
minor (as perhaps he will) then let him show us, how there can be a choice
where none are refused.

This might suffice for our desence in this matter that Cerberus does now
charge us withal. But because he says that this our conclusion is the sequel
of a proposition that we affirm, that is, that Gods predestination causes all
sin and wickedness: I must take some what more pain in the defense of that
which we have written.

First, I must say that Cerberus has belyed us: For we say not that Gods
predestination does cause any sin. Then I must also deny, and have alredie
proved, that Adams fall was not the original of sin. Thirdly, we deny that
the original of sin came of God: wherefore the conclusion that Cerberus
makes is not against us.

But Cerberus has found one sentence of ours so open and manifest, that it
may serve as well as a thousand. It is in the latter end of the forenamed
English book translated out of French, upon the words of Paul Romans 9. c. He
says not only. etc. Cerberus can not see how this Text of Paul may by those
words be better opened, than Iourie may be made white with ynke. But for have
to come to an end, he will not stand to prove this, although he might easily
do it, as he says.

But touching the two opinions, one that actual sin or incredulity, the
other that original sin, is the cause of Gods hatred toward men: this
fellow (says Cerberus) takes occasion upon the example of Esau to exclude all
that is in man. etc.

A little help would make this man of one mind with Origin, who writing
upon this part of Paul's Epistle to the Romans and these verse words, Jacob
have I loved, but Esau I have hated: says, that Jacobs soul being yet without
a body, did purge it self, and when God saw the pureness of it, he took it,
and put it into that body wherein Jacob was borne, and Esau his soul which had
not cleansed it self, he put into a body made out of the same lump, but not
to honor as the other was, because the soul of Esan was not worthy of such a
body. So he loved Jacob (as Origin thinks) because Jacobs soul had
clea^sed it self before it came into y^ body: and he hated Esaias, because his
soul had not clea^sed it self.

If a man should ask this question of Cerberus: why did God love Jacob and
hate Esau? what could he answer, if he will not say, Quia voluit? because he
would, If he will say, that God respected the actual righteousness and
sin that was in them: then shall he be found to join with Origin. If he
shall say that he respected original sin in Esau, and did therefore hate
him: then may it be asked why he did not hate Jacob for the same. For both were
defiled therwt alike. But if Cerberus will say, that God had respect to ye
works that they should do in the time of their life; then does he join with
the Papists: And that he would not seem to do.

His best way therefore, shall be to join with us, and say: That God loved Jacob
and hated Esau, because it pleased him so to do. And if any man shall stand up
to dispute the matter any further: then to answer with S. Paul. O homo tu
quis es, qui respondeas Deo? O thou man, who art thou, that dare take upon
thee to reason with God?


Cerberus. That very same thing says Knoxe in the. 141. page of his foresaid
book: where his words are these. Further I say: that if Esau was hated for
his evil deserving, then must it needs follow, that Jacob was loved for his
well deserving, by the Argument following: of the nature of contraries.

As well it might be said, it must needs follow by the contraries: that if a
King or Prince hate one man, which has well deserved his hate, by stealing
from him his ring, his chain, or some great Iuel, the^ does he not love any
other man, but he which has well deserved his love, by giving to him a ryng, a
chain, or some great treasure, as though he should say: because justice works
on the one side, therefore mercy has nothing to do on the other side, or as
though God were not both just and merciful: Just in damning for their offense,
those which are damned: and merciful in saving without their desert those
which are saved.

And who sees not that neither simile, nor dissimile, neither like things, nor
things contrary, do hold in all points, for nothing is so like, which in
somethyng is not unlike, neither any thing so contrary, which does in all
things vary. Christ is likened to a Lion, but did he ever ravish, or devour,
and shed any innocent blood? Latimer wysheth, that al Bishops were like
Bishop Devil in diligence, the^ ought not the Devil and a Bishop to differ in
all things. And most specially and plainly, does the Scripture beat in our
heads: above al other things, that the nature of contraries, do not hold in
both sides of Gods reward, and man's deserving. For as they are inseparable
relatiues in the one part, so on the other side, the one has never any
relation to the other, for as Gods hatred and vengeance, has ever relation to
man's deserving: so has Gods love and mercy never any relation to man's merit.
Yea, all the Scripture teaches us, that God never hates, or punishes man
without his own deserving. For as the wise man says: Et cum qui nullam poenam
commeritus Sapient. 12.
sit co^demnasse, a tua potentia iudicas alienum. And thou Lord (says he)
estemest it a thing contrary to thy power, to have condemned him which has
not deserved punishment.

What should be said of the Cananites and the Israelites, if the nature of
contraries do always hold, and have such relation of the one to the other, must
it not then necessarily follow (as he says) by the nature of contraries: that
if the Cananites were cast out of the fortunate land that flows with milk
and honey, for their evil deserving: that on the other side the Israelites were
brought and planted into that same happy and blessed rest, for their well
deserving? But what says the Scripture? Speak not in thy heart, after that
the Lord thy God has cast them out before thee, saying: for my righteousness
Deuteronomy. 9.
the Lord has brought me in, to possess this land, nay, but for the
wickedness of those Nations, the Lord does cast them out before thee. So
plainly speaks the holy ghost here, that thou may easily perceive, how
gross and vain their saying is, which affirm: That if God hate an evil man
for his own evil deserving, then must it needs follow, that he loves a good
man for his own well deserving. For the hatred of God and everlasting
damnation are just rewards of man's evil deserving: but the love of God and
everlasting life are free gifts Romans 6.
of God, for Christ's sake without any part of man's own deserving.

Take therefore this saying of theyrs: No sin neither original nor actual,
is the cause of Gods hate or eternal death, and put the same into the one side
of the ballaunce, then take, and put into the other side, this saying of S.
Paul to the Romans: was Romans 7.
that then that was good, made death unto me? God forbid, but sin was made
death unto me. Then wey both these sayings together with the hand of good
aduiseme^t, in the indifferent balla^ce of upright judgment, and put not in
above three graynes of wilful partiality: thus shall thou plainly see, that
the Apostle agrees far better with the Majesty of God, and has a much more
reverent opinion of his judgments, than these men have, yea, thou shall easily
perceive (whatsoever they say) that neither Gods pleasure, nor Gods ordinance,
or predestination, nor none other thing that is good, is made death, or the
cause of Gods hatred, against any man, but sin is the very grounded cause,
why God hates, takes vengeance, and punishes man by death and destruction,
according to that which the same Apostle says: Death is the reward of sin.
And the words Romans 6. Osee. 13.
of O see are also manifest and plain where he says: O Israel thou do
destroy thy self, but in me only is thy help. In which words of the holy
ghost, thou see how manifestly God does, as it were purge him self, from
being the cause or worker of man's destruction, so that the perdition and
destruction of man, is altogether to be attributed unto him self: And God
being clear, neither accessarie, nor partaker thereof, as the chief and high
Judge of heaven and earth, unspotted and without blame, gives the sentence of
everlasting death upon man, for his own wicked deserving and offense.

But on the other side says God unto man, in me only is thy help. In God
only, only in God is our help and salvation, in him only, and of him
altogether, and not of our selves: comes our salvation, and all whatsoever
belongs thereunto. The same is also set forth by all those Scriptures, which
are before rehearsed, to prove that sin and evil, comes not of Gods
predestination, for upon that conclusion depends also this proposition, that
sin is not the cause of Reprobation, or of Gods hatred toward man.


Crowley. Yet once again has Cerberus a snatch at Knoxe. Whether he do report
his words truly or not, I know not: for I have not seen that book of his,
neither have I cause to think, yt al is Gospel that Cerberus says. Much more
ado than needs does Cerberus make, to prove that an Argument a contrarijs,
simile and dissimile: does not always conclude necessarily. For as he says,
who sees not, that they do not hold in all points? This therefore that
Cerberus has here written, is but dalliaunce, and as it were dancing about
the bushe. The question is, whether the sequel be good in the matter that
Knoxe does use it in, or not. We must therefore consider the matter, and how
Knoxe does apply this manner of reasoning to this matter. The matter therefore,
is a question moved concerning the cause why Esau should be hated of God, and
Jacob beloved, before any of them had done either good or evil, yea and before
they were borne, and therefore, before there could be in them any deserving at
all. Now, Knoxe says, that if Esau were hated for his evil deserving: then
must it needs follow, by an Argument following of the nature of contraries,
that Jacob was beloved for his well deserving.

Now, I must think well of Knoxe, for I know him to be not only learned but
also godly, and therefore not like to ouershoote himself so far, that he
would stretch an Argument, taken out of the place of contraries, further than
the nature thereof will suffer. I must think therefore, that he meant, that if
God do in choosing and refusing, in loving and hating, respect nothing but the
well deserving of one sort, and the evil deserving of ye other (as the common
opinion of the Papists is) then it must needs follow, by an Argument of the
nature of contraries, that if he hated Esau for his evil deserving, he must
needs love Jacob for his well deserving.

If Cerberus be not satisfied with this, let him look for further answer at
Knoxes own hand, for he is yet living and able to answer for himself.

As for the similitude of a King or Prince, that Cerberus uses to deface
Knoxes Argument withal: may serve him among such as know not that God is free
from al men's affections, and that he can not be moved to love us the better for
the gifts that we bestow upon him, nor the worsse, for that we take from him
and spoil him of any treasure that he ought to have.

The nature of God is not to hate but to love. For S. John says, God is love.
And as the wise man says, he 1. Johan. 4. Sapient. 11.
loves all things that be, and he hates none of the things that he has
made. Neither has he ordained or made any thing, hating the same that he
ordained or made. For in that he made or ordained them, they are all exceeding
good. Wherefore, when we say, or when it is said in the Scriptures, that God
does hate any of his creatures, (as it is said that he hated Esau) it is mea^t
that he loved not Esau or those other creatures, whom he is said to hate, so
well as he loved the others, of whom it is said that he loved them.

It can not be denied, but must needs be confessed, that God loved al his
creatures, in that he would make them some thing, where as before they were
nothing, and in that he would give them some part of that which is proper to
himself. For to be, is proper to God. And whatsoever has any being: it has
the same of God. When God gives a being to his creatures, he shows that he
loves them: but when he gives them an everlasting and blessed being, then he
loves them so, that the other love in comparison of that, seems but an
hatred. And therefore it is said that he hates them, whom he appoints not to
that everlasting blessed being, but leaves the^ to themselves, that in them he
may have occasion to exercise his justice, and by them to give occasion to his
dearly beloved to see and consider the exceeding greatness of his love and
mercy toward them.

But Cerberus seems to have the whole Scripture on his side. For he says,
that all the Scripture teaches us, that God never hates and punishes us
without our own deserving. Which saying, I grant to be true, but not in that
sense that Cerberus would have us to understand it. For Cerberus would have
us to think that God could not be compted just, if he should refuse any man
in whom there were not sin, that might move God to refuse him, and to that
end he cites the words of the wise man. For this is his opinion, as it
appears Sapient. 12.
before, that in Christ all mankind is elected, and so consequently, that Esau
was elected in Christ. But by sin he made himself a reprobate, and was not
refused before he sinned.

But let us see, how this place of the wise man makes for his purpose. The
words are these, as Cerberus cites them. Et cum qui nullam poenam commeritus
sit condemnasse: a tua potentia iudicas alienum. And thou Lord, estemest it a
thing contrary to thy power, to have condemned him that has not deserved
punishment. All the Scripture is now, by Cerberus, brought into a short sum.
For it is knit up in less than two lines, written in the.xij. Chapter of the
book of wisdom.

Of what authority that book has awayes been thought to be: I think
Cerberus is not ignorant. And how diverse readings there be of that place which
he cyteth: I suppose he knows. The Tygurine Bible is it that Cerberus
follows. Other translations there be, that differ from that, and from the
old also. The old translation has it thus.

Cum ergo sis iustus, just omnia disponis: ipsum quoque qui non debet puniri,
condemnas, and exterum aestimas a tua virtute. That is. Forasmuch as thou thy
self art just, thou do dispose all things justly: him also that ought not
to be punished, thou do condemn, and do esteem him as one exiled from
thy power or dominion. Bylike, when Cerberus cited this place, he supposed that
no man should see his book, but such as were not able to discern Chalk from
Cheese. What place can make more manifestly against him and for us, than this
place does? For by these words it is plain, that though God do condemn him,
that has not by any deeds deserved to be condemned: yet is God never the
latter, just, and does dispose all things justly.

Yea, and the circumstance of the Text does show that this translation is more
nigh the meaning of the writer, tha^ is that which Cerberus follows. For the
sentence going immediately before, is thus. Neque Rex, neque tyrannus, in
conspectu tuo inquirent, de hijs quos perdidisti. That is: Neither King nor
tyrant, will in thy presence make inquisition for them that thou have destroyed.

And the sentence that does immediately follow, is thus. Virtus enim tua,
iustitiae initium est: and ab hoc quod omnium Dominus es, omnibus te parcere
facis. That is. For thy power is the beginning of justice, and because thou art
Lord of all, thou do make thy self to spare all.

But because there is such diversity of translations in the Latin, and
peradventure Cerberus will say he has looked in the Greek, and finds that
the Tygurine translation, which he follows, is most agreeable to the Greek
Text, out of which all our Latin translations are taken. It shall not be
amiss therefore to set down the Greek Text, that such as have any skill
therein, may judge betwixt us.

(...). That is to say (so far as I am able to understand it) Thou being just,
do dispose all things justly, commanding to condemn strange from the land
of thy power, him yt is not to be judged ignominious. If any ca^ see any other
meaning in this Greek text: I will not contend, for I see that many men of
great learning, have varied in opinion about the translation thereof.

But grant that Cerberus have cited that translation that is according to the
true meaning of the Text: what has he won thereby? Shall all the Scripture
be on his side, because it is written in ye book of wisdom, that God estemeth
it a thing contrary to his power (or more truly after the Latin Text that
Cerberus cites) a thing strange from his power, to condemn him that has not
deserved punishment? I think not. For the book of wisdom, is of that sort
of books that must be made to agree with ye Canonical books: the Canonical
books must not be enforced to agree with it: For it is Apokryphe, that is a
book permitted to be read privately, but not of such authority that we may
build our faith upon every sentence in it.

But grant that this book were of as great authority as any other book of
Scripture is: should we think that God might not justly refuse such of his
creatures as it pleases him not to choose, unless the same creatures had
first by sin made them selves unworthy to be chosen? We must not restrain
God of his liberty, to do with his creatures what he himself will. Neither
must we say or think, that any thing that he does, is or can be other than
just, albeit that we can not understand how the same should be just. We must
therefore, with reverend sear, seek another meaning of this place than
Cerberus does teach us: let us think therefore, that God speaks here of
therecution of his judgment, and not of election. And it shall be good for us to
say always with S. Austen, that the cause of Gods doings may be secret, so
Aug. Paulino Quest. 6.
that we can not know them: but unjust they can not be.

But Cerberus seems to himself to have gotten a great advantage by the
example of the Cananites and Israelites. The Cananites were driven out for
their sins, and this was justice: but the Israelites were put in their place
without deserving, and that was mercy. Wherefore in refusing, God works by
justice, and in choosing, he works by mercy. As though there were no
difference between choosing and refusing of creatures, and the using of them
when they be chosen or refused. God chooses and refuses without respect of
good or evil deseruings: but he makes not his refusal known unto men, till
the refused have by their sins showed them selves worthy to be refused. And
though the chosen sort, neither do nor can show themselves worthy for their
good works to be chosen: yet before they receive the great blessing promised,
they show themselves by their works, less worthy to be refused than the
other.

And to this do the Scriptures that Cerberus has cited out of Moses, Paul, O
see and the rest: full well agree. But it follows not hereof that therefore
God had not refused the wicked sort before they sinned.

It is true, that death is the reward of sin: but it is not true that every
one that sins, receives that reward, for Christ came to save sinners, and
the free gift of everlasting life is bestowed upon such sinners, as were
elected in Christ before the beginning of the world.

It is true also, that man destroys himself, by the free consent of his
will, to do contrary to the commandment of God, and that his help and
succor comes of God alone: and yet does it not therefore follow, that no man
is refused of God before he have committed sin, whereby he destroys
himself. For when the elect were chosen in Christ, then were the rest refused.
For otherwise, it could not be an election, but a general acceptance.

As for the saying that Cerberus says is ours, and would have his friend to
lay it in the one side of the ballaunce against S. Paul's words to the
Romans: I leave to himself to be weyed with the hand of good aduisement.
etc. And let him put in as many grains of wilful partiality as he will: for
the saying is none of ours. For we teach, that sin is the cause of eternal
death, in those that be not Gods elect, and were it not that Christ has washed
his chosen slocke in his own heart blood: sin would be their destruction too.

It is but for his own pleasure therefore, that Cerberus does thus turn round
after his own tail.


Cerberus. And upon the same Article depends also an other part of doctrine,
which they teach, worthy to be misliked of all men, as well for that it
imports a sophistical search of bottomless secrets, in the very essence
and nature of God, as also, for that it clearly withdraws us from Christ,
the only stay, and comfort of our weak conscience, delivered unto us in the
word of God, for that they might be sure to hold fast the former principle,
that all things come of Gods predestination, as running streams out of a deep
fountain. They affirm, that the free mercy of God in Christ, is but an
inferior cause of Election, and that we are taught to ascend unto a higher
cause, as unto the eternal purpose and predestination of God, which he
determined only in himself. So says the printed book before named,
translated out of French into English.

That same thing we read also, lately set forth in English print, in the gloss
of the last translated Bible. Romans cap. 9. with these words. As the only will
and purpose of God, is the chief cause of Election and Reprobation, so his
free mercy in Christ is an inferior cause of salvation. etc.

But for my part, I trust in mind, never to asce^d unto that high cause of
Election, and in heart never to taste of that eternal purpose or
predestination, which God has determined only in himself, without or above
his free mercy, which is in Christ. For surely, that eternal purpose, which
comes not of Gods free mercy in Christ, is to destroy, and not to save.
Again, if that eternal purpose spring out of Gods free mercy, then is that
free mercy of God, the chief cause, and not an inferior cause why he
purposes to save us, for a great dishonor it were to the mercy of God: to be
put to an inferior place, touching election and salvation of man. For if ever
Gods mercy be above all, it is in the saving of miserable man: and mercy
there is not in God toward man, but only in Christ.

Therefore S. Paul Ephesians. 3. b. calls it the eternal purpose, which he
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord: In Christ therefore was this eternal
purpose, and for his only sake, God the Father eternally purposed to elect and
save us. Consider and mark it well, whence comes this purpose or will of God
to save us: but of his free mercy? If his purpose to save us, spring out of
his free mercy, why is then his mercy inferior to his purpose, or how is the
fountain inferior to the springs that come thereof?

Also, what may be said in God at any time, or in any respect to be higher or
greater than his mercy, seeing it is written, that his mercy is as great as
him self. Ecclesiast 2. d. Yea, and most specially it is so to be said, that
his mercy passes all, when we speak of this matter: For of this it is
written, that mercy Jacob. 2. b.
rejoices against judgment, and why? all the judgments of God in this
behalf are not to be compared unto his mercy, for though it were not true,
which David says, that his mercy is above all his Psalm. 45. b
works, yet were it clear, that in Election and Redemption and salvation of
man, Gods mercy in Christ, has ever the highest place: and those which in the
salvation of our souls, make the free mercy of God an inferior cause, how
base a room will they assign unto his free mercy, in nourishing and
preserving our bodies. Let them reach as high as they can, I trust to go no
further, but to hold me fast by the everlasting mercy of God, and by the hemme
of Christ's garment, for the Scripture describes God unto me, without Christ
as a wrathful and most terrible Judge, but in Christ, and for his sake, as a
father whose wrath is pacified, and he well pleased, reconciled, agreed, and at
one: and to speak of a higher cause or purpose, to elect and save only in God,
beside or without this free mercy in Christ, or that Christ and Gods free
mercy in him, is not the chiefest cause which worked and obteyneth the decree,
and purpose of God, to elect and save, it is plainly nothing else, but to deny
the mercy of God in election, reconciliation, redemption and salvation, by
Christ, in Christ, and for Christ: As easily it may be perceived, if a man do
but weigh and consider, what eternal purpose an Election, and a reconciliation
is, seeing Christ is our Advocate, Mediator, Peace, Reconciliation and
Atonement, as in these Scriptures following, and many other, it does plainly
appear. Psalm. 84. a. Math. 1. a. Ephe. 1. a. 2. b. Rom 5. a. b. Coloss. 1. c.
2. Corin. 5 d. 1. Ioa^. 2. a. Heb. 5. b. c. and. 7. a. b. c. d. e. 2. Timoth.
1. c.

And although it be true according to the Scriptures, that God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten son. etc. yet did he neither love the
world, nor give his son without the intercession and mediatio^ of his son,
for if God loved the world without the reconciliation and mediatio^, or before
he was reconciled, entreated, and pacified by Christ, then is Christ in vain
come to late to be our mediator, seeing God the Father is without him already
reconciled. But horrible false is this opinion: For like as the son of a King
might entreat his Father for the servant, whom for his offenses, the King in
his displeasure, were ready to cast, not only out of his service, but also
into perpetual prison: even so Christ our only Savior, and Gods only son,
did offer up himself, as a ransom unto his Father for us, whereby he
pacified the wrath of his Father, and adjoined us with himself, to be son
and heirs of his Fathers glory. And this has Christ done, not only now in
time, but also everlastingly in the most high and eternal purpose of God,
before the foundation of the world was laid.

Thus I end, thinking it sufficient for this present, that I have in these few
words pourged my self of those things which you lay to my charge, and set
forth unto your judgment, the errors of Pelagius, that you may the better
diseerne, who they are, which are worthy to be called after that sect: and
also plainly declared, in what points my conscience differs, from certain
teachers of our time: and upon what ground, I am moved so to misslike some part
of their doctrine, which things if you diligently weye and consider, readyng
the same without partiallitie: then have I my desire.


Crowley. I am glad, that Cerberus is now come to an end. Much ado he had to
let slip so many things as offered themselves to be spoken off. But now he
has concluded, concenting him self with few words, in purging him self of
those things that his friend charged him with, and setting forth the Pelagians
errors. etc.

Yet, even in the winding up of ye matter, he has found one part of doctrine,
hanging upon the Article of Gods eternal predestination, which is to be
misliked of al me^ (if Cerberus be not deceived) and that is: That as the only
will and purpose of God is the chief cause of Election and Reprobation: so his
free mercy in Christ is an inferior cause of salvation. etc. Here Cerberus
does of purpose leave out the end of that gloss, shutting up the matter with
his. etc. I will therefore set down the words that follow, which are these:
and the hardening of the heart an inferior cause of damnation. Now this gloss
is some thing more plain than it was before, as Cerberus has cited it with
his. etc. He thought belike, that the Bible wherein he finds this gloss, is
not in every man's hand, and therefore his. etc. should cause men to think
that the rest of the gloss must be as good stuff as he thinks the first part
to be. That is worthy to be misliked of all men, importing a sophistical
search of bottomless secrets, and drawing from Christ. Such shifts does
Cerberus use, to make me^ mislike with that which he himself likes not.

But to prove this part of doctrine to be such as Cerberus assirmeth it to be:
he uses two reasons. One is, that the eternal purpose of God, springs out
of his free mercy in Christ: wherefore that free mercy cannot be inferior to
Gods eternal purpose, more than the fountain, from which streams of water do
slow, can be inferior to the streams that flow from it. The other is of the
mediation of Christ. For if God did in his eternal will and purpose, elect us
before Christ had appeased his wrath, by his mediation: then was it but a vain
thing for Christ to be a Mediator, neither had we any need of his mediation.

Although I would gladly content my self, to have defended mine own writings,
and other men's wherewith Cerberus finds fault, even with as few words as he
uses in purging himself and other, of that which his friend lays to his
charge: yet may I not so shortly slip over this matter wherewith Cerberus has
shut up his answer.

For if Cerberus would have sought how to have set forth to be seen, his own
wilful ignorance, and error in the chief points of our Religion: he could
not have found a better mean, tha^ he has used in these two reasons that he
makes against the doctrine contained in the gloss wherewith he misliketh.

For what greater error can there be, than to hold that with God there is
time past, and time to come: and that any of the essential properties of God
do spring out of other in time, as though there had been or could have been a
time, wherein God lacked those properties? Or that the son of God, the
second person in Trinity, should in his divine nature in time, make mediation
to God the Father, that thereby he might purpose to save man, whom he was
before purposed to destroy. For striving against him that has said, that the
only will and purpose of God, is the chief cause of Election and Reprobation:
and that his free mercy in Christ is an inferior cause of salvation. etc. He
says that the purpose or will of God to save us, must needs spring out of the
free mercy of God, and that therefore the will or purpose of God in saving,
must of force be inferior to his mercy, even as streams that issue from
fountains, are inferior to the fountains that they come from.

And to prove this, he cites the words of Ecclesiasticus the. 2. Chapter.
Secundum enim magnitudinem ipsius: sic and misericordia illius cum ipso est.
That is: Even according to his own greatness, so is his mercy with him. He
cites also the saying of S. James. Cap. 2. of his Epistle, where he says.
Iudicium enim sine miscricordia: illi qui non sacit miscricordiam. Gloriatur
autem miscricordia aduersus iudicium. That is: He that shows no mercy, shall
have judgment without mercy. But mercy reioyseth against judgment. And
again, he cites the words of David in the Psalm. 145. Miscricordia eius super
omnia opera eius. That is: His mercy is upon all his works.

All this ado he makes, to prove that Gods will and purpose are inferiors to
his mercy. But how well that is by these Scriptures proved, I refer to the
judgment of the indifferent Reader. Sirach says, that those which fear the
Lord will prepare their hearts, and humble their souls before the Lord. Let
us fall into the hands of God, and not into the hands of men: For even as his
greatness is, so is his mercy. Sirach his purpose is to set forth the effect
of ye fear of God, which works in ye hearts of me^, a true turning to God,
with an assured hope of forgiveness at his hand, because they be persuaded,
that he is no less ready to forgive penitent sinners, than he is able to
punish the impenitent.

S. James says, that the merciful shall find mercy, minding to persuade all
men to show mercy one to another. Assuring themselves, that unless they do
so, they can find no mercy with God, and on the contrary, if they do show
mercy, they shall not need to fear iud^ement, for mercy shall prevail
against judgment.

And David the Prophet has said, that Gods mercy is upon all his works,
although it please Cerberus to cite his words otherwise, for his purpose. For
he says, that David has said, that the Lords mercy is above all his works.
Which words though they be true, yet has not David so said, neither may I
suffer Cerberus, to cause the Prophet David to speak as he would have him,
that his fantasy might be maintained by the Prophets words. David's meaning is
to teach that the Lord God shows mercy upon all his works, so that there is
not one of the works of God, that has not cause to praise him for his loving
kindness and mercy. Both ye Hebrew and Greek Text, and all the translations
in Latin, and English too (so many as I have seen) do give this sense of the
Prophets words.

How can Cerberus prove then, by these Scriptures, that the mercy of God is
the fountain of his will and purpose? All that he does therefore is nothing
else but a setting forth of his own wilful ignorance, whereby he is fallen
into the filthy error of them that imagine of God, as of a man, and that he is
moved with affections as men be. Whereas, in God: His understanding, his
unmeasurable power, his unsearchable wisdom, his merciful goodness, his
truth and justice, his chastenesse and freedom in all points, to will what he
lusts, to do what it pleases him, and to purpose and appoint what likes
him: are essential properties, without which he neither is, nor can be God. To
imagine therefore, that there was a time wherein God was purposed to destroy
man, and that his mercy in Christ has changed that purpose, and caused him
now to purpose and will to save man: is to imagine yt there was a time wherein
God was not so merciful as he is now, and so, not so perfectly God as he is
now. And that by experience he has learned some what more wisdom than he had
at the first, and therefore, may be wiser hereafter than he is now. How great
absurdities these are, I leave to the judgment of the indifferent Readers.

But Cerberus will say, that though I have said some thing against him, yet I
have said nothing for him whose words I have taken in hand to defend: but in
my words I seem to fight against them both. I answer: I have not taken upon
me to defend, either mine own or other men's words, sucder than in conscience
I think them to be true. And if I did think that the writer of that gloss did
mean as grossly, as I perceive by his open words that Cerberus does: I would
not spare him more than I have spared Cerberus: but for as much as his words
seem not to me, to have any such meaning as to teach that there was a time,
wherein God was merciless toward man, and that his mercy first sprang out of
his will and purpose (as Cerberus does plainly teach, that his will and purpose
sprang out of his mercy) I must not refuse to take that good meaning of his
words, which may seem to me to be according to the truth of Christian
religion.

The words of Paul, whereupon this note is made, are these. I will have mercy
on him, to who^ I will show mercy. Upon this it is noted in the margin, that
as the only will and purpose of God is the chief cause of Election and
Reprobation: so his free mercy in Christ is an inferior cause of salvation:
and the hardening of the heart an inferior cause of damnation. I understand
the meaning of these words to be, that as the only will and purpose of God is
the chief cause, that there was an Election and choice of some, and a refusal
of other some: so the showing forth of his mercy in Christ, is an inferior
cause, that is, an isntrumental cause whereby salvation is wrought in the
elected, according to Gods will and purpose, and the hardening of the hearts of
the reprobates, an isntrumental cause of damnation, in the reprobates,
according to the same eternal will and purpose.

He therefore that says we must ascend to an higher cause of Election, than
that which appears in the execution of Gods mercy in Christ, does not teach
to set up the essential properties one above another, as though one were
fountain of another, and that God lacked the one till it sprang out of the
other: but he teaches that the same mercy that we see executed in Christ in
time, was decreed in the eternal will and purpose of God before all time, and
so was the refusal of the^ whose hearts we see hardened in time. If any man
do see cause to judge otherwise of this gloss: I am well pleased that the same
use his own judgment in enterpreting the meaning thereof. And if I may
perceive any man's judgment herein to be sounder than mine, I trust I shall be
ready to condescend to that.

And least any man should think, that herein I do follow mine own fantacie,
without example of any thing that I see in the ancient Fathers: I will set
down the words of S. Austen, that have been a mean to confirm me herein.

In his. 14. book, De Ciuitate Dei, (...). 11. Chapter: S. Austen writes
thus. Sed quia Deus cu^cta presciuit, and ideo homine^ quoque peccaturum
ignorare non potuit: secundum id quod praesciuit, itque disposuit, ciuitatem
Dei debemus asserere, non secundum illud quod in nostram cognitionem peruenire
non potuit, quia in Dei dispositione non fuit. Nec enim homo peccato suo,
diuinum potuit perturbare consilium, quasi Deum, quod statuerat, mutare
compulerit: cum Deus praesciendo vtru^que preuenerit, id est, and homo quem
bonum ipse creauit, quam malus esset futurus, and quid boni, etiam sic de illo
esset ipse facturus: Deus enim etsi dicitur, statuta mutare: Vnde tropica
locutione in Scripturis sanctis, etiam poenituisse legitur deum, iuxta id
dicitur quod homo spera(...)rat, vel naturalium causarum ordo gestabat: non
iuxta id, quod se omnipotens facturum esse praesci(...)rat. That is to say:
But because God did know all things before hand, and therefore could not be
ignorant that man should sin: we must teach that the holy City is such a
thing as he did foresee and appoint that it should be, not such as we could not
come to the knowledge of, because it was not in that disposition or order that
God made. Neither was man, by his sin able to disorder the purpose of God, as
though he should have constreyned God to change the thing that he had once
decreed: seeing that God by his foresight did prevent both, that is to say,
both how the evil man should become (whom he had created good) and also what
thing he would make of him, even when he should in such wise become evil.
For although it be said that God does change his purposes (whereof it comes
that by a figurative speech, it is read in the holy Scriptures, that God did
repent) the same is spoken according to that which man hoped for, or that which
the order of natural causes did import: not according to that, which the
almighty did know before hand that he himself would do.

Again, the same Austen in his book De diuersis questionibus. 83. and the.
15. 16. 17. questions says thus. Deus omnium quae sunt causa est. Quod autem
omnium rerum causa est: etiam sapientiae suae causa est. Nec vnquam Deus sine
sapientia sua: Igitur sempiternae sapientiae suae, causa est sempiterna, nec
tempore prior est quam sua sapientia. Deinde, si patrem sempiternum esse inest
deo, nec suit aliquando non pater: nunquam sine filio fuit. Omne praeteritum
iam non est. Omne futurum non dum est. Omne igitur and praeteritum and
futur(...) non deest. Apud d(...)m autem nihil deest: Nec praeteritum igitur,
nec futurum, sed omne praesens est apud deum.

That is to say: God is the cause of all those things that be. And in as much
as he is the cause of all things: he is the cause of his own wisdom. Neither
was God at any time without his own wisdom: therefore he is the everlasting
cause of his own everlasting wisdom, neither is he in time more ancient
than his own wisdom. Furthermore, if to be an everlasting Father, be a thing
that is in God, and that he has not at any time not been a Father: then has
he never been without a son. Whatsoever is past, is not now. Whatsoever is to
come, is not yet. Therefore, whatsoever is past or to come, is wanting, but
with God there is nothing wanting. There is with God therefore nothing past or
to come, but all present.

These sayings of Austen do seem to me sufficient to stay a man in that mind
that I am of, concerning the cause of Gods Election and Reprobation. His will
and purpose which could never be wanting in him, neither can by any means be
altered, changed or let, may well be called the cause why he has chosen
some, and rejected some other some. And this Election is in him everlasting as
he himself is: neither may it be thought that there was ever any time wherein
he had not elected those that be elected, and refused those that be refused.
But we hold not that this is done without Christ, and therefore Cerberus
labors more than needs to prove by Scriptures that our Election is in
Christ. For we account Christ to be eternal as his Father is, and his
incarnation to be always present with God. And therefore, that the Election
that is in Gods purpose and will, is not without Christ the mercyseate and
mediator betwixt God and man. Thus much for the first of Cerberus his two
reasons.

Now a few words to his second reason, and so an end. First, Cerberus does
in this reason flatly affirm, that God did not love the world, nor give his
son for the world, before his wrath was appeased by the mediation of his
son. Whereupon it follows, that there was a time, wherein God was wroth
with the world, and not pacified by his Son. Which doctrine is as much as
to deny Christ to be a mediator. But in the closing up of the matter, he
overthrows that again, affirming that Christ has pacified the wrath of his
father, not only now in time, but also everlastingly in the most high and
eternal purpose of God before the foundation of the world was laid.

Hitherto he has fought against us: but now in the conclusion he joins with
us, calling the purpose of God eternal and most high. And what is that but to
affirm all that we teach concerning the cause of Election and Reprobation.

As touching the mediation of Christ: we hold that which S. Austen writes in
his Homely, De ouibus. Non mediator homo praeter Deitatem, Non mediator Deus
praeter humanitatem. Ecce mediator. Diuinitas sine humanitate non est
mediatrix. Humanitas sine diuinitate, non est mediatrix. Sed inter diuinitatem
solam, and humanitatem solam, mediatrix est, humana diuinitas, and diuina
humanitas Christi.

Man without the Godhead, is not mediator. God without the manhood is not
mediator: Lo here is the mediator. The divinity without the humanity is
not mediatrix. The humanity without the divinity is not mediatrix: but the
humane divinity and the divine humanity of Christ, is the mediatrix between
the divinity alone and the humanity alone. And this mediation do we hold
(as in his conclusion, at unawares I think, Cerberus has confessed) to be
everlasting in the eternal and most high purpose of God: according to the
saying of Saint John in the second of his first Epistle. We have an Advocate
with God the Father, which is Jesus Christ the righteous. To whom with his
Father and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory. Amen.

Thus in as few words as I could: I have defended that doctrine of Gods
Providence and Predestination, which I and others, have taught, and as occasion
serves, do teach, both in preaching and writing. Beseeching the Christian
Reader to call upon God, for the aid of his holy spirit to assist us, and to
make us able to continue in the teaching of true doctrine, in this and all
other Articles that concern Christian religion, that by us, as the ministers
of God, the congregation of Jesus Christ may be edified.

And if the Author of the answer, do find himself grieved for that I have
talked of him under the name of Cerberus: my desire is, that he would make his
right name known to me either by word or writing, and if he think himself
able to disprove ought that I have written in this defense, he shall either
find me able to maintain my writing by good authority, or else ready to
yield to better. But if he will lurcke still in secret, and cast abroad such
libelles as is this answer to his friends letter: I will not trouble my self
any more in defending my self and others against him that dare not show his
face. Farewell. If thou profit in reading, I have the gain that I sought in
writing.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.



