Scala Coeli. Nineteen Sermons Concerning Prayer. The first six guiding to
the true Door: The residue teaching how so to knock thereat that we may
enter. The former part containing a preparation to prayer, the latter an
Exposition upon the several petitions of the Lords Prayer.

James. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss: that ye may
spend it upon your lusts.

LONDON Printed by N. O. for Francis Burton, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the Green Dragon, 1611.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR GEORGE MANVVARING of EITHFIELD in the County of
SALOP Knight, and to the virtuous Lady Madame ANNE his beloved wife: As also to
the right worshipful and well qualified Gentleman Sir ARTHVR MANWARING Kinght,
their son and Heir, Caruer to Prince HENRY his Grace, Prince of Wales, All
happiness Internal, External, Eternal, heartily wished.
RIght Worshipful, if Christ's own Disciples, though fervent in Spirit, yet in
acknowledgement of their ignorance, were desirous that he should teach them (as
John also had taught his Disciples) how to pray. How much more need then have
we, in these our days of frozen zeal, to desire instruction in this duty. If
much babbling, and blind devotion were acceptable before God, the Papist would
get the Goal: If turning up the eyes to heaven, with bended knees to public
view, but hallow hearts (deceiving men) were acceptable to God, the Hypocrite
would outstrip al: If not praying at all, were acceptable before God, the
Atheist would attain heaven before all. But if all of these be so far wide
thereof as that the one's not praying at all, and the others, praying amiss,
be both turned into sin; then well may we say, Lord teach us how to pray,
that our prayers, or not praying at all, be not turned into sin also.

Many of us, though living in the bright sunshine of the Gospel, yet know not
How, For what, or To whom, to pray. How our hearts are utterly unprepared, our
thoughts wandering, our cogitations musing upon vanities: For what, when we
should pray for Spiritual things, we crave earthly and carnal things, when
afflictions are needful to be heaped upon us, we are impatient under the
least burden, desiring all things that may keep down our proud flesh, and
prepare us better to Godward, to be removed: To whom, Some pray to Mary, some
to Peter, some to Paul, creatures of God; Some to Crucifixes, stocks, and
stones, the works of men's hands, forsaking the true God, and blaspheming his
holy name by idolatry and Paganism. These Sermons following (right
Worshipful) in my weak understanding, give great light (in this kind) unto
the simple, profitable and sound directions to the learned, wholesome
instructions unto all: The Title of the Book expresses sufficiently the
subject thereof; The Sermons themselves, the Authors exact skill and acute
judgment in handling thereof; whose name, though concealed, yet skilleth it
not much, for not the workman the work, but the work must approve the
workman. Thus much for them both: now for my self; I have always adjudged a
principal part of true honor to consist, as in being virtuous ones self, so
also in protecting and defending virtue and virtuous actions in others; To the
honor therefore of your names, and therein also to express my own love and
duty to your Worship, I have made bold to entitle you Patrons and Protectors
hereof, that as the work it self is virtuous, so also your names may herein
remain upon record unto posterity, The Honorable Protectors of virtue.

Your Worships much devoted, F. B.

A Table of the Texts of Scripture herein handled.
Sermon 1
NOt that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2. Cor. 3.5. Page 1.
Sermon 2.
Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of
turning, Iam. 1.17. Page 15.
Sermon 3.
Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and and ye shall find: knock, and
it shall be opened unto you, Math. 7.7. Page 28.
Sermon 4.
Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what to
pray as we ought: but the Spirit it self, makes request for us with sighs
which cannot be expressed, To. 8.26. Pa. 44.
Sermon 5.
And so it was, that as he was praying in a certain place, when he ceased, one
of his Disciples said unto him: Master, teach us to pray, as John also taught
his Disciples. Luke 11.1. Page 58.
Sermon 6.
And he said unto them: When ye pray, say: Our Father which art in Heaven,
Hallowed be thy name: Thy Kingdom come: Let thy will b^e done, even in Earth
as it is in Heaven, etc. Luke 11.2. Page 71.
Sermon 7.
Our Father, Page 87.
Sermon 8.
Which art in Heaven, Page 101.
Sermon 9.
Hallowed be thy Name, Page 114.
Sermon 10.
Thy Kingdom come, Page. 127.
Sermon 11.
Thy will be done, Page 13^.
Sermon 12.
In Earth as it is in Heaven, Page 148.
Sermon 13.
Give us this day, our daily bread, Pa. 158.
Sermon 14.
And forgive us our debts, Page 174.
Sermon 15.
As we forgive them that trespass against us, Page 185.
Sermon 16.
And lead us not into tentation, Page 198^
Sermon 17.
But deliver us from Evil. Page 217.
Sermon 18.
For thine is the Kingdom, Power and Glory for ever and ever. Page 222.
Sermon 19.
Amen, Page 235.
ERRATA.
Reader, I entreat thee for thine own good, to amend these following faults
(committed in printing) with thy pen, before thou enter upon the body of the
book, thus: Page Line^ Fault. Correction 17 2 Subjection Subiectum 73 20
discite Dicite. 99 2^ to go. 110 9 dr^d Kindred. 129 13 impotent impatient.
142 10 in sece insere. 121 12 mala malo. 156 1 men's meus. 180 5 words word. 204
8 Meribuh Meribah. 205 16 indicat inducat. 206 4 dicitur ducitur. Ibid. 22 ^s
as.

Page 244. line 19. for Secenter, read Scienter.

A Preparation to Prayer. The first Sermon.
2. COR. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as
of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God.


TOUCHING our hope which we have concerning the performance of Gods promises,
the Apostle says, Heb. 6. that unto the full assurance of hope, there must be
diligence showed, and that we are to prepare our selves to receive Christ, and
also having received him, with all his benefits, to strive to hold him fast,
and never suffer our hope to be taken from us.

Upon which points, the doctrine that is to be delivered out of this Scripture
does follow by good consequence, for of these points of holding fast our faith
in Christ, two questions may arise, which may be answered by the Apostles
words in this place, where it may be demanded, First whether we be able of
our own strength to show forth that diligence that is required to assure us
of our hope. The Apostle resolves us of that doubt in saying, We are not able
of our selves to think any good as of our selves.

Secondly, because it may be objected, If we be not able of our selves, from
whence then may we receive ability? he adds, that our sufficiency is of God,
from whose goodness it comes, that we are able to do any good thing
whatsoever: to the end that when God stands without, Knocking at the door of
our hearts, Romans 3. For the performance of such duties as please him, we, in
regard that of our selves we cannot do the least thing that he requires,
should knock at the gate of his mercy, that he will minister to us ability to
do the same, according to his promise, Math. 7. Knock and it shall be opened
to you. That as by the preaching of the Law there was opened unto us the door
of faith, Acts 14. And as the Creed is unto us a door of hope. Hos. 2.15. So
the consideration of our own Insufficiency, might open unto us a door unto
prayer, by which we may sue unto God for that ability which we have not of
ourselves: So this Scripture has two uses, first to preserve us from error,
that we seek not for that in our selves, which cannot be found in us:
secondly, for our direction, that seeing all ability comes from God, we
should seek for it, where it is to be found.

Both these things are matter very necessary to be known, the first serves to
exclude our boasting, Romans 3.27. We ought not to boast of our ability, because
we have none. The second is a means to provoke us to call upon God by prayer,
that from him we may receive that which is wanting in our selves.

To speak first of the negative part, both heathen and holy writings do
commend to us this saysaying, (...) but in a diverse sense, the heathen use it
as a means to puff up our nature, that in regard of the excellency which God
has vouchsafed us, above other creatures, we should be proud thereof; but
Christian Religion labors by the knowledge of our selves, and of our misery,
to cast down every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
God, and to bring into captivity all imaginations to the obedience of Christ,
2. Cor. 10.5.

Which as Heathen Philosophers will us to consider the excellent virtues
wherewith man's nature is endued, the Scriptures all along put us in mind of
our insufficiency, and tell us, that if any man seem to himself to be
something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself in his own fancy, Gal.
6.3. And if any man thinks, that he knows any thing, he knows nothing
yet as he ought to know, 1. Cor. 8.2.

Amongst the places of Scripture, which the holy Ghost uses to show our
insufficiency, none does so much dissable our nature, as this place of the
Apostle, which denies unto us all power ever to conceive a good thought, so
far are we off from fulfilling that good which we ought.

In this negative, we are first to consider these words, whereby the holy Ghost
does disable us, we are not able to think any thing, Secondly the
qualification, in these words, as of our selves.

In denying our ability, he sets down three things, 1. Not able to think,
2. any thing, 3. this want of ability is imputed, not to the common sort of men
only, but even to the Apostles themselves, who of all other seemed to be most
able. The Apostle to show our insufficiency, tells us, We are not able so
much as to think any thing, therefore much less are we able fully to perform
that good which is enjoined us. For whereas there are seven degrees to be
considered in the effecting of any thing, to think that which is good is the
least, and lowest degree; which being denied unto us, does plainly show, what
is our imperfection.

The first thing to be observed in undertaking any good, is the accomplishing
of it: secondly the working or doing of the thing required^ thirdly the
beginning to do it: fourthly, to speak that which is good: fifthly, to will and
desire it: sixthly, to understand: seventhly, to think. But the Scripture does
deny all these unto us. The perfiting or bringing to pass of that which is
good, is not in our selves. To will is present with us, Sed bonum perficere non
inuenio, Romans 7.18. Deus est etc. It is God which enableth us to perform,
Phil. 2.7.

This we find by experience to be true, in things that are evil, The brethren
of Iospeh when they sold him to the Egyptians, had a purpose to work their
brothers hurt, but they had no power to perform, their wicked attempts; For
God turned their wicked purpose to good: Genesis 50.20. When Paul was going to
Damascus, with purpose to persecute the Church, it pleased God in the way to
stay his purpose, so that he could not perform that evil which he intended,
Acts 9.9. Thus much the wiseman shows, when by an example he proves, that
the strongest does not always carry away the battle. Eccle. 9.13.

The heath^n themselves say, that heroyicall virtues are in the mind of man,
but if any singular thing be done, it is the Gods that give that power: and the
Pelagian says, though we be able to begin a good work; yet the accomplishment
is of God.

Secondly, we are not able, facere, no more then we were able to effect, for so
says Christ, Sine me nihil potestis facere, The Prophet says: Scio quod viri,
non est via eius. Ier. 10.23. If it be not in man's power, to order his way, and
to rule his own steps, much less is he able to hold out to his iourneyes end,
but it is God that orders and directs man's steps, Prou. 16.9. Therefore
Paul says, The good I would do I do not, Romans 7.17. And if we do any good,
that it be not effected; yet it is the work of God in us, as the Prophet
confesses. Domine omnia opera nostra operatus es in nobis, Esaias 26.12.

Thirdly, the inchoation or beginning of that which is good is denied us,
though we purpose in our hearts to perform those duties of godliness that are
required, yet we have not the power to put them in practice, Filij venerunt ad
partu^, and non sunt vires pariendi, Esa. 37. The children are come unto the
birth, and there is no strength to bring forth. If we begin to do any good
thing, it is, Deus qui coepit in nobis bonum opus, Phil. 1.6. In consideration
of which place, Augustine says of the Pelagians, Audiant qui dicunt, a nobis
esse coeptum, a Deo esse euentum, Here let them learn of the Apostle, that it
is the Lord that does begin and perform the good work.

Fourthly, the power to speak that which is good is not in us, for as the
Wiseman says, A man may well purpose a thing in his heart, but the answer of
the tongue comes from the Lord, Prou. 16.1. Whereof we have often
experience. They that have the office of teaching in the Church, albeit they
do beforehand prepare what to say, yet when it comes to the point, are not
able to deliver there mind in such sort, as they had purposed: as on the other
side, when God does assist them with his spirit, they are enabled on a sudden
to deliver that which they had not intended to speak.

Fifthly, as the ability of effecting was attributed to God, so is the will,
Phil. 2.14.

Sixthly, for understanding, the Apostle says, The natural man perceives not
the things that are of the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2. For the wisdom of the
flesh is enmity with God. Romans 8.7.

Seventhly, the power of thinking the thing that is pleasing to God, is not in
us, so far are we from understanding or desiring it, as the Apostle in this
place testifies. And therefore where the Prophet speaks generally, of all
men. Psa. 94. The Lord knows the thoughts of men, that they are but vain,
The Apo^tle affirms that to be true, of the wisemen of the world, that are
endued only with the wisdom of the world, and the flesh, that their thoughts
are vain also, 1. Cor. 3.19.20.

Secondly, that we should not think, that the want of ability, stands only
in matters of difficulty and weight, the Apostle says not, we are unable to
think any weighty thing, but even, that without the special grace of Gods
spirit, we cannon think any thing, So Augustine understands Christ's words,
Ioh. 15. where he says not, Nihil magnum, and difficile; but Sine me nihil
potestis facere.

This is true in natural things, for we are not able to prolong our own
life, one moment; the actions of our life, are not of our selves, but from God,
in whom we live, move, and have our being, Acts 17. Therefore upon those words
of Christ's: Ego a me ipso non possum facere quicquam, nisi quod video patrem. I
of my self can do nothing, but what I see my father do, etc. Ioh. 5.19.
Augustine says, Ei tribuit quicquid fecit, a quo est ipse qui facit.

But the insufficiency of which the Apostle speaks, is not in things
natural, but in the ministration of the spirit: So he says, that God of his
special grace, has made them able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the
letter, but of the spirit; his meaning is, that no endeavor of men can endue us
with the grace of repentance, with faith, hope, and Christian charity, except
the inward working of Gods spirit.

As the Apostle speaks of the gift of tongues, of the understanding of
secrets, and of all knowledge, without charity. Nihil mihi prodest. Cor. 13. So
all our endeavors, are unprofitable to us, unless God by his spirit do
cooperate with us, for, He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings
forth much fruit, Ioh. 15.5. that is, the fruit of righteousness, the end
whereof is eternal life. Romans 6.22.

Thirdly, the persons whom he charge with this want of ability, are not the
common sort of natural men, that are not yet regenerate by Gods spirit, 1.
Cor. 2. but he speaks of himself, and his fellow-apostles, So these words are
an answer to that question, 2. Cor. 2.16. (...). Unto these things who is
sufficient? he answers himself, Not we, for we are not able of our selves to
think a good thought, much less are we fit of our selves to be means, by
whom God should manifest the favor of his knowledge in every place; so that
which Christ spoke, Ioh. 15. he spoke it to his Disciples, who albeit they were
more excellent persons then the rest of the people, yet he tells them, Sine
me nihil potestis fac^re.

The negative being general, we may make a very good use of it, If the
Apostles of Christ were unable, how much more are we: If Jacob say, I am
unworthy of the least of thy blessings Genesis 32. If John Baptist say, I am not
worthy, Math. 3. If Saint Paul confess, I am not worthy, to be called an
Apostle, 1. Cor. 15. much more may we say, with the Prodigal son, that had
spent all, I am not worthy to be called thy son, Luke 15. and with the
Centurion, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof. Mat. 8.

The reason of this want of ability is, for that the nature of men cannot
perform that which the Apostle speaks of, neither as it is in an estate
decayed, through the fall of Adam, and that general corruption, that he has
brought into the whole race of mankind; nor as it is restored to the highest
degree of perfection, that the first man had, at the beginning. Adam himself
when he was yet perfect, could not attain to this, for he was but a living
soul; the second Adam was a quickening Spirit, 1. Cor. 15. And it is not in the
power of nature to eleuate, and lift it self up, to conceive hope of being
partakers, of the blessedness of the life to come, to hope to be made
partakers of the Divine Nature. 2. Pet. 1. and of the heavenly substance: if
men hope for any such thing, it is the spirit of God, that raises them up to
it.

As the water can rise no higher then nature will give it leave, and as the
fire gives heat only within a certain compass, so the Perfection, which
Adam had, was in certain compass, the light of nature that he had, did not
reach so high as to stir him up to the hope of the blessedness to come; that
was without the compass of nature, and comes by the supernatural working of
grace.

As we are corrupt, it never comes into our minds, to hope for the felicity
of the life to come; For all the thoughts of man's heart are only evil, and
that, all the day long. Genesis 6.

That is true, which the Apostle witnesses of the Gentiles, Romans 2.13. That
they by nature do the things of the Law. If we understand it of moral duties
(for the very light of nature does guide us to the doing of them.) But as the
Prophet says, Psalm. 16.2. My goodness does not extend to thee. So whatsoever
good thing we do, by the direction of natural reason, it is without all
respect of God, except he enlighten us before. Therefore in our Regeneration,
not only the corruption of our will is healed, but a certain divine spark of
fire, and zeal of Gods Spirit is infused into us, by which, we are helped to
do those duties of piety, which otherwise naturally we have no power to do.

Now follows the qualification of this general negative sentence. For where
the Apostle has said; We are not able to think any thing of our selves, The
Scripture records diverse good purposes, that came into the hearts of Gods
servants. The Lord himself said of David. Whereas it was in thine heart to
build an house to my name, thou did well in thinking so to do, 1. Reg.
8.18. The Apostle says of unmarried folks, that they care for the things that
belong to the Lord, how they may please the Lord, 1. Cor. 7.32. But the Apostle
shows, that if we have any such thoughts at any time, they do not proceed
from us

By which words the Apostle, no doubt, makes this distinction, that there are
some things that come of us, an^ are of our selves: again there are other
things, that come from us, and yet are not of us, that is from, and of our
selves, that grows in us naturally.

That is said to be from our selves, but not of our selves, which is ingrafted
in vs^ It is the true Olive, that from it self, and of it self yields
fatness; and the wild Olive being ingrafted in it, does from it self yield
fatness, but not of it self, but as it is by insition made partaker of that
fatness, which naturally is in the true Olive. Romans 11.

Figmenta cogitationis, are from, and of our selves; but if any divine, and
spiritual thoughts come into our hearts, the Lord God is the Potter that frames
them in us, Ier. 18.6.

The Apostle says, Scio quod in me, hoc est, in carne mea, non habitat bonum.
Romans 7.18. But sin dwells in me, v. 17. therefore sin, that dwells in us, is
from us, and of us, but the grace of Gods spirit, which dwells not in us, but
does tarry guest-waies, is that, which is from us, but not of us.

Our Savior says, Luke. 24.38. Why do thoughts arise in your hearts? such
thoughts are from us, and of us; but those thoughts, that come from the Father
of light, Iam. 1. are from our selves, but not of us.

All that we have, by the strength of nature, is said to be of our selves, and
from our selves, but the power, wherewith we are endued from above, to the
doing of heavenly, and spiritual things, is of our selves, but not from our
selves, Perditio tua ex te Israel, Ho. 13. that is, from us, and of us,
Tantummodo salus ex me; that is, neither of us, nor from us.

The Apostle says, 1. Cor. 15. I persecuted the Church: that was from
himself, and of himself; but, when he says, yet I labored more then they
all, he corrected that, and says, yet not I, but the grace of God with me:
Because that was of himself, but not from himself, but from the grace of God,
which did cooperate with him.

Sins are of our selves, and from our selves, but not good actions. Hoc
piarum mentum est, vt nihil sibi tribuunt, this is the part of godly souls,
that they attribute nothing to themselus. Aug. It is dangerous to ascribe too
little to the grace of God, for then we rob him of his Glory, but if we
ascribe too little to our selves, their is no danger^ for whatsoever we take
from our selves, it cannot hinder us from being true Christians: but if we
ascribe that to the strength of our own nature, which is the proper work of
grace, then do we blemish Gods glory.

The affirmative part is, our sufficiency is of God. So that albeit, in regard
of themselves he said, Who is sufficient to these things? yet, having ability
from God, he is bold to say, Omnia possum in eo qui me consort at. Phil. 4.13.

The Apostle wills Titus to choose sufficient men, such as were able to
exhort with wholesome doctrine. Tit. 1.9. That is, such as God has made able,
so he speaks of all in general, that God the Father has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12.

As none are meet, but such as are made meet, so there are none (...),
worthy, but (...), such as are made worthy, Luke 20.21. The Apostle says, I
was indeed to come to you, that ye might receive a second grace, 2. Cor. 1.15.
Whereby he shows that to be true, which Saint Peter affirms, That the
grace of God is manifested 1. Pet. 4. And so much we are to understand, by the
words of the Evangelist, when he says, That from the fullness of Christ, we
received grace for grace. Ioh. 1.

As Noah is reported to have found grace in the sight of God, Ge^. 6. So many
do find grace with God: first he works grace in men, by the means of his
word, when before they were void of grace, The grace of God has appeared to
all, teaching them, Tit. 2.12. Also by the means of the cross, Job 33. Psalm.
119. and by that he works a second grace that is inherent, whereby they are
inabl^d, to do the duties of holiness.

In which respect, as he is said to give grace. Prou 3. Humilibus dat gratiam:
so we receive grace, 2. Cor. 6.1. After God by his spirit, has thus enabled
us, we are said to be able, and meet, to do those things, which we are
commanded; so that, though our righteousness be but menstrualis iustitia,
Isay. 64. he will not reject it: though our zeal in godliness, be but as
smoking flax, or the broken reed, he will not quensh, nor break it. Isa. 42.
and though the measure of our charity, exceed not the cup of cold water, yet we
shall not loose our reward. Math. 10. And though the afflictions of this life,
which we suffer for Christ's sake, be not worthy of the glory that is to be
revealed, Yet, as the Evangelist speaks, (...), Luke 21. For, if we suffer
together with Christ, we shall be glorified with him. Romans 8.17.

So then, the sum of all comes to this, where The Apostle exhorts, Let us
have grace, Heb. 12. The question is, from whence we may have it? It is
certain we have it not of our selves, (for it is a divine thing) therefore we
must have it from him, that is the Well of grace. Ioh. 1.14. If we come to him,
out of his fullness we shall receive grace for grace.

He is not a Well locked up, but such an one as stands open, that al may
draw out of it, Therefore the Apostle says, that the grace of God is (...) 1.
Pet. 1.13. And as Solomon says, bonus vir, haurit gratiam^ Prou. 12.2.

The means to obtain this grace at the hands of God, is by prayer; who has
promi^ed to give his holy Spirit to them that ask it. Luke 11. And having
received grace from God, we shall likewise have, bonam spem per gratiam. 2 Thessalonians. 2. He has promised that those that seek, shall find. Math. 7.

If in humility we seek for grace from God, knowing that we have it not, of
our selves, we shall receive it from God, for he gives grace to the humble,
1. Pet. 5.

Seeing then, that, in us there is no ability, so much as to think any thing,
and all ability comes from God, we are to learn from hence, that if God say,
turn to me and I will turn to you, we must pray. Convert thou us O Lord,
and we shall be converted. Lam. 4. If he say to us, make you clean hearts,
Exech. 18. Because that is not in us; we must pray: Create in me a clean
heart, and renew a right spirt in me. Psa. 51.10.

When Christ says, Beleeuest thou this? Ioh. 11: for as much as faith is the
gift of God, Ephesians. 2. we are to pray with the Disciples, Domine, add nobis
fidem, Lu. 17.5. when the Apostle exhorts, perfect sperate. 1. Pet. 1.13. we
should say with the Prophet. Lord my hope is even in thee. Psalm. 39. And where
our duty is to love, with all our hearts, because we cannot perform this,
without the assistance of Gods Spirit, we are to pray, that the love of God may
be shed in our hearts, by the holy Ghost. Romans 5.5.

The second Sermon.
JAMES 1.16.17. Err not my dear brethren.

Every good giving, and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down
from the Father of lights; with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning.


AS Saint Paul 2. Cor. 3.5. tells us, that we are not sufficient to think a
good thought, but our sufficiency is of God. So the Apostle says, It is God
only, from whom every good giving, and every perfect gift comes: And that
we shall err, if we either think, that any good thing, which we enjoy,
comes from any other but from God, or that any thing else but Good proceeds
from him; so that as well the ability which man had by nature, as our enabling
in the state of grace, is from God. He is the fountain, out of whom (as the
Wiseman says) we must draw grace by prayer, which is, Situla gratiae, the
cou^duit or bucket of grace. Therefore he promises, in the old Testament, To
power upon his Church, both the Spirit of grace and of prayer, that as they sue
for grace, by the one, so they may receive it in, by the other, Zach. 12.10.
Unto this doctrine of the Apostle, in this place, even those, that otherwise
have no care of grace, do subscribe, when they confess themselves to be
destitute of the good things of this life, and therefore cry. Quis ostendit
nobis bona? Psa. 4.

As before the Apostle showed that God is not the cause of any evil; so in
this verse he teaches, there no good thing, but God is the author of it; If he
be the fountain of every good thing, then he cannot be the cause of evil; for
no one fountain does out of the same hole, yield sweet and bitter water. Iam.
3.11.

Secondly, if every good thing be of God only, then have we need to sue to
him by prayer, that from him we may receive that, which we have not of our
selves. Wherefore as this Scripture serves to kindle in us the love of God, for
as much as he contains all good things that we can desire; so it is a special
means to provoke us to the duty of prayer.

This proposition has two parts: first, an Universal affirmative in these
words, Every good giving: secondly a prevention, for where it may be objected,
that howsoever some good things come of God, yet evil things also may
successively come from him; even as the heathens say, that Jupiter has diverse
boxes, out of which he does power both good and evil. The Apostle preuenteth
that objection, and says, that with God there is no variablenes, nor shadow of
changing: So that as the meaning of these words in the Prophet Hosea 13.9,
Salus tua tant ummo do ex me, is both, that salvation is only of God, and that
nothing else but salvation comes from him; so the Apostles meaning in these
words is, both, that God is only the cause of good, and that he is the cause
of nothing else but good, least when we are tempted unto evil, we should
make God the Author of all such temptations.

The former part of the proposition called subjection, is, Every good giving,
etc. The latter part, called praedicatum, is, descends from above.

Where the heathen call all virtues and good qualities which they have, (...)
of having, the Apostle calls them (...) and (...), of giving, to teach us
that whatsoever good qualities is in any man, he has it not as a quality
within himself, but he receives it from without, as it is a gift.

Esau, speaking of the blessings bestowed upon him says, I have enough, Genesis
33. And the rich man Luke 12. (anima) soul thou have much good, as though they
had not received them from God; but the Saints of God speak otherwise, Jacob
says, these are the children which God has given me, Genesis 33.5. Again, when
Pilate without all respect of God, of whom the Apostle says, There is no power
but of God, Romans 13. said, Know thou not, that I have power to crucify and
to loose thee? our Savior said again, Thou should not have any power over
me, except it were given thee from above. Ioh. 19.10.

The consideration hereof serves to exclude our boasting, Romans 3. That, the
Wiseman boast not of his wisdom, Ier. 9. seeing wisdom, strength, and
whatsoever good things we have, it is the good gift of God, as the Apostle tells
us, Quid habes, quod non accepisti? 1. Cor. 4.

Secondly, this division is to be marked, that of the good things which come
from God, some are called Donationes, others Dona: and to these two
substantives, are added two adjectives, whereof one does answer to the giuings
of Gods goodness, the other to the gifts of God ascribes perfection.

The first error the Apostle wills them to beware, is, that they think not
that God is the cause of any evil, because every good thing comes from him:
the second error is; that they should not conceive this opinion, that the
maine benefits are from God, and the lesser benefits are from our selves; not
so, for the Apostle tells us, that as well, every good giving, as every perfect
gift, is from above.

That which the Apostle calls Donatio, is a transitory thing: but by gift, he
means that which is permanent and lasting.

Joseph is recorded to have given to his brethren, not only corn, but
victuals to spend by the way, Genesis 45.21. So by giving, the Apostle here
understands such things as we need in this life, while we travel toward
our heavenly country, but that which he calls gifts, are the treasures which
are laid up for us in the life to come; and thus the words are used in these
several senses.

Of things transitory the Apostle says, No Church dealt with me in the matter
of giving. Phil. 4.15. there the word is (...), but speaking of the good
things that comes to us by Christ, he says: The gift is not as the fault.
Romans 5.16. where the word is (...).

By Giuings he understands, beauty, strength, riches, and every transitory
thing whereof we stand in need, while we are yet in our journey toward our
heavenly country, such as Job speaks of, Dominus dedit, Dominus abstulit. Job.
1.21. By gift he means the felicity that is reserved for us after this life,
the kingdom of heaven, that whereof our Savior says, to Martha: Luke 10.
Mary has chosen the better part, which shall not be taken from her.

That which is a stay to us in this life, is (...), but the things which
neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, all which are reserved for them that
love God, 1. Cor. 2. these are (...), and as well the one, as the other, come
from God. So much we are taught by the adjectives that are joined to these
words. Giuings are called good, and the Gifts of God are called perfect, In
which words the Apostles purpose is to teach us, that not only the great
benefits of the life to come, such as are perfect, are of him; but that even
that good which we have in this life, though it be yet imperfite, and may be
made better, is received from him, and not else where, Who does despise little
things? says the Prophet. Zach. 4^10.

God is the Author both of perfect and good things: as the Image of the Prince
is to be seen as well in a small piece of coin, as in a piece of greater
value; so we are to consider the goodness of God as well in the things of this
life, as in the graces that concern the life to come, yea even in this; To
think that which is good, 2. Cor. 3.

Of him are the small things, as well as the great. Therefore our Savior
teaches us to pray, not only for that perfect gift: vt adueniat Regnum, but
even for these lesser good things, which are but his giuings, namely, that he
would give us our daily bread.

Under Good, is contained all gifts, both natural, or temporal. Those giuings
which are natural, as to live, to move, and have understanding, are good, for
of the^ it is said, God saw all that he made, and lo all was good. Genesis 1.

Of gifts temporal, the heathen have doubted, whether they were good, to wit,
riches, honor, etc. but the Christians are resolved that they are good, 1.
Ioh. 3. So our Savior teaches us to esteem them, when speaking of fish, and
bread, he says. If you, which are evil, can give your children good things,
Luke 1 1. And the Apostle says. He that has this worlds good.. 1. Ioh. 3.
For as Augustine says, That is not only good, quod facit bonum, sed de quo
fit bonum, that is not only good that makes good, but whereof is made good, so
albeit riches do not make a man good always; yet because he may do good with
them, they are good.

The gift which the Apostle calls perfect, is grace and glory, whereof there is
in this life the beginning of perfection, the other in the life to come, is the
end and constancy of our perfection, whereof the Prophet speaks, Psa. 84.12.
The Lord will give grace and glory.

The Apostle says, Nihil perfectum adduxit Lex. The Law brought nothing to
perfection. Heb. 7. that is by reason of the imperfection of our nature, and
^he weakness of our flesh. Romans 8.3.

To supply the defect that is in nature, grace is added, that grace might make
that perfect which is imperfite.

The person that giu^th us this grace is Jesus Christ, by whom grace and truth
came. Ioh. 1. And therefore he says, Estote perfecti sicut Pater vester
coelestis perfectus est. Math. 5. and by this grace not only our sins are
taken away, but our souls are endued with inherent virtues, and receive grace
and ability from God, to proceed from one degree of perfection to an other, all
our life time, even till the time of our death, which is the beginning and
accomplishment of our perfection, as our Savior speaks of his death. Luk,
13.32.

In the latter part of the proposition we are to consider the place, from
whence, and the person from whom we receive these gifts, the one is superne the
other, a Patr^ luminum, Now he instructs us to beware of a third error,
that we look not either on the right hand, or on the left hand, that we regard
not the persons of great men, which are but instruments of God, if we have any
good from them, all the good we have it is de sursum, the thoughts of our
hearts that arise in them, if they tend to good, are not of our selves, but
infused into us by the divine power of Gods spirit, and so is whatsoever good
thought, word, or work, proceeding from us. This is one of the first parts of
divinity, John Baptist taught; a man can receive nothing, except it be given
him from above, Ioh. 3.27. This was the cause of Christ's ascending into heaven,
Psalm. 68. He went up on high, and, dedit dona hominibus. and the Evangelist
says, the holy Ghost (which is the most perfect gift that can come to men) was
not yet given, because Christ was not yet ascended. Ioh. 7.39. Therefore if we
possess any blessing, or receive any benefit, we must not look to earthly
means, but to heaven.

The thing, which is here mentioned excludes the fourth error: we think that
things come to us by fortune, or customably: he says not, that good things
fall down from above, but they descend, and qui descendit, proposito
descendit. Our instruction from hence is, that they descend from a cause
intelligent, even from God himself, who in his counsel and provision
bestows his blessings as seems best to himself: for as the heathen man
speaks, God has, sinum facilem, but not pensoratum, that is a lap, easy to
receive and yield, but not bored through, to let things fall through without
discretion.

When the Prophet says, Tu aperis manum. Psalm. 145.15. He does not say that
God lets his blessings drop out of his fingers. Christ when he promised to
his Disciples to send the Comforter, says Ego mittam eum ad vos. Ioh. 16.7.
Whereby he gives them to understand that it is not by casualty, or chance,
that the holy Ghost shall come upon them, but by the deliberate counsel of
God; so the Apostle speaks, of his own will begat he us, by the word of
truth.

The person from whom, is the father of lights. The heathens found this to be
true, that all good things come from above, but they thought that the lights in
heaven are the causes of all good things, therefore is it that they worship the
Sun, Moon, and Stars. James says. Be not deceived, all good things come
not from the lights, but from the Father of lights. The natural lights were
made, in ministerium cunctis gentibus, Deuteronomy. 4. and the Angels, that are the
intellectual lights, are appointed to do service unto the Elect. Heb. 1.13.

It is the Father of lights, that gives us all good things; therefore he only
is to be worshipped, and not the lights, which he has made to our use.

God is called the Father of lights, first in opposition to the lights
themselves, to teach us, that the lights are not the causes of good things, but
he that said, fiat lux, Genesis 1. Secondly in regard of the emanation, whether
we respect the Sun beams called radij, shining in at a little hole, or the
great beam of the Sun, called Iubar, he is author of both, and so is the
cause of all the light of understanding, whether it be in small, or great
measure: Thirdly, to show the nature of God: nothing has so great aliance with
God, as light, The light makes all things manifest. Ephe. 5. and the wicked
hate the light, because there works are evil. Ioh. 3. But God is the Father
of lights, because as out of light comes nothing but light, so God is the
cause of that which is good. Prou. 13.

Again, light is the cause of goodness, to those things that are good of
themselves; It is a pleasant thing to behold the light. Eccle. 11. On the other
side; howsoever good things are in themselves, yet they afford small pleasure,
or delight, to him that is shut up in a dark dungeon, where he is deprived of
the benefit of light. So God is the Father of lights, for that not only all
things have there goodness from him, but because he makes them good also.

Light is the first good thing that God created for man, fiat lux, Genesis 1. But
God is the Father of lights, to show that he is the first cause of any good
thing, that can come to us.

Again, because he is that only cause of the visible light, which at the
first he created, and also of that spiritual light, whereby he shines into
our hearts, by the light of the Gospel. 2. Cor. 4. The Apostle says of the
whole Trinity, Deus lux est. 1. Ioh. 1.5. More particularly Christ says of
himself, Ego sum lux mundi. Ioh. 8.

The holy Ghost is called light, where he is represented by the fiery tongues,
Act. 2.3. The Angels are (...), Heb. 1.7. David also, as a civil Magistrate,
was called, the light of Israel 2. Sam. 21.17. Ecclesiastical Ministers are
called light. Vos estis lux mundi. Mat. 5. and not only they, but the people
that are of good conversation are said to shine, tanquam luminaria in mundo.
Phil. 2. All these lights have there being from God, and for this cause he is
worthily called, lux mundi, and the father of lights; again, this name is
opposed unto darkness, God is light, and in him there is no darkness, 1. Ioh.
5.5. Therefore the ignorance of our minds is not to be imputed unto him. He is
the light that lightneth every one. Ioh. 1.9. and cannot be comprehended of
darkness: Therefore it is not long of him, that we, through ignorance, are
said to sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, this comes of the devil,
the Prince of darkness, who blinds men's eyes. 2. Cor. 4. God is the Father
of lights.

Secondly, he is so called to distinguish him from heat.

The lights which we make for these private uses, do not only give light, but
heat also; but God gives light without heat, wherefore such as are of a fiery
spirit, as the Disciples that said, Shall we command that fire come down from
heaven, and consumne them? are not like God. Christ is called the day star,
not the dog-starre. 2. Pet. 1. God is said to have walked in the cool of the
day, not in the heat of the day, Genesis 3.8. When God would speak to Eliah, he
showed himself neither in the strong wind, nor in earthquake, nor in fire,
but in a small still voice. 1. Reg. 19.12. To teach men, that, if they will be
like God, they must be of a meek and quiet spirit. He is said to dwell in
the light. 1. Tim. 6. not that he is of a hot fiery nature, as our lights are,
but because he gives us the light of knowledge.

In respect of the number, he is not called the Father of one light, but Pater
luminum. It was an imperfection in Jacob, that he had but one blessing, Genesis
27. God is not the cause of some one good thing, but as ther^ are diverse
stars, and one star differs from another in glory. 1. Cor. 15. so as we
receive many good things, and of them some are greater then others, so they all
come from God, who is the Author and fountain of them all.

Our manifold imprefections are noted by the word tenebrae, which is a word of
the plural number, and in regard thereof it is needful, that God, in whom we
have perfection, shall not be pater luminis, but pater luminum. Our miseries
are many, therefore that he may deliver us quite out of miseries, there is
with the Lord Copiosa redemptio. Psalm. 130. The sins which we commit against
God are many; therefore he is the Father, not of one mercy, but pater
miserecordiarum, 2. Cor. 1. The Apostle Peter tells us, that the mercy of God is
multiformis gratia. 1. Pet. 4. So that whether we commit small sins or great,
we may be bold to call upon God for mercy, According to the multitude of thy
mercies, have mercy upon me, Psalm. 51. For as our sins do abound, so the
mercy of God, whereby he pardons and is inclined to pardon us, is exuberans
gratia, Romans 5.

The darkness that we are subject to is manifold, there is darkness
inward, not only in the understanding, Ephe. 4. where the Gentiles are said to
have their cogitations darkened, but in the heart, whereof the Apostle speaks,
He that hates his brother, is in darkness. 1. Ioh. 2.

There is the darkness of tribulation and affliction, whereof the Prophet
speaks. Thou shall make my darkness to be light. Psalm. 18. and the misery
which the wicked suffer in the world to come, which our Savior calls, utter
darkness, Math. 22. God does help us, and give us light in all these
darknesses, and therefore is called the Father of lights.

As the Sun gives light to the body, so God has provided light for the
soul, and that is first the light of nature, which teaches us, that this is a
just thing, ne alij facias quod tibi fieri non vis^ from this light we have
this knowledge, that we are not of our selves, but of another, and of this
light the Wiseman says. The soul of man is the candle of the Lord. Prou.
20.27. They that resist this light of nature are called, rebels Lumini. Job.
24. with this light every one that comes into this world is enlightened. John
1.9. Howbeit this light has caught a fall, as Mephibosheth did, and thereupon
it halteth, notwithstanding, because it is of the blood royal, it is worthy to
be made of.

Next, God kindles a light of grace by his word, which is, lux pedibus, Psalm.
119. and lux oculis, Psalm. 19. and that we may be capable of this outward
light, he lightneth us with his spirit, because the light of the law shined
but darkely; therefore he has called us into the light of his Gospel, which
is his marvelous light, 1. Pet. 2.

He lights the outward darkness of affliction, by ministering comfort, there
springs up light for the righteous, and joyful gladness for such as are true
of heart. Psalm. 97.11. In the multitude of my sorrows, thy comforts have
refreshed my soul. Psalm. 94. He gives us everlasting consolation, and good
hope through grace. 2. Thess^ 2. And that we should not be cast into utter
darkness, he has made us, meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light, yea he has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the kingdom of his beeloued son. Col. 1.12.

Of these things it follows: first, if all good things be gifts, we may not
boast of them; if they come from God, we may not forget him, from whom we
receive them.

Secondly, because Gifts are rather Commendata, quam data, because there is,
(...) Phillip. 4. Seeing God will come, and take account of the Talents. Math.
25. We must neither wast-ful^y mispend them, Luke 16. nor have them without
profit. Math. 25. Vt crescit donu^ sic crescat ratio donati.

Thirdly, seeing they come from above, we must not be like blind moles, nor
as swyne grouelling upon the earth, which eat the accornes that fall from the
tree, and never look up, but it may teach us to look up; Sursum cor, qui
habes sursum caput.

Fourthly, seeing God is Pater Luminum, we must walk as Children of light. 1 Thessalonians. 4. For we are not darkness, but light. Ephe. 5.

Fifthly, seeing God has diverse good things in his hand to give, we must
desire to receive them from him by prayer.

The third Sermon.
MATH. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find: knock
and it shall be opened unto you.


AFter the consideration of our own inability, mentioned by Saint Paul^ 2.
Cor. 3. And the examination of the manifold goodness of God, from whom, as
Saint James says, every good giving, and every perfect gift comes: Because
we see that of our selves we cannot so much as think any good, and yet that
from the Father of lights we may receive that grace which shall enable us to do
all things; Now it follows by good order, that we repair to God for that
power, which we have not of our selves. Christ will not have holy things given
to dogs, nor pearls cast to swyne, that is to such as make no account of
them, and therefore if we esteem of the grace of Christ, or make any reckoning
of it, we must come to him for it; now we cannot come to God, but by prayer,
as Augustine says, Non passibus, sed precibus, itur ad Deum: and nuncius
noster oration est, quae ibi mandatum nostrum peragit, quo caro nostra peruenire
nequit: It is not with pases but with prayers we go to God; and our messenger
is prayer, which there does our errand where our flesh cannot come. Therefore
Christ says: do not wait as swyne, till the grace of God be cast unto you,
but if you will have it, ask, and it shall be given to you.

The tenor of this Scripture has this coherence, first, knowing our own
insufficiency, and the gooodnesse of God, from whom every good thing comes,
presently we wish with our selves that he would admit us to be suitors unto
him. Therefore Christ in the word Ask, tells us, that God has his Courts of
requests, that we may be bold to put up our supplications.

Secondly, whereas earthly Princes may perhaps afford a good countenance, but
will not grant the thing that is sought for at their hands; Christ says, that,
the Father of lights, is not only affable, but liberal; so that albeit we be
not only dust and ashes, and therefore unworthy to pray to God, Genesis 18. But
also wretched sinners unworthy to be heard, because as the blind man says,
peccatores non exaudit Deus. Ioh. 9. Yet he will not cast out our prayers, nor
turn his mercy from us. Psalm. 66.18. But if we ask, it shall be given.

Thirdly, that we should not think, that as in the world there are many
suitors but few obtainers; so howsoever all do pray unto God, yet we are not
in the number of those that speed; therefore Christ adds, Whosoever asks,
receives: whoseuer seeks finds: and to him that knocks, it shall be
opened: No unworthiness of our own can exclude us from the mercy of God, for
he receives the prayer, not only of the publican, Luke 18. but of the
prodigal son, Luke 15. and promises mercy to the thief hanging on the
cross, Luke 23, if at the last hour he seek it by prayer.

Of these two verses there are three parts, first a precept, petite, quaerite,
pulsate: ask, seek, knock: secondly, a promise, it shall be given, ye
shall find, and it shall be opened: thirdly, an enlargement of the promise,
which is made not only to such as are of just and holy conversation, but to
sinners; For whosoever asks receives.

As on Gods behalf we see first his affability: secondly his liberality:
thirdly, the largeness of his liberality: so on our own parts we are taught,
first, that we may boldly power out our desires before God: secondly, we may
conceive hope to be heard in the thing we crave: thirdly, not an uncertain
hope, confounded through our own unworthiness; For whosoever asks receives,
and as Christ speaks: Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.
Ioh. 6.37.

In the precept four things are to be considered: first, the necessity:
secondly, the vehemence, signified by a threefold petition, which implies an
instancie, as Solomon speaks: have I not written three times to thee? Prou.
22.20. thirdly, the cohaerence of these three terms, asking, seeking, and
knocking: fourthly, the distinguishing of them.

Touching the first, the example of our Savior might be a sufficient motive
to stir us up to prayer, who in the morning very early before day went into
a solitary place, and there prayed, Mark. 1.35. and in the evening, prayed
himself alone in the mountain, Mat. 14.23.

Secondly, whereras he sets down a form of prayer, Math. 6. He shows
that prayer is necessary, but when unto both he ad^deth a precept, we may not
think any longer it is a matter indifferent, but of necessity, a commandment
is a thing obligatory. So when Christ commands us to pray, he does not leave
it as a thing in our own choice; but binds us to the performance of it, for
prayer is not only required as a thing supplying our need, (for when we
feel want we need not be provoked to prayer;) the bruit beasts themselves
being pinched with hunger, do seek their meat at God, Psalm. 107. and the
ravens call upon him for food Psalm. 147. but it is required as a part of Gods
service. Anna being in the Temple, served God by prayer, Luke 2.37. By prayer
the Apostles performed that service to the Lord, which the Apostle calls (...),
Acts 13.1. Therefore so often as we resort to the house of God, to put up our
petitions to God, then we do him service properly, and not only when we are
present at a Sermon, for then God rather serves us, and attends us, and
entreats us by his Ministers to be re^onciled to him. 2^ Cor. 5.

As prayer is a part of Gods worship: so the neglect of prayer is a sin, as
one says, peccatum non orandi. Therefore the Prophet among other sins
wherewith he charge the wicked, reckons this to be one, that they call not
on the Lord, Psalm. 14.9. The neglect of this duty was the beginning of Saul's
fall, as all the fathers interpret that place. 1. Sam. 14.19. where it is
said, that, Saul commanded the Priest to withdraw his hand from the Arc. For
this has been commanded ever from the beginning, that we should pray unto
God; not only in the law of nature, Job. 8.5. But also in the law of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 10.12.

In the time of the law a special part of the service, which the people
performed to God, was the offering up of incense, and therefore the Prophet
compares prayer to incense, Psalm. 14.1. And it is most fitly resembled to
incense, for the use of incense was to sweeten those places which are unsavory:
Even so the wicked imaginations, and unchaste thoughts of our hearts, which
yield a stinking smell in the nostrils of God, are sweetened by no other means
then by prayer: and therefore to show how the one is rese^bled by the other, it
is said, that while the incense was a burning, the people were without upon
their knees in prayer, Luke 1.10. neither was it a thing usual in the law
only, but also in the Prophets. Call upon me. Psalm. 50. and aperi os tuum, and
implebo. Psalm. 81.

Touching the effect and fruit whereof it is said, Whosoever calls on the
name of the Lord, shall be saved, Joel. 2. Secondly, albeit God have little
commandments, as Christ speaks Math. 5. He that breaks one of these little
commandments: Yet this, touching the duty of prayer is not a slight
commandment, but of great instance, and so much we are to gather from hence,
that Christ is not content once to say, Ask; but repeates it in three several
terms: ask, seek, knock; which as Augustine says, shows instantissimam
necessitatem.

From the vehemence of this commandment we are to consider these three things:
first, it lets us see our want and need, in that we are willed to ask:
secondly, by seeking, Christ does intimate thus much to us; that we have lost
our selves: thirdly, in that he would have us to knock, he would have us to
learn that we are as men shut out of the presence of God, and his kingdom,
where is the fullness of joy, and pleasure for ever.

The first shows man what is the misery of his estate, in regard whereof he
is called Enoch: secondly, his blindness, which is so great, that when he does
pray, he asks he knows not what, Mat. 20. If he would pray, he knows not
how to pray; for which cause the Disciples desire Christ to teach them. Luke
11. Their blindness is such as they know not the way to come to the Father, as
Thomas confesses. Ioh. 14.5. Thirdly, it shows our slothfulness in seeking
our own good, which appears herein, that we have need to have a
commandment given us to stir us up to pray to God.

The third thing in the precept is the dependence of these three words, petite,
quaerite, pulsate. For there is no idle word in Gods book. Therefore as they
that have to do with Gold, will make no wast at all, but gather together the
least parings: so we must esteem preciously of Gods word, which is more
precious then gold. We must be gone hence, and there is a place whether we
desire all to come, which we cannot do, except we knock: and because we know
not at what door to knock, therefore we must seek the door, But we have no
will nor desire to seek, therefore Christ wills in the first place that we
ask it, and the thing that we must ask, is the spirit of grace, and of
prayer: and if we ask it, then shall we have ability and power, not only to
seek the door: but when we have found it, to knock at it.

Fourthly, as these words depend one upon another, so they are to be
distinguished one from another: they that are suitors for any earthly benefit,
do occupy, not only their tongue in speaking, but their legs in resorting
to great persons^ they that seek do occupy not only their legs, in going up
and down, but their eyes to look in every place; and they that knock, as
they use other members, so especially they use their hands, But when our
Savior enioyneth us the use of prayer, he expresses it not in one word, but
in three several terms to teach us, that when we come to pray to God; the
whole man must be occupied, and all the members of the body employed in the
service of God; for Christ will not have pearls cast unto swyne; and we may
not look to have the gifts of God cast into our mouths: but if we will
obtain, we must first, open our mouths to ask it. Psalm. 81. secondly, they
are not so easily found, as that we shall stumble upon them: but we must seek
diligently, with the lifting up of our eyes. Psalm. 1.20. And to God that dwells
in the heavens. Psalm. 123. Thirdly, because the door is shut and locked up,
therefore we must knock, for which end we are willed, To lift up our hands
with our hearts to God which is in heaven. Lam. 3.

The lifting up of our hands is that which the people call the Evening
sacrifice, Psalm. 141. As the body, so also the soul may not be idle, but
occupied with these three virtues: first, it must petere, which notes
confidence and trust, secondly, qu^rere, which signifies diligence: thirdly,
pulsare which implies perseverance: If we join these three virtues to our
prayer, doubtless we shall be heard.

As the 2 cause of our life here is, sudor vultus: (for we live arando, ac
serendo) by plowing, and sowing, so the second cause of our living is another
sudor vultus; which consists in asking, seeking, knocking: As in the sweat
of our brows we eat the bread that feeds our bodies, so by these spiritual
pains and endeauours we come to the bread of life, which feeds our souls
eternally.

Now if we ask that question that is made Job. 21.15. What profit shall we
have if we pray unto him? It is certain that God having created us, may justly
command us: but he does not only constrain us to pray by his commandment,
but allure us thereunto by his promise: he says, if we ask the life of
grace, we shall obtain it, if we seek it, we shall find it: thirdly,
having found the way, we shall intrare in gaudium Domini, enter into our
masters joy, Math. 25.

If we ask, we shall have grace, whereby it shall appear, we have not
received our soul in vain, Psalm. 24. secondly, seeking we shall find the
help and assistance of Gods spirit, so that we shall not receive grace in
vain, 2. Cor. 6. thirdly by knocking, the way of entrance shall be opened unto
us, so that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. 1. Cor. 15. as Aug.
says, non dicitur quid dabitur. Christ names not what shall be given to you:
to let us know that that gift is a thing supra omne nomen, above all that can
be named.

It is as great a gift as an earthly Prince can give to promise half his
kingdom, Mar. 6.23. but God has promised not half his kingdom, but all his
kingdom, we shall receive of God, not only whatsoever we desire, (For
desiderare nostrum, as one says, is not terminus bonitatis Dei, our desire is
not the limit or bounds of Gods goodness) but above all we can ask or
think. Ephe. 3.

In the confidence of this promise the Saints of God in the time of their
misery fly unto God by prayer, as their only ready help. In the days of
Enoch, which were full of miseries and troubles, men began to call upon the
name of the Lord. Genesis 4.26. and Abraham in every place where he came, being
departed out of his own country, and living in exile, built an Altar and
called on the name of the Lord. Genesis 12.8. David says that his only remedy
which he used against the slander and injuries of his enemies, stood herein,
that he gave himself to prayer. Psalm. 109. Iosaphat being besieged with
enemies on every side, used this as a bulwark against them. Lord we have no
power to with-stand this great company that are come against us, and we know
not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee. 2. Chron. 20. The like comfort
did Ezechiah find in prayer, both when Senacherib threatened his destruction,
and in his sickness: and it is indeed the city of refuge, whether the godly
in all times have used to fly for safeguard from their miseries. It is rete
gratiarum, and situla gratiae, the net of graces, and bucket of grace. Prou.
12.2. by which a good man draws the grace of God.

The special gift that we can desire of God is Christ himself, who is Donum
illud Dei. Ioh. 4. Now forasmuch as indeed nothing can be a greater benefit,
then to enjoy the presence of God, as the Prophet says, Whom do I desire in
heaven but thee? Psalm. 73. and Phillip says. Ostende nobis patrem, and
sufficit. Show us the Father and it is sufficient Ioh. 14. We are to consider
how we may come to it.

Christ says, I am the way, Ioh. 14. and ego sum ostium. Ioh. 10. If he be
both the way and the door then no doubt but if God bestow Christ on us, we
shall both find the way to God, and enter into his kingdom, by Christ, who is
the door: for the obtaining of this gift we must be instant with God in prayer,
which if we do, he will give us that we ask: therefore Augustine says,
Domine cupio te, da mihi solum te, aut non dimittam te. Lord I desire thee,
give me thee alone, or else I will not let thee go.

In the third place our Savior enlarges the promise, least we should doubt
that God will not hear all manner of persons, that pray to him, or that he
will not grant all their suites, therefore in regard of the persons, Christ
says, Quisquis, whosoever asks, receives, whosoever join these three
virtues in their prayer, Confidence, Diligence, Perseverance, and occupy all
the parts of their body in this service of God, they shall be sure to receive
the thing they ask, for the promise is made only to them that perform Gods
commandment, petenti dabitur, we must ask and we shall have it: for God uses
not to cast holy things upon them that make no reckoning of them. Mat. 7.

Touching the things themselves, He that is the truth has said, Whatsoever
you ask my Father, in my name he will give it you. Ioh. 16. Therefore it is
impossible he should lie, especially when he confirms it with an oath, as
in that place, Verily, Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you ask the Father
in my name he will give it you. But we must take heed what we ask: we may
not (...) ask without a cause. If we ask any thing according to his will he
hears us. 1. Ioh. 5. Therefore our prayers must be grounded upon some just
cause^ we may not ask any childish petition of God, for he will reuert them.
If we like children ask we know not what, we cannot assure our selves to be
heard, for unto such prayers he answers, Ye ask you know not what, Math.
20. Much less will he grant hurtful petitions.

As he is our Physician, he will not give us cold drink when we are sick of
an ague, though we cry for it never so much. They that ask vengeance of God,
and would have him to be the executioner of their wrath, shall not be heard,
Prou. 26.13. but their prayer is turned to sin. Psalm. 109. So far is it
from the service of God.

If the child ask fish, the father will not give him a Scorpion, no more will
God hear us in those things which we ask of him, if he know they will be
hurtful.

He only is wise, and knows what is good for us, and if we receive not the
thing which we ask, yet he (as Jerome says) non accipiendo accepit, in not
receiving he has received. Christ says not, ask, and ye shall receive the
thing ye ask, but ask and it shall be given unto you, that is the thing that
you desire. We all desire those things that be good, though outwardly we are
not able to discern what is good, but God our heavenly Father, as he knows
best what is good for us, so he will give us good things, though we be not able
always to ask that which is good for our selves.

Secondly, we must pray in such manner and form, as he requires, God does
hear us many times even, quando petimus malum: in as much as he does not give
us the hurtful things, which we ignorantly ask. But he will not hear us,
cum petimus male, ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss. Iam, 4.
Therefore we must beware how we stand affected at the time of prayer: if we
pray coldly, without any great desire to attain the thing we ask; we ask
like swine, that esteem not of pearls, but trample them under their feet. If
we draw near with our lips, but our hearts be far from God. Esa. 29. then
it is not like we shall be heard, If we pray as Peter and the other Disciples,
who being heavy with sleep, asked they knew not what. Luke 9.32. we cannot
receive the truth. But if as Moses speaks, we seek the Lord with all our heart.
Deuteronomy. 4.29. If we do with Paul, orare spiritu, and orare mente. 1. Cor. 14.
then we may conceive hope to be heard, for the commandment to ask is given
Cordi, non pulmoni, to the heart not to the lungs, Id quod cor non facit non
fit, that which the heart does not is not done.

Secondly, touching the manner, as with feruency, so we must pray with
reverence, not having our heads covered, as we see many do: which behavior
how rude and unbeseeming it is, we may eaeasily discern, as the Prophet
speaks, Offer this kind of behavior to thy Lord or Master, and see whether
he will accept it? Mal. 1.

If thou, having a suite to an earthly Prince, dare not speak but upon thy
knees with all submission; how much more ought we to reverence the Lord God, in
comparison of whom all the Princes in the earth are but Crickets and
Grasshoppers, Esa. 40. Therefore the manner of our prayer to God must be in all
reverence.

Solomon prayed upon his knees. 2. Chron. 6. Daniel fell down upon his knees.
Dan. 6. So did Saint Peter. Acts 9. So Paul. Ephe. 3.14. And not only men upon
earth, but the glorious spirits in heaven cast themselves and their crowns
down before him that sits upon the throne, Apoc. 4. Yea Jesus Christ the Son
of God fell down upon his knees and prayed to his Father. Luke 22. and
exauditus propter reuerentia^. Heb. 5. So did Paul serve God (...), Acts 20.19.
Secondly, if we would obtain any thing at Gods hand, we must not only ask
it, but seek for it. He that having prayed, sits still without adding his
endeavor, shall not receive the thing he prays, for he must not only orare,
but laborare, pro quibus enim orandum, pro ijs laborandum est: to this end the
Apostle would have us to pull up our faint hands and weak knees, Heb. 12. And
when we have asked grace, we must be careful that we our selves be not
wanting unto grace, as well as we were careful that grace should not be
wanting unto us.

This diligence is noted in the word petite, which as it is used in the first
place, so also it signifies to go to, or to hit, and knock: so that it
contains all the three virtues that are required unto prayer, but for our
instruction our Savior has expressed them in three several terms.

Thirdly, having found the way, we may not rest there, there is a door whereby
we must enter, and that shall not stand open for us against we come, we must
knock at it. It pleases God to entreat us. 2. Cor. 5. to seek and find us,
when we are lost, Luke 15. He stands and knockes at our door. Apoc. 3.
Therefore as Moses speaks in Deuteronomy. We are to consider what he does require at
our hands.

The service that we owe him, is likewise to entreat him, to seek for grace
of him, to knock continually, till he open the gate of his mercy. If God hear
us not so soon as we ask, we may not cease to knock, as Saul did, who
because that God answered him not neither by dreams, nor by vrim, nor Prophet,
asked counsel of a witch, 1. Sam. 28. Importunity as our Savior speaks Luke
11. is a means whereby often times men obtain their ^uites. The unjust Judge
will be content to hear the widows cause at length, even because he would
be rid of cumber: if she be earnest with him, she shall at last obtain her
suit by importunity: So howsoever God be not inclined to do us good, and have
his ears open to our prayers, yet he is much delighted with our importunate
suites.

If the unjust Judge that neither feared God, nor reverenced man, may be
overcome with importunate suite, much more will God revenge them which give not
over their suites, but cry to him night and day. Luke 18. Let us not be weary
of well doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

These conditions being performed that we seek in the desire of our heart and
in humility: secondly that we be not wanting to grace, but work with it:
thirdly, if we do it with continuance, not giving over, then we shall find it
true, which Christ says, omnis qui petit accipit.

The sum is, as when God said, seek ye my face, David answered, thy face O
Lord I will seek, Psalm. 27. So when Christ says to us ask; our answer must
be; we will, at least dispose our selves thereunto, especially seeing he does
not only praeire exemplo; but dicere vt petas, seeing he does not only by his
commandment, permittere, but praecipere vt petas.

Lastly, seeing by his promise he does not only allure the^, vt peta^t, but
does minari si non petas, threaten if thou ask not: for if we ask of any but
from him he is angry, as he was with the King of Israel, that required of
Baal-zebub when he should recover, 2. Reg. 1. Is there not a God in Israel? And
Christ was offended with his Disciples for the neglect of this duty. Hitherto
ye have asked nothing. Ioh. 16. And when we come to ask of God, we must not
cease our suite, if he grant us not our suite at the first; but say with
Jacob, non dimittam te, Genesis 32. We must be instant, as the Cananite was, Math.
15. We must be earnest, as he that came at midnight to borrow bread, Luke 11.
and importunate as the widow with the Judge. Luke 18. and then we may assure
our selves of a comfortable effect of pra^ers.

The fourth Sermon.
ROMANS 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not
what to pray as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes request for us with
sighs, which cannot be expressed.


OVT of Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 3. we may see, first, that of our selves we are
not sufficient at all to good: and that all good comes from the Father of
lights. Iam. 1.17. and that, in that regard, we must ask, and receive at his
hands from whom it comes. Math. 7.7. Now the Apostle meets with another
difficulty, which is, how we may pray? for as we cannot perform any good
thing of our selves, unless God minister power, so we know not how to ask
this grace at his hands. Therefore to answer that question of the Disciples,
which desired that Christ should teach them how to pray. Luke 11. The Apostle
says, that because we know not what to pray for, as we ought, therefore the
Spirit does help our infirmites.

The Apostle begins at our infirmities, which he lays down in such sort, as
we may plainly see that our defects and wants are many: for as there are
infirmities of the body, which the Scripture calls the infirmities of Egypt,
Deuteronomy. 7.15. Whereunto the Saints of God are subject as well as other, as the
Apostle speaks of Timothy, that he had Crebras infirmitates. 1. Tim. 5. So the
soul also has certain infirmities; and that is the infirmity whereof the
Apostle speaks; for albeit our soul be the stronger part, as our Savior
speaks when he says: The Spirit indeed is strong, Math. 26. yet it is
subject to many infirmities, and weaknesses, when it doubts of Gods mercies,
saying: Will the Lord absent himself for ever? has God forgotten to be
gracious? which the Prophet acknowledges to be signs of his infirmities.
Psalm. 77.10. and as the spirit is weak, so there is a weakness of conscience,
1. Cor. 8.7. and no marvel if there be such infirmities in the bodies also;
for life it self is but weak, in regard whereof it is said of God, that
hereby he is content to spare us, for that he remembers that we are but dust,
Psa. 103. and considers that we are but even as the wind that passes away.
Psa. 78.

The difference is that, as Christ says, haec infirmitas non est ad mortem
Ioh. 11. and the dropsy, palsy, and such like diseases and infirmities of body
are not mortal.

The second thing which the Apostle teaches is, that howsoever we be, as the
Apostle speaks, compassed with infirmities. Heb. 5.5. yet they are not past
cure, for the Spirit helps our infirmity: so that al-be-it we are subject to
fall through weakness, yet there is hope concerning this thing, Esa. 10. 2.
and our error may be healed, Dan. 4. for there is balm in Gilead. Ier. 8.
which serves to cure all our spiritual diseases.

Now the cure of the infirmities of our soul is not performed by any strength
of our own, nor by our own Spirit, but by the Spirit of God: for so long as
our infirmities are but bodily, the spirit of man will sustain them, and there
is help to be found; but when the spirit it self is wounded, then who can
help it? Prou. 18.

The spirit of man, must have help from a higher thing then it self, as from
the Spirit of God, which only is able to minister help.

The Apostle ascribes to the Spirit of God two benefits, first, in regard of
the life to come: secondly, in respect of this present life: for the one as he
is the Spirit of Adoption, assures us of our estate in the life to come, namely
that as God has adopted us to be his children, so we shall be fellow heirs
with his own Son of his heavenly kingdom. Touching the other, because we
are subject in this life, to fall through infirmity, we have this benefit
from him, that he stays and vpholdes us, and therefore is called spiritus,
(...).

As our infirmities are manifold, whether we respect the body, or the soul,
so the weakness and defects of our souls appears not only in good things,
which we cannot do, because the flesh ever lusts against the Spirit, so that
we cannot do the things that we would. Gal. 5. but in evil things which we
should bear and are not able.

The evil things that we should bear, are not only afflictions, and the
crosses which we are subject to, which the Apostle proves to be more
tolerable, because they are not worthy of the glory to come: but dilatio boni,
wherein we need the virtue of magnanimity, because it is a great cross, as the
Wiseman says: Spes quae differtur affligit animam, Pro. 13. Touching which
affliction and crosses, because in this life we cannot obtain that which the
Prophet wishes, namely, to fl^e away (as it were) with the wings of a dove,
that so we might be at rest. Psalm. 55. therefore we must betake our selves to
the Mourning of the Dove. Es. 38. waiting patiently when God will give us time
to escape.

The means and ways whereby the Spirit does help us, are many; but he only
means prayer; to teach us, that howsoever it be not esteemed as it ought, yet
it is the chief prop and principal pillar which the holy Ghost uses to
strenghten our weakness. Therefore when the Apostle wills that first of all,
prayers and supplications should be made for Kings and all in authority. 1.
Tim. 2. the reason is, as Augustine notes, because both man's salvation, the
honesty of life, knowledge of the truth, quietness of kingdoms, duties of
Kings, and whatsoever tends to the public benefit comes by and from
prayer: So that not only the Church, and spiritual matters, but the
commonwealth and temporal things are stayed upon the pillar of prayer.

Wherefore as prayer is a special help: so we are not only exhorted by
religion to use it, but nature it self binds us unto it: for so long, as we
can ethier devise any help of our selves, or receive it from any other, so long
we lean upon our own staff; but when all help fails, then we fly to
prayer as our last refuge; and therefore when God is said to feed the ravens
that call upon him. Psalm. 147. That cry of theirs is the voice of nature, so
that albeit men for a time, lean to their stays and help, yet there is a day
when all flesh shall be made to come unto him, who only it is that hearreth
prayer. Psalm. 65. that is, when they lie howling upon their beds. Hos. 7. then
they shall be feign to call upon God for help^ so, howsoever Pharaoh in the
pride of his heart say, Who is the Lord, that I should hear his voice? Exodus
5. Yet he made him come to him, when he plagued him with thundering, and rain,
and hail, which made him send to Moses and Aaron, that they might pray unto
God for him. Exodus 9.28.

But here the Apostle means the prayer of the Spirit, which always reckons
prayer to be the first and chiefest help in all troubles, and not the last,
as the prayer of the flesh does.

Therefore, as we must discern^ simulacra virtutum, from virtues themselves,
and that which is natural, from that which is of grace; so we must
distinguish the prayer of the Spirit, from the carnal prayer, and be sure that
the virtues which we have, if they be any, are not natural, as those in many
of the heathen, but that they proceed from grace, and the working of Gods
Spirit.

To the right framing of our prayers it is required, that we do not only orare
mente and spiritu, 1. Cor. 14. but as the Psalmist says, of the praising of
God; so we pray to God with understanding. Psa. 47. Both our heart, our
understanding, our affection must concur in making intercession to God.

For a second point, if prayer be a stay to us in our infirmities, then we
must be careful that our prayers be not faint and weak, but that they
proceed from the feruency and vehemence of the Spirit, for as Christ says. If
the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? Math.
6. If our prayer be nothing else but infirmity, as it is for the most part, how
great is our infirmity?

But the Apostle shows our weakness in prayer, in that he denies men two
things: first, that we know not what to pray for, secondly, that we know not
how to pray: for both these defects we have a double supply; for Christ as he
is the light of the world^ Ioh. 8. has directed us what to pray for, by that
form of prayer which he has prescribed unto us; and the holy Ghost, who is
compared to the wind that blows where it will, instructs us how to pray,
for that it stirs up our affections, so that we pray with feruency of
spirit, and utter our desires unto God with sighs that cannot be expressed,
for as a man that trauelleth must have a knowledge of his way: so he cannot
take a journey in hand, except he have a good wind to set him foreward: to this
end we are taught, not only by the wisdom of God the Father, what to pray
for, but from the power of his Spirit we have those motions kindled in us,
whereby our prayer is made fervent.

Touching the persons, whom the Apostle charge with this twofold ignorance,
they are not the common sort of men, but even the Apostles themselves, for he
includes himself in the words, We know not, So Christ said not to heathen
men, Nescitis quid petitis, Math. 20. but to his Disciples James and John, so
that this is generally true of all men, that they know not what to ask (...)
as they ought, except Gods Spirit help them.

It is true that we have a diffused knowledge of good and evil, and a desire
to be partakers of the one, and to be delivered from the other, for ignoti
nulla cupido; but we must have a distinct knowledge, that is, whether the thing
we desire be good or no: There is an estate of life which is contemplative,
and another Active, and our infirmity is such, as we know not which of them to
take our selves unto, but oftentimes we think that course of life to be good
for us, which albeit it be good in it self, yet turns to our overthrow, so
that when we desire of God to place us in any such course of life, we speak
after the manner of men. Romans 6. taking it for a contented course for our
selves, whereas it falls not out so.

This will appear more plainly, both in things temporal and spiritual. The
sons of Zebedee in their suite to Christ, Math. 10. had a desire to obtain
some good thing at our Saviors hands, and they could not bethink themselves
of any thing better then to be exalted to some place of honor, and therefore
desired that one of them may sit at his right hand, and the other at his left
hand: but Christ told them, they asked they knew not what, for honor is not
fit for all men; they were the Disciples of Christ, and were to drink of the
cup of affliction, and therefore willed them to be mindful of it, and not to
affect that which was not for their good.

Likewise in spiritual things we may errre, and hereof we have example in
Saint Paul, whom a man would think to have had knowledge enough, so that he
would not ask the thing that was not good for him, he had the messenger of
Satan sent to buffet him, and he prayed that it might be removed from him,
which seems to have been a reasonable petition, but God answered him that he
asked he knew not what; it was more necessary for him to be exercised with the
temptations then not: and whereas he desires to be so pure, as not once to be
driven to evil; God told him, that his grace was sufficient for him, for it
was his will to perfect his strength in his weakness, 2. Cor. 12. Therefore if
we have any revelation from flesh and blood, Math. 6. that persuades us, that
this or that is good for us, we must know that all such are false, and that we
must suffer our selves to be directed by Gods Spirit, who knows better what
is good for us, then we our selves.

But to the end that we should not err, the Spirit of God makes intercession
for us, and therefore we may be sure that although we know not how to pray, in
such sort as may please God; yet the Spirit of God, who knows the secrets of
the counsel of God, will make that prayer for us; which shall be both for our
good and also according to Gods will. 1. Cor. 2.

It cannot be verified of the holy Ghost, which is God, that he either prays
or groaneth, but the Apostles meaning is, that he makes us to make
intercession, and has that operation in our hearts that he makes us to groan,
So when the Apost Gal. 4.6. says, that the Spirit cries Abba Father, his
meaning is, that by it we cry Abba Father. Romans 8.15.

Again, the Spirit is said to make intercession for us, because it sheds
abroad the love of God in our hearts, To. 5. for from the love of God proceeds
this love and affection in us, that we desire him and all his blessings, and
therefore make our prayer to him to that end, which is nothing else, but
explicatio de^iderij: so that we do not so soon desire any good thing, but we
are ready to pray for it, So says the Prophet, Lord thou know my desire,
and my groaning is not hid from thee, Psalm. 36.

Likewise when our desire is delaied, so that we obtain not the thing we
would have, then we are cast into sorrow, which is wrought in us by the Spirit
which is in us, and by prayer; for it is the Spirit of God which kindles this
feruency of desire in prayer, as Augustine says, Tepida est omnis oration, quam
non preuenit inspiratio, every prayer is lukewarm, which is not prevented
with inspiration.

The first thing that the Spirit of God works in us, is, that he inclines
our hearts to pray to God for the good which we lack, which is a thing not in
our own power; and therefore David thanks God that he found in his heart to
pray, 2. Sam. 7. for when we would settle our selves to pray, Nihil tam long
abest a nobis, quam orare vt decet.

Now being thus untoward in our selves, the Spirit of God comes and helps our
infirmity, and as the Psalmist says, He opens our hearts to pray, By this
means it comes to pass, that a man having his affection cold, shall on a
sudden feel in himself a desire to pray, and shall say, Domine, paratum est
cor meum. Psalm. 108.

Secondly, whereas the Lord says, open thy mouth, and I will fill it. Psalm.
87. we find this infirmity in our selves, that when we have found an heart
to pray, yet we cannot open our mouths; and therefore David says, Open thou
my lipp^s, Psalm. 51. and so must we sue to Christ, that he will give us words
to speak; for God has a key both to our tongue and will.

Thirdly, having begun to pray, that falls out many times which David
complains of, cor meum dereliquit me, Psalm. 40. So our heart will be gone,
and our mind will be wandering abroad, not regarding what our tongue speaks.

It falls out often, that as Abraham had his sacrifice ready, he was no sooner
gone from it, but the foul^s of the air did light upon it. Genesis 15. So while
we offer up to God, the calves of our lips, Hos. 14. and our course is past,
Psalm. 141. It comes to pass through our wantonness many foul thoughts be got
upon our sacrifice and dispoile it, and the remedy that the Spirit of God
affoords us against this infirmity, is, that it calls us home and tells us, we
are kneeling before the Majesty of God and therefore ought to take heed what we
speak in his presence. Therefore Bernard to keep his mind in the meditation
of God, when he would pray began thus, Let God arise, and let all his enemies
be scattered, Psalm. 68. and Augustine to the same purpose, began thus, Save
me O God for the waters ouerflow. Psalm. 64.

Fourthly, though we have our meditation still on God, yet we shall find in
our selves, that our spirits are dull and heavy, and have no manner of vigor
to help our infirmity, herein the Spirit helps and puts these meditations in
our hearts, whereby it kindles as the Prophet says, a fire burning within us:
so that God shall be feign to say to us, as he did to Moses, Dimitte me: let
me alone. Exodus 32.

Fifthly, albeit we pray but faintly, and have not that supply of feruency that
is required in prayer, yet we have comfort, that ever when we most faint in
prayer, there are of Gods Saints that pray for us with all instancy, by which
it comes to pass, that being al but one body, their prayers tend to our good
as well as their own, for the faithful, howsoever they be many, and
dispearsed into diverse corners of the world, yet they are but one dowe; and as
they are the members of one body, so they pray not privately for themselves,
but for the whole body of the Church: so that the weakness of one member is
supplied by the fervent and earnest prayer of the other. Therefore when the
Apostle says. The Spirit makes intercession for us, gemitibus
inenarrabilibus, Augustine asks, what gronings are these? are they thine, or
mine? no; they are the gronings of the Church, sometime in Me, sometime in
Thee, and therefore Samuel (to show that the Ministers of God do the people no
less good when they pray for them, then when they teach them) said, God forbid
I should cease to pray for you, and so sin against God. 1. Sam. 12.23. for
he was an help to them, not only in preaching to them, but in offering burnt
offerings for them. Therefore the people pray to Esaias, lift thou up thy prayer
for us, For as the offering of the Minister is to put the people in mind 2.
Pet. 1. so they are Gods remembrancers: they are Angels, as well ascending
upwards by their prayer in the behalf of the people, as descending to teach
them the will of God.

But if the Spirit that quails in us, do quail also in the whole Church; yet
we have a supply from the tears, which our head Christ shed on his Church,
Luke 19.41. and from the strong cries which he uttered to God his Father, in
the days of his flesh. Heb. 5.7. by which he cease not to make request to
God still for us, so that albeit the hardness of our heart be such as we
cannot pray for our selves, nor the Church for us, yet we may say, Conquaeror
tibi domine lachrimis Jesus Christi.

Lastly, because we cannot pray,(...), we have two helps also in that behalf
from the Spirit: first, that the Spirit teaches us to submit our will unto
Gods will, because as we are men, so we speak after the manner of men^ Romans 6.

This submission we learn from the example of Christ his prayer to God his
Father, Transeat calix iste a me, Let this cup pass from me, yet not my will,
but thy will be done. Math. 26. So David qualified his desire, If I have found
favor with the Lord, he will bring me again, but if not, let him do what
seems good to himself. 2. Sam. 15.

Secondly, when we look back upon our prayer, and see, that by reason of want
of feruency and zeal, it is but smoking flax, then the Spirit stirs us up
to desire God, that according to his promise. Esa. 42. He will not quench it,
but that his grace may be sufficient for us, and that he will make perfect his
strength in our weakness. 2. Cor 12.

The other thing wherein the Spirit helps our infirmities, is, that he
works in our hearts, certain groans that cannot be expressed, which is a
plain opposition to drousy and sloathfull prayer: for a devout prayer, plus
constat gemittibus, quam sermonibus, it is not fine phrases and goodly
sentences that commends our prayer, but the feruency of the Spirit from whom it
proceeds.

It is well, if we do orare mente, and spiritu. 1. Cor. 14. but if our prayers
do draw out sighs and gronings from our hearts, it is the better, for then it
appears that our prayer is not a breath, coming from the lungs, but from the
very depth of the heart, as the Psalmist says of his prayer, De pro^undis, out
of the deepes have I cried to thee O Lord. Psalm. 130.

What the Apostle means by gronings which cannot be expressed, is plain,
for when the grief of the heart is greatest, then are we least able to utter
it, as appears by the Sunamite. 2. Reg. 4. Notwithstanding as it was God that
wakened in us the desire of good things; so though we be not able to utter them
in words, yet he does hear, etiam vocem in silentio.

There are mutae praeces, and tamen clamantes: such as are the silent prayers
of Moses, which he made in his heart to God, though he expressed it not in
words; to this God said, Cur ^lamas ad me? Ex. 14.

Now as Martha was loath to serve alone, and therefore would have Mary to help
her, Luke 10. So the spirit does not pray alone, but does (...), bears
together or helps us, whereby the Apostle gives us to understand, that man must
have a cooperation with Gods Spirit: So we see the Saints of God, albeit they
acknowledge prayer to be the work of Gods Spirit in them; for as much as we are
not able to call Jesus Lord, but by the Spirit of God. 1. Cor. 12. Yet they are
not themselves idle, but do add endeavor, as David, Lord open thou my lips:
So he affirms of himself, I have opened my lips and drew in my breath.
Psalm. 119.

But that we may have the help of Gods Spirit (without which our endeavor is
but vain) we must still think upon our own weakness, and humble our selves
in the sight of God, as the Publican did Luke 18. so the Spirit of God will
rest upon us, as the Lord promises. Esa. 66. For this end fasting is commended
to the Church, for it has been as use always among the faithful, to humble
their souls with fasting, Psalm. 35.

Secondly, as we must pray in faith, So we must also be charitably affected to
our brethren, first, by forgiving them, if we will have forgiveness at the
hands of our heavenly Father, Mar. 11.25. Secondly, by giving them that need,
this commended Cornelius his prayer, that he gave alms, Act. 10.

If our prayer be thus qualified, we shall have Gods Spirit to assist us in
prayer, whose help if we obtain, and unto our prayer add a patient
expectation, so that we be not in have to obtain the thing we crave, but we
wait upon Gods leisure, as the Prophet says, Qui crediderit, non festinabit,
Isa. 28. He that believes makes not have, thus we shall find that the Lord
will not cast out our prayer.

The fifth Sermon.
LVKE. 11.1. And so it was, that as he was praying in a certain place, when
he ceased, one of his Disciples said unto him, Master teach us to pray, as
John also taught his Disciples.


WHich words do bring us to that form of invocation, to which by degrees we
have been approaching; for first out of Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 3. we learned that
of our selves, we are not able so much as to think a good thought, much more
unable to do that which is good: Secondly, from S. James, that albeit we have
no power in our selves, yet our want may be supplied by the Father of lights:
Thirdly, that therefore to the end we may obtain this ability, we are to
seek for it by prayer, as Christ councelleth: Petite, and dabitur vobis.

But then we meet with another difficulty, and that is as Paul confesses, Romans
8. that al-be-it grace may be obtained at the hands of God by prayer; yet we
know not how or what to ask, except the Spirit of God supply our infirmities;
and therefore as then it was said, that as the Spirit of God makes
intercession for us, so here the same Spirit does move the Disciples to seek
for a form of prayer of Christ, whereby we are taught, that if we know not how
or what to pray for, our duty is to repair to Christ, with the Disciples, that
he would direct us.

This Text has two parts, first, the petition of the Apostles,: secondly,
Christ's answer thereunto, Verse. 2.

In the first part we are to consider, first the occasion of the petition:
secondly, the petition it self, Domine doce nos.

Touching the first point, the Disciples took occasion of this petition from
Christ's praying, for seeing him not only pray now, but at sundry other times,
presently they conceived thus within themselves, that doubtless prayer was a
matter of great importance, and a means of no small benefit, otherways Christ
would never have prayed so often.

Before we considered two special motives to prayer: The first was Christ's
commandment: the second Christ's promise, Math. 7.7. ask and it shall be given
you; and here again we have other two motives: first, the provocation of
Christ's example, whom the Disciples found praying in a certain place:
secondly, the mould and set form of prayer, which he has given us, for our
better direction in this duty, say Our Father, etc.

Concerning the first of these, no doubt the examples of holy men ought to move
us to pray, much more when Jesus Christ himself, who is the Holy of holies,
Dan. 9.24. does by his own example stir us up hereunto.

King David, when he had his crown pulled off his head, by his own son,
and was driven out of his kingdom, said to the Priest, If it please God, he
can bring me again, and show me both the Arc, and the Tabernacle, 2. Sam.
15.25. Declaring hereby, that he was more careful to have the liberty to come
into the house of prayer, to power out his supplication before the Lord, as he
was wont, then to be restored to his crown, so great account did he make of
prayer. The like account did the holy Prophet Daniel make, for when by the
commandment of the King it was proclaimed, that whosoever made any petition to
God or men, save only to the King, should be thrown into the Lions Den;
he chose rather to adventure his life, then not to pray, Dan. 6. Whereby we
may gather, both how acceptable to God, and also how necessary for us, this
duty of prayer and invocation is: So that these examples of these holy men,
ought to be of no small efficacy to persuade us hereunto; and especially if
we consider the example of our Savior Jesus Christ, who is greater then
either David or Daniel. Of whom it is reported, that he went into a solitary
place alone, not only in the morning, Mark. 1. but also in the evening, Ioh.
6. not for an hour, but to spend the whole night in prayer. Luke 6.12. he
prayed not only, in deserto, which was a place of distress, but in horto. Ioh.
18.2. which was a place of pleasure, as he prayed when he was in his agony,
Luke 22.46. so also when he was to be made King, Ioh. 6. to teach us, that as
well in prosperity as in adversity, we have need to pray, for hereunto our
Savior does exhort us in plain words, not only by precept, Mat. 7. Luke
21.40. pray that ye enter not into temptation, because prayer is a mean to
keep us from evil, both a malo culpae, and a malo poenae, as well from sin, as
from all manner of plagues, which are the effects of sin; as one says, there
would none adversity come upon us, unless there were peruersity in vs^ but
secondly, by promise of reward, pray unto your Father in secret, and he will
reward you openly, Mat, 6.6.

We think it sufficient, if earthly Princes will vouchsafe to hearken to our
prayer; but God promises us more, he will reward us for the same. Therefore
seeing God both commands us to pray, and promises to grant us that we pray
for: seeing he does not only by his example teach us that Prayer is requisite,
but prescribes us also a Form of Prayer, we ought not to be negligent in this
duty.

Besides, out of this occasion, we are to consider this: That Christ prayed,
though he needed nothing, as he was the only begotten Son of God, he was
full of grace and truth, Ioh. 1.16. He had received the Spirit without measure,
Ioh. 3. Yet for all that, he prayed.

There are three uses of prayer: First, there is an Use of Necessity: for God
has left prayer to be our City of refuge, to the end, that when all means
fail, we should fly unto God by prayer. In which regard the wise man says,
Pro. 18. Turris altissima est nomen Domini. But Christians should have a
further use of this duty: for unreasonable creatures, as Lions, and Ravens, are
provoked (in regard of their necessity) to call upon God.

Secondly, the Use of Duty: for prayer is an offering: The Prophet compares
it to Incense, Psa. 41. a Reasonable service, Romans 12. Our Spiritual
sacrifice, 1. Pet. 2. It is compared to Incense, which gives a sweet smell to
all our works, words, and thoughts, which otherways would stink, and be
offensive to the Majesty of God. This use of prayer we have not only for the
supply of our wants in the time of adversity, but at all times, as Job says,
Chap. 27.

Thirdly, there is the Use of Dignity, when a man does abstract himself from
the earth, and by often prayer does grow into acquaintance, and familiarity
with God: for this is a great Dignity, that flesh and blood shall be exalted so
much, as to have continual conference with God.

Now as Christ was the Son of God, he had no cause to pray in any of these
thre^ respects, but as he was Principium omnis creaturae, Col. 1. as he was the
head of the Church, Ephesians. 1. he had use of prayer in these three respects: as
he was a creature, he stood in need of those things, which other creatures of
God were wont to desire. Again, as he was a creature, though the chief of al
creatures, he ought this duty of Invocation unto God his Creator: and as he
called on God in these two respects, so he was heard, as Christ speaks; I know
thou hear me always, Ioh. 11.41. But as he was in the state of a Creature,
the last use does most of al concern him; for which cause, having told Martha,
that one thing was needful, Luke 10. because the obtaining of the same is not
in our power, he presently with-draweth himself unto prayer in the beginning
of this Chapter, teaching us to do the like.

Before we come to the Petition, these words, vt cessauit, are to be
considered: for there are some with Saul, will call for the Arc, and will
presently cry, Away with it, 1. Sam. 14. that is, will begin their prayers, and
will break them off in the midst upon any occasion: but the Spirit of God does
teach us to be of another mind, when he wills us to avoid whatsoever may be
a means to interrupt our prayers, 1. Pet. 3.

The Disciples forbear to make their petitions to Christ, till he had done
praying: and therefore from their example we are to learn, so to settle our
selves to prayer, as that nothing shall cause us to break off, and so to
regard others that are occupied in this duty, as by no means to interrupt them.

In the Petition we are to consider, first, the thing that they desire:
secondly, the reason why they make this Petition. First, whereas they make
request that Christ would teach them how to pray, they do by implication
acknowledge as much as Saint Paul speaks of, Romans 8. that they know not what
to ask: not that they were without that general institution which we have from
nature, that is, to desire that which is good, but because they know not how to
limit their desire: as in temporal things, they know not whether it were good
for them to be the Chief men in a Kingdom, that was the ig^orance of the sons
of Zebedee, Matthew. 20.

In spiritual matters they will be like Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 12. who thought it
good for him to be saved from the temptation, whereas God told him, that his
grace was sufficient for him; and yet that the temptation should continue still.

As James and John made a request ignorantly for themselves, Math. 20. So they
make another in the behalf of Christ, Luke. 9. Lord, will thou that we
command that fire come down from Heaven? and therefore were reproved by Christ
for it: and as we see both by examples of Christ's own Disciples, that we may
pray amiss, Iam. 4. So in the old Testament David says, We may pray so, as
prayer (which is a part of Gods service) shall be turned into sin, Psalm. 109.
For prayer is nothing else but an interpreter of our desire, as on^ says: Ea
petimus quae appetimus: and as our desires are many times not only vain and
unprofitable, but dangerous and hurtful: so it falls out likewise that our
prayers are vain, and so are turned into sin.

The Disciples therefore being privy to their own infirmities in this case,
are stirred up by Gods Spirit, to seek for a perfect form of prayer of
Christ, in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid, Col. 2. And
this they do to the end they might not fail, either in the matter, or manner
of their prayers, and that, having received a platform of prayer from Christ,
they might use it as a pattern and complement of all their petitions. The
Pharisees were great prayers, Mat. 6. but they, under a pretense of long
prayers did devour Widows houses, Math. 23. and therefore their prayers turned
into sin. The Heathen used also to make long prayers, Matthew. 6.7. but they
erred, for they thought that they should be heard for their long babbling.
Therefore the Disciples, that they might not pray amiss, do make their
request to our Savior: Lord teach us to pray: which petition was therefore
acceptable to Christ, because profitable for thems^lues: for thus he professes
of himself: Ego Dominus Deus tuus, docens te vtilia. Isa. 48.17. Not subtilia,
(^aith August.) So Saint Paul confirms, that he withheld nothing from the
Church, that was profitable for them to know, Act. 20.

The world is full of curious questions: The Pharisees move questions touching
matrimony.

The Sadduces asked, what should come to pass after the end of the world,
whether we shall know one another, Math, 22. These were unprofitable and
curious, the inventions of flesh and blood, not those that proceeded from the
holy Ghost, The Disciples question is here, how they may serve God, and how
they may perform that duty for which they came into the world, Curious things
are those abscondita, which belong to God, with which we may not meddle, Deuteronomy,
29. we must enquire of things which concern us, Of the sons of Caine and
Abell, who were inuentors of tents, some devised to work in brass and copper,
others found out Music, as they thought it most profitable for the
publique-weale. The trade that the sons of Seth used and professed at the
same time that they thought to be most profitable, was the calling upon the
name of the Lord. Genesis 4. and they were occupied therein, as an Art no less
profitable then the building of houses, or making of armor, and ever since
howsoever the world do addict themselves to other things, that serve to make
most for their private profit: yet the Church and City of God, are busy in
studying how they may by prayer receive mercy and obtain grace, to help them
in time of need, Heb. 4.

The reason whereby they urge their suite is, as John taught his Disciples;
which reason, in the judgment of flesh and blood, might seem of small
efficacy; for whereas John confessed himself unworthy to unloose Christ's
shoe, Math. 3. he might have took it in scorn that the Disciples of John
should teach him his duty after the example of John: But Christ to commend his
humility, is content both in his preaching and praying to follow John. John
said, Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, Math. 3. And Christ though
he were the wisdom of God, and furnished with all manner of doctrine, yet
was content to borrow that sentence from John Baptist, as appears in his
Sermon, Math. 7. So he was content to follow him in prayer; So that the
example of John's diligence in teaching his Disciples that duty, was a motive to
him to do the like unto him.

Whereas the Disciples of Christ tell him, that John was wont to teach his
Disciples to pray, they speak by experience, for diverse of them were before
time Disciples unto John, as appears Ioh. 1.37.

The ordinary prayer that was used in the Synagogue among the Jews was; that
prayer, which is entitled, the prayer of Moses, Psalm. 90. and as Christ says,
The law and the Prophets were until John, Luke 16. So that prayer of Moses
continued in the Church of the Jews, until John's time; when he was come, he
used another form of prayer which endured to the coming of Christ, who having
taught his Disciples a third form of prayer, John's prayer ceased, the reason
was, because as the Apostle speaks of Moses, Heb. 3. Albeit both Moses, the
Prophets and John, were faithful in the house of God, yet they were but
servants, but Christ was that Sun of righteousness, and the day star, that
was long before promised, and therefore seeing he being come, has taught a
more perfect form of prayer, he being only wise, all other forms ought to
give place to his,

Secondly, according to the rule of John Baptist, a man can receive nothing
except it be given him from above, Ioh. 3.2. Then, if we will obtain any thing
we must put up our supplications to God for it, but in making our prayers we
may offend: for he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaks earthly
things, Therefore John, according to his own confession, may mingle some
corruption with his prayer: But Christ that is from heaven is above all, Ioh.
3. and therefore if he teach us to pray, it shall be in such sort as God shall
accept it: and for this cause Christ's prayer does excel the prayers both of
Moses and John, and all the Prophets.

Touching which form of prayer, as before he had given them an abridgement, of
that obedience, which the law requires, Luke 16. So here he does briefly set
down a form of prayer.

As it is said of him, that, grace and truth is by Jesus Christ, Ioh. 1. so
when in the other Chapter, he had showed them the truth of the Law^ so now he
tells them that grace must be sought for of God by prayer, whereby we may be
able to obey that Law.

The suite of the Disciples, being both profitable to themselves, and no
subtle question, Christ is content presently to grant their request, and
therefore his answer is, when ye pray say, etc.

Wherein we are to observe two things: first, whereas there are certain
practicke spirits, that cross that saying of our Savior, and tells us, we may
not use this prayer which Christ gave, saying, Our Father: but that we are to
frame our prayers of our own, as our state shall require, these words are a
contradiction to there ne dicite.

Christ himself has commanded us to use this form of prayer; and therefore,
we may be bold to say: Our Father; whatsoever prayers we make of our selves,
they have some earth, because we our selves are of the earth; but the prayer
instituted by Christ is free from all imperfection: because it was penned from
him that was from above, Ioh. 3.

In this prayer there is not one word wanting, that should be put in, nor any
word more then ought to be. Therefore both in regard of the Author of it, and
the Matter, we may safely use this form of Prayer.

Secondly, these words are an opposition betwixt Cogitate and Dicite. It is not
enough to think in our minds this prayer, but our prayers must be Vocal; so
that, as in this Christ casts out the dumb Devil; so here he casts out
the dumb prayer. It is true, that the life of prayer and thanksgiving
stands herein: That we sing praises with understanding, Psalm, 47. that we do
orare mente and Spiritu, 1. Cor. 14. Herein stands the soul of prayer; but as
we our selves have not only a soul, but a body also: so our prayer must have
a body: Our tongue must be the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45. We must at the
time of prayer, bow our knees, as our Savior Christ did, Luke. 22.41. We must
lift up our hearts with our hands, Lam. 3. Our eyes must be lift up to God,
that dwells in the heaven, Psa. 123. And as David says, Psalm. 135. All our
bones must be exercised in prayer.

The reason why we must use this form of prayer, is taken from the skill of
him that has penned it, and from his favor with God.

We are not acquainted with the phrases of the Court, and we know no^ what
suit to make unto God. But Christ, who is our Advocate, in whom all treasures
of wisdom and knowledge are hid, Col. 2. He can form us a bill, and make
such a petition for us, as shall be acceptable at the hands of God. None knows
the things of God, but the Spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2. So none knows what
pleases God, but Christ, who has received the Spirit from God: and in this
regard, as he knows Gods will best, so he is best able to frame a form of
prayer, so as it may be agreeable to Gods will.

Secondly, touching the Authority which Christ has with God his Father; it was
such as God proclaimed from Heaven: This is my beloved Son: and Christ says:
Thou hear me always, John. 11. So greatly was he respected with God.

In both these respects we may be bold to say: Our Father. etc.

We have the promise, that if we ask any thing in the name of Christ, he
gives it us, John. 16.17. Much more may we have confidence to be heard: Si non
modo in nomine eius, sed verbis eius.

The Apostle says: If I had the tongue of Men and Angels, 1. Cor. 13. His
meaning is, that the tongues of Angels were more glorious then the tongues of
men; and therefore that song of the Angels, Holy, Holy, Holy, Ecles. 6. is
magnified in the Church: But this prayer was formed by the tongue of Christ,
who is the Lord of Angels.

The Cherubins hid their faces before the Lord of Hosts, Esaias. 6. And he that
made this prayer was the Lord of Hosts, of whom it is said: Os Domini
exercituum locutum est.

This prayer as one said is (...), the Engaging of our charity and love: for we
desire to have remission of sin no otherwise then as we forgive our
brethren, whereby the love of our brother is continually increased: And this
prayer is breuiarium fidei, it teaches us to believe those things which we
pray for.

Lastly, our perfection in obeying the Law, and in believing those things which
we ought to intrea^, with such a hope by prayer: Legem implendi, and legem
credendi, lex statuit supplicandi.

The sixth Sermon.
LVKE. 11.2. And he said unto them: When ye pray, say: Our Father which art in
heaven, hallowed be thy name: Thy kingdom come: Let thy will be done, even in
^arth as it is in Heaven, etc.


IT is the answer of our Sa^iour Christ, to that Disciple of his, which in the
name of the rest desired to be taught a form of prayer.

Concerning prayer, among other things already noted, we are to know, that it
is the doctrine of the Fathers; that God not prayed unto on our parts, and his
holy Spirit not yet possessing our souls, has notwithstanding promised, that
he will power his Spirit upon all flesh, Joel. 2. as it was powered upon the
Apostles after Christ's Ascension, Act. 2. Namely, that Spirit which he calls
the Spirit of Grace and Prayer, Zach. 12.10.

When he thus vouchsafes to send the Spirit of Grace into our souls, then
from thence there do run two streams into the two several faculties of our
soul, that is, the Spirit of Grace has a working on our Understanding by the
light of Faith: and secondly, in our Will, by inspiring us with holy desires:
of which holy desires, the interpreter betwixt us and God, is Prayer: For that
as the Apostle speaks: Our r^quests are made known to God by prayer and
supplication, Phil. 4.6. Now as prayer is properly the effect of Grace; so
whatsoever we obtain of God by prayer, it is the gift of Grace; which prayer
is therefore our reasonable service of God, because we do therein acknowledge,
not only our own wants and unworthiness, but also that as God has in his
hands all manner of blessings to bestow upon us; so if we sue to him for them,
he will withold no good thing from us, Psalm. 84.12.

Before we can pray for good things, it is required, that we do conceive a
love of them; which if it be in us, then we shall not only be inflamed with a
desire of them, which is an effect of love, but shall be stirred up to pray for
them: But it is the peculiar work of the Holy Ghost, to shed in our hearts the
love, not only of God, Romans 5. but of all other good things, which work he
performs, not in all indifferently; for he is compared to the Wind, that
blows where it will, Ioh. 3. But those whom it pleases the Holy Ghost to
inspire with a love and affection toward good things, they do not only
desire them, but withal do pray earnestly for them unto God; for as it is the
work of Jesus Christ, the eternal word, to enlighten every one that comes
into the world, so it is the office of the eternal Spirit, to inspire our
hearts with holy desires.

In this answer of our Savior, we are to consider three points: first, a
time limited for prayer: secondly, the contents of the word, Oration: thirdly,
what is to be noted out of the word, discite.

Touching the time limited for prayer, we have heard already, that there are
three uses of prayer, one was the use of dignity and perfection, when men do
converse and enter into familiarity with God, by abstracting their minds from
humane affairs, and subleuating them into heaven by a continual meditation of
God, and things pertaining to the life to come, which because it is peculiar to
them that have already attained to some perfection, we must say of it, as
Christ did of another matter: Qui potest capere capiat, Matthew. 19. Our
weakness is such, as cannot by any means come to this use; yea the infirmity
of the Disciples themselves was so great, that allbeit Christ had so many other
things to tell them of, yet they were not able as yet to bear them, Ioh. 14.

Therefore we are to consider the two other uses, which do more nearly
concern us; whereof the one is, the Use of necessity, which stands either
upon fear, or upon want; and when necessity lies upon us, in either of these
respects, they are so forceable, that they make all flesh to come unto him that
hears prayer, Psalm. 65. Of fear the Prophet says: Lord in trouble they
visited thee, they powered out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them, Isa.
26.16. And the want of outward things is so vehement a motive, as when nothing
else can move men to prayer, yet they will assemble themselves before the Lord
for corn and oil,, Hos. 7.14.

These two, the one being as Solomon terms it, Plaga cordis, 1. Reg. 5, the
other, Desiderium cordis, Psalm. 5. do point to us two times of prayer;
namely, when either we are oppressed with misery, as the effect of sin, or
disquiered with our selves with the conscience, and guilt of sin it self,
which is the cause of all our miseries.

Touching sin, the Prophet says: While I held my tongue, my bones consumed
away; but after he had confessed his sins unto the Lord, and craved pardon,
he forgave his wickedness: And because it is not his case only, forasmuch as
we have all sinned, his counsel is in this behalf; pro hoc orabit omnis
pius, Psalm. 32. Which being done, as the Prophet speaks, the weakest of them,
that is, every sinner, shall be as Dauid^ Neither are we of necessity to pray,
that God will forgive the guilt of our sins past, but that he will prevent us
with his grace against temptations of sins to come; for in this regard, our
Savior Christ would have his Disciples occupy themselves in this holy duty,
Orate, Pray ye that ye enter not into temptation, Luke. 22. For the effect of
sin, which is adversity.

Then is prayer necessary in the time of affliction, when outwardly through the
malice of our enemies we are in misery: In which case the Prophet says: when
the ungodly, for the love he bare to them, required him with hatred: Then he
gave himself to prayer, Psalm. 109.3. Or else inwardly, by reason of crosses,
which it pleases God to bring upon us, against which, the only remedy is to
use Prayer, as the Apostle exhorts, James, 5. Is any afflicted? let him pray. A
timore tuo concepimus spiritum salutis, Es. 26.8. That is, For fear.

And when we consider our own wants, the troubles that are upon us, though
for a time we hold our tongues and speak nothing, yet a fire will kindle in
us, we cannot long be silent, but the desire of our heart must have a vent by
prayer, as the Prophet had experience in himself, Psalm. 39. So that as well
the fear of danger to come, as present want and affliction, will lead us to
prayer.

But when we are rid of all adversity, yet there is another use of prayer,
which is the Use of Duty.

We are to pray, not in regard of our selves, but in obedience to God, who
commands prayer to be made by us, as a part of his service and duty, which
we owe to him.

Prayer made of duty is of two sorts, both in regard of time, and place.

Job in the law of nature tells us, that it is our duty: Inuocare Deum omni
te^pore. Job. 27.10. and our Saviors charge unto his Disciples is, that they
should semper orare. Luke 18. which the Apostle interprets by (...), 1. These.
5. But this cannot be performed of us by reason of our infirmity, therefore we
must expound this otherwise, and as Saint Paul speaks, we must speak after
the manner of men, propter infirmitatem. Romans 6. and so we are commanded to
pray always; the meaning is, that it is our duty to appoint certain hovvres
for prayer; for as Augustine says, Semper orat, qui per certa interualla
temporum orat, the reason of this exposi^ion is, for that our service to God,
must be a reasonable service, Romans 12. and the preaching of the word must not
be done negligently; for it must be (...), 1. Peter 2. which cannot
continually be performed of man without some respect.

Touching the set times appointed to the service of God in the Law, it is
appointed and required, that there should be both morning and evening sacrifice
day by day, and that upon the Saboth there should be twice so long service as
upon other days. Numb. 2.8.

This public service was performed by the Jews, among whom the book of
the Law was read four times a day, Nehem. 9.3.

For private devotion the Prophet says, In the evening, in the morning, and at
noone day, will I call upon thee. Psalm. 55. and Daniel was for praying three
times a day, cast into the Lions Den. Dan. 6.

In the new Testament this duty of prayer was by the practice of Saint Peter
limited to the third hour, Act. 2.15. to the sixth hour, Act. 10.9. to the
ninth hour, at which time Peter and John went up to the Temple together to
pray, Act. 3. whose diligence and care ought to stir us up to the like.

Further the Disciples desire to be taught a right form of prayer: not only
as here, as a Christian, but as an Apostle and Minister sent forth to preach
the Gospell^ whereby we learn that prayer belongs not only in general
to every Christian, but more particularly and specially to those that have any
Ecclesiastical authority over others.

So that is an opinion very erroneous, that we have no other use of the
Apostles of Christ, and their Successors, but only for preaching: whereas, as
it is a thing no less hard to pray well, then to preach well: so the people
reap as great benefit by the intercession of their pastors, which they
continually make to God, both privately and publicly, as they do by their
preaching.

It is the part of the Ministers of God, and those that have the charge of the
souls of others, not only to instruct the flock, but to pray for them.

The office of Leui and his posterity, as Moses shows, was not only to teach
the people the Laws and Judgments of the Lord, and to instruct Israel in the
law, but also to offer Incense unto the Lord, Deuteronomy. 33. Which Incense was
nothing else but a type of prayer, made by the faithful. Psalm. 145.

Therefore Samuel confesses, that he should sin no less in ceasing to
pray for the people, then if he were slack to show them the good and right
way, 1. Sam. 12.23.

This duty the Ministers of God may learn from the example of Christ's own
practice, who went out early in the morning to pray. Mark. 1.35. So he prayed
for Peter that his faith should not fail, Luke 22. also from the example of
the Apostles, who al-be-it they did put from them the ministration of the
Sacraments, yet gave themselves continually to prayer, and the Ministry of the
word, Act. 6.4.

In which regard Paul says, he was sent not to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel. 1. Cor. 1.17. which they did refuse to do, not as a thing impertinent
to their office, but that they might with more attention of mind and feruency
of Spirit apply themselves to make intercession for Gods people.

Thus much they are to learn from hence, that the Priests are Angeli Domini
exercituum. Mal. 2.7. If Angels, then they must not only descend to the people
to teach them the will of God, but ascend to the presence of God to make
intercession for the people^ and this they do more cheerfully, for that God is
more respective to the prayers which they make for the people, then the people
are heedfull to the law of God taught by them.

For this cause the Priests are called the Lords remembrancers, Es. 62.6.
because they put God in mind of his people, desiring him continually to help
and bless them with things needful; for God has a greater respect to the
prayers of those that have a spiritual charge, then to those that are of the
common sort. Thus the Lord would have Abimelech deal well with Abraham, and
deliver him his wife, because he is a Prophet, and should pray for him that he
may live, Genesis 20.

So to the friends of Job the Lord said: My servant Job shall pray for you, and
I will accept him. Job. 42.

This office was appointed to the Priests in the Law, Leuit. 5.6. orabit pro
ijs sacerdos, Thus Ezechi^ sent for Esaias: so says he, Lift thou up thy prayer,
Esa. 37.4.

Men as they are Christians ought to pray, three times a day, as David Psalm.
55. but as they are Prophets and have a special charge, they must pray to God
seven times a day, as the same David. Psalm. 119.

This day of prayer, made by the Priests in the behalf of the people, was so
highly esteemed, that they took order that prayer should be made continually,
and because the same Priests are not to do all one thing, but to pray;
therefore some were appointed for the first watches, others for the second, and
others for the third watches, that so while one rested, the other might pray,
whereof David speaks, when he says, Mine eyes prevent the night watches,
Psalm. 119. So Christ speaks of the first and second watches. Luke 22.

Touching David's diligence in performing of this duty for the good of the
people, he says, At midnight I will rise up, to give thanks to thee. Psalm.
119. So did Paul and Silas, rise at midnight to sing praise to God. Act. 16.
And it were to be wished that the like order were taken in the Church that the
sacrifice of prayer were continually offered among Christians as it was in the
Synagogues of the Jews.

Secondly, in regard of the place, we are every where to lift up pure hands 1.
Tim. 2 and so the Psalmist extends this part of Gods service to all places
generally of his dominion. Psalm. 103. Howbeit though it be not to be neglected
in no place; yet especially we must offer this sacrifice of prayer and praise,
in the assembly among the faithful in the congregation, Psalm. 111. and so we
must learn to distinguish the lyturgy and the public service of God in the
Church, from that private devotion, which our Savior would have us to perform
daily; when he says, When thou prayest enter into thy chamber, Math. 6. For
God has promised to accept that worship which we tender unto him in the place
consecrate for that purpose: In every place where I put my name, thither will I
come and bless thee; Exo. 20.24. Non solum quod oratis, sed quod ibi oratis,
that is, the public place whether the Saints of God from time to time
assemble themselves to call upon God together. In his Temple does every man
speak of his praise, Psalm. 29. Our Savior Christ did therefore tell them that
it was domus orationis, Isa. 56. to teach us, that the chief end of our
meeting there, should be, not to make it a public school of Divinity, and
instruction, but to power out our prayers to God; for private prayers was not
enough, unless at times appointed we meet together to pray publickely.

So the Apostle Saint Peter does teach us by his example, who not only when he
was at home went up to the top of his house to pray Acts 10. but to the Temple
also. Act. 3.

Saint Paul did not content himself to bow his knees to God when he was at
Rome, and Ephesus, and other places; but he went to Jerusalem, and prayed in
the Temple Act. 22.11. which thing as he did for himself; so no doubt, he
did it in the behalf of the Church of God, to which he was sent to preach; and
it were to be wished that in the Church there were minus oratorum, and plus
orantium.

The second general point is, touching the contents of the word, Oratis.

Our necessities are manifold, and the grace of God, which we sue for to God,
is, multiformis gratia, 1. Pet. 4. Besides, the Apostle says, pray with all
manner of prayer, Ephe. 6. therefore it is meet that we should take notice
how many kinds of prayers there are, wherein the Apostle guides us, when he
says, Let supplicatio^^, prayers, thanksgiving, and intercessions be made,
1. Tim. 2. These four contain all those sorts of prayer, which are contained
in the body of this word, Orate.

Prayer, or invocation consists of confession and petition, confession is
divided into confessionem fraudis, which the Greeks call (...), that is the
confession of sins, whereunto they add supplication to God for pardon, like
that of the Publican, Luke 18. God be merciful to me a sinner,

The other kind of confession is, Confessio laudis, that is, thanksgiving to
God for his goodness in pardoning our sins, and bestowing his benefits upon
us, which kind of confession is called (...). This also is a part of prayer,
and ought to go with it, as appears, Phil. 1.3 Col. 1.3. where the Apostle
does thank God always for the Churches in his prayer.

Both these the Jews gather from the words Judah and Israel; for Judah is
confession; and Israel is the name of prevailing in wrestling with the Angel,
as the faithful do strive with God in prayer. Romans 13.

The one they call Tehillah, the other Tephillah.

They had both these, Hosanna, and Halleluiah.

Petition stands upon Comprecation and Deprecation.

Deprecation is, when we desire that evil may be removed, which kind of
prayer is (...) and Techinah.

Comprecation is, when we would have our want supplied with good things, which
is (...) and Tephillah.

Intercession is an other kind of prayer proceeding from charity, as the other
came from faith, when we do not only confess our own sins, but the
sins, of others, when we pray not only for our selves, but for others; when
we praise God not only for his goodness on our selves, but for others.

So it was the charge which God gave by his Prophet to them in captivity, not
only to pray for themselves, but to pray for the prosperity of the City
where they were prisoners. Ier. 29, 7.

As they we^e to have a care of the commonwealth, so the like is to be had of
the Church. Therefore when Peter was in prison, there was prayer made
continually of the Church to God for him, Act. 12.5. pray for all Saints says
the Apostle, Ephe. 6. and for me especially, that utterance may be given to
me, etc. and as for them that have any special place in the Church or
commonwealth, so we are bidden to pray for all such as are in misery, as David
teaches us by his example; who when his enemies were sick, ceased not to pray
for them, no less then for himself, but put on sackcloth and humbled his
soul with fasting. Psalm. 35.

Unto these kinds of prayer some add two more; the first is, when upon
condition that God will grant us our desire, we vow that we will faithfully
serve him afterward, as Jacob prayed, Genesis 28. The other is a simple prayer or
petition uttered in short words, as Lord have mercy on me, and such like, which
are nothing else, but sparks of that fire, which kindeleth within us, whereof
David spoke, Psalm. 39. Hear me Lord and that right soon for my Spirit
fails. Psalm. 143.

In regard of this our weakness, our Savior has in a short prayer
comprehended whatsoever is needful for us, which breuity he used, least if he
had set a large form of prayer, our spirit should be dead, and our devotion
keycold before we could come to the end; and for the same purpose the Church
has prescribed collects, prayers answerable to that short petition of our
Savior Christ.

All these kinds of prayers were used by our Savior Christ in the days of his
flesh, as he took our nature, and was the head of a body Factus pro nobis
peccatum, 2. Cor. 5, and so did not only confess himself a sinner, but
suffered the wrath of God for it; which made him cry, Deus mi, Deus mi, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Math. 26. The rebuke of them that rebuked
thee fell on me. Romans 15. Psalm, 69.

Also he was an example to us of thanksgiving, I thank thee o Father, etc.
Luke 10.21. I thank thee that thou have heard me, Ioh. 11.

For Deprecation, as he was a man. Let this cup pass from meee. Math. 26.

The good he prayed for at the hands of his Father was, Pater, glorifica me ea
gloria, quam habui apud te, etc, Ioh. 17.

Touching Intercession, he prays, Pater ignosce eis, Luke 23. I pray not for
them only, but for all them that shall believe by their preaching Ioh. 17.

As he used all these kinds of prayer, so he set them all down in this form
of prayer.

The Confession of sin, and the supplication for remission, is in the five
petitio^s, The thanksgiving is that (...) for thine is the kingdom, power,
and glory; and the good which he desires is, the sanctification of Gods name,
the accomplishment of his kingdom and fulfilling of his will, as also a
continual supply of all things needful for this present life.

The evil from which he prays to be delivered, is first, from sin it self:
secondly, from the temptations of sin: thirdly, from evils, which are the
effects of sin.

The third and last point in this Text is, that we observe something in this
word Dicite; whereof the first is, that here Christ does not say, Say thus, as
Math. 6. whereof some gather, that we may frame prayers, after the form of the
Lords prayer, but not use the words themselves: But he says to his Disciples,
Dicite Pater noster etc. that is, we may boldly use the very words of this
prayer, and albeit, to set forth the desire of our hearts, we use other
forms of prayer, and that in more words, yet we must conclude our prayers with
this prayer of Christ.

Secondly, when he says Dicite, he does not say cogitate or recitate, or
murmurate, but, intus dicite and cum ore, for there is a mouth in prayer, and
non est oration sine ore, therefore he allows vocal prayer; and as he will
have us express the desire of our hearts in words, so the chief thing is,
that our prayers be from the heart; for invocation is a spiritual sacrifice,
1. Pet. 2. A reasonable service, Romans 12. So both the understanding and reason
must be occupied, and also the spirit or inward affection of the heart: Our
Savior requires both in express words, worship him in spirit and truth. Ioh.
4. Sing with understanding, Psalm. 47. I will pray with the Spirit, and I will
pray with the understanding also. 1. Cor. 1^.

We must not only have a spiritual feruency and zeal, but also must know
what we pray for, which is belonging to the understanding: So that if both do
not concur, our service is not reasonable, nor our sacrifice of praise,
spiritual.

As for that prayer that comes only from the lips, it may be said of it, as
God spoke of hypocrites, Is that the fast that I required? Isa. 58. So,
assembling to hear the word, as people use to do, Ezech. 33. Is this that
which God requires? Is this to eat the Lords Supper? 1. Cor. 11.

It is not enough to make long prayers, and use many words, there is a
spiritual prayer which God will have with our vocal petitions, and therefore,
that we may pray with understanding, we have need to be instructed in the
sense of the Lords prayer.

The excellency of this prayer is in regard of him that made it, who is come
from above, who has mixed nothing with this petition that sauoreth of the
earth; for they are all heavenly, as he himself is heavenly: Secondly, in
respect of the form, which is a most perfect form, it was compiled by him who
is the wisdom of God, and therefore cannot be but perfect, quia perfecta
sunt opera Iehouae, Deuteronomy. 33. Thirdly, in regard of the excellent benefits
that are procured to us by it, which are so many as can be desired at the
hands of God. Fourthly, for the order which Christ keeps.

If man did make a prayer, he would begin at daily bread; but Christ in this
prayer teaches us first to seek the kingdom of God, Math. 6.

Our first Petition must be for the glory of God, and then for our own welfare,
chiefly in the world to come; and also in this life, for as we may not pray at
all for things that are evil, so in things that are good and lawful, we must
take heed that we ask not amiss.

The petitions, being seven, are divided thus: The first, concerns God
himself, the other six concerns us.

They concern us in a threefold estate, first, of Glory: secondly of Grace:
thirdly, of Nature.

In these petitions that concern us, the evil that we would have removed from
us, is^ first, sin: secondly, temptation: thirdly, evil.

The good we desire to be granted us, is first, that Gods kingdom may be in
our hearts: secondly, that his will may be performed of us: thirdly, that he
will give us things necessary for this present life.

The seventh Sermon.
LVKE 11.2. Our Father.


THis Prayer, penned by our Savior Christ in the behalf of his Disciples and
his Church unto the end of the world, stands first upon an Invocation, then
upon certain Petitions.

The invocation is the style or word of salutation, wherein we call upon the
Majesty of God. The Petitions contain the sum of those things we seek for at
the hands of God.

That which we have generally to note out of this preface is, that this is one
benefit which God vouchsafes us, that we may pray unto him and be heard;
whereby we are to conceive of him that he is not like the great Monarchs, to
whom no man might presume to speak, except he hold out his golden Scepter to
him, as it is in Est. 4.

The heavenly Majesty vouchsafes every man this honor to speak to him, and
the Golden Scepter of his word does allure us thereunto.

Secondly, it is a greater benefit to pray to God on this manner, that is by
the name of Father; and therefore by that which he promises the faithful,
Isa. 65, Before they call I will he^re them. we are taught that we are so
assured of Gods goodwill and favor toward us, even before we open our mouths
to ask any thing of him that we doubt not to call him Father, from whence we
may reason as the Apostle does, Romans 8. Seeing be has given us his Son, how
shall he not with him give us all things? So seeing God takes us for his
children, how shall he deny us any thing, whereby he may show himself a
Father?

In the first we consider the perfection o^ Gods goodness, in these words, Our
Father: In the second, the excellency of his power, expressed thus: Which art
in heaven.

Both these are attributed unto God, not only of the Christians, but even by
the Heathen, that are strangers to the Church; for they attribute this unto
God, that he is optimus, maximus, and therefore where these two doubts arise in
our hearts, Domine si vis, Lord, if thou will, Math. 8. and Domine si quid
potes, Mark. 9. they are both taken away by these two attributes.

By that term which sets out the perfection of Gods goodness, he assures
us that he is willing, and by that which expresses the excellency of his
power, we are taught that he is able to perform our requests.

His goodness gives us fiduciam, that in regard of it we may boldly come to
the throne of grace, Heb. 4.

The consideration of Gods power breeds in us devotion and reverence, (for
both must be joined together) neither fear without the consideration of his
goodness, nor bold confidence that is not tempered with a dutiful regard of
his power, is acceptable to him.

So that which we learned in lege credendi, that God is the Father almighty, is
here taught again in lege supplicandi; where we are instructed in our prayers
to ascribe both these unto God: first, that he is our Father; secondly, our
heauen^^ Father.

The consideration of these tw^, are the pillars of our faith, and there is no
petition wherein we do not desire, that God will either show us his goodness,
or assist us with his power, and no Psalm or Hymn, that is not occupied in
setting forth one of these.

The titles which express Gods goodness have two words, the one a word of
faith, the other a word of hope and charirity.

Of both these words of Pater, and noster, Basil says, that here Lex
supplicandi, non modo credendi, sed operandi Legem statuit, The law of prayer,
does not only establish and confirm the law of belief, but of working also,
For where in the word Father, is expressed the love of God to us, it
comprehends withal the love we bear to him.

Where we call God our Father, and not my Father, therein is contained our love
to our neighbor, whom we are to love no less then our selves, Upon these two
hang the Law and the Prophets. Math. 22.

Again, the word Father, is a word of faith, and our a word of charity; and
the thing required of us in the new Testament is, Fides per charitatem operans,
Faith, which works by charity. Gal. 5.

So that in these words Our Father, we have a sum both of the Law and the
Gospel.

Christ might have devised many more magnificent and excellent terms for God;
but none were apt and fit for us to assure us of Gods favor. Our Savior
says, Luke 11.13. That earthly fathers, which many times are evil men, have
notwithstanding this care for their children, that if they ask them bread,
they will not give them a stone: much more shall our heavenly Father give us
the holy Spirit, if we ask it.

Wherefore Christ teaching us to call God by the name of Father, has made
choice of that word, which might serve most to stir us up unto hope, for it
is Magnum nomen sub quo nemini desperandum, a great name under which no man can
despair.

There may seem an opposition to be betwixt these words, Father and Our, if we
consider first, the Majesty of God, before whom the hills do tremble, and the
Angels in heaven cover their faces. Secondly, our own uncleanness and
baseness, both in respect of the mould whereof we be made, which made Abraham
confess himself unworthy to speak unto God being but dust and ashes, Genesis
18. And also in regard of our pollution of sin, in which regard we are
called, The slaves of sin, and children of the Devil. Ioh. 8.

Herein we find a great distance between God and us, and so are we far from
challenging this honor to be the sons of God in regard of our selves. Who
durst (says Cyprian) pray to God by the name of Father, if Christ our Advocate
did not put these words in our mouths? He knows how God stands affected
toward us, for all our unworthiness; and therefore seeing he has framed this
petition for us, we may boldly as he commands say thus, Our Father.

Therefore albeit of our selves we cannot conceive hope, that God is our Father,
yet we may call him Father by the authority of Christ, and say with Augustine,
Agnos^e Domine stilum aduocati filij tui, Lord take notice of the style of our
Advocate thy Son.

We know not Gods affection toward us, but by Christ we take notice of him,
for he has declared him unto us, Ioh. 1.18. and being taught that God in
Christ, vouchsafes to admit us for his children, We do with boldness come to
the throne of grace, Heb. 4.

Therefore we have thankfully to consider unto what dignity we that live under
the Gospel are exalted, not only above the Patriarchs in the time of the
Law, but above the heavenly Spirits.

Before the Law was given, Abraham says, Shall I speak to the Lord? Genesis 18,
In the law Christ says, Ego sum Dominus Deus tuus, Exodus 20. then he was not
called Father. But if we ask that question which the Apostle makes, To which
of the Angels said he, thou art my Son? Heb. 1.5. It will appear that God has
honored us in a degree above Angels, for that he gives us leave to call him
Father.

Thus we see what pre-eminence we have from God, above, as well the Saints on
earth in time of the Law, as the heavenly Angels; that we may not onepray, but
pray thus, Our Father.

In the word Father, we are further to note, not only that God is the cause of
all things, for that he brings forth all things, but also his (...), or
natural affection, to those things that are produced.

Gods Paternity is first generally to be considered in all creatures, which for
that they have their being from God, he is said to be their Father, So Job
called God Pater Pluuiae, The Father of the rain, Job. 38. Also he is called
Pater Luminu^, Iam. 1.17. and this is a motive sufficient to move God to be
favorable to our prayer, if there were no more, that we are his creatures: so
David spoke, Despise not the work of thine own hands, Psalm. 138. But men have
another use of Gods paternity, for whereas of other things God said Producat
terra, Genesis 1. When man was to be created, he said, Let us make man, giving us
to understand that howsoever other creatures had their being from God
immediately, God himself would be his Father, and frame him immediately with
his own hand.

Secondly, when God created man according to his own image he breathed into
him life immortal, he gave him the sparks of knowledge, and endued his soul
with reason and understanding, in which regard it is called the candle of the
Lord. Prou. 21.

Thirdly, when man was fallen from his first estate, God opened to him a door
of repentance, which favor he has not vouchsafed to the Angels that fell, and
so we may crave Gods favor, not only as we are the works of Gods hands, but
as we are his own image.

Fourthly, God is our Father, as we are Christians: that which Moses says; Is
he not thy father, Deuteronomy. 33. and doubtless thou art our Father, Isa. 63. is
to be understood of our generation, but we have a second birth, called (...),
or Regeneration, which sets us in a degree above mankind, and makes us not
only men, but Christians, which if we be, then we are the sons of God, not
as the rain, or lights, or they that are created to the image of God, but for
that we are borne of God, Ioh, 1.18. that is, borne again of the water and of
the Spirit, without which Regeneration, no entrance is into the kingdom of God.

And our dignity in being the sons of God, in these three sorts is to be
considered: First, in that we are the price of Christ's blood, 1. Cor. 6.
Secondly, we have Characterem, that is, the stamp of the sons of God, when we
are called Christians. Act. 11. Thirdly, we are the Temples of the Holy Ghost.
1. Cor. 3. By means whereof he gives us holy desires, and makes us sorry
that we have offended his Majesty; the assurance of this, is that which the
Apostle calls, the Spirit of Adoption, which he sends into the hearts of
Christians, to certify them both that they are the sons of God, and may call
him Father, Rom, 8. in a double sense, both in respect of nature and grace, not
only by generation, but by Regeneration.

In the natural affection that God bears us, we have two things, 1. the
immutability of it, 2. the excellency.

God does teach us, that his love to us is unchangeable, in this that he
expresses it by the name of Father, Nam pater etiamsi offensus, est pater; and
filius etiamsi nequam, tamen filius. A father though offended, is a father; and
a son though naught, yet is a son.

The Master may cease to be a Master, so may a servant. The husband may cease
to be a husband, so may the wife by means of divorce; but God can never cease
to be our Father, though he be never so much offended, and we cannot cease to
be his sons, how wicked soever we be; and therefore God does by an immutable
term, signify unto us the immutability of his affection. Heb. 6.

And in deed whether he do bestow good things on us, or he chasten us, his
love is still vncheangeable, for both are to be performed of a father toward
his children, and therefore whether he afflicts us, or bestow his blessings on
us, we are both to acknowledge his fatherly care, howsoever To flesh and blood
no affliction seems good for the present. Heb. 12.

This immutability of his love, as it ministers comfort in time of affliction,
so does it comfort and raise us up in sin and transgression, so that
notwithstanding the greatness of our sins, we may be bold to seek to God
for favor, and say, Etsi amisi ingenuitatem filij, tamen tu non amisisti
pietatem patris: Although Lord, I have lost the duty of a son, yet thou have
not lost the affection of a father.

The excellency of Gods love appears herein, that he is not described to be
God under the name of a king, or great Lord, as Math. 18. There we have an
example of great goodness in pardoning ten thousand Talents; but yet a doubt
will arise in our minds except we know him to be good otherwise then as he is a
king: for so look what mercy he shows to us, the like he will have us show
to others, but we come short of this. But this is it that contents us, that he
describes his goodness under the term of Father: in which regard how wickedly
soever we deal, yet still we may say with the evil child, I will go to my
Father, Luke 15. He had cast off his father, he had spent all his patrimony;
yet for all that he resolves to go back, and his father is glad to receive
him, he went, and met, and entertained him joyfully; such affection does God
bear to his children.

The benefits that we have by the fatherly love of God is of two sorts: First,
Fructus indulgentiae paternae: Secondly, Fructus liberalitatis pat^rnae, that
is, the fruit of fath^r^y compassion, and the fruit of fat^^rl^ bounty.

Fathers stand ^hus affected toward there children, that they are hardly
brought to chasten them, and if there be no remedy, yet they are ready to
forgive, or soon cease punishing: Pro peccato magno paululum supplicij satis
est Patri, for a great offense, a small punishment is enough to a father.

And for their bountifulness, the Apostle says, That there is naturally
planted in fathers a care to lay up for their children. 2. Cor. 12. they are
both in God; for facillity ad veniam, to pardon, and readiness to forgive,
makes him Patrem miserecordiarum, 2. Cor. 3. not of one, for he has a
multitude of mercies, great mercy and little mercy, Psalm. 51.

The affection of David toward Absolon, a wicked son, was such, that he
forgave him, though he sought to deprive his father of his kingdom. 2. Sam.
12. and though we offend the Majesty of God, yet he assures us, that he will
be no less gracious to our offenses, then David was, For David was a man
after Gods own heart. 1. Sam. 13.

Touching the care which God has to provide for us, the Prophet says, and
also the Apostle, Cast your care upon the Lord for he ^areth for you, 1. Pet.
5. He cares for us, not as he has care of Oxen, 1. Cor. 9. but such a tender
care as he has for the Apple of his eye, Zach. 2. He provides for us, not
lands and goods, as earthly fathers; but, an inheritance immortal,
incorruptible, and that fades not, reserved in heaven for us, 1. Pet. 1. and
has prepared for us, an heavenly kingdom, whereof we are made co-heires with
his Son Christ, Romans 8.17. and this is the fruit of his fatherly bountifulnes
toward us.

Out of these two, the immutability, and excellency of Gods love, showed both
in forgiving sins, and providing good things, aryseth a duty to be performed
on our parts, for (...), in all comfort: and nomen patris, vt explicat, sic
excitat charitatem: the name of a father as it shows, so it stirs up love:
as it shows quid sperandum, sic quid sit prestandum, what is to be performed
of us: the name of a father does promise unto us forgiveness of sins, and
the blessings not of this life only, but especially of that that is to come,
and this duty lies upon us, that we so live as becomes children: we may not
continue in sin, but at the least must have virtutem redeundi, the virtue of
returning, Isa. 63^ why have thou caused us to go out of the way.

A child though he have wandered never so far, yet at length will come to that
resolution: I will return to my father, Luke 15.

But if we consider the dignity whereunto we are exalted, we shall see on
earth, Si filij Dei, quodammodo Dij simus: If we be sons, we are after a
sort Gods: and Diuinae participes naturae, 2. Pet. 1. partakers of the divine
nature, as the sons of men are men.

But the Apostle sets down this plainly; behold what great love he has
showed us, That we should be called the sons of God. 1. Ioh. 3. This dignity
requires this duty at our hands, that we reverence our Father, Mal. 1.6. If I
be your Father, where is my love? If ye call him Father, without respect of
persons, etc. Then pass the time of your dwelling here in fear. 1. Pet. 1.13.

Our, is a word of hope, as Father is a word of faith, for he that says
noster, our, includes himself, and by hope applies Gods favor in particular
to himself, which by faith he apprehends to be common to all, neither does
appropriate it to himself, saying, My Father, but includes them with himself;
and so the word our is also Vox charitatis, the voice of Charity.

As the first word did teach us, the Father-hood of God, so the word our,
implies the fraternity we have one with another: for God, to show what great
regard he has of the love of our neighbor, has so framed and indyted this
prayer, that there is neither, Ego nor mi, nor meum, nor mea, neither I, nor
mine, nor my, but still the tenor of it is, Our Father, our bread, our
trespasses, us from evil.

Therefore one says, that prayer is not only breuiarum fidei, an abridgement
of our faith, but (...), a mutual pledge of our love toward our brethren
which is then especially testified, when we pray to God for them: For this
prayer which our Savior sets down for us, and all Christians prayers, are not
the prayers of nature, pro se orat necessitas, necessity stirs up men to
pray for themselves: but the prayers of charity, when we are to commend the
state of our brethren to God as well as our own, quia pro alijs charitas: for
charity prays for others; for in this prayer there is matter not only of
supplication for ^he avoiding of evil, and comprecation for the obtaining of
good in our own behalf; but of Intercession also, to teach us, that whether
we desire that evil be removed, or good be bestowed upon us; we should desire
it for others, as well as for our selves.

The use of this doctrine is of two sorts: first, against Pride, for if God be
not the Father of one man more then another, but all in common do call him Our
Father, why then does one man exalt himself above another? Have we not all one
Father? Mal. 2. and the Apostle says, Ye are all the sons of God by faith
in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. and our Savior says, Vos omnes fratres estis, Ye
are all brethren. Mal. 2.3.8. Therefore we are not only to love one another as
brethren, but to honor one another, because we are the sons of God; for this
end the Apostle exhorts, In giving honor to one before another. Romans 12. So
far ought we to be from despising one another, Cur enim non pudeat
aspernari fratrem quem Deus non aspernatur filium? Why are we not ashamed to
scorn him to be our brother, whom God scorneth not be this son?

Secondly, it serves against malice, we were all in the loins of Adam when he
fell, and all one in the body of Christ; so that whatsoever he, as our Head,
has done or suffered, the same all men do, and suffer in him.

And lastly we are all included in this word, to teach us, that we ought to
wish the same good to others, which we do to our selves, for this is that which
Christ commends in our Christian practice in the duty of prayer, Vt singuli
orent pro omnibus, and omnes pro singulis, that each should pray for all, and
all for each other.

He has taken order, that no man can pray this prayer, but he must pray for
others, as well as for himself, and so do good to all, and the mends that is
made him is, that they also for whom he prayed, do likewise at another time
pray for him; and though we cannot always pray in such feruency, of Spirit as
is required in prayer, yet the holy Ghost does supply our infirmity, by
stirring up others to pray, and make intercession in our behalf, cum
gemittibus, inenarrabilibus, with unspeakable groans, Romans 8. even then when
we cannot do for our selves, and this is a special benefit, which the
faithful have in the Communion of Saints.

The Apostle says, that God to assure us that he takes us for his sons, has
sent his Spirit into our hearts, whereby we cry Abba Father, Gal. 4. the one of
these words has respect to the Jews, the other to the Gentiles, teaching that
it is our duty to pray both for Jews and Gentiles, and so for all though they
be strangers to us.

Secondly, we are to pray for sinners, be their sins never so great, in
hope that God will give them the Grace to repent, and to come out of the snare
of the Devil. 2. Tim. 2. and that he will translate them out of the state of
sin into the estate of grace, for this life as long as it lasts is, tempus
praestitutum poenitentiae: a time ordained for repentance.

Thirdly, as for our brethern, so for our enemies, as our Savior wills.
Math. 5.44. for they also are comprehended under the word noster; For God has
shut up all in unbelief: that he may have mercy on all.

Neither are we to pray in general for all, but for some in particular as
need requires.

Not in general for all good things, but for some special blessings.

As we are to pray generally, that Gods will may be done, so, for that this
is Gods will our sanctification, 1. Tess. 4. we may pray in particular for
those things that we have need, as to be delivered from all temptations
generally, so specially from those sins, whereunto the corruption of our
nature is most inclined.

The eighth Sermon.
Which art in heaven.
WHICH words contain the second part of this invocation; for as in the word
Father we call upon the bowels of Gods mercy, so by these words; Which art in
heaven; we do invoke the arm of his power, (for so it is termed by the
Prophet in the old Testament,) Stir up thy strength and help us, Psalm. 80.2.
Rise up thou arm of the Lord, Isa. 51.9. So that as the Lepers doubt, Math, 8.
is taken away by the consideration of Gods fatherly goodness: so when we know
that this our Father has his being in heaven, it takes away that doubt which
we use to make of his power, Domine si quid potes: Lord if thou can do us any
good? Mark. 9. for the style of God in respect of our necessities, consists of
his goodness and greatness, which as they are both expressed by the Heathen
in the title optimus, maximus: so the power of God in these words which they
use, (...), Dwelling in ^eauenly habitations.

Christ, willing to express the greatness of Gods power, does it by that
place where his glory and power are most manifest, and that is heaven, whereof
the Prophet says. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handy works, Psalm. 19.7. For when we see a poor cottage, we
presently guess, that the dweller is no great person; but if we meet with
some great house, we conjecture that some person of account dwells there, and
therefore Job says, that the baseness of man, in respect of the Angels, is
great, for that he dwells in the houses of clay, whose foundation is of the
dust. Job. 4.19. But here our Savior tells us, that God our Father, has his
dwelling in the stately Tabernacle of heaven; whereby we may gather what is the
greatness of his power.

But before we come to these things which are particularly to be considered
in these words: First, we are to take heed that we run not into their error,
which so confine and compass God in heaven, as if he had nothing to do in
earth, such as they who say: How should God know? can he judge through the
dark cloud? the clouds cover him that he cannot see? Job. 22.14. For when he
is said to have his being in heaven, the Holy Ghost thereby does not express
his presence, but his power, therefore we are to know that God is not so in
heaven, that he is not in earth also; for so does the old Testament witness of
him, coelum and terram ego impleo, Ier. 23. Behold the heaven, and heavens, and
the heaven of all heavens, are not able to comprehend thee. 1. Reg. 8.27. and
the Prophet David says, If I go up to heaven, thou art there: if I go down to
hell, thou art there also, Psalm. 139. Whereby it appears that we may not
limite Gods power and presence to any one place, who is every where present,
for when God is said to be in heaven, we learn thereby what his excellency is,
which does especially show it self; for as the glory and Majesty of earthly
Princes, does chiefly appear in there thrones; so the glory and Majesty of
God, does especially show it self in heaven, which is his throne, Esa. 66.
Math. 5.34. He has not his denomination from earth, a place of worms and
corruption, but from heaven, a place of eternal glory and happiness.

Secondly, the use of this is, to temper our confidence in God; for albeit we
love him as he is our Father; yet withal we must fear him, for as much as he
dwells in heaven; as we may in regard of his goodness, pray unto him with
confidence, so withal, considering his power, we must pray with due devotion
and reverence unto his Majesty, for he is not as an earthly father that
dwells in houses of clay; but his dwelling is in heaven, and therefore as he
is a Father, and consequently will be honored, so because he is our Lord, he
requires fear at our hands, Mal. 1.6. With thee is mercy that thou may be
feared, Psalm. 130.4. Whereby the Prophet would have us so to esteem of Gods
mercy, that withal we be bound to fear him; and that we be not like those
that contemn the riches of Gods mercy, the more that he labors with his
bountifulness and goodness to bring us to repentance, Romans 2. for as sweet
things have an obstructiue power to stop the passages which are in our
bodies, and on the other side sour and bitter things do fret and consume, and
so open the veins: So it fares with the soul, for it is stopped when we
consider nothing but the mercy of God, and contrariwise, when we cast our eyes
too much upon the Majesty and power of God, the force thereof casts us into an
astonishment, and brings to desperation, and therefore, that we neither have
Nimiam trepidationem, nor Nimiam ostentatione^, too much terror, not too much
security; we must know that God is so in heaven, as that yet he is a Father,
and as he is a Father, so not an earthly but an heavenly father; and we cannot
but fear and reverence God, if we in humility consider our baseness in
respect of him, for though he be our Father, yet so long as we be on earth,
we are strangers and exiles from him, and howsoever it please him to account us
sons; yet as it fared with Absalon, we cannot see our Fathers face, 2. Sam.
14. until he take us hence, that we may be at home with him in his kingdom
of Glory.

Thirdly, these words lead us also to a confidence in God, and serve to raise
up our faith: There is Paternitas both in heaven and earth, Ephesians. 3.16. There
are Fathers of the flesh, and Fathers of the Spirit, Heb. 12. But when the holy
Ghost says, that God our Father has his being in heaven, we are thereby to
distinguish him from other fathers. If he be an heavenly father, he is of a
more excellent nature, then other fathers that are earthly and carnal, for
they are mortal, as they live on earth, so by death they shall be brought sub
terris, and do forsake us: but our heavenly Father is immortal, his years
change not. Psalm, 102. and though our fathers and mothers forsake us, yet the
Lord will take us up and succor us, Psalm. 27. Secondly, though earthly fathers
were immortal, yet they are not able and their affections are turned away,
either by means of some leude parts in the children, or for that they bear
not that natural affection toward their children which they ought. But God is
immutable in his love: so that although Jacob will not acknowledge us, and
Abraham will not know us; yet God will be our father. Isa. 63.16.

The Apostle says, There are wicked parents that are (...) without all
natural affection, Romans 1. And it falls out that sometime a woman will deal
cruelly with her own child; but though she forget it, yet God our heavenly
Father, will not forget his children, nor turn his fatherly affection from
them. Isa. 49. and therefore Tertullian says: Nullus pater tam pater: no
father so fatherly. Thirdly, though they wish us never so well; yet many times
they cannot do us that good they would, for want of ability, yea though they be
never so able; yet they cannot deliver from sickness and death, for the sons
of Princes dye daily, they can give us bread and fish. Luke 11. they have a
care to provide and lay up for their children. 2. Cor. 12.14 but it is such
treasure, as the moth, and rust will corrupt, Mat. 6.19. But God our heavenly
Father can deliver us from all evil, he can give us, not only bread and fish,
and other things necessary for this life, but his holy Spirit if we ask it,
Luke 11.

The treasure that God lays up for us, is not earthly, but an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled. 1. Pet. 1. such things as neither eye has seen,
nor ^are has heard, Isa. 64. 1. Cor. 1. For God is not only careful in this
life for our well doing; the knowledge of that is spes mortua: but his care
extends to the life to come, and therefore the holy Ghost says not Pater in
coelo, sed in coelis, in the heavens, whereby he has begotten us unto a
lively hope, 1. Pet. 1.4. Quaecunque optant vel timent homines: Whatsoever
things men either wish for, or are affrayed off, all things come from heaven,
whether it be rain, drought, or contagion, or plague, and from the first
heaven, Vbi vultures coeli. Mat. 6.

From this heaven Saint Paul tells the heathen that God sends us rain, and
fruitful seasons, Act. 14. And when Job says that God sends rain, and
frosts, and snow; and thundreth and works maruailous things, etc. Job. 37.
That is done in Primo coelo, But in the second heaven are the Eclipses of the
Sun and Moon, there he works in the signs of heaven, He binds the seven
stars together, Job. 38.31. whatsoever wonders are wrought there, it is God
that works them, and therefore he says to his sons, Nolite timere a
signis coeli. Ier. 10. he is in the second heaven, and will not suffer any
thing to hurt them.

The third heaven is that whereunto the Saints of God shall be received in the
life to come, where Saint Paul heard things that were not lawful to be
uttered. 2. Cor. 12. So that as God will not suffer the first or second heaven
to do us hurt, so he will bring us to the happiness of the third heaven: for
he is Pater noster in coelis, Whereby we have hope and comfort not in this life
only, which is but a dead hope, but a lively hope touching the life to come.
For Christ does not express Gods power by an action, saying, Our Father which
made heaven and earth, Psalm. 121. nor, which ridest upon the heavens, Psalm.
68. But by a local word, to show, that as God is in heaven, so we have an
interest in the same place, and that he will at the length bring us to the same
place where he is,.

Fourthly, this word heavenly serves to prepare us to prayer, to the end that
we should lift up our hearts and affections, from earth to heaven, seeing we
speak not ^o an earthly father, but to one that is in heaven, and this is that
(...) or sursum corda. Touching which thing one says, Aquilarum est hoc
negotium: this business belongs to Eagles, which as they fly highest, so they
look most steadfastly upon the Sun; non Talparum, not belonging to moules,
nor of such as are blind and will not open their eyes, Ne^ Miluorum, neither of
Kites, which albeit they fly aloft, yet cast their eyes still downward to the
dunghill, we must wish with the Prophet; O that I had the wings of a Dove.
Psalm. 55. and labor more and more to fly up with the Eagle into heaven, into
the presence of God the Father, and his Son, who sits at the right hand
bodily, for, vbi cadauer, ibi congregantur aquilae. Luke 17.

As the consideration of Gods Majesty, who is in heaven, does bring us down
and make us bow our knees before God our Father, Ephe. 3. So it must cause us
leuare manus and corda, Lam. 3. and to lift up our eyes to the hills. Psalm.
121. and to have such a continual meditation of his power, that we may say
with David, Prouidebam, Dominum in conspectu meo semper, I have set the Lord
always before me.

Fifthly, this word does admonish us, what things we should sue unto God for,
he is a heavenly Father, therefore we must ask of him heavenly things; his
answer to the sons of Zebedeus was, Math. 20. Ye ask you know not what,
honor and wealth are not things proportionable to him that is in heaven, and
an earthly Prince will count it a disgrace, if a man ask at his hands mean
things, such as may be had of every man.

The gifts we are to ask of our heavenly Father, are the eternal salvation of
our souls, this gift of the holy Ghost which he has promised to them that
ask it, Luke 11. and all spiritual blessings in heavenly places, Ephe. 1.3.

God is a Father as Abraham was, and as he had mooueable goods, which he gave
to the sons of Keturah; so he bestowed the inheritance, which was immovable,
upon his son Isaac. Genesis 25. So we that are the children of the promise, as
Isaac was, Gal. 4. must seek for the inheritance of Isaac, and not content our
selves with that portion which was given to the sons of Keturah.

Solomon says not amiss, Two things have I desired of the Lord, Prou. 30. But
David says better, Vnam petij a Domino, I have sought one thing of the Lord,
Psalm. 27. That I may dwell in the house of the Lord, that I may be partaker of
Grace in this life, and may be received into glory in the life to come.

Unto Martha that was troubled about many things, our Savior said, Vnum est
necessarium. Luke 10. and this is the reason why it is not said qui es
interris, For God shows himself a Father, rather in heaven then in earth,
Deus pater est in coelis, he is in heaven by assuring us of Gods heavenly
blessings: for they are the signs of Gods fatherly bounty to such as are his
heirs by promise; as for earthly things he shows himself in them rather to
the sons of Keturah then to Isaac, and in respect of this world Martha is
said to have chosen the better part. Luke 10.

Sixthly, as it teaches us, what we must pray for, so also we learn hereby
what we are to judge of our selves, and how we are to dispose of our minds,
when we come to pray; if God our Father be in heaven, then because we are yet
on earth, we must esteem of our selves as strangers and pilgrims. This did
all the fathers acknowledge, I am a stranger, and soiourner upon earth, as all
my fathers were. Psalm. 39. and therefore having a longing to be in our City,
Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in Meshech, Psalm. 120. The Apostles
Peter and Paul confessed the same, the one writing to the Church of God calls
them Pilgrims and strangers, 1. Pet. 2. the other reports of the Fathers
that they confessed themselves strangers and pilgrims upon earth, and in
saying these things they show that they sought a country, not the land of
Canaan from whence they came, for they had time to return thither if they had
been mindful of it; but they sought a better, that is, an heavenly City. Heb.
11.13. and we have no abiding City here, but do look for one to come. Heb.
12.13.

These show us that al-be-it we have our dwelling in earth, and be subject to
many calamities, yet for this our exile, we do, genus de coelo ducere, we take
our pedigree from heaven, when therefore as the Poet says, os hominum sublime
dedit; it is a shame for us to have our hearts downward; we must remember,
that we are of a more excellent nature then other creatures, (...), for we are
his dred, Act. 14. we have received from God a soul and spirit endued with
many heavenly qualities, which being dissolved from the body, returns to God
that gave it. Eccles. 12.

During this our exile and pilgrimage, we are not only to consider, that we
look upwards with our faces, (which moved the Heathen to meditate of heaven)
but chiefly, that in our soul we have the image of God imprinted, ought to
move the people to think of God, and to set our minds on things above, Col. 3.

Al-be-it we be here in a far country, far from our fathers dwelling; yet
we must not forget our fathers dwelling house, Luke 15.

The portion is in heaven which our father will give us, and that we seek to
be acquainted with the laws of that country, where our inheritance lies,
that we may guide our lives according to the same, least being rebellious, we
deprive our selves of our right and be disinherited.

Secondly, seeing we know that we are not in our own country, we must say
as Absolon did: Why am I come hither, if I may not see the Kings face? 2. Sam.
14. He being an ungracious son, was desirous to see his father: then it shall
be a shame for us, that are all the Sons of God, by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal.
3. if we have not a longing desire to come before the presence of God our
Father, Psalm. 42, and except we have a desire to enter into the courts of the
Lord, Psalm, 84. Except that with the Apostle, we desire to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ, Phil. 1. the first begotten of many brethren; and if with
our Father God, we lay up our treasvre in heaven, and count it our chief
felicity to be there, then would we think upon heaven more then we do: For
where our treasure is, there must our hearts be also, Mat. 6. But because we
altogether set our hearts on earthly things, therefore it falls out that our
heart is as a heavy clodde of earth, and unable to lift it self up to Heavenly
meditation.

Thirdly, as we desire to be in heaven in our Fathers house: so our
conversation must be (...), Phil. 3. we must not live by the laws of earthly
Princes, and acts of Parliaments, but by an heavenly law: though we be
strangers on earth, yet we are Citizens of heaven, and must carry our selves
according to the laws of our country, being always desirous to do that which
pleases our heavenly Father, though there were no human law to compel us
thereunto; and whereas natural men have for the end of their civil actions,
bonum commune, a common vtility, we that are spiritual, must make bonum
coeleste, the heavenly good, our end: we must do well, because God will behold
our well-doing favorably, and the Angels of heaven will be glad of it, Luke.
15.

Christ who is the Lord from heaven, did subject himself to the will of God his
Father: Not my will, but thy will be done, and as he that is heavenly: so must
they that will be heavenly: as we now bear the Image of the earthly, so shall
we portare Imaginem coelestis, 1. Cor. 15.

He while he lived on earth, did guide himself by an heavenly law, and we that
remain on earth must express his image by the imitation of his obedience. It
is true which both our Savior Christ, and John Baptist said, That that is
borne of the flesh, is flesh, and so, that that is of the earth is earthly, and
speaks of the earth, Ioh. 3. But there must be an imitation, and we must
set our selves forward toward our heavenly country, But because it is not in
our power to do this of our selves; for that, as Christ says: No man can come
to me, except the Father draw him, John. 6. Therefore we must pray with the
Church in the Canticles, Cant. 1.4. Trahe me, and to this end does the holy
exercise of fasting and mortification serve greatly, that we may, as it were,
with Doves wings, fly up into heaven.

As the word Father does show us not only our dignity, but our duty also; so
the word Heavenly, does not only give us a hope of heaven, but also teaches
us, that seeing our Father is heavenly, we must live by the laws of Heaven. As
we are careful to be made partakers of the inheritance which God has prepared
for us; so we must be as careful to please him, and to do those things
which are agreeable to his will. We must not only know, Quid sperandum, what
is to be hoped for, but Quid praestandum, what is to be performed of us. If we
pray not only with confidence, because GOD does take us for his sons, but
also with invocation, with devotion and reverence, knowing th^^ our Father has
his dwelling i^ heaven, and we are pilgrims in earth. Thus shall we be very
adoratores, John. 4. true worshippers. As we know we shall have our part in
heaven, so we must begin our heaven here on earth: and this shall be done, if
we add our endeavor to those things which we pray for at the hands of God,
as August. prays: Da Domine, vt pro quibus oramus, pro ijs laboremus. Grant
Lord, that the things we pray for, and crave of thee, for them we may also
labor.

The ninth Sermon.
Hallowed be thy name.
HAVING ended the first part of this prayer, which we called Invocation,
consisting upon the power and goodness of God, we come to the petitions
themselves, which are seven, of which the first concerns God, the other
concern our selves: or they may be divided as the days of the week, whereof,
as one falls out to Gods portion, the other to be employed in our own
affairs: So, of these petitions, the first does immediately concern the glory
of God, the other six the supply of our own necessities: in the beginning we
heard that it is expedient to know not only what we are to ask, but in what
order; what first, and what second; touching which point we are taught by this
form of prayer, that that petition which concerns the sanctification of Gods
name, is Caput votorum; and that all other things that we either desire, or
pray for in our own behalf, ought to stand after it; and that we must both
desire and pray for the sanctification of Gods name, before any thing that we
desire, either for our selves, or for our brethren; whether it be for the
removing of evil, or for the obtaining of good: for as before we learned
what his love is to us, in that he vouchsafes to be our Father; so hereby we
shall express our love again to him, if when we come to pray to him for our
necessities, we be carried away with such a desire of the glory of our
heavenly father, that we forget our own selves, and desire only that his
name may be sanctified, which duty Christ does by his own example commend
unto us.

In this form of prayer, we are put in mind of that which before was
required in the law of works; for as there we learned, that God is not
honored aright, except he be loved above all things, because he created all
things: and for his wills sake they all were created, Reu. 4.11. So we cannot
pray to him aright, except above all things, and in the first place we seek
for the sanctification of his name.

In respect of God himself there is no cause why we should make this
petition on his behalf; for as the prophet says: Thou have no need of any
goods, Psalm. 16.1. So he stands not in need of any thing that can come to him
by our means: if we would vvish him any profit, the earth is his, and all
that is therein, Psa. 24. If pleasure, there is with him torre^s voluptatis, a
River of pleasure, Psalm. 16.11. Wherefore all-be-it that in his own essence
and nature he be^ perfect, yet extra secus essem sit tibi nomen, he took
himsele a name from without, he calls himself the Lord Almighty: not that
any term can sufficiently express him and his essence, but to the end, that
while we have a reverend regard of his name, he might receive some service
at our hands.

The account that men do make of their name, is such as Solomon says: A good
name is more to be desired then great treasure; it is more worth then precious
ointment, Eccl. 7.1.5. God accounts, that we do not only greatly profit
him, but do procure great delight and pleasure to him, when we reverence his
holy name; which how pretiious it is, it does appear hereby, that he
sets the hallowing of his name before his kingdom.

Many of the Kings subjects that are in the furthest parts of the land, never
see his face all their life time, and yet in reverence to his name are ready to
make long iournies, to appear when they are commanded in his name; and so it
fares with us that live on earth: For Deum nemo vidit vnquam, John. 18. Nay,
very few are admitted to see his backe-partes, Exodus 33. But though we cannot
see his face, yet as those are counted dutiful subjects that do not only
reverence the Princes person, but obey such commandments as come in his name:
so look what duty we do to Gods name here on earth, he reckons it to be as
good service, as that which is performed by the Angels in Heaven, that always
behold his face, Math. 18.

And reason it is that we should esteem of Gods name, for as in time of
trouble, Turris altissima nomen Domini, the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower,
Prou. 18.10. So being delivered once of danger, yet we are sure of the
salvation of our souls, and sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus 1. Cor. 6.

Besides, there is no other name given under Heaven, by which men can be
saved, Acts. 4. And therefore ought by good right to receive sanctification of
us.

Howbeit we may not hereupon ground that error, which some gather upon these
words, Ephe. 1. where it is said, That God has chosen us in Christ to the
praise of the glory of his grace: not that God is desirous of vainglory, he
is not to receive any thing from us; but contrary-wise as he is good, so he
is desirous to communicate his goodness to us, But the care that he has for
the sanctifying of his name, aryseth from the duty which man owes unto him: In
which regard such as have been most religious in all times, have reared up
Altars, and set up Temples in honor of Gods name.

The account of this Petition is that which makes the difference betwixt the
Papists and religious people, between Heretics and the true worshippers of
God, that, the one esteems highly of the name of God, the other does not.

We usually account of men's names, according to the worth of their persons:
but God himself is holy, therefore he tells us, that his name also is holy: as
the Prophet says, Holy and reverent is his name, Psalm. 111.9. and Psalm. 9.9.
and it is not only holy in it self, but it gives holiness unto all things
that are holy.

The word of God is holy, because it is published in nomine Dei, wherefore the
name of God being holy in it self, needs not be hallowed by us, that can
neither add holiness to it, nor take any from it; but when God wills us to
hallow his name, it is to prove us, that by glorifying his name we may show how
we glorify God himself, and what reckoning we make of him, that God may have
proof how we do with the Virgin, magnify God our Savior. Luke 2. and how
we do glorify God in our bodies and in our spirits, 1. Cor. 6.

The name of God must be considered in two sorts, either as it is expressed by
the term of Lord, Father, Lord almighty, or else as it is expressed in such
things as bear his name, as he speaks of Moses, Exodus 23. Behold I will send
my Angel before thee, beware of him, and hear his voice. etc, quia, nomen
meum est in eo.

Touching the expressed name of God, whether it be Father, which imports his
goodness, or Lord, which implies his power, as we may not account basely of
them, so we must not use them lightly and negligently, but upon just occasion.

The things that have the name of God impressed and imprinted in them, are
either those persons which have their denomination of God, either jointly as
the Church, which is called sancta Ecclesia Dei, or severally, as the Priest of
whom Moses says, Let thy Vrim and thy Thummin be with thy holy one, Deuteronomy. 33.

The Priests are called holy, because they are consecrated to the Lord In
which respect, as in the old Testament they are called viri Dei; So in the new
they are vasae nominis Dei, vessels of the name of God, as the Lord speaks in a
vision touching Saul to Annanias. That he was a chosen vessel to bear the
name of God among the Gentiles. Act. 9.15.

Secondly, those places are said to be Gods, which are consecrated to holy
uses, as the sanctuary, which is domus Dei, and all those places where he puts
the remembrance of his name, and whither he promises that he will come to
bless his people that are assembled there, for his worship. Exodus 20.

Thirdly, those times which are kept holy to the Lord, as the Sabbath, which is
Dies Domini, Reu. 1.

Fourthly, the Word of God preached in Gods name.

Fifthly, the Element consecrated in the Sacrament for a holy use, called
therefore, panis Dei. Ioh. 6.

In all those, there is an impression of Gods name, and therefore we must not
lightly account of them, but show great reverence to them, that thereby we may
testify the high and reverent regard and estimation we have of God himself,
for sanctification is when God is said to magnify or glorify.

It signifies to make great and glorious: so when sanctification is given to
him, it betokens to make holy, but when we are said to sanctify, that is to
account holy; when we magnify God, that is magnifacere Deum, to esteem greatly
of God; and our glorifying of God is to account him glorious: so that when we
pray, hallowed be thy name, our desire is, that Gods name, which is holy of it
self, may be so accounted of us; and be holily used by us.

And whereas he says not glorificetur, or magnificetur nomen tutum, glorified
or magnified be thy name, but sanctificetur, hallowed or sanctified be thy
name, it is to the end, that we receiving the sanctification of Gods spirit,
might have a holy regard of his name: for things may be accounted great and
glorious by those which are neither great nor glorious; but sanctificetur
cannot come from any persons that are profane, but only from such persons as
are holy, Therefore the Angels in heaven cry not, Glorious, glorious, but Holy,
Holy, Holy, Esa. 6.

The tittle that Aaron ware upon his breast, was not Glory, but Holiness unto
the Lord, Exodus 28. And the four beasts ceased not to cry day and night, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, Reu. 4.8.

The duties which pertain to the sanctifying of Gods name, are two: First,
that against which we do Deprecari, or pray to be removed: secondly, that for
which we do pray, or desire to be granted.

First, we are to pray, that we we may not use the name of God, which is
Wonderful and Holy, either Contemptuously to Magic, or cursing, or
negligently abuse it upon any slight occasion; because that holy things are to
be separated from a common use, and are not to be used but when necessity
requires.

We see by experience that the holy name of God has not that reverence which
it ought to have, and therefore the persons which do take it vain, do often
times pull upon themselves the plagues and vengeance of God by that sin: for
God does in justice punish such offe^ders, not because the name of God can
receive any pollution by men's default; but because we do, quantum in nobis est,
as far as in us lies, pollute the holy name of God, even as he that looks
after a woman to lust after her, has already committed the sin of uncleanness,
although she be no^ a whit the less chaste for his lust, Math. 5.

The Heathen fail in this duty, because they do appropriate the name of God to
foure-footed beasts. Romans 1.23. And change the glory of God, who is
incorruptible into the similitude of mortal man.

The Jew sins, because he co^temnes the name of JESUS, which is a name
above all names. Phil. 2. and despises the name of CHRST, the preciousnesse
whereof appears herein, by that that it is Oleum effusu^, an ointment powered
out. Cant. 1.

But as we are to pray against the contemptuous abuse of Gods name, so we are
to pray, that we do no^ negligently, or carelessly use it, without that reverent
estimation, and regard, that is due to it; that we tread not under feet the
Son of God, nor account of the blood of the Testament, whereby we are
sanctified, as a common thing, Heb. 10.29.

Secondly, Moses and Aaron were debarred from entering into the land of Canaan,
not because they polluted Gods name; but for that they did not sanctify the
Lord among the children of Israel at the waters of strife. Deuteronomy. 32.51.

Therefore as we pray against the contempt and negligent use of Gods name; so
we must pray, that we may have a due regard of it, First, that we sanctify Gods
name in our hearts, 1. Pet. 3. Secondly, we must not use the name of God with
our tongues, but seriously, and therefore we are forbidden to take it in vain
in the third co^mandemen^: Thirdly, in all our actions, we must not begin any
thing that is extraordinary, but in the Name of the Lord that made heaven and
earth. Psalm. 124. and men must refer the end of them to the Glory of his Name.
1. Cor. 10.

God, whose name is called upon by us, is holy, and Christ, of whom we are
called Christians, Act. 11. is holy; therefore, we must sanctify God in our
actions.

Neither do we pray, that we our selves only may sanctify Gods name, but that
others also may do the same, for Christ says not, Sanctificemus: let us
sanctify, but Sanctificetur, let thy name be sanctified.

This is it whereunto the Prophet exhorts, Laudate Dominum omnes Gentes,
Laudate Dominu^ omnes populi, Psalm. 100. and Psalm. 117. Praise the Lord all ye
Nations, praise him all ye people, that is for persons.

For places, The Lords name be praised from the rising of the Sun to the
going down of the same. Psalm. 113.

Thirdly, for the time, Blessed be the name of the Lord, from this time forth
for evermore, Psalm. 113.

But because it cannot generally be sanctified, except it be known, we must
desire that all may know God, and pray with the Prophet, Let thy way be known
upon earth, and thy saving health among all Nations. Psalm. 67.

Secondly, not to know it only but cheerfully to go forward in the profession
of Gods truth, and in the worship of his name: Thou have mutiplied the people,
but not increased their joy, Isa. 9.2. But we are to pray that as all Nations
know his name, so, that they may so carry it and profess it, as that the
Heathen may not have occasion to say scoffingly, populus Dei est iste, Ezech.
36.20. We must desire of God that all that profess his name may so carry
themselves, that for their sakes, the name of God may not be evil spoken of
among the Gentiles, Romans 2. But contrary-wise, that they may shine as lights
in the world, among a froward and crooked generation. Phil. 2. That they may by
their good works stir up all men to glorify our heavenly Father. Math. 5.
and by their good conversation, without the word, win those that obey not the
word. 1. Pet. 3.1.

We are to desire that such as have not yet cared to perform this duty, may
now begin, that such as have begun to sanctify Gods name, may go forwards,
and that such as are fallen away from God, and pollute that holy name, which
sometimes they did highly esteem, may Resipiscere, that being renewed by
repentance, they may recover themselves out of Relapses, that they may be of
the society of Angels, that cry continually, holy, holy, holy, Isa. 6. Reu. 4.

We must be careful not for our selves only, but for those over whom we have
power, that they may sanctify Gods name and account it holy; that the Heathen
may not take occasion to pollute the holy name of the Lord, saying, are these
the people of the Lord? but that while they behold our good conversation, they
may have occasion to say. Verily God is in you, 1. Cor. 14. 1. Cor. 14.25.

Thirdly, Tuum nomen, thy name, men are given generally to give a kind of
honor to God, but in the mean time they will have themselves honored; but
here they are taught otherways, It is our duty to ascribe all glory to God;
Non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam, Not unto us O Lord not unto us, but to
thy name give the glory, Psalm, 115. So that all men are no less desirous of
their own honor and glory, then the builders that built Babell, that said,
Let us get us a name, Genesis 11.

But such as are thus affected, and carried with the love of themselves, are
not fit to sanctify the name of God, as our Savior speaks, How can ye
believe, seeing ye receive glory one of another, and seek not the glory which
is of God? Ioh. 5.44.

As we may not usurp Gods honor for our selves, so we may not defy Princes:
for we see how ill that voice was taken, Vox Dei and non hominis, the voice of
God and not of men, Act. 12. neither may we give Divine honor to the Apostles
and Prophets of God, The Heathen people said of Paul and Barnabas, Gods are
come down to us in the shape of men, and they would have sacrificed unto them,
but the Apostles, not willing to admit this sacrilege, rent their clothes and
cried, we are men subject to the same passions that you your selves be. Act.
14. for we are desirous to give honor, if not to our selves, yet to others;
but here Christ tells us, that no other name is to be sanctified but the name of
God; whereof we should be so careful, that we ought to pray, that Gods name
may be sanctified by others, if not by our selves, though we in our own
persons cannot hallow it, yet sanctificetur nomen tuum, Let thy name o Lord be
sanctified.

Hereby, as we pray for the gift of the fear of God, which is one of the seven
virtues which are set down. Isa. 11. because we do truly sanctify GOD, when
we make him our Fear and Dread, Isa. 8.13. So we pray against the vice of
Pride, which is the contrary to the virtue of Fear, so shall we obtain the
blessings Math. 5.23. Blessed are the poor in spirit, etc. And upon this
petition is grounded, not only whatsoever Hymn or Psalm is sung of the
Congregation, but even the end of all Assemblies is to ascribe Holiness to
God, and to sanctify his Name for his benefits bestowed upon us.

And in this they acknowledge, first, their own unworthiness: secondly, they
bless him for his goodness extended toward them: thirdly, they do not
acknowledge it in themselves, but do tell it forth as the Psalmist speaks: O
come hither and hearken, all ye that do fear God, and I will tell you what he
has done for my soul, Psalm. 66. Fourthly to this end they lift up their
voices in singing, to the end they may make the voice of his praise to be
heard, Psalm. 66.

And among other benefits, we are to praise and bless his name for the
benefit of Sanctification, which we have in the name of the Lord JESUS:
secondly, for the Means whereby this Sanctification is offered and wrought in
us, which is the Word, as Christ says: O Father sanctify them in thy truth,
Ioh. 17.13. For the perfection of sanctification that we shall have after this
life, when we shall be Partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light,
Col. 1.12. when we shall continually sing with the heavenly Angels, Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Is. 6.

And howsoever, when we desire of God that his name may be sanctified, we
seem like natural children to forget our own necessities, in respect of the
care we have to Gods glory; yet even the^, we pray no less for our selves
then for God, for the Lord has promised: Them that honor me, I will honor, 1.
Sam. 2.30. and Christ says: That if the name of the Lord Jesus be glorified in
us, we also shall be glorified in him, 2. These. 1.12. Et sanctificando nomen,
adueniet Regnum: In sanctifying his name, his kingdom shall come, as the next
petition is.

If while we remain on earth, our whole desire be to sanctify Gods name,
we shall at length come to the place where we shall day and night sing as the
Cherubins do, Isa. 6. And with the heavenly Host of Angels, sing Glory to God
on high, Luke 2. we shall fall down before his throne, saying always: Thou
art worthy O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and praise for ever. Reu. 4.11

The tenth Sermon.
Thy Kingdom come.
AAVING entreated of the first petition, touching the holy estimation of Gods
name, we are consequently to speak of those six that concern our selves,
whereof the first three, are spent in praying for that which is good, in the
other three we pray for the removing of evil; The first two petitions, or the
sum of them, is excellently expressed by the Prophet, Psalm. 84.11 and by our
Savior, Math. 6.33. for agreeable to the words of David, and of Christ our
Savior, in the first Petition we ask for glory, and seek for the kingdom of
God; in the second, for grace and righteousness: in the third, for the good
things of this life, which shall not be withheld from them that lead a godly
life, but shall be ministered unto them that upon earth do seek Gods kingdom,
and the righteousness thereof.

Wherefore as of things which concern our good, the first, both in order and
nature, is the kingdom of God; for the first thing in our desire ought to be
the kingdom of God, according to the commandment of our Savior, and we are
to account all things but dung in respect of it, Phi. 3.9. Hereunto is required
the spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, Isa. 11.2. that may teach us to
contemn all earthly pleasures, in respect of the heavenly kingdom.

Here our Savior condemns that capital vice that reigns in those men which
in the world live of their own, and take no further care but to establish for
themselves a kingdom upon earth. But if (according to his direction) we fix
our desire upon the kingdom of Heaven, and by despising the world, do labor
for the virtue, which consists in the purity of the heart, then shall we have
the blessing that is promised to the pure in heart, Math. 5.8. that is, they
shall be exalted to see God.

Now when he says: None shall see my face and live, Exodus 33. they that truly
make this prayer shall behold his face in the kingdom of glory.

These two first petitions have relation to the Invocation; for as God by the
word Father does express his love to us, and for that he is in heaven, does
give us hope for an heavenly estate; so we in these petitions do first desire
that whereby our love toward him may appear, while we prefer the
sanctifying of his name before the regard of our own good: secondly, we
declare our heavenly Hope that may come of being partakers of his heavenly
kingdom.

Howsoever God will not have any man's name Hallowed, or Glorified but his own,
as he speaks of himself, Isa. 42. My glory will I not give to another: yet
he will communicate his Kingdom to us: and therefore in our own behalf we
are taught to pray: Thy Kingdom come.

In the petition we are to consider two things: First, the Kingdom it self:
secondly, the Coming of his kingdom.

Touching the first point it may be objected, how it is that Christ teaches us
to make this petition: for Gods Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his
Dominion endures throughout all ages, Psalm. 145.13. How then is it said to
come? For the answer of this doubt, the Kingdom of God must be distinguished.
First, God has an Universal Kingdom, such a kingdom as ever was, and for
ever shall be; of which it is said: The Lord is King be the people never so
impotent: he rules as King, be the people never so unquiet, Psalm. 99.
Secondly, there is a Kingdom of Glory, that whereof our Savior speaks, Mat.
25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you,
etc. And the thief upon the Cross said: Lord remember me when thou come
into thy Kingdom, Luke 13. and this is the kingdom which in the first place
Christ teaches us to pray for: we pray for this Kingdom, that it may come: we
pray for our own good, for it is a Kingdom of power, and therefore able to
defend us: and therefore our Savior in the conclusion of his prayer, adds
this, For thine is the Kingdom, Math. 6. According to which the Prophet David
says: Thy Saints give thanks to thee, they show the glory of thy kingdom,
and talk of thy power, Psa. 145.11.

The government of his Kingdom is committed to Christ, of whom it was said by
God: I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Syon, Psalm. 2. In which regard
he doubts not to affirm of himself, Math, 28. Data est mihi omnis
potestas, etc. All power is given me in Heaven and in Earth. And
notwithstanding God reigns as king; yet that is verified, which the Prophet
complains of, Isa. 26. 13. O Lord God, other Gods besides thee have ruled
over us: for Satan takes upon him to be king, and has played the tyrant,
and has prevailed so far, as that the greatest part of the world are subdued
unto him, in which regard our Savior calls him the prince of the world, Ioh.
14.30. And by the Apostle he is termed the God of this world, for that he
blinds men's eyes, and makes them subject to the Kingdom of darkness, 2.
Cor. 4.

Secondly, there is a Kingdom of sin, against which the Apostle exhorts:
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, Romans 6.12. which he means when
he says: That sin has reigned unto death. Romans 5.21.

Thirdly, the Apostle shows, that Death has a Kingdom, when he says, that
by means of sin death reigned from Adam to Moses. Romans 5.14.

These are enemies to the kingdom of God; for while the devil reigns by
means of sin, as he does so long as he works in the children of
disobedience Ephe, 2. he takes away the glory of Gods kingdom, and death
takes away the power of it.

And in regard of Satan's kingdom, he is said to be a king over all the
children of pride. Job. 41.34. For he makes the whole world rebel against God,
so that they are not ashamed to deny him to his face, and that is true not
only of the common sort of the world, but even of a great many of the Church,
of which number are those that stick not to say, We will not have Christ to
rule over us. Luke 19.14.

Again, there are many stumbling blocks for the hinderance of Gods kingdom
Math. 13.41. that the kingdom of God cannot come; and therefore we do
worthily pray as well that the kingdom of Satan and sin may be overthrown,
as for the removing of those offenses.

God having exalted his Son into the highest heaven, says unto him. Sit thou
at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footestooll. Psalm. 110.

The last enemy that is to be destroyed is death, 1. Cor. 15.16. Wherefore our
desire is, that there may be such a kingdom, as wherein the law of God may be
exactly kept, and that it would please God in this kingdom to tread down
Satan under our feet. Romans 16. that not only death it self, but he that has
the power of death being destroyed, Heb. 2.14. God may be all in all. 1. Cor.
15.28.

When we behold the state of the world, and see that good men are trodden under
feet, and the vessels of wrath and sin are exalted and prosper, then we may
know that that is not the true kingdom, and therefore we pray that God will
set up his kingdom in our hearts, and govern us by his Spirit.

And therefore this point does not only concern our selves, but also God, for
unless his kingdom come, his name cannot be sanctified of us.

As there are temporal kingdoms so there is a spiritual kingdom, called the
kingdom of Grace, whereof our Savior speaks, The kingdom of God is within
you. Luke 17.21.

As before we prayed for the Kingdom of Glory, so now for this kingdom of
Grace; for without this we shall never be partakers of that other kingdom.

The glory of other kingdoms is the reformation of things that were before
amiss; but the glory of the kingdom of Grace is, that, as during the tyranny
of Satan, Sin reigned unto death, so now under this kingdom, Grace may
reign through righteousness by Jesus Christ. Romans 5.21.

That we may have interest in both these kingdoms, we must hearken to that
which Christ proclaims, Math. 4.27. Repent for the kingdom of God draws
near: as it draws near to us, so we must draw near to it, else we shall
never enter into it, for, except a man be borne again, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. Ioh. 3.2.

And that we may begin to draw near to it, there is an outward regiment to
be used, which is a token of the grace of God bearing rule in our hearts; we
must by the kingdom of God within us, cast out devils. Math. 8. We must
entreat God by the power of his Spirit to plant in our hearts that which is
good, and to root out, and remove out of them that which is bad, Math. 13.48.
We must displace Satan and sin, that they set not up their thrones in our
hearts, and in steed of it we must set up Gods kingdom, ruling in us by his
Spirit, for the kingdom of God stands in righteousness, and peace, and joy in
the holy Ghost. Rom, 14.17.

If we find these virtues in us, they are sure pledges of the kingdom of
Grace, and we may assure our selves, that after this life is ended, we shall be
received into the kingdom of Glory.

And howsoever he has appointed Kings and rulers over us for our outward
safety and defense, yet they have there Scepter from him, and the end of their
rule is, to further Gods kingdom, as the Apostle speaks, That we may live
under them, in all godliness and honesty, 1. Tim. 2.

Touching the coming of his kingdom, it may be demanded why we pray that it
may come to us, seeing it were meeter that we should come toward it? but
hereby Christ gives us to understand what our corruption is: It is with us as
with the Israelites, that were so addicted to the fleshpots of Egypt, that
they cared not to go into the promised land; likewise we are so in love with
this present world, as that we have no mind of heaven.

Besides, there are so many stumbling blocks in our way, as that the kingdom
of God must come unto us, or else we shall never possible come unto it.
Therefore, as we pray that God would lighten our blind eyes, and inflame our
hard hearts with a love of his heavenly kingdom, so also, that he would send
his Angels to gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, Math. 13.41.

The things that we pray against are the kingdom of Satan, darkness, and
sin, that they may depart from us, and that the inward kingdom of Grace may
take place in our hearts, but the principal kingdom that we desire is the
kingdom of Glory, whereof our Savior said, Behold, I come quickly Reu. 22.7.

This is the kingdom which the Saints desire, saying, Come quickly, Lord
Jesus. Reu. 22.20. and all creatures do wait for this kingdom, looking when
they shall be made free from the bondage of their corruption. Romans 8.20. For
whereas now all things are subject unto vanity, then there shall be a kingdom
that shall not perish.

It is not for the wicked to desire the coming of his kingdom; Woe be to you
that desire the coming of the Lord, it is darkness, and not light, Amos. 5.18.
The wicked shall say to the Mountains Fall upon us, for the wrath of the Lord
no man is able to abide it. Reu. 6.16. But to the godly, it is a day of
comfort, Lift up your heads, for the day of redemption draws near. Luke
21.33. Howsoever, he will render vengeance to the ungodly that have not known
nor obeyed the Gospel of God. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Yet he comes to make a garland
to crown the godly, and to set them in his throne, they shall be received
into his kingdom of glory, where they shall enjoy the things, which neither
eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has ever entered into the heart of
man, which he has prepared for them that love him. 1. Cor. 1.

Therefore S. Paul says, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
Phil. 3. Simeons desire is, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace. Luke
2.29.

Thus the remembrance of the day of our redemption is a joyful remembrance to
them, and the chief thing that they desire, so that they are willing to
depart, in regard of their future hope, rather then to tarry here: and howbeit
that Christ deferres his kingdom and coming, yet we are to be watchful, for
it will come as a snare, Luke 21. and 1 Thessalonians. 5. and when he comes he
will rather be for us, then against us.

The eleventh Sermon.
Thy will be done.
THE sum of all our desires, is set down by those words of the Prophet,
Psalm 84. Where he says, The Lord shall give glory and peace, and no good
thing shall he withold from them that live uprightly, And our Savior does
excellently express the same, Math. 6. Seek the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all other things shall be ministered.

The Petitions of Glory, and Gods kingdom, have already been handled: Now in
this third (which is the second of those which concern our selves) we are
suitors for the grace of God in this life, whereby we may be enabled to do
his will here, that so we may obtain the Kingdom of Glory in the world to
come: for the Kingdom of God, and of Glory is the haven that we desire all to
arrive at, and Grace and righteousness is the gale of wind that drives us
forward thereunto, and our suite to God in this petition is, that by doing of
his will here on earth, Grace may reign in our hearts by righteousness. Rom,
5.21. that so hereafter we may reign with him in glory.

He does not only will us to seek Gods kingdom. Math. 6. And tells us that
there is one prepared for us before the foundation of the world, Mat. 25.34.
but also how we may find it, and attain to it, Mat. 7. Not every one that
says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of God, but he that shall do
the will of my Father which is in heaven.

Therefore touching the order of this prayer, as of those things which concern
our good, the first is, that Gods kingdom may come to us: so the door whereby
we must enter into the same, is the doing of Gods will, and therefore in the
second place we are taught, that the Kingdom of God shall come, not by
wishing or desiring, but by doing of Gods will, as Christ says, the kingdom
of God is come near you. So Christ tells us, If we draw near to God, he will
draw near to us. Iam. 4.

Touching the will of God, it may be demanded, why we should demand, and ask
this petition? For as the Psalmist says, Our God is in heaven, he does
whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115. Whatsoever the Lord will, that did he, in
heaven, in the earth, and in all deep places. Psalm. 135.6. and who has
resisted his will? Romans 9.19. No counsel, or wisdom can prevail against the
Lord. Prou. 21.30. And if any do oppose themselves against his will, yet they
do but kick against the pricks. Act. 9.

The answer to this objection is, that we pray not so much that Gods will may
be done, but rather, that, what God wills, may be our will, for there is
one will of God which we may resist, another which we may not resist.

For the distinction of Gods will, it is either hidden and secret, or revealed
and open, the one is that which the Prophet calls the counsel or thought of his
heart. Psalm. 33.11. The other is that will of his word, wherein he declares
and opens to men what his will is.

His secret will is, voluntas beneplaciti, the good pleasure of his will; his
revealed will is, voluntas signi, which is disclosed to us.

Gods secret will is, voluntas quam Deus vult, that will which God wills; his
revealed will is, voluntas quam ipse nos velle vult, that will which he
wills us to will; the secret will of his heart is, voluntas adoranda, non
scrutanda: He that curiously searches the glory of heavenly things, shall not
enter into glory, Prou. 25.27. How unsearchable are his judgments? Romans 11.
and who has known the will of the Lord? or who was his counselor? But the
open and revealed will of God is, voluntas scrutanda, and facienda, both to be
searched out, and to be done of us. Be not unwise, but understand what is the
will of God, Ephesians. 5.17. The knowledge of his will is not enough, but as Christ
says, If ye know these things, blessed are ye if do them, Ioh. 13.17.

Of the secret will of God that is true which the Apostle says, Who has
resisted his will? Rom, 9. and therefore we pray not that that will may be done.

Of his revealed will that is verified which Christ complains, Math. 23.
Quoties volui congregarevos, and nolustis? How often would I gather you
together, but ye would not? God oftentimes wills when we will not, and
therefore we have need to pray that his revealed will may be accomplished in
us.

Moses thus distinguishes Gods will, Secreta Deo nostro, quae aute^ reuelauit,
nobis, and filijs nostris. Deuteronomy. 29. The things that are secret belong to God,
but the revealed are for us, and our children. The secret will of the Father
is, that of all that he has given me, I should loose nothing, Ioh. 6.39. The
revealed will of him that sent (...) is, That every one that sees the Son,
and believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Gods judgments, which are the fountain of Reprobation, are abyssus magna,
Psalm. 36.6. and his mercy extended to all, that by faith apprehend the same, is
abyssus and profunditas, a great depth. Romans 11.37. Therefore we are not
curiously to enquire and search out of Gods secret touching Reprobation or
Election, but to adore it.

His revealed will does especially concern us, which is expressed in his
commandments; whereby he declares whatsoever he desires at our hands, and
therefore our study must be to frame our lives and actions according to that
will.

unto both these wills, we must give a fiat; but severally.

The first will is passive, and for as much as the secret will of God shall be
done whether we will or no, we crave that with patience we may submit o^r
selves to whatsoever he in his secret will has appointed to bring upon us.

The other will is active, and therein we desire, that we may willingly
practice that which he wills in his word.

There is, voluntas de nobis, and voluntas in nobis; for the first, we desire
that we may approve of it, though it be done without us: in the second, we
desire not only an approbation, but a cooperation.

Touching his secret will, when we say fiat voluntas tua, we pray that Nihil
Dei displiceat nobis, that nothing which God commands displease us, and in
respect of his will declared, our desire is, that nihil nostrum displiceat Deo,
that nothing we do, do displease God.

Touching his secret will, so long as it is not plain ( within his own
counsel he will compass) we may dissent from it, for a man may bona volunt
ate velle, quod Deus non vult; he may with a goodwill, will that which God
wills not, so Samuels will was good, when he wept for Saul whom God would not
have him to bewail. 1. Sam. 26.

Secondly, we may bona voluntate nolle quod Deus vult, with a goodwill not will
that which God wills: as a child may be unwilling of the death of his father,
whom notwithstanding Gods will is, shall not recover.

Thirdly, men may mala voluntate velle, quod Deus non vult, with an ill will he
may will that which God wills not, The Patriarchs in a corrupt will would go
into Egypt, whom God would not to go thither.

And fourthly, they may in a corrupt will be unwilling to that which God
wills: So it was Gods will that Saul should be King, when as the people were
unwilling to it, and this is the state of the will of the creature, so long as
it is not acquainted with the will of his Creator.

But when once it pleases God to reveal his will, then we must say with the
people, fiat consilium Domini, Let the counsel of the Lord come to pass, Isa.
46.10. We must not wrestle nor struggle against it; but patiently submit our
wills to his, not only when Gods will is voluntas dulcis, when his will is to
do us good, as Bethuel spoke concerning the marriage of his daughter, Genesis
24.50. but when it is Amara and au^rsa voluntas, we must submit our wills to
his, when it pleases him to cross us, either outwardly, by taking away those
that are beneficial to us: in which case it was said by some, that beewailed
the departure of Saint Paul, The will of the Lord be done, Act. 21.14. or in
our selves, in which case we may say with Christ. Luke 23. I would have this
cup pas^e from mee^ yet ^ Father, if thy will be otherways, not my will but
thy will be done.

This lesson had David learned; for albeit he had complained of the great
affliction that he had suffered; yet he says, Tacui tamen Domine. Psalm, 39.
And as he was content to bear this, so he gave God thanks for them,
acknowledging, That it was good for him that he had been in trouble. Psalm. 119.

We must learn Jobs fruits, Job. 1. as well as Bethuels, and these being
joined we shall perfectly conform our wills to Gods secret will.

Concerning the will of God declared, or the will of his word, the Lord by his
Prophet says of his Church, My will is in it, but David speaks more plainly
of this revealed will, Thou have charged that we should keep thy commandments
dilligently. Psalm. 119.

The Apostle speaks more particularly, haec est voluntas Dei, sanctificatio
vestra. 1 Thessalonians. 4. and this is the will of God, that by well-doing, ye
should stop the mouths of ignorant and foolish men. 1. Pet. 1.15.

This is the revealed will of God, and we must not only take notice of it, but
labor to practice that which in our understanding we know is meet to be done.

As the Apostle says, ostende mihi fidem ex operibus tuis. Iam. 2. Show me
thy faith, by thy works. So we must show our desire that we have unto Gods
kingdom, by obedience of his will; for not they that sing, or say, or wish,
that Gods will be accomplished, but qui fecerit, He which does the will of God,
shall enter into the kingdom of God. Math. 7.

To the doing of Gods will, two things are required: first, that we lay aside
our own will: For as they that will sanctify Gods name, must say with David,
not to us, but to thy name give the praise Psalm. 115. So that Gods will may be
done, we must say with Christ, not my will but thy will be done, we must
abridge our selves of our own will, that Gods will may take place.

The better sort that are regenerate, do assent to the law of God, that it is
good, and have a delight to it. Romans 7.22. but yet they see another law in
their members,. which leads them unto the law of sin and death.

Every man finds that to be true in himself, that the flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh. Gal. 5.

The will of the flesh wills one thing, and the will of God another, therefore
that Gods will may take place, we must renounce our own will, and as Christ
says, willingly deny our selves, Math. 16.24. We must oppose Gods will to the
will of the flesh, and the will of man. Ioh. 1.13.

We must pray unto God, Convert meum nolle, in tuum velle, convert my
froward and unwilling will into thy will, and because thy will is the true
will, Insece oleum voluntatis tuae, oleastro volu^tatis meae, ingraft the true
Olive of thy will, into the wild Olive of my will.

If our will be contrary unto Gods will, and will not be subject unto it, then
we must scatter it, and pull it up by the roots, Psalm. 32.9. In chamo, and
fraeno constringe maxillas meas, (says an ancient father) and upon the words
of Christ, Compel them to enter, that my house may be full. Luke 24. says
he, Compelle me Domine intrare, si vocare no^ est satis.

Secondly, that Gods will may be done in us, we must be possessed with a base
conceit of our own will, and have an high, and reverent opinion of Gods will:
we must be persuaded that our own will is blind, and childish, and perverse,
and therefore Solomon says, Ne initaris, etc. Do not lean to thy own
wisdom. Prou. 3.1. Every man is a beast by his own knowledge, and to
express the fault of man's will, Job says, that man is tanquam pullus asini:
like an wild asses colt. Job. 11.12. which of all other beasts is most
foolish. But be he never so wise naturally, yet he is but a fool in heavenly
things, as St. Paul witnesses. 1. Cor. 2.14.

Men speak evil of things which they know not, yea even in those things which
they know naturally they are but beasts. Iud. 10. All our reason and
understanding has not in it self sufficient direction for our will: and
therefore Christ says of Saint Peter, that flesh and blood did not reveal to
him that knowledge, that is attained by Gods spirit, Math. 16. and in
spiritual things, S. Paul he counseled not with flesh and blood. Gal. 1.16.

Lastly, our will is wholly inclined to that which is evil. Ier. 4. wherefore
one says truly, toll voluntatem tuam, and ego extinguam infernum: take away
thine own will, and I will quensh hell fire.

They that are given over to Satan as the Incestious Corinthians. 1. Cor. 5.
may be restored, but those whom God gives over to their own will, Romans 1.24.
their case is desperate, and therefore we have the more cause to think the more
humbly of our own will, and willingly submit our selves to the holy will of
God.

Touching both, S. Paul says, The law is holy, and the commandment is holy,
and just, and good, and the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal sold under
sin. Romans 7.14.

But we must think honorably of Gods will: and this we cannot but do, if
we consider, that his will is so perfect, as it needs no rule to be guided:
but our will being crooked, and perverse, must of necessity be directed by the
rule of his holy will, or else we shall swerue out of the way.

Our will is blind and foolish: but his will is full of counsel and wisdom;
our will is crooked, and perverse, and frowar^, but his will is full of all
goodness; which we are to understand hereby, that he shows himself a father
to us: if a child be left to his own will, it is as much as his life is worth,
therefore withold not correction, but strike him with the rod, and he shall
not dye, Prou. 22.13. and our will being childish, we must be abridged of it,
or else, we shall fall into danger: therefore we do pray, that we may not
only submit our will to Gods, but that we may utterly deny our own will, being
foolish: that Gods most holy will may take place in us: but we do not only
pray, that we may have a will, and desire to do Gods will, but also ability,
and power; for of our selves we have no strength to do it; that appears by
the petition it self, Nam qui^ stultius, quam petere id quod penes nos est?
What is more foolish then to ask those things that are in our own power? and
the Apostle says, We are not sufficient of our selves to think a good
thought, 2. Cor. 3. Such is our corruption, That though God will, yet we will
not Math. 23.

We cannot speak unto God; for no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 12.

We do not find either will, or ability, but it is God that gives both. Phil.
2. and though the Spirit be willing, yet the flesh is but weak. Math. 26.41.

Therefore we are petitioners for the grace of God, and for power from him,
without which we cannot do Gods will, so that our desire is, to obtain
something from God, whereby his will may be acccomplished in us, for it is not
said, faciamus, or fac tu voluntatem tuam, let us do, or do thou thy will;
but, fiat voluntas tua; thy will be done.

Wherein we are to consider, a quo, and per quem fiat, from whom, and by whom
it is to be done, we pray not that we of our selves may do the will of God; for
no man can rise up to heaven, unless he first receive a grace from heaven;
He that is of the earth, speaks of the earth, Ioh. 3. Therefore our suite is
not only for good thoughts, and heavenly desires, but also for ability of
grace; but this grace is either passive or active.

The passive grace is that, which proceeds from God toward us; which stands
in offering grace, as God is said to do. 1, Pet. 1.13. or when he causes his
grace to appear to al men. Tit. 1.2.11. and that is not enough, unless we be
made capable of it; as it is in vain, that light does shine, unless we have
eyes to see it; and therefore as he offers grace, so he must give us grace,
and enable us, to draw grace from him, Prou. 12.2. That he would power grace
into us, Zach. 12. That he would sow in our hearts good thoughts, change our
affecti^ns, and make them conformable to his will; and so though the thoughts
of his heart seem hard to flesh and blood, may for all that please us.

And last, our desire is, vt induamur virtute ex alto. Luke 24. and he does
offer his grace, and does power it into us.

Then we must have that active grace, by which the will of God may be done in
us, of which the Prophet says, omnia opera nostra, operatus es in nobis. Thou
Lord have wrought all our works in us. Isa. 26. God must not only, sanare
cogitationem, and mut are affectum, heal the thought, and change our
affection, but perducere ad actum, that is, he must bring to pass, that as he
gives us ability to do his will, so his will may be done by us; we must say
with the Prophet. Psalm. 27. Thou art my help forsake me not, o God of my
salvation.

As he preuents us with his grace, by giving us both a will, and a power, so
he must still follow us with his grace, that we may go forward in doing of
his will, for our cas^ is compared to the state of the Israelites, which in
their fight with Amalecke, did prevail, as long as Moses held up his hand; but
when he let it down, they were put to the worse. Exodus 17. we may see it in
the case of Saint Peter, who was able to walk upon the water, while Christ
held him up, but when he was left to himself, he suncke, Math 1.4. therefore
we must have not only a preventing, but also an accomplishing grace, that may
still follow us in our works: ne cessent in effectum, that they fail not in
the vpshot, whereo^ the Evangelist makes mention, that from him who is full of
grace, We must receive grace for grace. Ioh. 1.14.

It was not the grace of God only, that wrought in Saint Paul, stirring him up
to holiness: but also gratia Dei, (...) The grace of God with me. 1. Cor. 15.
And when the Angels say (...) Toward me good will. Luke 2. they do not only
wish, that God will show good will toward men, but that he would accomplish it
in them, by infusing grace into their hearts.

Our desire therefore is, that the will of God may be done and fulfilled in us,
but yet by his grace, and the assistance both of his preventing and following
grace, And as for sanctifying of Gods name, our desire was that it may be
sancti^ied of us; but if not, yet that it may be by others: so here, though
the will of God be not done in us, yet, vt fiat quouis modo, that it be done
howsoever, that it may be done in others: but especially in our own behalf,
that when we are either unwilling or unable, to do his revealed will; it may
please him to give us the knowledge of it, and to put into us the obedience of
it, that being assured in our consciences, that we have done the will of God,
we may have that peace, and joy of the holy Ghost. wherein the kingdom of
grace stands. which may be to us a pledge of the Kingdom of glory,
whereunto we shall be exalted, after this life, if we be careful both to submit
our wills to Gods secret will, and to frame our wills and the actions of our life
to that declared and open will of God which for our direction he has revealed
in his word

The twelfth Sermon.
In Earth as it is in Heaven.
WHich words are an appendix to the three first petitions; for though it be
addded to the third, which concerns the doing of his will, yet the ancient
fathers refer it also to the two former; So that we are to pray no less,
that Gods name may be sanctified in earth as it is in heaven: and that his
Kingdom may be consumate in earth, as it is in heaven, then that his will be
accomplished on earth, as it is in heaven.

Wherefore we may observe by this complement of the three first Petitions,
that God respects not only the doing of that which he requires, but chiefly
the manner of it; for it suffices not simply to do Gods will, as others do
on earth, but we must do it as it is done in heaven; for aduerbes please God
better then verbes, and he respects more in the doing of his will, the
manner of the doing of it, then our doing it self.

The Greeks distinguish the will of God by both the words of (...) and (...),
when we do Gods will without any regard how, so it be done, that is his (...)
but when Gods will is done with a sicut, and in such sort as he requires, that
is his good pleasure, and (...).

Gods will was done of the people, when they sacrificed any beast whatsoever,
but if the chose out the fittest, then the sacrifice was the more acceptable;
so in this prayer we do not only desire to do Gods will vtcunque, without
regard how, whether with willingness and cheerfulness, or against our wils^
but we desire to do it in the best manner, as it is done in heaven; wherein
we offer that sacrifice or service to God, which is as the fat of Rams, for
the sanctifying of his name.

The Apostle says, that at the name of JESUS every knee shall bow, both of
things in heaven, in earth, and things under the earth. Phil. 2.10. But our
desire is so to reverence the name of JESUS, as the things in heaven reverence
it.

Of Gods Kingdom it is said, that Christ is ruler both in the midst of his
enemies, and also that in the day of his power the people shall as friends
offer free will offerings with an holy worship, Psalm. 110.2. But we pray that
Gods Kingdom may come among us, not as among his enemies, but that we may
willingly submit our selves, to his will and government.

Lastly, for the doing of his will the Prophet said: Whatsoever the Lord
pleased that did he, in heaven, in earth, and in the sea. Psalm. 135.6.

We desire that his will may be performed in us, not as in the deep places,
but as in heaven, for this prayer contains two Sicuts; the one pertaines to
God, teaching us how to love him; the other concerns our neighbor, where we
pray so to be forgiven as we forgive our debtors: so that as heretofore we
have noted, lege operandi lex statuitur supplicandi, though there were no law
to require the love of God and our neighbor, yet this form of prayer does
teach us how to love God, and what perfect love we owe to our neighbor.

In the thing it self, we are to observe three points: first, a
qualification: secondly, an Elevation of the soul: thirdly, an appplication.

In the qualification we are to enquire what is meant by heaven and earth,
either tanquam continentia, or else we may understand them as things contained
therein; then how Gods will is done therein.

Howsoever our tongue or dialect speaks of heaven singularly; yet both Greek
and Latin, imply a plurality of heavens, for there are three heavens: first,
the air where the birds fly, whence they are called volucres coeli. Math. 6.
secondly, the heaven of heavens, where the Sun, Moon, and Stars are set to
give light: thirdly, that which the Apostle calls the third heaven, whereunto
he was taken up, which is the place of blessedness, where Gods Majesty is
especially resident. 2. Cor. 12.

In all these heavens which contain other bodies, in them we we shall find
that Gods will is done.

Of ^he lower heaven the Prophet says, that it is obedient to Gods will, and
fulfils his word by sending down snow and fire, and wind. Psalm. 148.

In the second heaven which Salomo^ calls the heaven of heavens. 1. Reg. 8.27.
Gods will is done, for there at Gods commandment the Sun and Moon stood
still, contrary to their usual course, till the people of God avenged
themselves of their enemies. Josh. 10.13.

Thirdly, the earth it self, and things contained it, do yield obedience to
heaven; for if the heaven be favorable in sending down rain, and fruitful
seasons, Acts. 4.17. Psalm. 65. the earth answerably will bring forth her
increase for the good of man; but if the heaven be brass, the earth also will
be Iron, Deuteronomy. 28.

Lastly, as the powers of the heavens are such, as, that they can draw up
clouds from the earth, Psa. 1.35. which do distill rain upon the earth, to
water the Furrows thereof; so we desire, that the spiritual heaven may
transform us into an heavenly nature, not se^ting our minds on earthly things,
but on things above.

For the things contained in heaven, as they are heavenly; so we desire, that
we living on earth, may have our conversation in heaven: that earthly man, to
who^ God said, Terra es, Genesis 3. may by this means be made heavenly.

In the third heaven is contained, in respect of his humanity, first Christ
himself, who is both in heaven and in earth: for as he is called the head,
Ephesians. 3.23. of his Church, he is in heaven: but in respect of his body, which
is called Christ, 1. Cor. 12. he is on earth. Therefore we pray, that Christ
on earth, that is, the Church, may do Gods will, even as Christ the head, who
is in heaven, has done it: that as Christ our head came not to do his own
will, but the will of him that sent him, Ioh. 6. 38. so the whole body of
Christ may labor to fulfill the same.

Secondly, in heaven thus are Angels, which fulfill his commandment, and
hearken to the voice of his word, Psalm. 10. So our prayer is, that men, to whom
God has made the promise, that they shall be (...), Luke. 20. may labor to
be like the Angels, in doing Gods will, as they hope to be like them in nature.

Thirdly, in heaven there is the Congregation of the first borne, Heb. 12.23.
that is, the Saints departed. wherefore our prayer is, that as they have, and
still do carefully fulfill Gods will, so the Saints on earth, and Church
militant, may do the same.

Again, whereas S. Cyprian out of the 16. Psalm. 2. and 19.1. says, that
heaven is here upon earth; for when the Psalmist says: The Heavens declare the
glory of God, the Apostle applies that to himself, and to the rest of the
Apostles, Romans 10. of whose preaching he says: No doubt their sound went out
into all lands, and their words into the ends of the world: So that the
Apostles were heavens living on earth: So our prayer is, that as they living on
earth, lived an heavenly life, and began heaven here, so our carnal heart may
be applied to the meditation of heaven, that we may be Saints on earth,
Psalm. 16.

The wise man says of the body: That it being dust, at the hour of death,
turns it self to dust, from whence it came, and that the Spirit returns to
God that gave it, Eccles. 12.17. Thus must the Spirit return to God in our life
time, and we must, while we be on earth, and bear the image of the earthly
Man, seek still to be in heaven: and here labor more and more to bear the
Image of the heavenly, 1. Cor. 15 49. As the heavenly part of man, that is his
Spirit, is willing, and does not only consent that Gods law is good, but
delight in it, Romans 7. so we be careful to bring our ^lesh in subjection,
that our old man, an outward man may conform himself to the inward and new
man, 2. Cor. 4. Ephesians. 4.

Secondly, touching the question; how Gods will is done in heaven? the answer
is, that where his will is both dulcis, and amara voluntas, a sweet and a
bitter will, it is there obeyed and performed in both kinds: for the heavens
do not only at Gods commandment keep a continual motion, which is
agreeeble to nature, but against nature, Sun and Moon stand still at his
will, Ios. 10. whose obedience tells us, that our duty is to do his will, not
only in things agreeable with our nature, but when his will is contrary to our
liking.

This obedience was performed in Christ: Not my will, but thine be done, Luke
22. and in the Angels, which at Gods commandment are ready not only to
ascend, but also to descend, Genesis 28. to show, that they are content, not only
to appear in heavenly glory, which is their nature, but also to be abased,
according to the Apostles rule, I can abound, and I can want, Phil. 4.

The heavenly bodies do service to all Nations, and the Angels are ministering
Spirits, Heb.

As naturally they have a desire to ascend to bear rule, so at Gods
commandment they are content to descend, to do service here below, they do
altogether fulfill Gods will, Psalm. 104. whereas the nature of man does hardly
grant to obey Gods will, in that which seems strange to flesh and blood, as
Agrippa affirms of himself, Thou somewhat perswadest me, Act. 26.25.

The Saints in heaven confess to God: thou have created al things, and for thy
wills sake, they are, and were created. Reu. 4.11. And therefore refuse not to
subject their will to the will of God, be it pleasant to them or not: but as
our Savior speaks: ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but for
that ye eat of the loaves and were filled, Ioh, 6.26. So if we do that which
God requires, it is rather for our own sake, with regard to our own private
profit, then to do Gods will.

The heavenly Angels do Gods will with willingness, and readiness of mind,
which is the fat of their sacrifice: and therefore they are said to have every
one six wings, Isa. 6. From whose example we must learn to do all things
commanded of God, without murmuring or disputing, Phil. 2.14. and that because
it is Gods will we should do it.

In earth when God wills any thing it is not pleasant to our wills, we make
excuse Luke. 14. or we post it off to others, as Peter said to John, Ioh. 21.
Carne autem hic? we are ready to communicate with flesh and blood, Gal. 3.16.
and to say with the Disciples: Durus est hic Sermo, this is a hard speech,
John. 6. If we cannot shift it off from our selves, yet as the Devil
reasoned; Cur venisti ante tempus? Matthew. 18.29. and as the people say: It is
not time yet to build the house of the Lord, Aggai. 1.5. So we are ready to
defer and prolong the doing of Gods will, as much as may be, when we do it,
as the unclean Spirit would not come out of the child, but with much crying,
and renting of him, Mark. 9.26. so we cannot do Gods will, but with great
murmuring, and grudging; and when men do Gods will in this sort, they do it
not as it is done in Heaven by the Angels and Saints, that willingly obey it:
but as the Devils in hell, which against their wills are feign to do it.
Therefore our rule in this behalf is, that we do Gods will, not (...), 2.
Cor. 9. but (...), Col. 3. not grudgingly, but cheerfully from the heart,
accounting it our meat to do the will of our heavenly Father. Ioh. 4.

Secondly, for the Elevation, it is true, that the qualification is signified
by (...), not (...), and our prayer is, that we may do Gods will as it is done
in heaven, but not as much, with like readiness of mind, but not in like
measure: (for that is impossible for earthly men): we desire to fulfill Gods
will in the manner, but not in the same degree of obedience, which may be
expressed by the words Image and likeness, Genesis 1. Our obedience may be the
likeness of the Angels, but not the Image.

The Character or stamp of the Angels obedience, is that which is equal in
proportion; but such obedience is not to be found; there may be a beam of it,
answerable in likeness and quality, not in quantity; so in likeness we are,
Conformes imagini Christi, Romans 8. and bear the image of the heavenly Man, 1.
Cor. 15. as endeavoring thereunto, but yet we cannot attain to it.

But all-be-it is hard for flesh and blood, which our Savior requires: Be ye
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect, Mat. 5, yet there is an use of
such precepts: first, vt feramur ad perfectionem, that we may be led on to
perfection, Heb. 6.1. Secondly, we must have an Heroyicall and free Spirit,
Psalm. 51. which may stir us up to wish that we could do more then we can,
which consists of Aspiration and Suspiration. We must aspire to the greatest
perfection, with David: Concupiuit anima mea: My soul has lusted to keep thy
righteous judgments for ever, Psalm. 119.20. And O that my ways were so
directed, Psalm. 119.5.

This is an Angelical perfection, which we cannot attain unto in this life:
therefore we must, suspirare, when we consider, that the law says, Thou shall
not lust, and yet find that we do lust, we are to sigh, and say with the
Apostle: Who shall deliver us foom this body of death? Romans 7.

If we find that we cannot love our God with all our heart, and soul, as we
ought, then to say with the Prophet: Vae mihi, quia prolongatus est incolatus
men's interra: Woe is me that my dwelling is prolonged in the Tents of Kedar,
Psalm. 120.5.

We must desire to do more then we can, and grieve that we cannot do so much
as we ought; that as we do what we can, so what we cannot do, we should
supply it, Voto, desiderio, animo, with our hearty wish, desire, and mind.

Thirdly, the supplication is of two sorts, Real, and personal. Touching the
first, as the grace of God is, Multiformis gratia, 1. Pet. 4. So the will of
God being one, is of many sorts; and contains diverse particulars: therefore
as we generally pray, that the will of God may be done, so when by the word
of God we understand, what is the will of GOD in particular, we are to desire,
no less, that it may be performed: This is the will of GOD, even your
sanctification. 1. Thessa. 4. Therefore our desire must be, that this will of
his may be done and fulfilled in us. This is a special remedy against the
temptations of the flesh, which oppose themselves against Gods will.

There is another will of God for patience, for he would have us suffer for
Christ's sake, without murmuring, that so we may stop the mouths of ignorant
men. 1. Pet. 2.6. Therefore we are to pray, that this will of God also may be
done in us.

As Joseph was careful to do Gods will, touching sanctification, and Job to
obey Gods will in suffering patiently; both which are now Saints in heaven; so
must we after their examples be both holy, and careful, and patient.

It may be we are willing to obey Gods will in particular, but we will say,
Nondum venit hora: it is not yet time, Therefore we must learn to practice the
Prophets resolution, I made have, and prolonged not the time, to keep thy Law.
Psalm. 119.

When God reuealeth his will to us, we must presently put it in practice, and
as Saul did Act. 9. and not counsel with flesh and blood, and this is the
real application.

The persons to whom the doing of Gods will is to be applied, are not only
the whole earth (which is also to be wished as the Prophet shows) Set up thy
self o God above the heaven, and thy glory above all the earth. Psalm. 57. But
the earth or land wherein we dwell (as the Prophet speaks) that glory may
dwell, in terra nostra, in our land, Psalm. 85. So we pray that Gods will may be
done in all lands but especially in our land, and country, that so he may bestow
his blessings upon it, but yet we are every one of us particularly to apply to
our selves, for to man it was said by God, terra es. Genesis 3. To man it was
said, Earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, Ier. 22. So we desire
that Gods will may especially be done, and fulfilled, in that part of the
earth, whereof God has made us, that is, that in these our earthly vessels,
which we carry about with us, we may be careful to do that, which God
requires at our hands.

The thirteenth Sermon.
Give us this day our daily bread.
OVT of the words of our Savior, in the sixth of Math. ver. 33. we have else
where set down the order of these three Petitions, which concern our selves,
for the first is the Petition of Glory and of Gods Kingdom, which our Savior
wills us to seek in the first place. The second is the Petition of Grace,
and o^ Gods righteousness, wherein we pray that Gods will may be done. The
third Petition tends to this end, that as the Prophet speaks, God would not
withold any temporal blessing, needful for this life; but that he would
give us all things, that are necessary for us.

The things pertaining to glory, for which we pray in the first place, are
eternal; those that concern grace, are Spiritual, and the blessings of this
life, which we desire may not be withheld from us, are natural and temporal.

This is Natures prayer, for not only we, but all creatures above and
beneath, make the same suite of God, by the voice of nature; the ravens of the
air call upon God, that he would feed them. Psalm. 147. The Lions beneath
roaring for their prey do seek their meat at God, Psalm. 104.21. and therefore
no marvel that we, in as much as we are creatures, do seek to God, who is
the God of nature, to supply the defects of nature that we find in our selves,
as other creatures; and yet there is a difference betwixt us and them, for they
call upon God, only for corporal food, that their bellies may be filled; but
the prayer that we make for outward things, is not without respect to things
spiritual, and this Petition follows upon the other, by good consequent and
order; for (as the Heathen man says) Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus
obstat, res angusta Domi; So we shall be unfit to seek Gods Kingdom, and to
do his will, unless we have the helps of this life.

Therefore we desire that God will give us the things of this life, those
things without which we cannot serve him: that as we desire the glory of his
Kingdom, and the grace of his Spirit, whereby we may be enabled to do his
will, so he will minister to us all things for the supply of our outward wants,
in this life; the want whereof has been so great a disturbance to the Saints
of God in all times, that they could not go forward in godliness as they
would.

Abraham by reason of the great famine, that was in Canaan, was feign to go
down into Egypt, Genesis 12.7. The same occasion moved Isaac, to go down to
Abimelech at Gerar. Genesis 26. and Jacob to relieve his family in the great
dearth at this time, was feign to send his sons, the Patriarchs, into Egypt,
to buy corn. Genesis 42. The children of Israel, when they wanted bread or water,
murmured against God and his servants. Exodus 16. Numb. 20. the Disciples of our
Savior, were so troubled in mind, because they had forgotten to take bread
with them; that they understood not their Master, when he gave them warning to
beware of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 8. So the want of
outward things, does distract our minds, and makes us unfit for Gods service.

Therefore that we may in quietness of mind, iutend those things that go
before in this prayer: our Savior has indicted us a form of prayer to sue to
God, as well for things temporal, as spiritual, and eternal: for it is
lawful for us to pray for them, so that we do it in order.

The first Petition that the natural man makes, is for his daily bread, but
our care must be first for the kingdom of God, next for the fulfilling of
Gods will and doing that righteousness which God require that our hands, and
after, we may in the third place pray for such things as we stand in need of
during our life.

This blessing the fathers observe out of the blessings which Isaac pronounced
upon his sons; Jacobs blessing was first the dew of heaven, and then the fat of
the earth, showing that the godly do prefer heavenly comforts before earthly.
Esaus blessing was, first the fatness of the earth, and next the dew of
heaven, to teach us, that profane persons do make more reckoning of earthly
commodities, then of heavenly comforts. Genesis 27.28. and 39.

Therefore in regard of the Spiritual account we are to make of Gods
kingdom, and the doing of his will; we are to wish them in the first place,
and then David's Vnam petij a Domino: One thing I have required of the Lord,
Psalm. 27. And that which Christ says to Martha; Vnum est necessarium: one
thing is needful, Luke 10. would bring us to Salomons two things. Prou. 30.
Give me not poverty, nor riches; but feed me with food convenient for me;
least being full, I deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? or being poor, I
steal, and take the name of my God in vain. And that is it which we are bold
to do, by Christ's own warrant; for he has taught us first to pray for his
Kingdom, then for the working of righteousness, or for the doing of Gods
will, and lastly for daily bread.

If we do first pray for the two former, then we may be bold in the third
place to sue to God for the latter, for he has promised, to withold no good
thing from them that lead a godly life; if the doing of Gods will be our
meat, then, Requiem dedit timentibus se, He has given rest to them that
fear him, Psalm. 111.

In the Petition, we are to observe, from six words, six several points:
first, the thing that we desire, that is, bread: secondly, the attribute, our
bread: thirdly, daily bread: fourthly, we desire that this bread may be given
us: fifthly, not to me but nobis, to us: sixthly, hodie, and as long as we say
hodie, to day^ Heb. 3.

To begin with giuinge: hitherto the tenor of this prayer ran in the third
person, now we are to pray in the second, saying: da tu, whereupon the Church
has grounded a double dialect of prayer, which comes all to one effect; for
that which the Church prays for. Psalm. 67. God be merciful to us, and bless
us, is no less a prayer, then if we should say, in the second person, Miserere
nostri, O Lord be merciful to us, and bless us. and that which is added, and
lift up his countenance, is all one, as if the Church, speaking to God, should
say, Lift up the light of thy counttenance.

This change, or alteration of person, proceeds from the confidence, which
the Saints are to gather to themselves, in prayer: for having prayed for the
sanctifying of Gods name, for the accomplishment of his Kingdom, and for grace
and ability to do his will, Christ assures us, that we may be bold to speak
to God for our own wants.

Out of the word of Giving, we are to note three things: first our own want;
for if we had it of our selves, we would not crave it of God, this confession
of our want, and indigence, is a great glory to God, that all the inhabitants
of the earth vsque ad Regem Dauidem, to profess to say, Give us, Psalm. 40. I
am poor and needy, but the Lord cares for me; they do profess themselves
to be his beggars, not only by the voice of nature, which they utter for
outward things, as other unreasonable creatures do, but by those prayers, which
they make for the supply of grace, whereby they may be enabled to do Gods
will, so that not only regnum tuum is Gods gift, but also panem nostrum, we
acknowledge to be his gift: It is from God from whom we receive all things, as
well the good giuings as the perfect gifts, Iam. 1.17. he is the Author, not
only of blessings spiritual, but of benefits temporal; he gives us not
only grace to obey his will, but as the Prophet speaks dat escam. Psal^ 104.

The idolatrous people say of their idols, I will go after my lovers, that give
me my bread, and my water, my oil, and my wine, But God says after, It is I
that gave her corn, and it is my wine, and my flax, and my oil. Hos. 2.8.
Ipse dat semen sementi, and panem manducanti. 2. Cor. 9.10. We are destitute
of the meanest blessings that are; it is God only from whom we receive all
things, therefore to him we pray, acknowledging our own want, da nobis panem.

Secondly, we must consider the word Da as it is set in opposition to Veniat,
or habeam panem, It must not content us that we have bread, but labor that
we may have it of Gods gift, Esau said of things temporal which he inioyed, I
have enough, Genesis 33. not acknowledging from whom: Balaam cared not how he
came by promotion, so he had it, and therefore he is said, to have loved the
wages of unrighteousness, 2. Pet. 2.15. but we must labor, not so much to
have good things, as to have them from God: and Pilate is to acknowledge, that
the power which he has, was given him from above, Ioh. 19. and not to vant of
any usurped power.

It is said of God, tu aperis manum tuam. Psalm. 104. Thou openest the doors of
heaven. Psalm. 78. So we are not so much to labor for temporal things by our
own endeavor, as that we may have the^ from God.

Thirdly, Da, opposed to rendering teaches us, that it is not of our own
endeavor but it is of Gods free bounty and liberality, that we have bread and
other things: which while we seek for of Gods gift; we confess that to be
true which Solomon says, Non est panis sapientis, Be a man never so wise, yet
he has not always to supply his need. Eccl. 9.11. As he that is hiest gets
not always the gole, nor the strongest man the victory: so says our Savior,
Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit to his stature? Math. 6.

All our endeauours for the things of this life, are unprofitable, without Gods
blessing; it is in vain to rise up early, and to go to bed late. Psalm. 127,

And when he blesses our labor, the^ he is said to give us bread; and
therefore we are to confess with David, that Whatsoever we have received, we
have received it at his hands. 1. Chron. 29, 14.

Now the means of Gods giving, is of four sorts: First, God gives bread when
he blesses the earth with plenty; when he gives force to the heaven: when the
heaven hears the earth, the earth hears the Corn, the Wine, and the Oil,
and they hear man, Hos. 2.21.

Secondly, he gives, when he sets us in some honest trade of life, and
vouchsafes his blessing to our endeauours therein, that we may get our
living, and eat the labor of our hands, Psalm. 128. without which the first
giving will do us no good.

Thirdly, he gives us bread, not only in his blessing the earth with increase,
and by blessing our honest pains in our vocation; but when he gives us,
Baculum panis, the staff of bread; for at his pleasure he uses to break the
staff of bread, Leuit. 26. and to make it of no power to nourish us: then are
they but beggarly elements, When we eat and have not enough, Agg. 1. Therefore
our prayer is, that he would cause the earth to yield us bread, so that to the
bread he would infuse a force, to strengthen man's heart, for which end it is
ordained, Psalm. 104.

Fourthly, because Moses says, Man lives not on bread only, but by the word
of God: therefore we pray that as our bread, by his blessing, is made to us,
panis salubris, so it may be panis sanctus, Deuteronomy. 8. that he will give us
grace to use his creatures, to the end that we may the better serve him;
otherwise, howsoever they nourish our bodies, yet they will prove poison to our
souls.

God performs these three former giuings to the Heathen, so that their
bellies are full with bread, but withal he sends leanness into their
souls, Psalm. 106. But Christian men have not only the earth to yield her
fruit, Gods blessing being upon their labors, and a blessing upon the cr^ature
it self, that it is not in vain, but nourishes; but also it is sanctified to
the^, and that bread is properly theirs, because they are Gods children, Et
panis est filiorum, It is the childrens bread.

Secondly, the thing we desire to be given, is Bread, concerning which,
because the decays and defects of our nature are many, so as it were infinite
to express the^ severally; therefore our Savior Christ does here comprehend
the all under the term of Bread, using the same figure which God himself
uses in the law, where under one word, many things are contained.

Howsoever our wants be many, yet the heathen bring them all to these two,
Pabulum, and Latibulum: Food and Covering; and as they do, so does not only
Moses in the Law, where all that pertain to this life, is referred to victum,
and amictum, Deuteronomy. 10.18. but also S. Paul in the Epistle, 1. Tim. 6.8.
Habentes victum and amictum, his contenti simus.

So then, under this petition is contained, not only that God would give us
bread, by causing the earth to bring forth corn, and all good seasons for that
purpose, but that withal he will give us health of body, and not plague us
with sickness, as he did the Israelites, Psalm. 31. Then, that we may have
peace, without which, these outward blessings will afford us no comfort: and
that as he filles our bellies with food, so he will give us Laetitiam
cordis, Act. 14.17. that is, all manner of contentment in this life.

How-be-it this petition stays not here, for the prayer of Christian men must
differ from the Lions roaring, and the Ravens crying: the end of their praying
is, that their bellies may be filled: but we must have as great a care for
the food of our souls: therefore where we call it panem nostru^, we do not
mean panem communem: such bread as is common to us with other creatures, but
that Spiritual bread, which is proper to men, which consist not only of body,
but of soul and body, which must be both fed: and where we pray that God
would give (...), we ask such bread as is apt and meet for our sustenance:
that is, not only Earthly, but Heavenly Bread, because we consist not only of
a terrestrial, but also of a celestial substance: so then our desire is, that
God would give us, not only, panem iumentorum, but panem Angelorum, Psalm. 78.
The bread of Angels; and our suit is as well for panis coeli, John. 6. as for
Earthly bread.

The bread of the soul is Gods word, which has a great refere^ce to earthly
bread: and therefore speaking of the sweetness of that bread, Job says: I
esteemed of the words of his mouth, more then my appointed food, Job. 23. and
David says: Thy word is sweeter then honey, and the honey comb, Psalm. 19.10.

In the new Testament, the Apostle, to show the nourishing force of Gods word,
says, that Timothy was enutritus verbis fidei, 1. Tim. 4.6. To show the taste
or relish that it has as well as natural food, says Gustauerit bonum Dei
verbu^, has tasted the good word of GOD, Heb. 6 So the food of the soul is to
be desired at Gods hands as well as the bodily food.

There is a Famine as well of Gods word, as of bread, Amos. 8. There is an
hungring and thirsting after righteousness: Mat. 5, therefore we are to pray,
that God would supply the wants, not only of the body, but of the soul
likewise.

But there is a Spiritual food, both for Body and Soul, that which our
Savior promises, Ioh. 6. He that comes to me shall not hunger, and he
that believes in me, shall never thirst: that is, the hidden Manna that God
has promised for us in heaven; whereof it was said: Blessed is he that eats
bread in the Kingdom of God, Luke. 14.

Thus, by how much the leanenesse of the soul is worse then bodily famine, so
much the more earnestly are we to pray for the spiritual food, then for the
food of the body.

Thirdly for the first attribute, we pray not simply for Bread, but for our
Bread.

The word Our has respect not only to use, but to Property and right.

This right or property is double: First, that which was appointed in the
beginning: In sudore vultus tui commedes panem tuum, Our request to GOD is, for
that food, which is gotten by honest pains taken in our calling, whereunto God
has made a promise, Thou shall eat the labor of thy hands, Psalm. 128. And
without which we have no right to this bodily food: For 2 Thessalonians. 3. Qui non
laborat, non manducet: He that laboreth not, let him not eat. Now we would
have God supply our wants with bread by right, and this right is general to
all adventurers.

Secondly, as we would have it made Ours, by the labor of our vocation, so by
the duty of invocation, that this corporal food, which is common to other
creatures, may be proper to us by calling upon God, for his blessing upon it,
which if we do, we have a promise, it shall be truly ours. Open thy mouth, I
will fill it, Psalm. 81.11. For, the creatures of God are sanctified to us by
the word of God and prayer, 1. Tim. 4.

This puts a difference betwixt the Christian man's bread, and that which the
profane man eats: for first, those slothful persons, whom the Apostle calls,
slow bellies, Tit. 1.12. cannot say this prayer as they ought: for they are
nothing but idle upon the earth, and Fruges consumere nati: borne to eat and
drink, they labor not for their living, but eat panem alienum, not suum;
which the Apostle requires, 2. These. 3.12.

Secondly, those that eat the bread of violence, Prou. 4.17. and feed upon
bread that is gotten by deceit, Pro. 20.17. do not eat panem suum, but
subdititium: they eat not panem datum a Deo, but a Daemone.

Thirdly, Esau having filled his belly, rose without giving God thanks after he
had ^ate, as without calling upon God ^or his blessing before, Genesis 25. For the
which also he is said to be profane, Heb. 12. So are all those that eat of
Gods creatures, without praying to him for his blessing, and for a sanctified
use of them; which thing if they refuse to do, as Atheists and profane
persons, their bread may be panis salubris, but not sanctus, it may be able
to nourish their bodies, but it shall bring leanness to their souls.

Fourthly, the other attribute of bread, is Daily, concerning which, we must
consider four things.

First, from the Latin word quotidianum, which has relation to the time; by
which word, as we acknowledge our daily want, and Gods continual care and
providence for the supply thereof, of whom it is said: Thou give meat in due
season, Psalm. 104. So Christ te^cheth us daily to praise and magnify Gods
care, daily extended toward us, and to use that Psalm of thanksgiving,
wherein the Church confesses Gods goodness in that behalf, psalm. 145.

Secondly, for the Greek word (...), which signifies, bread apt and meet for
our substance.

Now, forasmuch as man consists of Body and Soul, his prayer to God must be
not only for such meat as is meet to nourish the Body, but also for the food
which agrees with the Soul: for it is in vain to have food, except it be
nutritive, and convenient for us.

Thirdly, the Syriack word used by our Savior signifies, panem necessitatis
meae, which has relation to the quality of the bread, teaching us not to pray
for Dainty meat, but such as is fit to releive our hunger: Tribue victus me^
necessaria: not meat which is above my estate: Da panem necessitatis, non
lasciuiae, bread of necessity, not wantonness.

The Israelites lusted after the Fleshpots of Egypt: and therefore God gave
them quails from heaven, but (which was the heavy judgment of God upon them)
they perished while the meat was in their mouths, Psa. 78.

The Apostle wills us therefore, not to set our minds upon superfluity: but
contrarily, (...)^ Food and Raiment, let us therewith be content.

Fourthly, the Hebrew word used Pro. 30. has relation to the quantity: for it
signifies panem dimens. mei, non gulae; and it teaches us not to seek
abundance, but to desire of God to measure us out so much as he knows to be
meet for us, and as Christ speaks, to give us our portion of meat in due
season, Luke 12.22. For the Scripture tells us what inconvenience comes of
abundance of meat: Dilectus meus impinguatus rec^lcitrauit, Deuteronomy-32.15. My
beloved when he waxed fat, spurned with his heel. and the sin of Sodom was
Fullness of bread, Eze. 16. and the people by excessive eating and drinking of
wine, made themselves sick, Hos. 7.5. Therefore Christ diligently warns his
Disciples to take heed of surfeiting and drunkenness for this cause: Ne
grauentur corda: That your hearts wax not heavy.

Fifthly, in the word Nobis we must consider two things: First, a Reason,
secondly, a Limitation: for the first, we desire that this bread should be
given us.

First, because we are Gods creatures, he refuses not to hear the Lions and
Ravens in this behalf, when they cry to him. And our Sa^iour says: that our
heavenly Father feeds the Fowls of the air. Math. 6.26. And therefore we,
in regard we are his creatures, as well as they, we may by right make this
prayer to him.

Secondly, in as much as we are men, we may be bold to crave that favor at
his hands which he shows indifferently to all men: for he suffers the Sun
to shine on the evil, and on the good, Math. 5. And as David says: Oculi
omnium suspitiunt in te: The eyes of all wait and look up to thee, Psa: 145.
Therefore we are to pray, that God will give bread not only Nobis animalibus,
but nobis hominibus, not only as to living creatures, but as to Men.

Thirdly, the Gentiles and Heathen people, which only seek after these
things, Math. 6. do obtain them at Gods hands; much more will God grant them
to us, which profess our selves Christians, and his Children.

Secondly, for the Limitation, it is not mihi, non meum, but give us, and give
our: the reason is, that as Solomon says, Pro. 5.6. Our wells may flow out
abroad, and that there may be rivers of waters in the streets, and that not
only we may not be burdensome to others but that we may have to give to them
that have need. Ephesians. 4.

Sixthly, for the word Hodie, our Savior teaches us to pray, Give us bread
this day, and as the Apostle speaks: Heb. 3. Dum Dicitur hodie, the reason is,
because life is but only, dies, not seculum: and the wise man says: Talk not
of to morrow: for thou know not what a day may bring forth. We may not say
to our soul: Soul, thou have store of goods laid up for many years. We see
by his example what may fall out, Luke. 12. Forasmuch as the continuance of our
life is uncertain, our desire must be that God would give us sufficient for
our present want.

How-be-it this makes not for them that are careless for the time to come: for
such are sent to learn wisdom of the Ant, Pro. 30 which prouides for Winter,
and not only the Saints at all times have been careful and provident for
outward things, as Joseph who counseled Pharaoh before hand to lay up corn to
feed him for seven years space during the famine. Genesis 41. But our Savior
himself gives charge, that that which remains should be saved, and nothing
lost. Ioh. 6. And it was his pleasure that Judas should bear the bag, for
his and their provision, to teach us that he allows provident care for things
earthly.

But by this word daily our Savior commends (...), or immoderate care for
worldly things, whereby the soul is rent and divided, and not that (...), 1.
Tim. 5. which is required of every man for his own household, and is both
lawful and honest.

Here aryseth an objection how a man having filled his belly, or being ready to
leave this world, may say this prayer. The answer is: first, Multi dormierunt
diuites qui senexerunt pauperes: therefore our desire is, that as we have
enough now, so we may be preserved in this estate, and that God would not
change plenty into poverty. Again, though we have bread, and it continue with
us, yet it is nothing without that beata pax; therefore though we have the
thing it self, yet we are to desire that which is the life of bread, which is
a power to nourish, Then that God will give us the sanctified bread which is
the heavenly Manna, and grace, that as we work for bread in our vocations, so
we remember to sanctify it by invocation; for else it is usurped bread,

The fourteenth Sermon.
And forgive us our Debts.
AVgustine intrepreting our Saviors words, of the shutting of heaven in Elias
time. Luke 4.23. compared prayer to a key, that has power to open heaven from
whence all blessings descend unto us, and to shut the bottomless pit of hell,
from whence all evils proceed. Prayer, is a means not only to draw all grace
from God, Prou. 12.2. but it is obex mali, and flagellum daemonis: as the name
of Christ is Oleum effusum. Cant. 1. because by it we receive all good; so the
name of the Lord is Turris fortissima, Prou. 18. for that it saues and defends
us from all evil.

As these are both truly affirmed of Gods name; so by the invocation of the
name of God we have this double benefit, that we do not only receive all good
by it, but also are delivered from all evil.

In the three former Petitions our Savior has taught us to draw grace from
God; in these three latter we are taught to use that kind of prayer that
concerns the removing of all evil called Tekinah (...), and deprecation.

The evil is of three sorts, of sins past and to come, and of the evil of
punishment.

In the first of these three Petitions we pray against the guilt of sins
past, that God would not charge us with them: in the second, against the
running issue of sin to come, that God would not suffer us to sin
hereafter: in the third, that God would turn away from us all those plagues
that our sins deserve, both in this life, and in the life to come, and these
three petitions are fitly opposed to the three former.

To the Kingdom of glory we oppose our sins: to the doing of Gods will,
temptation: to natural good things, the evil of the world to come: and the
miseries of this life; from both which we desire to be delivered, when we
say: deliver us from evil.

The Petition consists of debts, and forgiveness, but before we handle them,
we are to speak, first, of the necessity of this Petition: secondly, of the
goodness of God that penneth the Petition for us.

What need we have to pray to God for remission of our sins, appears hereby,
because our sins do make a partition betwixt God and us, Esa. 59. the effect
whereof is, that our mis-deeds do turn Gods blessings from us, and do keep
good things from us. Ier. 5.25.

Now having already desired at Gods hands the glory of Gods Kingdom, the good
of grace, for the doing of his will, and all outward good things necessary for
this life: we are of necessity to pray that God will forgive us our sins:
which otherwise will hinder us of these good things, and as our sins do
hinder Gods graces that they cannot come to us; so they hinder our prayers,
that they cannot come to God: for our sins are as it were a cloud ^o hide
God, so that our prayers cannot go through. Lam. 3.44. So that except we
desire the forgiveness of our sins, we shall in vain pray for the three
former good things.

Besides, our sins are a plain hinderance to Gods kingdom, for none shall
come thither, but such as are vncorrupt, and void of sins in the whole course
of their life. Psalm. 15. Et nihil impurum ingreditur illuc: no unclean thing
shall enter thither Reu. 21.

Therefore the Prophet says, hic est omnis fructus, and auferantur peccata.
Isa. 27.9.

Secondly, the goodness of God appears herein that he has endited us a
prayer to ask remission, telling us that it is possible to obtain remission
of sin. It is true, that by our sins, we have made our selves incapable of
all good things, but yet we see the goodness of God, that as we have still
dona, so he teaches us to say, condona.

Where he teaches all men to pray for good things, we learn that we are all
m^ndici Dei: but in that we are taught to ask forgiveness of sin, we see
that we are malefici Dei, the malefactors of God, such as have need of pardon:
and the goodness of God toward us appears to be the greater in this behalf,
because there is no Angel or Spirit to whom he vouchsafes this favor, to have
their sins remitted, save only to man.

Of them it is said, he found no truth in his Angels, in his servants, and in
his Angels there was folly. Job. 4.18. that is, they had trespasses, but yet
God will not forgive them, nor receive any supplication for pride; but
contrariwise he keeps the Angels that sinned in everlasting chains to the
judgment of the great day, 2 Pet. 2. he that is the God of the Spirits of all
flesh, Numb. 27.16 and 16.22. will not hear the Spirits that sinned against
him: but thou that hear prayers to thee shall all flesh come. Psalm. 65.

There is a way for man to escape the danger of sin, if he ask pardon: but
the sins of the wicked Angels shall not be forgiven. The elect Angels do
make the 3. first Petitions as well as we; and the Petition for the supply of
natural defects is common to all living creatures, but this which prays for
pardon of sins is proper only to man; so we see how God exercises his
goodness, and shows it; not only in exersing of liberallity to them that have
ne^d; but his long suffering in pardoning them that have sinned against him.

To come to the Petition it self; by Debts, our Savior means sins,
expressly so called Luke 11.4. and sinners are called debtors, Luke 13.4. for
the Scripture speaks of them. Math. 18.24. one was brought that owed ten
thousand Talents, that is, which had committed a great number of sins, and
Luke 7.31. a lender had two debtors, by which are meant sinners, the reason
hereof is, because there is a resemblance betwixt sins and debts.

In the affairs of men the case is thus, that if the condition be not
performed they are bound to endure the penalty, and so become double indebted:
so it is between God and us, the sins that we commit by the breach of Gods
law, is Chyrographum contra nos, an handwriting against us, Col. 2. So they
are called in the old Testament, Thou writest heavy or hard things against us,
Job. 13.26. and Ezech. 2. Our sins are compared to a book written in both
sides; for we are bound to keep Gods commandments, because he made us, and not
only so, but he still does nourish and preserve us, therefore we ought to do
his will, he gives us Talents, Math. 25. which we ought to employ to his glory;
he gives us dwelling places in the world, as to the Israelites, he gave the
land of the Heathen, that they might keep his statutes, and observe his laws.
Psalm. 105, If we fulfill them, we discharge our duty to God, and are free from
all penalty, but if we do it not, there is an obligation. Deuteronomy. 27. Curssed is
every one that continues not in all things that are written to do them. If he
place us in his vineyard, he will look to receive fruit of it. Math. 21. If
he give us Talents, he will have us so to employ them, as that he may reap
gain thereby. Luk, 19. The gifts, and graces that God bestows upon us, must
be employed in hallowing his name, in enlarging his kingdom, in
accomplishment of his will; if we fulfill this, the penalty of the law takes
no hold of us, but if we do not only not use them to his glory, but abuse them
and turn them to the breach of the law, by serving sinn^, then are we in a
double sort indebted to God, and make our selves guilty of his wrath, Et quis
intelligit, etc. Who understands the power of his wrath? Psalm, 90.

If we considered, how grievous plagues God threatened for the breach of the
Law, we would be more careful, and heedfull that we do not offend him, which
because we consider not, we become indebted to God.

We are debtors to the flesh, to provide for it only, so much as is meet for
the releeuing of it, Romans 8.12. And the rest of our care must be for the
Spirit: but because all our care is for the flesh, to satisfy it, in fulfilling
the lusts thereof, and are careless for our Spirits, therefore we become
indebted to God in a third sort, by breaking his commandments, in that which
concerns our self, but this the Apostle says, I am debtor to the wise, and
the unwise, Romans 1.14. That is, we must be careful of others, as God said to
Caine. Where is thy brother? Genesis 4. But because omnes, quae sua sunt quaerunt:
all seek their own. Phil. 2. and seek not the good of others, therefore they
grow further indebted to God.

These debts, or sins are properly said to be ours, because they proceed from
us, (for there is no member of our body that is not guilty of some sin) and
not in that sense, that bread is said to be ours, which comes to us, and is
made ours, by Gods gift, and when we pray forgive us our debts, we learn that
it is our duty, to crave forgiveness for others, as for our selves, for as the
Apostle by these words, The rebukes of them that rebuked thee, fell upon me,
Romans 15.5. shows, that Christ was carried with the same zeal against sin
committed against God, as if it had been against himself; so he teaches, that
we must be moved with the like compassion toward others, when we consider
their sins, that we find in our selves for our own; and that we ought no
less to pray for them, then for our selves, and to suffer others to pass over
the bridge of Gods mercy, as well as we.

In the words debts, three things are to be noted: first, where Christ teaches
his Apostles, that were baptized, and the most perfect Christians that ever
were, to pray, for remission of sins; it should work in our nature an
humiliation, for they in making this prayer acknowledge themselves sinners,
much more ought we.

The Apostle Peter confesses of himself. Luke 5.3. I am a sinful man, S. Paul
says of himself, peccatorum primus sum ego: I am the chief of sinners. 1.
Tim. 1.15. Saint James including himself, and the rest of the Apostles, says,
in multis offendimus omnes, In many things we sin all. Iam. 3.2. S. John
says, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, 1. Ioh. 1.9. He says
not exaltamus nos, as if the Apostle spoke of modesty, or non humiliamus nos,
we do not humble our selves: but d^cipimus nos, and if we deny it, the truth
is not in us: seeing it is so, we must not say with the Pharisie, I am not as
this man, but with the Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner. Luke 18.13.

Secondly, we are not only sinners, but daily sinners, as appears by this,
that we are taught, no less to pray daily for forgiveness of our sins, then
for bread; To confirm this Solomon says, Septics in die cadit iustus, the
just man falls seven times a day, Prou. 24. and as man eats and drinks every
day, so he drinks iniquity like water. Job. 15.

Thirdly, we run into such debts, as we are not able to discharge: for if we
were, we needed not to say: Dimitte nobis: Forgive us our debts, but have
patience with me, and I will pay thee all. Matthew. 18.

To signify to us, the greatness and number of our sins, one was brought that
owed 500 pence, and another that owed 50. Luke 7. and another that owed to his
master ten thousand Talents. By which we perceive, that we cannot make
satisfaction to God, therefore he must remit them.

The consideration whereof ought to work in us humiliation: First, that as Job
says: our hearts do not excuse us, and that we seek not to justify our
selves, that as God requires, we confess our mis-deeds, Leuit. 26.40. that we
acknowledg^ our sins to God, and hide them not, Psa. 32. For, if we confess
our sins, God is faithful to forgive our sins, 1. Ioh. 1.

Secondly, that we do not only confess, but be sorry for them, Psalm. 38.
that while we are in danger to God for our sins, we go and humble our
selves, and entreat him, and suffer not our eyes to sleep, till we be sure
how we may obtain forgiveness, Pro. 6.3.

The consideration of sin made David forget to eat his bread, Psalm. 102. so
greatly was he disquieted, till he was assured of pardon.

For the second point, if our sins be debts, they must be paid. Owe
nothing to any: but we are not able to answer one of a thousand, Job. 9. and
for the penalty of malediction we are not able to endure it, Psalm. 90. who
knows the power of his wrath? therefore our prayer must be to God, that our
misery may prevail more with God, to move him to compassion, then our
unworthiness, to stir up his indignation: and that he will Cancel the
handwriting, Col. 2. which thing, for that he is full of the bowels of
Compassion, Ier. 31.20. he is moved to do, when he sees us sorry for our
sins; how-be-it his justice must be satisfied, else his mercy cannot take
place: but Christ by his death having done that, God says of the sinner:
Deliver him, for I have received a reconciliation, Job. 33. Qui circumcisus
est, debtor est totius legis, Galat. 5.3. But Christ was circumcised, and
therefore fulfilled the law for us, ad vltimum quadrantem, to the utmost
farthing: and not only so, but he says of himself: Exolui quae non rapui: I
restored that which I took not, Psalm. 69.4. He not only perfectly fulfilled
the law, but suffered the curse of the Law, which he had not deserved, with
this condition: Sinite istos abire: Let these go, Ioh. 18. that is, he was
content to be the reconciliation for us, that he might draw us out of the
hands of Gods justice.

The estate of our debts may be compared with the Widows state that was left
in debt by her husband, 2. Reg. 4. for as the Lord blessed her oil in such
sort, as she did not only pay her debts, but had enough to live on after; so
Christ is our Oleum effusum: our oil powered out, that is of power not only to
satisfy Gods wrath for our sins, but also to give us an estate in the Kingdom
of heaven, and for his sake it is that we may be bold to pray for remission of
sins, and are taught to believe, that for his merits our sins are
forgiuen^ so that is true, Legem operandi, and legem credendi, lex statuit
supplicandi, the Law of prayer stablished both the law of obeying and believing.

Out of Dimitte arise three things for our comfort: First, that even those
sins which we commit after baptism, after our calling, and when we are come
to the knowledge of the truth, are remissible.

In teaching the Apostles to pray, he assures them of this favor, that the
same party that says peccata nostra, our sins, is taught to say, Pater
noster: Our Father. Our comfort therefore is, that still we are the children of
God, though great sinners: for though we loose the dutiful affection of
children, yet God cannot loose, Viscera patris, the tender bowels of a Father.

David, to a rebellious son, could not but show a fatherly affection: Do good
to the young man Absolon, 2. Sam. 18.5. So though the prodigal Son had offended
haynously, yet the Father is ready to receive him, Luke 15.

Secondly an other comfort, that al-be-it we commit sin daily, yet he will
daily forgive us: for God should mock us, says Augustine, if bidding us pray
for forgiveness, he should for all that shut up the bowels of his mercy: he
bids us pray for pardon of our sins, putting no difference, whether they be
peny-debts, or Talents; whether fifty, or a thousand, if we ask forgiveness,
he tells us, he is ready daily to remit them.

Thirdly that be our sins never so great, so great as cannot be satisfied by
us, yet he will forgive them, propter seipsum: For his own sake, Isa, 45.
Christ has made himself a satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, 1.
Ioh. 2.

We must labor how we may soundly apply his satisfaction to our selves; and
among other means whereby we apply the satisfaction of Christ to our selves,
prayer is one: They shall confess their iniquities, then I will remember my
covenant, Leuit. 26.40.41. He shall pray unto God, and he will be merciful
unto him, Job. 33.26. I confessed my sins unto the Lord, and thou forgauest
the wickedness of my sin. Propter hoc, or abit omnis sanctus, Psalm. 32. For
this cause shall every one that is holy pray, etc.

By virtue of this prayer, Solomon says, that the people having committed any
sin, if they come into the house of the Lord, and pray for pardon: God, who
is in heaven, will hear them, 1. Reg. 8.47. But this is more plain in the new
Testament, Math. 18. Did I not forgive thee? quia rogasti me; and to Si^on
Migus: Pray to God, if he will forgive thee the thoughts of thy heart, Act.
8.22. that is, if we confess, and be sorry for our sins, and ask pardon,
he will forgive us; How long will thou be angry with thy people that prays
to thee? Psalm. 66. But we must be of the number that is meant by Nobis, that
is of the Apostles, that is, such as are baptized into Christ's Death, Romans 6.
We must dye unto sin, as he died for sin, Vt, sicut is demisit peccata, so
we must dimittere peccata, he has suffered in the flesh and has ceased from
sin, so must we, 1. Pet. 4. We must have a care that hereafter we fall not into
sin, more then our infirmity compels us: For sins of infirmity, Gods grace
sufficient, 2. Cor. 11. But if we willingly sin after remission, there is no
more sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10. We are therefore to crucify the flesh, with
the lusts and affections thereof; if we will be Christ's, and receive benefit
by his satisfaction, Gal. 5.

The fifteenth Sermon.
As we forgive them that trespass against us.
AN this Treatise it has been noted, that there is a double Sicut, annexed to
two several petitions: the one concerning God, and our duty we owe to him, in
the third petition: The other concerning our Neighbor, and the charity that we
ought to show toward him, in this fifth petition: wherein we are to consider
this, that as this law of Prayer, which our Savior prescribes to us, does
establish the law of works and of faith, so these two Sicuts do comprehend
the sum of the Law, and the Prophets. The Law says: Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thy heart, Leuit. 19. and the same is confirmed by this petition,
wherein we are taught, that if we desire to have our sins forgiven of God, we
must not only not hate our brother without cause, but if he offend, we must
likewise forgive him. Neither does this petition concern our Neighbor and
Brethren only, but our selves likewise: for hereby we have a pledge of
Remission of sins, if we acknowledge, that we have forgiven others: and as the
taking away of our sins, is the great fruit and benefit we desire of God: so
the subordinate means that GOD has appointed for the end, is the forgiving
others that offend us. Now God has laid upon us this blessed necessity of
forgiving one another, not only that he might establish the peace in earth
among men; but that by his means glory might redound to God on high.

In respect of our selves, this is our estate before we become true Christians:
To be hateful, and to hate one another, Tit. 3.3. and that has a sorrowful
effect: For if we bite and devour one another, we shall be consumed of one
another, Gal. 5-15. To prevent this, Gods will is, that we should not hate,
but forgive one another, which unless we do, we cannot live peacebly, so that
this petition has a respect to our benefit also, as well as our Neighbors,
and God himself also has his part in it: for when we have forgiven our
brethren, and purged our hearts of all hatred, we are more fit for his service;
and contrariwise, as without forgiving others we cannot live peaceably one
with another: so neither can we live devoutly toward God: and therefore our
Savior charge: If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift at the Altar, and go thy
way first, and be reconciled, Matthew. 5. and the Apostle gives express charge,
that man and wife should live quietly, ne interrumpantur praeces, 1. Pet. 3.7.
lest their prayers be interrupted.

Thus it pleased the wisdom of God, in this petition, to add this Sicut, not
for our neighbors sake only, nor for our selves only, but also in regard of
God.

The first Sicut pertains to the imitatio^ of the Saints in heaven, this does
not imply an imitation: For God forbid, that God should no otherwise forgive us
the^ we forgive our brethren; but it is a mere condition, teaching us, that if
we forgive those that are indebted to us, we shall obtain forgiveness of
God: for we do not always subscribe to Gods commandment, Forgive one
another, as GOD for Christ's sake forg^u^ you, Ephesians. 4. Col. 3. But by saying
this petition we bind our selves to this condition: so as we would no
otherways be forgiven, then as we forgive them.

At the first we became bound to keep his law, which he did deliver in ten
Commandments, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. and for not fulfilling of it, we fall into
the penalty of Maledictus. Deuteronomy. 27.

Now, because, we have not obeyed the Law, we are to undergo the penalty: and
therefore it is said to be Chyrographum contra nos, Col. 2.

God having the Obligation in his own hands, might require the forfeitur of
us: but it pleases him to enter bond to us by another obligation, wherein he
binds himself to forgive our sins upon this condition, that we forgive
others: for if we forgive not, then his bond is void, as appears by the
parable wherein our Savior shows, that if we will have forgiveness of God
we must forgive our brethren, and have compassion on our fellow servants, as
God has pity on us, Math. 18.

It is Christ that freeth us, both from the obligation of the ten
Commandments, and of the twelve Curses, and therefore as he that receives a
benefit does, as it were, become bound to be thankful: so we enter into a new
bond of tha^kfulnesse unto God, the condition whereof is, that we should
forgive our brethren, even as we desire to be forgiven of God.

By the words of this petition, we see what our estate is, to wit, quilibet
homo est debtor, habens debitorem, every man is a debtor, having a debtor: for
so it appears by the parable, Math. 18. wherein as one was brought that ought
a great many Talents to God; so he had another that ought an hundred pence; but
there is a great difference. The debts that man owes to God, are great sins;
but the debts that man owes to man, are of small value; we are debtors to God,
not only to keep the whole law, but also to undergo the curse of God, which
is due, even to the least breach of the same, Deuteronomy. 27..

Secondly, we are indebted, not only for not using his Talents to his glory;
but for abusing them in the service of sin; even so we are debtors one to
another. Romans 1.14. not only when we neglect the duties of charity, and
justice; but, when we of purpose do wrong one to another,

Now we can be content that others should forgive us, and therefore if we
will have forgiveness of God, for the debts that we owe him, we must forgive
our brethren, For what you would that men should do to you, and in what
measure, even so do to them. Math. 7.

Therefore our Savior in penning this Petition, tells us, that if we make to
our brethren a release of our debts, he will release us of his; and this
condition is very reasonable; for Caine has no reason to hope for favor of
God, though he serve him never so devoutly one day, when notwithstanding he
has a purpose to kill his brother the next. Genesis 4. neither is it reasonable,
that he should say to God, Dimitte mihi, that will not say to his brother,
dimitto tibi.

The difference betwixt Gods forgiving and ours is, first in the persons that
forgive; when we forgive, then one fellow-seruant forgiues another, as duty
binds the^. Math 18. But when God forgiues us, there Dominus dimittit seruum.

Again, as I have a debtor of my fellow servant, so I may be indebted to him,
and therefore I ought rather to forgive him: but God cannot be indebted to us,
but we are all deeply in his debt, and therefore it is a reasonable condition
that he requires at our hands.

Secondly, in the things to be remitted, the number of Gods debts are
thousands, ours are but hundreths: his Talents, ours are but pence, Math. 18.
The condition therefore is reasonable on Gods behalf, if we consider the
excellency of his person, and the vileness of ours: If we regard how greatly
we are indebted to God, more then our brethren can be to us; vt pudeat alia
lege petere remissionem: that we may be ashamed under any other condition to
ask forgiveness.

Then we may not think much, that he requires this forgiveness at our hands,
but magnify his mercy, that having forfeited our first bond, it has pleased
him to remit it, and only to tie us to this: we are to thank him that he
vouchsafes, accipiere stipulam, pro margaritis, to accept our stubble, for his
pearls; for the forgiveness of our sins (which was bought at so dear a
rate) to accept the forgiveness we show to our brethren.

Some would give thousands of Rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil for this
great benefit, Mich. 6.7. Much more ought we condescend to God, when he
offers us so great a benefit, upon so easy a condition, and thus we see that
to be true in some part, which some of the Heathen have observed: De vtilitate
capienda etiam ab inimicis: It is not altogether for our hurt that they wrong
and injury us, for unless there were some to offend us, we should not have
occasion to exercise this part of our mercy, in forgiving: and therefore, where
David compares his enemies to Bees, and not to waspes. Psalm. 118. the reason
is, for that albeit Bees have stings; yet they yield honey also, and so no doubt
David received great comfort inwardly, by means of his enemies; though
outwardly they persecuted him, with all the malice they could, for he that can
master his own affections so far, as quietly to put up a wrong, offered by an
enemy, and to forgive the same, may be assured that his sins are forgiven of
God.

Wherein we are to consider, the goodness of God, that vouchsafes to set men in
his own place and to give men a power to forgive, even as he himself does
forgive; whereby it comes to pass, that one man is to another even in Gods
place, so that if we would know whether God do remit our sins, or no, we
need not to climb up to heaven, to be certified of it, nor to go down into the
deep, for the word is near, even in our heart, and in our mouth. Romans 10.

If thy heart tells thee, that thou forgiuest thy brother, doubt not, but God
does likewise forgive thee, and it is his mercy, that he vouchsafes to frame
his pardons, after our pardon, to assure us that as we forgive one another in
earth, so God forgiues us the sins that we have committed against him, and he
lays this necessity upon us, not only to show that he is careful to have
peace among men, but also that he would have us to be perfect as himself; for
God is said to be Procliuis ad miserecordiam, tardus ad iram, and vindictam,
prone to mercy, slow to wrath and revenge. Psalm. 145.

So Christ requiring of us, that we should forgive our brethren that offend us,
wills us to be slow to anger, and long suffering, as God is, for it is not
(as man judges) an honorable thing to be revenged. Wicked Lamceh thought it
an honor, to take revenge, seventy times seven times, of any that offended
him. Genesis 4, 24. but contrariwise Christ tells S. Peter, that it should be a
greater honor for him, to forgive until seventy times seven times, Math. 18.
Therefore it becomes a Christian, rather to follow Christ, then wicked Lamech:
for as Christ says, It were better to loose the right eye, and the right, hand
the to have the whole body cast into hel-fire. Mat. 5.29. So it were b^tter for
us, to suffer wrong for righteousness, then for worldly honor seek to
deprive our selves of the remission of our sins, which cannot be obtained of
God, except we be content to put up injuries offered to vs^

If we will have true honor, let us imitate our heavenly Father, he is so
far from taking revenge of them that offend him: that he lets his Sun shine
upon them. Math. 5. So let us account it the greatest honor for us, to aspire
more and more, to resemble our Father herein, for the nobler sort of creatures,
are not desirous of revenge, but only those that are vilest and of lowest
power and of all creatures unreasonable, none so angry, as flies, and waspes,
and bees, and of them that have reason, women are more testy and fretting,
then men; and of men none more subject to anger then such as are sick; in their
greatest weakness, then are they most angry; which is no sign of an
honorable quality.

Let us therefore count it a shame to be like the weakest things, in this
behalf, and rather let us imitate the nobler creatures, which are more slow to
anger.

If we will be honorable, let us learn to get it by the example of such as
have true honor, Joseph in the Court of Pharaoh, no doubt was an honorable
man, and yet he placed not honor in taking revenge of his brethren, that had
rewarded him evil, but in forgiving them, and doing them good for evil, Gen,
50.21. David was an honorable man, and yet he placed honor in pardoning
Shemei. 2. Sam. 19. and to do good to Mephibosheth the son of Saul, that was
his deadly enemy: Solomon knew, no doubt, what was true honor, and yet he
gives us counsel, not to seek honor, by revenge: Say not, I will do to him,
as he has done to me. Pro. 24. and the honorable King, that was angry with
the unmerciful servant, thought it more honor, to draw near the honor of
God, in pardoning, then in revenging. Math. 18.

The benefit that insueth upon this condition, is of two sorts, first outward,
for by virtue of it, we have a covenant on Gods part; wherein he binds
himself to us, that he will forgive us, if we forgive our brethren; so that
we may be bold to challenge him for his promise, so that we keep the condition.

Secondly, inward, for when we love the brethren, not in word, and tongue
only, but in deed and truth, that is a means for us, to persuade our hearts
before him. 1. Ioh. 3.19. If we forgive our brethren from our hearts, we may
be assured that God will forgive us. So our Savior affirms of the woman,
because she loved much, she had many sins forgiven her. Luke 7.27.

Some when they came to this Petition, left out this Sicut, and so passed on to
the next Petition: but we must use this prayer orderly; Christ is not mocked,
he penned the prayer for us himself, and therefore he can quickly espy, if we
leave out any of his words, and to teach us, that we should pray in true
charity, he has not only enjoined us to forgive our brethren, as we would
be forgiven; but wills us before we begin to pray, to bethink our selves
whether we forgive: Cum stabitis ad orandum. Mark. 11. when ye stand to pray,
forgive: Secondly, as we must use this Sicut, so not with our lips only, but
with our heart, for otherwise, we do imprecari nobis, we pray for vengeance
against our selves, and Christ may say to us, Ex ore tuo te iudicabo serve
nequam. Luke 19. We cannot curse our selves more bitterly, then if we say to
God, forgive us, as we forgive our debtors, unless we do indeed forgive them.

As we run in debt with God daily, and so, need daily forgiveness, the same
measure of charity we are to show to others that offend us: by forgiving them
their trespasses.

We must not think it enough to forgive them, till seven times, but until
seventy times seven times, and as we would not have a counterfeite
forgiveness of God, so we must be careful to forgive our brethren from our
heart, otherwise he will call back his word and promise made to us touching
the remission of our sins. Math. 18.35.

Whereas some count it a sufficient forgiveness to forgive only, though they
do not forget, they must know that it is only, Semiplena remissio, a
forgiveness by halfes: for we desire God by the Prophet, that he will not
only forgive, but forget our sins; and remember not our old sins. Psalm.
79.8. Therefore we must perform the same measure of charity in this behalf to
our brethren: and whereas the messenger of Satan does so buffet us, 2. Cor. 12.
and our own corruption so preuailes with us, that we cannot utterly forget an
injury, yet so long as we show not a revenge in deed, nor in word, nor in
look, but strive to master our corrupt affection, we shall be accounted
according to that we have, and not according to that we have not. 2. Cor. 8.12.

As for that which some object, that so the law of justice is overthrown, by
this kind of mercy. Romans 3.31. It is not so, for merc^ triumphs over justice.
Iam. 2.

Now as prayer is a means to apply Christ's benefits and merit to our souls,
as Christ shows, I forgave thee, because thou prayedst me. Math. 18. So that
is not enough unless we use charity and mercy, to dimitte tu, we must add,
nos dimittimus, the want whereof caused the King to deal so seuerly with the
unmerciful servant. Math. 18.

Now mercy which is the second means of application, stands in giving and
forgiving, Quicquid prestatur indigenti Elemosinae est. Therefore because these
have need of forgiveness which offend, we should do a work of mercy in
forgiving them when they do us wrong, and both those kind of alms and mercy
are alike accepted of God, and therefore in the law he ordained as well
peace offerings, as meate-offerings.

That mercy is a means to us to apply this benefit unto our selves, which
Christ offers, appears by these places. Prou. 16.6. with mercy and
faithfulness sins are forgiven. Isa. 58.7. Dan. 4.27. and Luke 11. Date
Eleemosina^, and omnia sunt munda.

This is that which makes both prayer and fasting acceptable before God, and
without which all prayer is rejected as hypocritical, Math. 6.16. Thus must
we have oil from him, and the vessel to receive it in us, dimitte and
dimittitis that is both prayer, and mercy.

As we pray to God for pardon of our sins, so we must forgive others, now
Christ makes choice of that kind of mercy, which stands in forgiving,
because it is common to poor and rich, for all cannot give, but the poor may
forgive as well as the rich, and therefore it is the duty of us all to forgive
one another, if we will be forgiven of God.

Secondly, he makes choice of this mercy, as the greatest and excellentest,
for nature will move us to give him that is in need, and we cannot in such
case hide our selves from our own flesh: But when we do not only forgive
him that has done us wrong, but also offer kindness to him that did provoke
us to anger, that is a supernatural work.

Thirdly, it is the fittest mercy, for we desire to be remitted, and therefore
the fittest means to obtain remission is, that mercy which stands in
remission, and forgiving of others.

The mercy that we show in this behalf, is active mercy; that which God
promises us, if we forgive our brethren, is a passive mercy.

Of the active mercy our Savior says: Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy, Math. 5. But contrariwise, there shall be judgment
merciless to him that shows no mercy, James. 2.13. Wherefore we must so
deal with those which offend us, that we may say to God: Ecce misericordiam
actiuam, praesta mihi passiuam: Behold my active mercy, perform to me thy
passive mercy.

And to show the necessity of this duty on our parts, Christ having penned this
petition upon this condition, is not contented therewith, but having ended the
prayer, he returns to the same matter, and shows why we should forgive our
Debtors: For if ye (says he) forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father will forgive you yours, but if you will not, neither will God forgive
you, and hereof he has given an example in the parable of the King, Matthew. 18.
who to show to us, what we are to look for at Gods hands, is said to have
been loving and merciful, at the first, to him that was indebted so far unto
him: But when the same party having the debt which he ought, pardoned, would
notwithstanding have present payment of his fellow-seruant; then the Kings
affection was turned, and he became severe and rough, and committed him, till
he had paid all that was due.

The sixteenth Sermon.
And lead us not into tentation.
THIS is the Petition that concerns sin to come: for Remission, which was
the thing we prayed for last, is referred to sins past, Romans 3.25. and we
are no less to desire of God, that he will give us ability to resist sin to
come; then to be gracious to us in pardoning our sins already committed: thus
much we are given to understand, by this, that this petition is cheined to the
former, with the copulative, And, as if that were not perfected, without this,
no more indeed is it, for as God lets go his hold, so must we let go ours; and
if we will have God to remit our former sins; we must beware, that we do not
willingly sin against his Majesty afresh; but that we strive against
temptations to come: For as the Psalmist speaks: If I incline to wickedness in
my heart, the Lord will not hear me. Psalm. 66.16. If I purpose still to
continue in sin, I shall in vain pray, Forgive me my sins. But
contrariwaies, he that does not only confess, but also forsake his sins, he
shall have mercy, Pro. 28.13.

If accounting it sufficient, that we have spent the time of our life past in
sin, we shall resolve henceforth to live, so much time as remains for us in
the flesh, after the will of God. 1. Pet. 4.3. Then may we assure our selves,
that God will be merciful unto us; and will remember our sins and iniquities
no more. And that which we are to perform in this behalf, is, the second part
of Remission, which is opposed, both to retention and intention: that is, as we
would have God not to retain our sins, but freely to pardon them, so our car^
must be, that sin be more remiss in us: for whereas in the last petition we
considered a Double debt, one of Duty, another of Forfeiture, our desire was,
not to have both forgiven, but we desired to be forgiven, quia non
prestitimus; non ne praestemus: because we perform it not; not that we might
not at all perform it.

Howsoever our prayer to God is, that he would not lay upon us the penalty,
which we have run into, by not keeping his law, yet we are still bound to do
our duty.

Now, whereas the Prophet says, Hic est omnis fructus, vt auferatur peccatum,
Isay. 27. We may not think, that sin is taken away, when God, for his part,
does remit the guilt of our sins past; for, sin consists not only of an
off^^ce, or guilt but of an issue, or inclination to sin: so that our care must
be, as well that we pray, that this running issue may be stopped, as that
punishment due to us for sins past be remitted: and to this end, both parts of
repentance are required of us: that is, Sorrow for sins past, and a provident
care to avoid sin to come: we must by prayer seek for grace of God, non modo
qua deleatur debitu^, sed ne contrahatur debitu^: not only, that our debts may
be done away, but that it may not be contracted; as the widow, by the blessing
of God, had sufficient oil, not only to pay her Creditors withal, but also
to live upon afterward, 2. Reg. 4. So we must seek of Christ, the oil of his
grace, both for the discharging of our sins, and for an holy life.

As we would be glad to hear this voice from Christ: Remissa sunt tibi
peccata, Luke 7. So we must be content with this: Vade, and noli amplius
peccare: Go thy way, and sin no more, Ioh. 8.

As God on his part does covenant with us, that he will remember our sins and
iniquities no more, Ier. 31. So, that which he requires of us, is, Haec est
via, ambulate in ea, Isa. 30.21. For it is not enough for us to confess our
sins and be sorry, Psalm. 38. nor yet to perform our active mercy by giving
and forgiving, except we have a resolute purpose to forsake the sins we have
heretofore committed: for if being washed from our old sins, we shall wallow
in the mire like swine, and return to our vomit, then shall our latter end be
worse then our beginning, 2. Pet. 2. This is one reason, why this copulative
conjunction is set before this petition.

Another is, in regard of the ^icklenesse of our estate: we may not think our
selves secure when we have forgiveness of our sins. The Apostles of our
Savior Christ having received the Sacrament, which as Christ told them, was a
seal of the remission of sins, purchased by the shedding of his blood, fall
into a sleepiness, so as they were not able in time of greatest peril, to
watch with their Master one hour: therefore he was feign to warn them:
Pray, that ye enter not into tentation, Math. 26. the reason is, because the
Diuill is most malicious against them that are recovered out of his thraldom:
For when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he is never quiet, till he
r^turne again, and that he may, he will use all the means he can, Math. 12.
So that they (of all others) are in most danger, and most subject to the
malice and rage of the Diuill, that are restored out of the state of sin, into
the state of grace: and therefore we pray, that as God in his mercy does
vouchsafe to pardon our sins past; so it will please him to strengthen us with
his grace, that we may withstand the temptations of Satan.

The petition has two things to be considered, the Temptation, and the
Leading. Temptation (that we may know what we ask, Math. 20.) is a Trial or
Proof, and is of two sorts: (...), and (...), the one good, the other evil,
the one is made by God, the other by Satan.

God is said to tempt us, when he makes trial of our faith, which trial is
more precious then gold, 1. Pet. 1.7. as in Abraham, or when he tries our
patience, James, 1. as in Job: for while we live in this world we are
spectaculum Angelis, and Hominibus, 1. Cor. 4.

God therefore in his wisdom he thinks it good to try our faith and
patience, by laying affliction upon us, that al-be-it he know us sufficiently,
yet that both Men and Angels may have a proof of our faith, he tries us: for
as the dross is consumed with fire, and the pure gold remains behind: so
the pureness of our faith is tried with the fire of affliction: this is that
Fan which Christ is said to have in his hand, whereby he purges his flower,
and separateth the good corn from the Chafe. Math. 3.

The other proof or trial is, that which Satan makes: for as God tempts
Abraham, Genesis 22. for his good: so Satan tempted Adam, Genesis 3. but not for his
good, but only to draw him away from his God: as Christ has his Fan, so Satan
has his, Luk, 22. Satan has desired to sift and winnow you. The difference
is, that whereas God by affliction thinks good to prove how steadfastly we
believe in him, and how willingly we will undergo the cross for his sake: The
devils purpose is, that by all means he may quench our faith, and dash our
patience.

The Devils trial therefore is, t^tatio ad detrimentu^, non ad experimentum.
Gods tentation makes us happy: Blessed is he that endures temptation, Iam,
1. but the Devils temptation brings us to misery, and this later is that
against which we pray, and it is of two sorts: first, that which the Apostle
calls, tentatio humana, such as is incident to the nature of man: secondly,
tentatio Satanica.

Humane temptations are ^uch as are necessary, and cannot be avoided, by the
reason of the corruption of our nature, of which the Prophet speaks, when he
prays: Libera me de necessitatibus meis, Psalm. 25.16. The Apostle does more
plainly express it, when he calls it, the infirmity of the flesh, Romans 6.
and the sin that dwells in us, Romans 7. which causes this necessity, that
while we remain in the body, the flesh will ever lust against the Spirit,
Gal, 5. But there is another kind of temptation, which is Devilish; when we
do not sin of infirmity, or through the necessary weakness of the flesh: but of
malicious purpose, that whereof the Prophet speaks: Be not merciful to them
that trespass of malicious wickedness, Psalm. 59. and keep thy servant from
presumptuous sins. Psalm. 19. These sins proceed not from that necessity of
sinning, which does accompany our nature: but from that corruption of nature,
which the Apostle does call the superfluity of wickedness, Iam. 1.2. These
proceed not from sin that dwelles in us, but from that sin, which reigns in
us: Romans 6. And as we desire, that God will pardon our necessary tentations: so
especially we are to pray, that we may not fall into these superfluous sins,
as the Prophet does pray, Psalm. 19. Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins,
that they get not the Dominion over me. And, Order my steps in thy word: Ne
dominetur mihi omnis iniquitas, Psalm. 119.

For the better understanding of this point, we are to consider, what are the
tentations, and tentamenta: that is, the things whereby we are tempted.

The tentations are either without us, or within us.

Without, first the Devil, that is, the Tempter, 1 Thessalonians. 3. Secondly, the
corruption that is in the world through lust, 2. Pet. 1. the Tempter within us
is, our own concupiscence, Iam. 1.14. without which the outward Tempters should
not only not hurt us, but also greatly profit us: for the Devil shall in
vain tempt us, and the evil examples of the world shall not allure us,
unless we, in the lust of our hearts, do suffer our selves to be overcome:
and therefor one says well: Teipsum vince, and victus est mundus and Satanas.
If there be neither covetousness in us, nor the lust of the flesh, the devil
shall not be able to prevail against us, but we shall stand unconquered, both
of worldly lusts, and of the lusts of the flesh.

The things whereby the Devil tempts us, are Massah, and Meribuh, Psalm.
95.8. whereby is understood, Prosperity and Adversity. One while, as a serpent,
he allureth us by pleasures, and if he prevail not that way, then, like a
roaring Lion he terrifieth with violent danger: and that he may have his will
of us, by one of these means, he bewitcheth our understanding, Gal. 3. so
that we either make great account of those things, which indeed are of least
value, or else judge the danger which he threatens, to be more terrible then
it is.

From this petition, we are to acknowledge, that where we pray, that God will
deliver us from tentation: first, in regard of our selves, we are unable to
encounter with these temptations, and to withstand the least temptation, and
yet the the grace of God is sufficient for us: so that albeit in the light of
our own understanding, we cannot discern what is true pleasure, or what is
indeed to be feared; yet as the Prophet speaks: In lumine tuo videbimus lumen;
In thy light we shall see light, Psalm. 36. and though the messenger of Satan
buffet us never so much, yet Gods grace shall make us to have the victory,
without which we are not able to resist the first temptations.

Which considerations serve to keep us from pride, and ^o work in us
humility, 2. Cor. 12.

Secondly, in regard of our tempters, we are to acknowledge, that the devil,
much less any thing else, can be able to tempt us, without Gods permission: so
he was not able to touch Job, until he had leave of God, nor the heard of
swyne, till Christ had permitted him to enter. Matthew. 18.

Thus we see that Satan is chained by God, so that he cannot go further then
God will give him leave, which makes for our comfort.

Temptation is necessary, and therefore we pray not, ne tentat nos Satanas, but
ne Deus nos indicat, For it is Gods will to use Satan's service in this work,
and that if we feel that our corruption does yield to sin, we are to say
with the Prophet, let God arise. Psalm. 68. and save me o God. Psalm. 69. Also
with Ezechiah, Domine vim patior, responde pro me. Isa. 36. O Lord I suffer
oppression, comfort thou me.

Touching the leading into tentation, we desire not to be led, which has two
expositions: first, that God, who knows our weakness, will not give leave to
the devil to tempt us at all, by any of those means, because the issue of
tentation, is doubtful, for many excellent men, even the Saints of God have
been overcome thereby.

Secondly, at the least ne inducat, that he lead us not into them, which have
three differences: first, in respect of God, that albeit the devils desire be
to ^ift us, Luke 22. yet, ne induc^s tu, though the lying spirit be ready to
intise us, that we might fall, yea that God would not command him to go forth.
1. Reg^ 22. yet that he would not deliver us over in S^thans hands, and leave
us to our selves.

Secondly, in regard of us, that we commit not sin that leads thereunto, for
qui dicitur volens ducitur: but that if we needs must yield to temptations, it
may rather lay hold on us by violence against our wills, the^ lead us: so the
Apostle speaks. 1. Cor. 10. Tentatio vos non apprehendit: Tentation has not
taken hold of you, and when our Savior says to his Disciples: Orate ne
intratis in tentationem: pray that ye enter not into tentation: his meaning is,
that willingly and wittingly, and of delight of your selves, otherways then as
the infirmity of your flesh does compel you, for if any willingly enter into
tentation, these God suffers to be led into it, so as they cannot get out any
more; that is, the Gentiles till they be effectually called are said to commit
all uncleanness with greedinesse^ Ephesians. 4. 19. So we do not devour the
temptations that are incident to our nature, and that as the Syriake word, used
by our Savior, is, we take not pain to satisfye the tentations of Satan, as
it were to climb up into an high tree.

Thirdly, in respect of the nature of the Greek word, which is rather ne
inferas, then ne inducas.

Of Christ's leading into tentation. Math. 4, it is said, (...) that is, so led,
as that he was brought back again, but our leading by the devil, is, so to
be carried into temptations, as that withal we are left there to our selves.

Christ's tentation had an issue. 1. Cor. 10. nostra non habet exitum, ours has
no issue: but our prayer is not only, that it be against our will, if at any
time we be tempted, but that in the tentation he would so hold us by the hand
that we may get out of it, that albeit we be led into it, that we may be
brought back again.

From whence this question aryseth, Whether God lead a^y into tentatio^, so as
they never get out of it again: the answer is, that there are some such, but
they are those that first suffer themselves to be led, even as he hardens no
man's heart, but his that first hardens his own heart.

Of Pharaoh it is said, that albeit Aarons rod eat up the incha^ters rods:
that yet he hardened his heart. Exodus 7.13. After Exodus 8. when the sorcerers
told him, Digitus Dei hic est, this is the fingar of God^ yet he hardened his
own heart, and then God seeing his obstinacy, Indurauit cor eius, hardened his
^eart. Exodus 12.

So when Ahab had first sold himself to work wickedness. 1. Reg. 19.20. then
it pleased God to deliver him to the lying spirit, to deceive him, that he
might fall. 1. Reg. 22. Because Ephraim would have many Altars to serve, God
gave them many Altars. Hos. 8.11.

That w^ be not led into tentation, the m^anes that we are to use is, that we
put from before our face the stumbling blocks of iniquity, Ezech. 14. that we
restrain our eyes and mouths from beholding, or speaking that which is evil,
that we restrain our feet, as the Wiseman says: Keep thy way far from
her, and come not into the door of her house. Prou. 5.8^ For can a man take
fire in his bosom and his clothes not be bu^nt? Prou. 6.

Therefore if we w^ll not be led into tentation, we must not lead ^ur selves,
nor ^empt ou^ selves, nor grope for sin, for the devils tentation cannot hurt
us: it shall be a means to grace us, if we withstand it: but if we will be
drawn away of our own lusts, then we cannot but be led.

As we must forbear the occasion of sin, so must we use the means, that
may keep us from it, that is prayer.

We must make a covenant with our eyes. Job. 31. so we shall not be tempted.

As we prayed, that Gods will, touching sanctfication, 1 Thessalonians. 4. and
suffering, may be done of us, so we are to pray, not generally to be diliuered
from the temptations of sin; but particulary, from the temptation of any
several sin, whereunto we are inclined: if to worldly lusts. Tit. 2.12. that
he^ would keep us from them, If, to the lusts of the flesh, 1. Pet. 2. that he
will not suffer us to be tempted of them neither, that as our tentation
increases, so his strength may increase, and if not increase, then that he
will cause his tentation to decrease.

The seventeenth Sermon.
MATH. 6.13. But deliver us from evil.


THIS last Petition concerns the last of those three evils, which we desire
to have removed from us; under which we comprehend all miseries and calamities
of this life, for that is it which our Savior understands by the evil of
the day, in the last verse of this Chapter.

So there is a plain opposition betwixt this Petition and the fourth.

As there by daily bread, we understood all things necessary for this present
life: so when we say, deliver us from evil, we seek to be delivered from all
such things as are labourious and troublesome to us in the same.

There are that make but six Petitions of this prayer, saying, that the two
last are but one, but they have no warrant for it.

The ancient Church has always divided it into seven, and this division they
grounded upon the motive, which caused our Savior Christ to pen this prayer,
which was the avoiding of that (...) used by the Heathen. Math. 6. v. 7. into
which they cannot choose but fall, which affirm, that these two last Petitions
contain but one thing, wherein they are deceived; for tentation and evil are
not of one scantling.

Every evil is not tentation, neither is every tentation evil.

Some things are evil in their own kind, as wolves, and Kites: other things
are not only evil in themselves, but bring forth evil effects, for our
sins are not only evil, but the calamities and miseries which our sins
bring upon us, are also evil: and therefore we are to pray no less against
the one, then against the other.

Touching the misery of this life, we are to pray as the Prophet wills us, for
deliverance from them Psalm. 50. call upon me in the day of thy trouble.

That this and the former cannot be one Petition, appears, for where we pray
that we be not led into tentation, we desire that we may do no evil, when we
pray that we may be delivered from evil, our desire is that we may suffer
no evil.

In the first we pray against malu^ culpae, in the second against malum poenae.

The first is an evil of our own doing, the other of Gods doing, as the
Prophet speaks Amos. 3. Non est malum in ciuitate, quod non facit Dominus.

As before sin committed we desired non induci: so here, when we have
committed sin, our desire is, that God would not deliver us to our Ghostly
enemy, that he may afflict us in this life with temporal plagues, nor in the
life to come keep us in eternal torments.

When we desire, that God will deliver us from the miseries of this life, and of
the life to come, we have these things to consider: first, that the case of
Christian men is not like the state of the Heathens, for they had Jove's, white
Gods, from whom they received good things, and black Gods, whom they called
depulsores malorum^ but Christians have but one God to fly to, whom they
acknowledge to be both (...), and (...), a God that does not only give us good
things, but takes from us those that are evil: so God testifies of himself
to Abraham, that he is not only his exceeding great reward, but also his
shield. Genesis 15. both which we are to consider in this, that in Scripture he is
compared to a rock.

Secondly, that the devil has a desire to carry us away into sin and
transgression, to the end he may endanger our souls, and if he cannot hurt us
that way; then he will labor to do us some outward mischief: if he cannot
prevail as a tempter, yet that he may hurt us as a tormenter.

So he dealt with Job, who for that he was a just and perfect man, so as Satan
could not tempt him to sin against God, therefore his desire was, that he
might touch his body, and torment him, with outward losses, for his delight is
evermore in doing of mischief; if he can no longer vex the soul of man, yet
he will crave this leave, that he may torment the poor hogs. Luke 8.32.

Thirdly, that we have two kind of helps against this evil: first, that
precaution which our Savior tells us of in the former Petition that before we
commit sin, we pray non induci; that neither temptation come at us, nor we at
it Secondly, that albeit we by sin are fallen into evil; yet there is a
(...), or saluing to be looked for of God, who will deliver us after that we
are delivered into the hands of our adversary, as in the first Petition, we
pray that we may not fall into evil by yielding to tentation: so here if we be
fallen, yet God would deliver us out of it. Both these helps are ascribed to
God.

Of the first it is said to him, he that makes his prayer for his help, the
enemy shall not be able to do him hurt, and the son of wickedness shall
not come nigh him. Psalm. 89. Of the other, Let not the water flood drown me,
nor the deep swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. Psalm.
69.16.

Touching the evil from which we desire to be delivered, Chrysostom, and the
rest of the Greek Church, expound it of the devil, who is lerna malorum, or
the greatest evil that can befall us, which exposition is grounded upon the
A^^^cle, (...): but this exposition is too narrow: and for the holy word is
best expounded, when it is most enlarged: so that we shall have a full
understanding of this matter, if under the word Evil, we include whatsoever is
evil, and so desire generally to be delivered from it: but if we desire to be
delivered from whatsoever is evil: then from our selves, (says Augustine:)
for we are evil, and so we have need to pray: for as, when we ask
forgiveness of sins, it is from those sins, unto which our lust has already
drawn us away into sin: so when we say: Libera nos a malo, that is, ab
abstrahente, from that infirmity of the flesh, and necessity of sinning, which
does accompany our nature, in regard whereof the Apostle says: Quis me
liberabit de hoc corpore mortis. Romans 7.24.

So Augustine under the word ( Evil) does include, not only (...), but (...).

But Cyprians exposition is, when we pray, libera nos a malo, we desire not to
be delivered from this, or that evil, but generally from all evil, by which
he means not (...), nor (...); but (...): that is, all manner of trouble,
and calamity, and whatsoever turns away good from us, especially that evil
which keeps us from God, which is the chiefest good thing: so then our desire
is, not only to be delivered from the devil, who is the beginning of all
evil, as that which is opposed to our chief good; but from that which may
turn away from us the meanest blessing which we stand in need of outwardly,
which also are bona data, Luke 11.

If we understand by evil, Satan, then we pray to be delivered from him not
only when he plays the subtle serpent, and changes himself into an Angel
of light, 2. Cor. 11^ but when he plaieth the Lion, 1. Pet. 5. first, to be
delivered from his jaws, that he swallow us not down: for then there is no
help for us: that is, that God would save us from the nethermost hell, Psalm.
86. that which is called The second death, Apocal. 20. and (...).

Secondly, from his claws, under which are comprehended all temporal
calamities: first, the loss of life, against which the Apostles, being in a
great tempest, pray unto Christ, that he would save the^: Master, carest thou
not that we perish? Mark. 4.

Secondly, of good name, whereof the Prophet says: Libera me a contrarijs
hominibus, Psalm. 114.

Thirdly, the loss of goods, concerning which, when the Lord had formed
Grasse-hoppers to destroy their fruit, the Prophet prayed, O Lord God, spare I
beseech thee, Amos 7.2. And this is the remedy in all outward afflictions, as
Solomon says: If there be dearth in the land, through Blasting, Caterpiller,
or Grasse-hopper: then if the people come into the Temple, and say: Libera nos
a malo, God will hear their prayers and deliver them, 1. Reg. 8.37. Therefore
in that dearth which is spoken of, Reu. 6. where corn was given by measure and
weight, the remedy they had, was prayer: How long Lord do thou defer to
avenge our bloods. The reason why we pray to be delivered from these miseries,
is, that we may the better intend Gods service; so said David: Deliver me from
the slanders of men, that I may keep thy commandments, Psalm. 119.

Christ does not expressly name tribulation, affliction, and calamity, though
they be comprehended under the word Evil: wherein we are to observe, that in
this petition, as in the rest, he tempers his style with great wisdom.
Therefore outward trouble may cooperate to our good, and therefore he teaches
us not to pray, that God will deliver us from the^ absolutely, but from that
evil which is in them: and in this sense we may pray to be delivered, a malo
panis, as well as a malo famis: for bread, which of it self is good, may turn
to our hurt: and therefore Solomon prays: Give me not riches, least I be
full, and say: Who is the Lord? neither give me poverty, lest through want I be
driven to steal, and take the name of my God in vain Pro. 30.

There is both evil and good in both, and therefore we pray to be delivered
from the ^uill: for if God see that it is good for us to be humbled with want,
then we are not to pray against it.

Where we desire to be delivered, first, we acknowledge how little we are able
our selves; an hair, or a crumme of bread oftentimes is enough to cast away a
man: for the meanest creatures are able to hurt us, except God deliver us: and
as we cannot help our selves, so if we look about us, there is none to
succor us. So will the King himself tell us, who of all others seems most
able to help: If the Lord do not succor thee, wherewith can I help thee? 2.
Reg. 6.27.

Wherefore we may not trust to our selves, nor to any other foreign help or
power, but to God the great deliverer, to whom Christ has taught us to pray:
Libera nos a malo.

Secondly, herein we acknowledge our desire, which is to be delivered: the
word is (...), which implies such a deliverance which does rid us from bondage
or captivity: wherefore we use this word as a motive, that God will the rather
deliver us; because, if the evil, which lies upon us, continue long, it will
make us the Devils bond-me^, and we are his servants, and desire that he may
not take us captives at his will, but that we may come out of his snare. 2.
Tim. 1. to do God service, and not only so, but that our service may be done
freely, and with cheerfulness, for that we are his children, and he our
Father: that is, as the Prophet speaks: When God has set our hearts at
liberty, we may run the w^y of his Commandments, Psalm. 119.

But if we will be delivered from the Devil indeed, we must have this freedom
of Christ the son of God, of whom it is said: Si filius vos liberauerit, vere
liberi eritis, Ioh. 8. for he only is able perfectly to save us out of the
thraledome of Satan.

The Devil indeed is subtle, and plays the Serpent, but Christ is the
wisdom of God, and knows well enough to keep us from temptation.

The Devil is cruel, and roareth like a Lion, but Christ, who is the power of
God, is able to free us from evils, to save us from him. 1. Cor. 1.29. 2. Pet.
2.9.

The means and ways whereby the Son of God, who is his wisdom and power,
does free us from evil, is first non inducendo, that is, not to suffer us to
be tempted at all, for so we should be freed both from the evil of sin, and
from the evil of punishment, which is the effect of sin, but for as much as
there is none upon whom the devil has no^ at least laid his nails, and as it
were scratched with his claws by outward afflictions, we are not to look for
that means of deliverance: the Apostles themselves had not this privilege:
For S. Paul, that was a chosen vessel, had the messenger of Satan to buffet
him: even the corruption of his flesh, which did still tempt him to sin. 2.
Cor. 12. and for outward affliction, it is the case of all Christians
generally, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.
2. Tim. 3.

So that the godly may not look for their paradise on earth, Christ has
foretold: In the world you shall have trouble. Ioh. 16. as for their joys and
comfort, it is elsewhere to be had: Merces vestra magna est in coelis, Math.
5, But if they be without tribulation in this life, if they be in the state of
those that come into no misfortune like others, Psalm. 73. it is an evil
sign, and they little differ from the world, which have their portion in this
life; whereas the troubles and miseries of this world, are to the godly, a
pledge of the joys that are to come: and yet sometimes he gives them a taste
of his future mercy, by blessing them on earth: I have set before thee an open
door, because thou have a little strength, Reu. 3.8.

But we pray here for a deliueuerance after we are fallen into evil, and this
deliverance is performed four ways: First, when God does quickly take the
evil from us, and not suffer it to continue to our utter ouer-throw. Such a
deliverance is that when he suffers his wrath to endure but a little season,
when, though he send heaviness over night, yet he causes joy to come in the
morning, Psalm. 30.

It was a great cause of grief to the Apostles, that Christ speaking of his
departure from them, said: A little while, and ye shall not see me; but he
diliuered the^ out of this grief, by comforting them with the hope of his
speedy return, when he said: And yet a while and ye shall see me again, Ioh.
16. And as S. Paul says: This is a great means to deliver us out of our
afflictions when we know, that it is but to (...), a tribulation, that as it
is but light in it self, so it is but momentany, 2. Cor. 4.17.

Secondly, God does deliver us from evil, when he does mix some comfort with
our affliction, that may make us to bear it the better. Such comfort it
pleased God to mix with Joseph's trouble, who was first sold to be a slave by
his own brethren, after cast into prison by means of his wicked Mistress;
but in the midst of his affliction, God did not only bring him out of prison,
but brought him into favor with Pharaoh, which made him forget all his labor
and travel. Wherefore he called his first son Manasseh, of forgetting, Genesis
41.51.

Thus God tempered the afflictions of David, as himself confesses: In the
multitude of the sorrows of my heart, thy comforts have refreshed my soul,
Psalm. 94. And the Apostle says: Blessed be God, for he gives us comfort in
all our tribulation: so as we are able to comfort others with the same comfort
that he ministered to us, 2. Cor. 1.4.

Thirdly, when he gives us patience to endure our affliction, which is a
greater benefit then the former: for if we suffer wrong, and take it
patiently, then there is thanks with God, and we follow the example of Christ,
who suffered for us, though he had done no sin, 1. Pet. 2.20. And as it is a
thing thanke-worthy with God, so the Prophet says: Blessed is the man whom
thou chastisest, o Lord, that thou may give him patience in the time of
adversity. Psalm. 94.13.

Wherefore the Apostle exhorts: Let patience have it perfect work, that we
may be perfect and entire, lacking nothing. Iam. 1.4.

Christ was for a time forsaken of his Father: that he might comfort himself
with patience; and so it is required of us, that in our afflictions we possess
our souls with patience, Luke 21.19. for so we shall apply our selves to be
sound in Faith, and the love of God, and to be lacking in no duty which God
requires at our hands.

Fourthly, when out of evil he brings good, and turns the evils that are
come upon us, to our greater good: for to this end, God afflicts his
children, and therefore Christ says not; deliver us from Calamity, or
tribulation; but from Evil: for God in his wisdom does so dispose of the
afflictions of the godly, that they shall have cause to rejoice and glory in
tribulations, Romans 5.3. 2. Cor. 11.

Now they have cause to rejoice in their tribulations, in two respects.

First, quando crux liberat a cruciatu, when the cross delivers from
anguish, or vexation: for so the Apostle says: that God does chasten his
children in this life, that they should not be condemned with the world, 1.
Cor. 11.

Secondly, quando crux conuertitur in coronam, when their cross is turned into
the crown: for so Saint Paul says: That the afflictions of the godly, which
they suffer here, are but light and momentany, and yet procure unto us a
surpassing, and everlasting weight of glory, such as cannot be expressed, 2.
Cor. 4.17. And the same Apostle, Romans 8.18. says: I have made my reckoning,
and now find, that the afflictions of this life are not worthy, or comparable
to the glory that shall be revealed in the world to come.

Now we may not limit God to any one of these ways of deliverance; but our
desire must be that he will deliver us from Evil, that way which seems best
unto him.

Lastly, seeing it is Gods will that we shall undergo the cross in this life,
our prayer to God must be, that of the crosses that were on mount Caluary,
Luke 23.33. ours may be like to Christ's cross, that we may suffer innocently
for the name of Christ: For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience
toward God, endure grief, and suffer wrong undeserved, 1. Pet. 2.19.

Secondly, if not innocently, yet that our suffering may be like the good
thief, that confessed he suffered worthily: for he repented of his sin, and
by faith conceived comfort, that al-be-it his body were crucified, yet his
soul should be received with Christ into glory: but in any ways our desire
must be that we suffer not like the wicked and reprobate ^hiefe, that
blasphemed Christ, and dyed without repentance.

The persons to be delivered, are expressed in the word ( nos) which implies a
twofold reason, the one in regard of the word libera, we are thy servants,
therefore make us free, and suffer us not to be slaves to Satan: So the
Prophet reasons. Psalm. 116^ and 143.

Secondly, again, deliver us, for we are thy children, those whom thou have
taught to call thee Father, therefore though we be Mephiboseth for our
deformity, and absolons for our ungraciousness, yet show thy self a Father to
us; and of servants, though we be not only unprofitable Luke 17. but evil and
wastfull. Luke 16. yet because we are thy servants, deliver us.

Thirdly, we are thy workmanship, therefore, despise not the works of thine
own hands. Psalm. 138.

Fourthly, We are thy image. Genesis 1.

Fifthly, the price of thy Sons blood.

Sixthly, Vessels to carry thy name^ we are they, upon whom thy name is called,
therefore deliver us, else we shall be a reproach to them that are about us,
Dan. 9.18.

Seventhly, we are the members of thy Chruch, which is the body of Christ
Jesus, our Savior, our head Romans 12.5. Ephe. 1.22.

The other reason is from the word mala, the devil as he is our enemy, so he
is Gods, and he hates us, because we are thine, and therefore labors to
draw us from thee, but save thou us, that we fall not from thee, as he has
done.

Lastly, ( us) for we may not pray for our selves alone, but for our brethren
also, that God will be good to them likewise, and though we be out of
trouble; yet because we be of the body we may truly say, deliver us, when
we pray in the behalf of our brethren that are under the cross.

Until the last enemy, death, be destroyed; 1. Cor. 15.26. We shall never be
fully freed, but have one evil or other: Therefore we are to pray for that
time, when we shall hunger and thirst no more, when God shall wipe all tears
from our eyes Reu. 7.16. at the least, if he take us not presently out of the
world, yet to keep us from the evil of the world, Ioh. 17.15. Till that day,
when there shall be, no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain. Reu.
21.4. but God shall be all in all, to us for ever.

The eighteenth Sermon.
For thine is the Kingdom, power, and glory, for ever and ever.
SAint Paul wills that all things in the Church be done orderly. 1. Cor. 14.
Which no doubt he took from Christ, whose answer to John Baptist^ Math.
3.14. was; Sic enim decet: for so it becomes, whereby we see, that both
Christ and his Apostles, have always observed a decorum or decency in all
things.

So touching prayer, our Savior Christ, to show that it is an indecent thing
for any^ having done his Petitions to break off suddenly, or to begin his
prayer without any introduction, has not only made an entrance to his prayer,
wherein he ackowledged Gods goodness, but also adds a conclusion, wherein
he confesses his Kingdom, power and glory, which the Fathers call (...) and
he took the pattern of this conclusion out of the old Testament, where King
David acknowledges, Thine O Lord is greatness, power, and glory, and victory,
and thine is the Kingdom. 1. Chron. 29.11.

In the beginning we heard, that all Prayer and Invocation, is nothing else
but a testimony, and confession. The Petitions that are severally made in this
Prayer are; confession of our weakness, want, need, and unableness to any
thing that may pleasure God. The beginning and end o^ it are, an
acknowledgement of Gods riches, power and goodness, whereby he is inclined to
supply our wants, for that he is not only willing, as a Father, but able as a
King; so that whatsoever prayer we make, whether Tekinnah or Tehillah; whether
we pray that we may receive some good thing of God, or praise him for good
received, it is a confession; and both these confessions make for Gods glory,
not only to him that was to make confession of his sin, it was said da
gloriam Deo, Ios. 7.19. but the blind man that had rec^iued a benefit by the
recovery of his sight was said, to give glory to God. Ioh. 19.24.

The beginning of this prayer was a confession of Gods goodness, the end of his
power, for unto doing of good is required not only willingness, but power and
ability.

To show that God is willing, we are taught to call upon him by the name of
Father; for any father is willing to do his child good, but with this
willingness there must concur an ability to do good, which howsoever it be
wanting in earthly fathers, yet it is not wanting in our heavenly Father: for
whereas nothing does more express power, then the name of a King, Christ
acknowledges God to be such a Father as has Kingdom, power, and glory, and
therefore is able to do us whatsoever good he will: So God himself affirms
of himself, I am a great King. Mal. 1.14. Reu. 19.16. he is called King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, so that if we will pray to God the Father, we have
cause to conceive hope that he will hear our Petitions and help us, because
he is not only willing as a Father, but able as a mighty, glorious, and
powerful Prince.

Secondly, if to God the ^onne, his dying for us does assure us, of his good
will and readiness to do us good, and his rising again from the dead, when he
has broken the iron bars does assure us of his power.

Thirdly, if to the Holy Ghost, we shall not need to doubt of his
willingness, for he is the essential love of God, which is shed in our
hearts. Romans 5. Besides he is the Spirit operative, by whom God works all
good things in the hearts of his people, and therefore able to do whatsoever
good for us: and those two, to wit, the assurance of Gods goodness, and power,
are the two parts of the anchor of our hope. Heb. 6.18.19. and the give us not
only audaciam petendi, but also fiduciam impetrandi, not only boldness to
ask, but also assurance to obtain.

To make requests in our own behalf, and acknowledgement to God of his love
and power, are both confessio^s, but the principal is the acknowledme^t of his
goodness, and Kingdom and power, for to make request to God for good things
that we want, concerns men, but to confess Gods power and goodness, is that
wherein the heavenly Angels are occupied in, they feel no want of any good
thing, and therefore they have no need to make petition to God as we on earth,
and therefore all the confession that they make, is of Gods goodness and
power, whereof they cry continually, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, the
earth is full of his glory. Isa. 6.3. the same is done by the Saints in hea^^^^
Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and
might, be unto our God for evermore. Reu. 7.12.

Whereby we learn, that we, concerning whom Christ says, That we shall
be, (...), equal, or like to the Angels Luke 20. ought while we live on
earth, not speak only with the tongue of me^ but of Angels, not only to
confess our own wants, and to crave a supply from God, but to acknowledge
Gods riches, goodness, and power.

Again the Petitions tha^ we make for our selves, is a taking; and
sanctification of his name, by ascribing Kingdom, power, and glory, unto God,
is a giving, and therefore as the Apostle says, It is a more blessed thing to
give, then to receive, Act. 29.35. So the confession of Gods goodness and
power, is a better confession, then tha^ which we make of our own weakness,
and poverty; and this is the only thing which God receives from us, for the
manifold benefits that we receive from him.

Neither is this confession and acknowledgement left to our own choice as a
thing indifferent, but we must account of it as of a necessary duty, which may
in no wise be omitted, seeing God enters into covenant, that he will hear us
and deliver us out of trouble, when we call upon him. Psalm. 50. therefore God
challenges this a duty to himself by his servants, ascribe unto the Lord
worship and strength, Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name. Psalm. 29.
All Nations whom thou have made, shall come and worship thee and glorify thy
name. Psalm. 86.9.

Therefore our Savior commends the Samaritan, because he returned to give
glory to God for the benefit received; wherein he blames the other nine, that
being cleansed of their leprosy were not thankful to God, in that behalf.
Luke 17. For God, for this cause does hear our prayers, and grant our
Petitions, that we should glorify and honor his name.

But this is not all that we ar^ to consider in these words for they are not
only (...) but (...) not only an astipulation, but an allegation, wherein as
we acknowledge Gods goodness and power, that has heard and granted our
requests, so we allege reasons, why he should not o^^ly hear us, but also
releive and he^^e us with those things that we crave for at his hands: we do
not only say hear our Petitions, for so shall thou show thy self to be a
King, but a mighty and glorious King, and we for our parts shall acknowledge
the same; but we use this confession as a reason, why our former requests are
to be granted; for it is in effect as much as if we should say; Forgive thou
our sins: deliver thou us from evil: hallowed be thy Name: thy Kingdom
come, For Kingdom, power, and glory is thine and not ours.

The reason why we would have our requests granted is drawn from God himself
in two respects: first that we may by this humble confession make our selves
capable of the graces of God, which do not descend to any but those that are of
an humble spirit, For he gives grace to the humble, 1. Pet. 5.

If we would have our desires granted, because it is the nature of God to be
good and gracious; to be of power, to do what he will for the good of his
people, we must desire him to be gracious, propter semit-ipsum. Isa. 43.25.
Our motive unto God must be, For thy loving mercy and thy truths sake. Psalm.
115.1. Help us for the glory of thy Name, deliver us, be merciful to our
sins, for thy Names sake. Psalm. 79.9. By these motives we must provoke and
stir up God to hear us. This is the difference that is betwixt the prayers
of profane men, and those that are sanctified, Heathen and profane men refer
all to their own glory, so says Nabuchadnezar, Is not this great Babell,
which I have built by my great power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Dan.
4.30. Such a man thinks himself to be absolute Lord, and will say, Who is
the Lord over us? Psalm. 12. Therefore are they called the sons of Beliall: But
the Patriarchs that were sanctified frame their prayers otherwise: Jacob
acknowledged, I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies. Genesis 32. by which
humility he made himself capable of mercy. To us belongs shame (says
Daniel, chap. 9.) but to thee belongs compassion and forgiveness, though we
have offended; So Christ himself in this place does teach his Disciples to
pray, that God will give them the things they desire, not for any thing in
themselves, but for his names sake: for thine is Kingdom power, and glory,
whereby we perceive that humility is the means to obtain at Gods hands, our
suits.

The other respect is in regard of God, for he makes his covenant with us,
that he will be our God and we his people, And when the Prophet stirs up the
faithful, To worship the Lord, and to fall down before the Lord our maker: he
adds this as a reason: For he is the Lord our God, and we are his people,
and the sheep of his pasture. Psalm. 95. Wherefore one says Commemoratio, est
quoeda^ necessitas exaudiendi nos, quia nos ipsius sumus, ipse noster est: It
is a necessary motive to God to hear us, because we are his, and he ours.

Therefore in all the prayers and Psalms which the Saints of God make, they
ground their Petitions upon this: in regard of God the Father who is the
Creator, they say, We are thy workmanship created by thee, therefore despise
not the works of thy own hands. Psalm. 138. besides we are the likeness of
Gods image, Genesis 1. therefore suffer not thine own image to be defaced in us,
but repair it.

Secondly, in regard of Christ, We are the price of Christ's blood. Empti estis
pretio, 1. Cor. 6. Ye are bought with a price, therefore suffer not so great a
price to be lost, but deliver us, and save us. Again, we carry his name, for
as he is Christ's, so we are of him called Christians: seeing therefore that
his name is called upon us. Dan. 9.19. be gracious to us, and grant our
requests.

Thirdly, in respect of the holy Spirit, the breath of his Spirit is in our
nostrels, which is the breath of life which God breathed in us at our creation,
Genesis 2.7. Again, the same Spirit is to us an holy Spirit, and sanctifies us,
we are not only Vaginae spiritus viuentis, the sheathes of the living Spirit;
but Templa Spiritus sancti: the Temples of the holy Spirit, 1. Cor. 6.19. and
therefore for his sake we are to entreat him to be gracious to us.

We are Gods kingdom, and therefore it belongs to him to seek our good: all
the world is his kingdom by right of inheritance; but we that are his Church,
are his kingdom by right of purchase: we are (...), 1. Pet. 2.9. a people
peculiar, or gotten by purchase, he has redeemed us to be (...), Tit. 2.14. A
peculiar people, and the price whereby we are purchased, is his own blood. 1.
Pet. 1 Act. 20. he says, He will be our God, and we his people, Leuit. 26. He
will be our Father, and we his Children, 2. Cor. 6. he our Lord, and we his
servants: Therefore we may challenge at his hands that favor which Kings
vouchsafe to their subjects, which Fathers show to their children: that is, to
love them, to defend them, and to wish them all the good things they need.

If he have purchased us to himself by his blood, then we pertain to him, and
we may say to him as his Disciples said to Christ. Mark. 4.38. Carest thou not
for us that pertain to thee, but suffer us to perish?

These words, Kingdom, Power, and Glory, being jointly considered, are a
representation of the Trinity.

As Moses, speaking of the Author of our creation, reckons up the name of God
three times, Genesis 1.27. as in the blessings of the law, the name of God is
there repeated, Numb. 6.6. and as the Angels cry there, Holy, Holy, Holy, Isai.
6. to teach that there are three persons in the Godhead, which the Heathen
themselves have compassed; So Christ in the new Testament, does by these words,
Kingdom, Power, and Glory, signify those three persons, which afterward he
expresses, by the name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Math. 28.

If we consider them severally, although they may all be ascribed to any person
of the Deity, yet the Kingdom is to be ascribed unto Christ, 1. Cor. 15.35.
Power to the Holy Ghost, Romans 15.13.19. and Glory to the Father, Romans 6.4. that
we setting our selves in Christ's Kingdom, that is, his Church, by the power
of the Holy Ghost, may be partakers of that glory which God the Father has
prepared for us.

Again, these words are set to distinguish Gods Kingdom from earthly
kingdoms. Each King has not power, as the King of Israel says: If the Lord
do not succor thee, how can I help thee? 2. Reg. 6. 21. But Gods kingdom is
a Kingdom of power.

Secondly, there are Kingdoms of Might, but not of Glory: such was the
Kingdom of David, he had a kingdom of might, but not of Glory: for he spent
all his time in troubles; but the kingdom of Solomon his son, was both a
powerful and a Glorious kingdom, and there was a figure of the perfect
Kingdom of Christ.

Wherefore we are taught by these words, that as kingdom is the Lords, so he
has not only a kingdom of power, whereby he is a^le to defend, but of
glory, whereby he can also reward his servants and subjects: Moses desired of
God, that he would show him his glory, Exodus 33. But he that is of Christ's
kingdom, shall see the glory which Christ had from the beginning with the
Father, Ioh. 17, 21.

To consider these words severally: upon these words of the prophet: Knit my
heart unto thee, Psalm. 86. one says: Religio dicitur a religando: as there is
a mutual bond between the King and his people: so is there between God and
us. The Kings duty is to defend his subjects from injury and wrong, and to
bestow on them all manner of benefits. The duty of subjects is to be dutiful,
and yield all ready service to their Prince: so God for his part is ready, not
only to defend us from all danger, but to bestow all good things upon us: and
therefore we are bound to be religious and dutiful to him, as to our King and
Sovereign: we must not only love him as a Father, but fear him, as our Lord
and King, Math. 1.6. And this mixture shall keep us in the way of salvation,
we shall neither too much despair, nor presume of his goodness; this fear
we must testify both by a reverend regard of his law, and of his officers. He
is no good subject that rebelleth against the laws of his Prince; no more are
we, when no more can be gotten at our hands, but by the precepts of men, Esa.
29. when the statutes of Omri are kept for fear of temporal punishment, Mich.
6. and the laws of God are had in no price: then it is a sign that we are
not so dutiful and loyal to our heavenly Prince, as we ought to be.

Secondly, we must testify our fear of God, by a reverend regard of his
Prophets and Priests, which are the Ministers and Officers in his kingdom.
When the Jews mocked the messengers of God, and mis-vsed his Prophets, they
showed their contempt of God himself; and therefore the wrath of the Lord
arose against that people, 2. Chron. 36.16. Contrariwise, if we have an
honorable conceit of them, and receive them as the Angels of God, Gal. 4. then
we show our selves to be dutiful vassals to our heavenly Lord and King.

Next, for power, as S. Peter says, God is able both to respect the righteous,
and to show vengeance upon the wicked, 2. Pet. 2.9. So whether we respect the
power of his grace inward, whereby he works all good things in the hearts of
his people, or the outward power, whereby he defends them from evil: whether
it be the power of his holy Spirit, or of his right hand, we must confess
with the Saints, that all power, and strength, and might belongs to God, Reu.
7. And therefore whatsoever power we have, whether inward or outward, we must
employ it all in his service. Fortitudinem meam ad t^ seruo: I will keep my
strength, or reserve it unto thee, Psalm. 59.9. So we must not spend our
strength in thoughts of vanity, but employ it to his use, and to the setting
forth of his glory, to whom only all power belongs.

Thirdly, Christ teaches us to ascribe all glory to God, that whatsoever
praise or commendation does come unto us by any thing we do, we should make
a surrender of it to God, to whom all glory is due, and say with the Church,
Non nobis Domine, etc. Not unto us o Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give
all glory, Psa. 115. For as the Prophet says: The Church is a place wherein
the voice of gladness is heard, and the voice of them that sing, Praise the
Lord of Hosts, for he is loving, and his mercy endures for ever, Ier. 33.11.

The faithful are taught to return all glory to God, which is given to them.
God himself says, Gloriam meam alteri non dabo. Isa. 42. If he gives his
glory to any other, it is to such as deserve it, and have all power of
themselves; but there is no creature which has any power, but what is given of
God, and therefore God does by right reserve his glory to himself, and we
ought willingly yield all glory to him alone, because he promises, them that
honor me, I will honor. 1. Sam. 2. that we glorifying him here with a
verbal glory, we may be glorified of him with a real glory, when he comes
to judge the world, 2 Thessalonians. 1.12. and with an exceeding weight of glory, 2.
Cor. 4.

But yet we do not fully see wherein the glorious Kingdom of God differs
from the kingdoms of this world: for both power and glory may be ascribed to an
earthly Prince; and it is certain, that Solomon had them all: and therefore as
he is distinguished from earthly Fathers, for that he is said to be in
heaven: so he differs from earthly Kings, in that his Kingdom is said, to
endure for ever and ever.

There is another difference employed in the Article (...) earthly Princes have
a Kingdom, a Kingdom of power, and a certane glory in this world, but it is
not the Kingdom.

This prepositiue Article imports two things, a Generality and a superiority:
for the first point, he that has but a piece of the earth to bear rule in, is
not an universal King; but God is King over all the earth, Psalm. 47. Therefore
if we be so careful to behave our selves a right in the presence of an earthly
King, whose Kingdom is limited within certain bounds, which if he exceed, he
is no more King; much more ought we to praise and glorify him, whose Kingdom
is universal.

Secondly, for the superiority of Gods kingdom, there are a great number of
Kings on earth: but of this Kingdom it is said: All Kings shall fall down
hefore him, all Nations shall worship him, Psa. 72. For he is said to be King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Reu. 19.

Touching the other difference signified by the word ( for ever.) Though a man
had all the earth for his Kingdom, yet it could not be a Kingdom for ever
and ever: no Prince ever reigned the whole age of a man, and so long time as a
man naturally may live, which the Philosophers say, is the space of an hundred
years; but his kingdom indures not only the age of a man, but In seculum,
For ever: Thy Kingdom, Power, and Glory endures for ever and ever, whereas
man's Kingdom, Power, and Glory, lasts but a few years, and sometimes but a
few days.

Iesabel had a glorious kingdom, but within a few years it was said of her:
vbi est illa Iezabel? 2. Reg. 10. when it was fulfilled which the Prophet
Jeremiah foretold. 13.28. Tell the King and Queen: Humble your selves, for
your dignity shall be taken away, and the crown of your glory shall fall
down. And the like is the greatness of all earthly Kingdoms: and therefore
Christ teaches us to direct our Petitions to him, whose kingdom is
everlasting, Psa. 145. whose power endures for ever and ever: not to a mortal
King, but to God, Qui solus habet, etc. which only has imortality, 1. Tim. 6.
who being himself an everlasting King, and incorruptible, is able to bestow
upon us both a Crown, 1. Pet. 5. and an Inheritance incorruptible, and that
fades not, 1. Pet. 1.4. This is our hope, and the perfection of our desires:
and therefore, as the Creed has his period in Life everlasting, so last of all
we are taught to pray for glory everlasting.

The nineteenth Sermon.
Amen.
WE are now come to the last word of the Lords Prayer, the power and efficacy
whereof at this time is to be considered: for there is in it, every way, matter
worthy of our consideration; and we cannot perfectly accomplish our duty in
prayer, except we understand this word aright: For after we have laid out our
several petitions to God, and made our allegation to God, why we desire to be
respected by him; namely because we are of his Kingdom, and Jurisdiction, for
that we have no power of our selves to do any thing. Lastly, because that we
confess, that all glory is to be ascribed to him; the^ it remains, that we
desire of God, that those petitions and allegations made by us, may by him be
ratified, which is done in the word Amen.

Wherein the ancient Writers consider two things: First, Jerome says, it is
Sygnaculum consensus nostri, that by it we acknowledge that whatsoever we can
desire is contained in this form of prayer.

Secondly, as S. Cyprian says, it is votum desiderij nostri, that as we allow
of this form of prayer, and the petitions made therein: so we desire, that it
will please God to perform, and accomplish them: so in this word is employed
the consent of our mind to allow of the things which we are taught to pray for
in this prayer: and secondly, the desire of our heart, for the obtaining of the
same. The one is the seal of our faith, in as much as we acknowledge those
things to be true. The other is the Seal of our Love, whereby we testify our
desire for the accomplishment of these petitions. The one is referred to Truth,
the other to the feruency of the Spirit: in which two things, as our Savior
affirms, Ioh. 4.24. the right worship of God consists: concerning which
word, to be added in the end of our supplications, there is an absolute
commanden^, not only in the old Testament, let all the people say, Amen. 1.
Chron. 16.33. Psa. 106. but in the New, as appears by S. Paul's question, 1.
Cor. 14.16. who to show the necessity of this word, he says: How shall the
unlearned say Amen to thy thanksgiving? for indeed it concerns every one, as
he will answer the transgressio^ of decet omnis populus, all the people shall
say: which is a flat commandment, not to be omitted, to add this word to
their prayer. The word it self is originally Hebrew, but used by the
Evangelists, and retained still in every language and tongue, without
translation or alteration, either in Greek, Latin, or any other. The reason
of the retaining of it is, that it might appear, that the Synagogue of the
children of Israel, and the true congregation of the Church of Christ,
gathered out of all nations, is but one mystical body; whereof Christ is the
head: the same we are given to understand, by this, that the Spirit of Adoption
is said to cry not only Abba, in the hearts of the Jews, but also (...) and
Father, in the hearts of the Gentiles Romans 8.20. Therefore our Savior would
not have his name to be either entirely Hebrew, as Jesus, Messiah, or entirely
Greek, as (...), but the one in Hebrew, the other in Greek, Jesus Christ, to
show that he is our peace, who of two has made one, that has reconciled us
both in one body, and that he is the corner stone, whereby the Church,
consisting both of Jews and Gentiles, is coupled together, and grows to be
one holy Temple, to the Lord. Ephe. 2.14. Though they be as the Apostle
speaks, Congregatio primogenitorum, Heb. 12.23. yet we are the Church of God,
as well as they, we, I say, that are borne after them: we, that are of the
Gentiles, have none other law for our direction, then that which the Jews had,
as the Apostle says, I write no new commandment, but an old commandment,
which you have heard from the beginning, 1. Ioh. 2.7. We have no other faith,
but as the Apostle says, Eundem spiritum fidei habentes; 2. Cor. 4. the same
grace is offered to us, that was offered to the Fathers, for we believe to be
saved by the faith of Jesus Christ, as well as they, Act. 15.11. and we have no
other Sacraments then those which the Jews had, of whom Saint Paul says, They
all did eat the same spiritual meat, and drank the same Spiritual drink.
1. Cor. 10. and therefore it is meet likewise, that we should make the same
prayer that they made: and indeed there is no Petition in the Lords prayer,
which is not found in the old Testament, used by the Church of the Jews, For,
that which the Prophet prays. Psa. 57.6. Lift up thy self o God above the
heavens, and thy glory above all the earth. Psalm. 67. That thy way may be
known upon earth, etc, is nothing else, but the hallowing of Gods Name.

Secondly, Remember me o God that I may see the felicity of thy chosen. Psalm.
106. It is nothing else but an exposition of the second Petition, where we
pray, thy Kingdom come.

Thirdly, those words of the Prophet. Psalm. 143. Teach me to do the thing that
pleases thee, is a full comprehension of the third Petition, where we desire
that his will be done.

Fourthly, the eyes of all things look upon thee, and thou give them meat
in due season. Psalm. 145. and the prayer of Salomo^. Pro. 30. Give me not
poverty, nor riches, but feed me with food meet, is a full expressing of the
fourth Petition.

Fifthly, My misdeeds prevail against me; ^ be merciful to our sins. Psalm.
65.3. is a sum of the fifth petition, and the condition of this Petition is
found. Psalm. 7. Wherein the Prophet says, If I have done any such thing, or if
there be any wickedness in my hands; If I have rewarded evil to him that dwelt
freindly with me (yea I have delivered him that without a cause was my enemy)
then let my enemy persecute my soul; whereby he desires no otherwise to be
forgiven of God, then as he does forgive his brother.

Sixthly, that which the Prophet prays. Psalm. 119.37, Turn away my eyes, that
they behold not vanity, and Psalm. 143. Set a watch before my mouth, and keep
the door of my lips, is that which Christ teaches us to pray, Lead us not into
temptation.

Seventhly, redeem Israel from all trouble, Psalm. 25.20. in effect is as much
as Deliver them from all evil which is the seventh Petition.

Lastly, look what reason Christ teaches us to use here, the same does Dani^
use. 1. Chron. 29.

Therefore having the same prayer that the Jews had, it is meet that we
should have the same conclusion that they had, and the same is, they said Amen,
and so do we.

Touching the use of this word, it is found in Scriptures to have two seats or
places, and accordingly two several expositions, to wit in the beginning, and
in the end, before, and behind. In the beginning as in the doctrine of the
Sacrament of Baptism, concerning which our Savior says, Amen, Amen. Except a
man be borne of the water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. Ioh. 3. And touching the Sacrament of the holy Eucharist,
verily, verily, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you. Ioh. 6.33. And touching the effect of prayer,
Christ says also, Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye ask the
Father in my name, he will give it you. Ioh. 16.

In those places, the word ( Amen) is used, and thereby our Savior labors
to express the truth of that which he does reach. In the end likewise it is
said, as Psalm. 41.13. Psalm. 72. Psalm. 87.50. Praised be the Lord for evermore.
Amen, Amen. And in the new Testament, when the Apostle shows, That of the
Jews according to the flesh came Christ, who is over all, God, blessed for
ever. Amen. Romans 9.5. Here the word is used, and set behind, to signify, that
we desire that that may be performed, which God before by his Amen has
affirmed to be true. Therefore David, having received promise from the Lord, by
the hand of Nathan says, Let the thing that thou have promised be Amen. Let
there be an accomplishment of the same. 1. Chro. 17.25. So when the Prophet
Hananiah, had prophesied in the name of the Lord. I have broken the yoke of the
King of Babell, and after two years will I bring again, into this place, all
the ornaments of the house of the Lord: Jeremy the Prophet said, Amen, the Lord
do as thou have said, Ier. 28.6.

As in the beginning it ratifieth the truth of Gods promise, so being set in
the end, it signifies the desire of our hearts for the accomplishment of the
same, and this desire always follows, and is grounded upon the promise of
God, and the truth thereof: In which regard the Prophet says: Remember me o
Lord concerning thy word, wherein thou causest me to put my trust. Psalm. 119.
and therefore, to Christ's Amen, in the beginning, where he promises, Verily,
verily, whatsoever ye ask in my name. Ioh. 16. we may boldly add our Amen in
the end, that his Amen may be performed; and by right do we ground our Amen
upon Gods Amen; for he is called Amen, that is truth, Es. 65.16. So the Apostle
expresses it, when speaking of Jesus Christ, he says: Thus says Amen, the
faithful and true witness. Reu. 3.14.

Therefore S. Paul says of Christ, that in him all the promises are made to
us, yea, in the beginning, and Amen, to us in regard of the certain
accomplishment. 2. Cor. 1.

The reason of our Amen is, because not only faith, but trust and confidence
does proceed from the truth of God: fides, has relation to Gods truth, but
fiducia or confidence is settled upon Gods faithfulness, and both are affirmed
of God.

Moses says of God that he is, verus and fidelis, Deuteronomy. 32. and Esaias The Lord
is faithful, Esa. 49.7.8. Paul in the new Testament, he is faithful that
promised. Heb. 10. He deemed him faithful that promised Heb. 11. For there are
two things required in faithfulness, without the which a man cannot be said to
be faithful: the one is ability, of which Abraham doubted not of Gods
faithfulness, being fully persuaded, That what he promised he was able to
perform. Romans 4.21^ the other is will and readiness to do, touching which the
Apostle says, Faithful is he that called you, et ipse faciet. 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.

These are the parts of faithfulness, and they are both found in God, and
therefore not only God the Father is true, but Christ is said to be the truth,
Ioh. 14. and the holy Ghost is called the Spirit of truth. 1. Ioh. 5.6. So that
albeit that me^ deal so untruly that it is verified of the^; all men are
liars, Romans 3. Yet God abides faithful, and cannot deny himself. 2. Tim. 2.13.

So much the Prophet teaches when he says; the mountains shall be removed,
but the thing which he has spoken shall not fail. Esa. 58. And our Savior
says, Heaven and earth shall pass, but one jot of my word shall not pass.
Mat. 5.18. that is in regard of his power and ability.

For the other part of his faithfulness, which is his will and readiness, he
is said to be a faithful Creator, that will have care of the souls committed
to him. 1. Pet. 5. and to this purpose serves that which S. John affirms.
Behold what love the Father has showed us, that we should be Sons of God. 1.
Ioh. 3.

There is in God that faithfulness that is in a mother toward her children,
for as a woman cannot but pity her own child, and the son of her womb, so the
Lord will not forget his own people, Isa. 45.15. As his arm is not shortened
but is still able to help; so his affection toward us is such, that he is
most willing to help.

In this regard, as has been observed, he is both a King and a Father, the
one showing his power, the other his willlingnes and goodwill toward us; upon
both these we do ground our Amen, and do learn, not only, Credere vcro,
believe God which is true, but fidere fideli, trust him which is faithful,
upon this faithfulness we may ground alour Petitions, if we seek forgiveness
of our trespasses, as Christ teaches us to pray, then God is faithful to
forgive us our sins, 1. Ioh 1. If we will pray against tentation, the Apostle
says, God is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are
able to bear. 1. Cor. 10. If to be delivered from evil, which is the last
Petition: the Apostle tells us, The Lord is faithful, and will stablish us, and
keep us from all evil. 2 Thessalonians. 3.

Thus we see, both what is our Amen, and whereupon it is grounded.

The last thing is, the right saying of this word, which is a thing to be
inquired, for the Apostle as though he took care for the right saying of it,
says, How shall the unlearned say Amen? 1. Cor. 14.16. Teaching us, that it is
not enough to say Amen, vnles^e it be said in right form and manner.

The right saying is reduced to four things: First, that as the Apostle says;
We pray with the Spirit. 1, Cor. 14. For of the four evil Amens which the
Hebrews note, one is, when our Amen does not come from an earnest desire, We
must power out our hearts before him. Psalm. 62.8. So our Amen must come from
the heart: we must be so disposed, that we may say: As the Heart brayeth for
the rivers of waters, so thirsts my soul after thee o God. Psalm. 42.1. My
soul thirsts for thee, and my flesh longs for thee in a barren and dry
land where no water is. Psalm. 63. without this Amen, our Amen is exanime, a
dead Amen.

Secondly, a man may desire a false thing, so did the Prophet give his Amen to
the false prophecy of Hannaniah. Iere. 28. but we must be careful that it be
true that we pray for, therefore the Apostle says, He will not pray with the
Spirit only, but with his understanding also. 1. Cor. 14.25. So our Savior
tells us, We must worship God, not in Spirit only, but in Spirit and Truth: That
i^, we must have understanding that our Petitions be true and agreeable to
Gods will. Ioh. 4. for as in thanksgiving it is requisite, that we sing praise
with understanding., Psa. 47. So the like must be done in prayer; they are both
good; both to pray with the Spirit and with the mind, therefore it is better to
pray with both then with but one alone. Therefore it is a marvel that any
should think it enough to pray with the Spirit, though they do not know in
their mind what they pray for, but pray in an unknown tongue, as the Church
of Rome does; seeing the Apostle says: He will pray both with the Spirit and
with the understanding. 1-Cor. 14.15. and this understanding is not of the
words only, but of the matter that we pray for.

We may understand the words wherein the prayer is made, and yet not understand
the thing that is prayed for.

The sons of Zebedee prayed in their own Language, and yet our Savior tells
them, Ye know not what ye ask.

The Eunuch that was reading the Prophet Esaias, no doubt, understood the
language of the Prophet; and yet when Philip asked him: Understand thou what
thou read? he answered, how can I, except I had a guide? Act. 8.31.
Therefore we must pray, not only Intelligenter, but Scienter: we must know
what we ask, we must be careful, that whatsoever we ask, be according to
his will: for then may we be assured, that he will hear us, 1. Ioh. 5. we
must ask in Christ's name. Ioh. 16.

Lastly, to a good end: for otherways our prayers shall not be heard: Ye
ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, James. 4. But this is not all
that is required, that we may pray with the Mind and Vnderstanding^ for we
must intend the thing that we pray for with our heart, that the Lord may not
have cause to complain of us, as of the Jews, that honored him with their
lips, while their heart was far from him. Isa. 29.14. That we may with more
attention of heart address our selves to pray, our Savior bids us to gather
our selves from all things that may carry away, or distract our minds, and to
enter into our chamber, there to pray to our Father, which is in Heaven, Mat.
6.6. This did not S. Peter observe, when he prayed: Master, let us make here
three Tabernacles: and therefore the Evangelist says: He knew not what he
said, Luke 9.33.

Thirdly, that we may say Amen aright, we must not only understand in our mind,
and desire in our spirit the thing that we pray for, but must confidently look
for the performance of that we desire: for unto this confidence there is a
promise made on Gods part, of who^ the Prophet says: That the Lord is nigh to
all that call upon him in truth, Psa. 145. that is, in faith and confidence,
that they shall obtain the thing that they pray for: therefore our Savior
says: Whatsoever ye pray for believe, and it shall be done, Mar. 11.24. and
the Apostle says: If we will obtain our requests, we must ask in faith,
without wavering: or else we shall be like the waves of the sea, that are
tossed with the wind, and carried a^out with violence, Iam. 1.6. And we shall
not need to doubt, but we shall be heard, if we pray in a right manner, if we
pray for a right end, that we may say: Tua est gloria.

This confidence and trust has certain Limitations: first, we may assure our
selves, that God will grant our requests, if it be expedient for us: and
therefore we must not limit God, nor appoint him his time, but as the Psalmist
says: We must direct our prayers early to him, and wait for his pleasure, Psa.
5.3. We must tarry our Lords leisure, Psalm, 27.

Secondly, though he grant not the same thing we desire, yet he will grant us
a better. The Apostle prayed Christ, that the prick in the flesh, the messenger
of Satan, might be taken from him: but he had another answer: My grace is
sufficient for thee, that was better, then if God had said, apage Satanas, 2.
Cor 12. For if we pray to God in such manner and sort as he requires, we may
assure our selves, our prayers shall not return into our own bosoms, Psa.
35.3. But he will either grant the thing we desire, or else that which shall
be better for us.

Fourthly, that our Amen be indivisible, that is, we must say Amen to every
Petition of the Lords prayer: for naturally our corruption is such, that we
can be content to desire the accomplishme^t of some of them, but not of others:
we do willingly say Amen to Thy Kingdom come; but as for Hallowed be thy name,
we give no Amen to that, as appears by the whole course of our life, which is
nothing else but a profaning and polluting of Gods most glorious and fearful
Name.

We would gladly pray for daily bread, but as for doing of Gods will, and
obeying his commandments, we agree not to that.

We like well of the last Petition, Deliver us from evil, but as for that
goes before it, Lead us not into temptation, we will not subscribe to that: for
we do seek by all means to tempt our selves, and to draw our selves unto
sin.

We can be content to pray, that he will forgive us our trespasses, but as for
the condition, which is, the forgiving of those that trespass against us, we
give no Amen to that, as is clear by the wrathful and revenging spirit that
carries most men into all manner of outrages, while they will not learn to
put up wrong, as they are taught by Gods word. Therefore in regard of this
Petition, and the condition annexed, our Savior says: Take heed ye say Amen
to this entirely: except ye forgive one another, your heavenly Father will not
forgive you. Mat. 6.15.

Therefore we must have a care as well to hallow Gods name in this life, as to
be partakers of his Kingdom in the life to come: we must labor as well for
the fulfilling of his will, as for the obtaining of daly bread.

If we will be freed from evil, which is the effect of sin, we must take heed
that we do not tempt our selves; and as we would be forgiven of God, so we
must forgive our brethren.

Lastly, we must say Amen to the reason which our Savior uses in the
conclusion of the prayer. As the Apostle says: How shall the unlearned say
Amen to thy thanksgiving? 1. Cor. 14. For there are many that will say with
the Leapers, Jesus master, have mercy upon us: but being cleansed, few, or
none will return to give GOD thanks, and to say as our Savior teaches:
Thine is Kingdom, Power and Glory, Luke 17. We must not only pray to him
when we lie sick upon our beds, that it would please him, to comfort us,
and to make our bed in our sickness, Psa. 41.3. but to sing praises to him
when he saves us from adversity, and delivers us out of our enemies hands,
Psa. 106.129. Our Haleluiah must be sou^ded as loud as Hosanna. The Saints in
Heaven have no other prayer but Thanksgiving; they cry Amen, Blessing, and
Glory, and Wisdom, and Honor, and Power, be to God, Reu. 7.12. All their song
is Amen, Haleluiah, Reu. 19.4.

Therefore if we will come where they are, we must sound out the pra^s^s of
God, as they do; If we will be like the heavenly Angels, we must speak with
the tongue of Angels; If we say Amen to his praise and honor, he will ratify
his word toward us; so that his promise to us, shall be Yea, and Amen.

Laus Deo perennis.

Amen.

FINIS.

