THREE SERMONS, VIZ. The Waking Sleeper, The Ministerial Husbandry, The
Discovery of the Heart.


Preached and published By SAM. CROOK.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop under Saint Augustines gate. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR JAMES LANCASTER Knight, my singular good friend.
SIR,
THese being the days fortold by our blessed Savior, wherein men as in the
days of Noah and Lot, Luke 17.26. etc.
do eat and drink, buy and build, and plant, etc. unmindful of him, who is
ready to come as a thief in the night, Revel. 16.15.
at what time he only shall be blessed, that watches and keeps close about
him the wedding garments of faith and holiness: J have endeavored in the
opening and publishing of this part of holy truth, to awaken and stir up my
self and others, to prepare and wait for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And because this Scripture (framed rather for an Anatomy of the Church in her
several members, then, as some have supposed, for an History of her general
estate according to periods of time) has concluded al, even the elect in part,
under this common disease of spiritual drowzinesse; whereby it may come to
pass, that on the one side the Godly may be discouraged for their partaking
with the wicked, and on the other side the wicked may be emboldned, because
they see Gods children charged with the same corruption, in which they
fearelesly please themselves: I have therefore further intended to take forth
the precious from the vile; Ier. 15.19.
by distinguishing the waking Sleeper, that is, the weak humbled Christian,
who even in sleeping waketh, from the sleeping waker, that is, the presuming
Hypocrite, who seeming to be awake, is fast, yea dead asleep.

J have made bold to offer this my poor labor to the light under the shadow
and shelter of your worthy name.

First, in regard of that light you hold forth of good example, Iam. 1.27.
in the practice of that pure religion and undefiled before God even the
Father, which approves it self by your visiting of so many fatherles and
widows in their affliction; a grace that infallibly accompanies salvation,
Heb. 6 9.
and makes you one of those few who do stop the mouth of Popish iniquity,
blaspheming our doctrine, and slandering our Professors as abhorring from good
works.

Secondly, in regard of many particular bonds and coards of love, whereby you
have tied me in thankfulness unto your self; whereof therefore J am
desirous, there should be extant this public, and (if it may be) perpetual
acknowledgement.

And so, wishing that this may be the beginning not of one, but of many good
years unto you, until it shall please God to translate you to datelesse and
boundless life, I commend you to his grace, who is not unrighteous that he
should forget your work and labor of love, Heb. 6.10.
which you have showed to his Name, in that you have ministered unto the Saints,
and do minister; and rest.

Wrington Summers. Febr. 8. 1615. Your Worships in the Lord Jesus, to be
commanded, Sam. Crook.

THE WAKING SLEEPER.
CANT. 5.2. I sleep, but mine heart waketh.


OF this excellent part of Scripture the Author is the Holy Ghost, moving the
heart, and guiding the pen of that wise and peaceful King, called Solomon, as
a tipe of him that should be the Prince of peace; Iedidiah, 1. Chron. 22.9.
because the Lord loved him; Lemuel, as belonging to the Lord. Esa. 9.6. 2.
Sam. 12.25.
The matter, Prou. 31.1.
is the mutual and spiritual love between Christ, and the Church militant:
The form is threefold, to wit, a Song, a Dialogue, an Allegory from the
condition and affection of persons espoused or affianced: The End and use, to
set forth the love and respect that is in Christ to us ward, and ought to be
in us toward him, in this condition and time of espousals, waiting for the
blessed consummation, our glorious conjunction with him at his second coming.

Whatsoever is here spoken of the Church, the spouse of Christ, in general,
agrees to every faithful soul in particular; as to a part of that whole
body, whereof Christ is the head and Savior: and such a part, as partaketh
with the whole, not only in nature, but also in figure and fashion; and as a
model of that universal spouse of Christ, is also it self a special and
proper spouse, truly affianced unto the Lord.

Thus as the whole Church, so every faithful Soul, is Christ's sister (and
soror and coniux) as Sarah to Abraham, Cant. 4.9.10. Gene. 20.12.
being by Regeneration the daughter of his Father, Cant. 8.1.
but not the daughter of his Mother as he by Incarnation is her Brother, the
son of her Mother (viz. humane nature) but not the Son of her father.

As in the whole Church, so in every faithful soul Christ sees and
acknowledges a time of love, Ezekiel. 16.8.
wherein he swears unto her, and enters into covenant with her, so hand
fasting her unto himself, and himself unto her, and that in faithfulness.
Hos. 2.20.


As the whole Church, so every faithful Soul is black, but comely: Mara,
Cant. 1.4. Ruth. 1.20.
in regard of infirmities and afflictions, but Naomi in regard of graces. Yea,
fresh as the morning, fair as the Moon, Cant. 6.9.
pure as the Sun, Mal. 4.2.
as the Sun of righteousness, Christ himself; who, with himself, Ezekiel.
16.14. Psalm. 50.2.
gives his own perfect beauty unto his spouse, so making Sion the perfection
of beauty. And no less every daughter of Sion, every faithful Soul; but in
a threefold proportion. The first of Justification, where by the whole
righteousness of our humane nature in Christ being imputed unto us, we are
made the righteousness of God in him. 2. Cor. 5.21.
The second of Sanctification, whereby we are made clean, Job. 13.10. 1.
These. 5.23. Iam. 1.4.
whole, but not wholly, throughout, but not thoroughly, and so perfect in the
parts of beauty, not in the degrees. Ephe. 5.27.
The third of Glorification, whereby all spots and wrinkles being taken away,
w^ shall one day be perfectly holy and without blame, and as our Lord, Hebr.
7.26.
separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens.

This last perfection we have now only in taste, and in expectation: Of the
former two the Scripture speaks more directly and more frequently; and namely
in this Song, wherein the Church, or faithful soul, is acknowledged by Christ
to be the fairest among women, Cont. 1.7.
and in comparison of others, as the Lilie among the Thorn, Cant. 2.2. Cant.
2.14. and 4.7. Cant. 7.6.
sweet of voice, and comely of visage, yea all fair and no spot, and in a
word abundantly delectable.

Which if we understand of imputed righteousness, applied to us from Christ,
there needs no qualification: but if of righteousness imparted to us, and
inherent in us, Psalm. 119.
it shows that we have respect to all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.176.
not that we do not sometimes go astray; and that we aim and endeavor
after perfection, Ph^l. 3.12, 13.
not that we have already attained thereto.

For this cause the Church in the entrance of this Song, does as well confess
her self black, Cant. 1.4.
as avouch her self comely: and in these words, no less complains of the
drowsinesse of her flesh, then rejoices in the wakefulnesse of her spirit. I
sleep, but mine heart waketh.

For being to set before us a sorrowful type of her own unkind and sinful
sluggishnesse, denying entertainment to her loving Savior, and of the
chastisement inflicted on her for her amendment, she first tells us in what
state she was, when her Lord made tender of love unto her; to wit partly
sleeping, and partly waking. A state mixed or compounded, and that of
contraries; but with distinction, as may seem, of the subjects wherein they
are. I sleep, that is my natural, or unregenerate part: but mine heart
waketh, that is, the spiritual or regenerate part in me. Not that some one
created part is in a Christian, either regenerate or corrupt, some other not:
but because the whole man, and every part, is partly sanctified, and partly
sinful, partly spirit and partly flesh. Hereupon it is truly said I sleep;
that is, mine whole nature is subject to infirmity through sin; or (as Romans
7.18) in me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing: and as truly, mine
heart waketh, that is, there is in me an hidden seed of God, 1. Ioh. 3.
a principle of Grace, an inner man, that suffers me not to consent to sin,
but rowseth me up, and armeth me against it; Romans 7.22.
so that it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. Romans 7.20.
In a word, the whole nature of man is as the air, to wit a receptacle, first
by creation of light alone without darkness, that is of grace without sin:
since the fall, of darkness alone without light, sin without grace: after
conversion, of a twylight, light and darkness, grace and sin, entermingled
throughout, and iustling at one another; G^l. 5.17. Prou. 4.18. 2. Sam. 3.1.
but grace (as the morning light, or as the house of David) waxing stronger,
and corruption weaker: Finally in Heaven, as in Paradise, shall be no night,
no sin at all, but a perpetual Sunshine of grace, without so much as any
mist or cloud of corruption.

The sum then is, that in this world the state of the Church, and of every
member of it, is a sleepie watchfulness, or a waking sleepiness, that is, a
mixture of sleep and waking, sin and grace, flesh and spirit. Which that we
may duly consider of, let us sever them, and begin with the former.

I sleep.
THe Church confessing that she sleeps, teaches us,

First that we all, as many as are members of this body, are apt to sleep,
that is, to be surprised with the infirmity of the flesh, notwithstanding the
readiness of the spirit. Matthew. 26.41.
The spirit indeed is ready (says our Savior of his drooping and drowsy
Disciples) but the flesh is weak.

For the opening of this point, consider.

1. What the spiritual sleep is.

2. In whom it is found.

What the spiritual sleep is we shall see by comparing it with the natural.
The natural sleep is a ligation or binding up of the instruments of sense and
motion; caused principally by vapors ascending from the stomach into the
brain, Secondarily, by weariness, extreme cold, or heat, frication, Musik;
finally whatsoever does either consume or benum the spirits: and the end of
sleep, is that the spirits and natural heat retiring inward, may attend to
the refection and nourishment of the body.

Agreeably in the spiritual sleep of sin may be noted.

1. The ligation of the spiritual senses; whereby it comes to pass that men
have eyes and see not, Esa 6 9.10.
ears and hear not, 1. Cor. 2.14.
hearts and understand not the things of God; neither can they perceive them
(wanting the use of spiritual sense) because they are only spiritually
discerned.

2. The surcease of spiritual motion; the natural man neither doing the
works, Ro^. ^.12 17.
nor walking the ways of God.

3 The causes are alike; to wit,

Either principal; the vapors of worldly and fleshly lusts, 1. Pet. 2.11.
Ephesians. 4. Luke 21.34.
fighting against the soul, darkening the cogitations, oppressing the heart;
and so shutting out all heavenly thoughts and affections: or secondary; as
weariness in holy exercises, such as surprised the three excellent disciples,
Mar. 14.37.40.
whom our Lord chose to assist him in his agony: extreme cold of fear, Math,
26.70.
such as benumbed S. Peter unto the denial of his Master: and no less
extreme heat of unadvised zeal, such as incensed the two sons of thunder to
demand fire from heaven upon the Samaritans by a falsely-supposed spirit of
Elias: Luke 9.54.
frication whereby the itching ear is scratched with fables or flatteries, in
stead of truth: music, 2. Tim. 4.3.4.
whereby the devil, in his sirens, the world, and the flesh, sings lullaby,
spare thy self, Rejoice, O young man, Math. 16.22. Eccles. 11.9. 1. Cor.
15.32.33.
in thy youth, Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall dye, etc.

4 The end of spiritual sleep is, that our care and endeavor being diuerted
from heavenly things, we may fully take thought for the flesh to satisfy the
lusts thereof. Romans 13.14.


Thus as the natural sleep leaves little, 1. Sam. 19.13.
or no difference between David and Michols Puppet: so this spiritual sleep
of sin makes an Idol of a man. Look what a thing an Idol is, (says the
Psalmist) that has a mouth and speaks not, Psalm. 115.5.8.
eyes and sees not, etc. such is the Idolater: such is every sinner. Every
sinner sets up an Idol of sin in his heart, Ezekiel.
worshipping the creature (happily his own creature) and forsaking the
Creator: Romans 1.25.
and that Idol of sin takes away the heart from God, so filling it with the
love of the world, Hos. 4 11. 1. Ioh. 2.15.
that the love of the Father can find no lodging nor entertainment.

Finally as the natural sleep is an image of death, so is the spiritual. Yea
sleep and death in this case, as twins are joined, yea confounded. Lighten
mine eyes (says David) that I sleep not in death: Psalm. 13.3.
and the voice of the Gospel, waking the spiritual sluggard (as dead in
trespasses and sins) is, Ephesians. 2.
Awake thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5.14.
and stand up from the dead, etc.

Such is the sleep of sin: now let us see who be the sleepers. We shall
find them to be of three sorts.

1 Sinners uncalled, sleepers not yet wakened; such all men are or were, being
borne sluggards, none understands, none seeks after God, Romans 3.10.11.12
none does good, etc. Naturalists make it questionable whether man begins to
live sleeping or waking, by reason of the stupidity that is in him more then in
other living creatures: but in Divinity it is without doubt, that since first
our nature fell asleep in Adam, every man takes his beginning of being in
this sleep of sin. Behold (says David) I was borne in iniquity, Psalm. 51.5.
and in sin has my mother conceived me: and Zophar deriding the fond conceit
men have of their own wisdom, Job 11.12.
vain man (says he) would be wise, though man borne (that is, John 3.
till he be borne again) be a wild Ass colt.

2 Called, but not chosen, wakened but fallen asleep again, and that more
dangerously then before, 2. Pet. 2.
whose latter end is worse then their beginning. These besides the hereditary
habit of sluggishnes, have by relapse, doubled the disease, and are given over
to the spirit of slumber, Esa. 29.10. Heb. 6.
from henceforth never or very hardly to be awakened.

3 Effectually called and converted; in whom the original sluggishnesse of
nature is in part corrected, and the relapse into the spirt of slumber by grace
prevented: yet even in them the remainders of natural corruption have place
and power, until by that almighty voice of the son of God, Ioh. 5, 28.
Psalm. 17.15.
they shall be wakened the second time unto immortality, and perfection.

In this third rank is the spouse of Christ in this place, and all Gods
children in the time of this life, to wit, sleeping, but not wholly, waking, but
not thoroughly: Romans 7.19.
neither willing the evil that they do; nor doing the good that they would.
The vapors of worldly lusts not yet so dispelled, but that (feeling in their
heart what Rebecca felt in her womb, Gal. 5.17.
an intestine war) they are many times brought on their knees to pray with
David, Psalm. 119.36.37
Incline mine heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness. Turn
away mine eyes from behoulding vanity, and quicken me in thy Law and many times
to cry with Paul, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Add heereto much weariness and vnwieldinesse in holy exercises: much
couldnesse in maintaining Gods cause and party: much partiality in zeal,
maintaining a private spirit of enmity under color of the cause of religion:
much prejudice in hearing the word, ready to count him an enemy that tells
an untoothsome truth: Galath. 4.
much lingering and listening after the voice of the charmer (flattery never
wants welcome, while self-love is at home) who having more of the serpent to
beguile then we to beware, will at times get within us, and lull us asleep in
security and sensuality.

In a word, to this truth the confessions of all the Saints touching both
their general inclination to sin, and particular falls (many of them extant
under their own hands) do prove plentiful testimony; showing that as all
men, dwelling in houses of clay, between whiles (will they nill they) sleep
by reason of bodily infirmity, and, though by an unwelcome heaviness, nod
toward the earth, as it were pointing to their natural Element, so even the
best of Gods children, compassed with flesh and blood, cannot but at times
bewray their folly and unsteadfastness. -Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus.
The best Artist has not always his wits awake: and the most circumspect
Christian does not always stand upon his guard of faith and a good conscience.

In prosperity, we are apt to be secure, presuming that We shall never be
moved. Out of this sleep the Lord sees it needful to waken us by
afflictions. Security and safety meet not together. He that said, Psalm.
30.6.7
I shall never be moved, immediately confesses, Thou did hide thy face, and
I was troubled. But he that said, my foot slideth, found cause to acknowledge,
Psalm. 94.18
Thy mercy O Lord stayed me up.

In time of trial and trouble, least cause indeed, but many times most mind
to slumber, at least most temptation. The three Disciples never more
heauie-headed, then when Satan was now ready to sift them, and good men we
see, never more in danger to be in love with life, loath to die, or unmindful
of death, then when the arrest is now granted forth. The storm it self is not
sufficient. Satan must, if it be possible, cast Palinurus into a sleep, that
when the Pilot (I mean Christian watchfulness) is ouer-board, he may be in
hope to bring the Bark under water.

In times of holy exercises, when the eye should be most broad awake to behold
the beauty of the Lord, Psalm. 27.4
in visiting his Temple, the ear, as it were, a fresh boared to hear what the
Lord God will say, Psalm. 40 Psalm. 85.
and heart and lips enlarged to show forth his praise, even then, many times,
does Satan and our own flesh watch us a shrewd turn, and labor to take us
napping. What affinity has an Oratorie with a Dormitorie? Ierem. 7 Ezekiel. 33.31
Yet even the house of prayer is many times a privy witness of our noddings,
or of the wandering of our hearts after couetuousnesse, Pro. 5.14
and we are in danger to be brought into all evil in the midst of the
Congregation and Assembly.

Finally (which requires special consideration) if ever a Christian be like
him that sleeps in the top of the mast, Prou. 23.34
compassed with danger, void of care; it is after some spiritual feast of
grace, or victory over sin. We use to say, When the belly is full, the
bones would be at rest. In such like manner it fared here with the spouse of
Christ. She had feasted her well-beloved, and was feasted by him, in the verse
immediately foregoing: instantly she betakes herself to her vndermeale, or
afternoones nap, 2. Sam. 11.2
like David, and with like perilous consequent. He slipped into occasion of
evil, and she lets slip an opportunity of grace. It was a feast unto
Peter to hear that voice of Christ, Matt. 16.17
Blessed art thou Simon, the son of Iona, etc. but it was sower sauce that
followed shortly after; when, unmindful of his confession, and tendering his
master, but after the flesh, 2. Cor. 5.16
without respect to his office, he gat a curse instead of a blessing, Mat. 16
Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me, etc. Blessed Paul,
extraordinarily admitted to a taste of heavenly glory in the Paradise of God,
2. Cor. 12.2
Verse. 4
how he fared he is not able to express: but how, through infirmity he was
in danger to have been transported another way, that he willingly
acknowledges; and how, by Gods appointment, Verse. 7
the messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him, and to prick him, that he
might be kept awake from the danger of ouer-weening. Our flesh, counterpoized
with the spirit, makes us like the balance, of which if one scale be lifted
up, the other will assay to go as high as it, and turn down the former as
low as it self. And Satan (as Hannibal said of Marcellus) is never quiet,
conquering, or conquered: but conquering pursues his Victories, and conquered
labors to recover his loss.

If these things be so, and that we be all of so heavy a mould; Oh how highly
are we to esteem the goodness and patience of God, that is content to
entertain such dullards into his service? He that is served of Cherubims and
Seraphims, that fly swiftly to do his Commandment in obeying the voice of
his Word; Psalm. 103.20
and yet finds not due steadfastness in such servants, Job. 9.18
but is able to lay folly upon his Angels: that he should take delight in the
children of men; Prou. 8.31
admitting us into his school, who are as Children weaned from the milk, Esa.
21.9
and drawn from the breasts: Verse. 10
to whom precept must be given upon precept, precept upon precept, line unto
line, line unto line, there a little, and there a little. That he should
accept the will for the deed, and through the weakness of the flesh, Mat. 26.41
discern and approve the readiness of the spirit. That he should not deal
upon advantages with so unprofitable servants, but spare us, as a man spares
his own son that serves him; Mal. 3.17 Psalm. 19.11
yea appoint great reward for weak or rather no service. Who would not love
and honor so kind a Lord? Who would deny any of that little he can do unto
so indulgent a master? Who would not take his part, striving against sin, Who
in unspeakable mercy forgiueth and covers iniquity, transgresson, Exodus
34.7
and sin?

On the otherside how meanly ought we to account of any service that we can
perform? and When we have done our best confess that we are unprofitable
servants? Luke 17.10
If therefore unprofitable, because we have done no more then duty, much more
because we have done much less. Let Papists, and Familists, and what other
broods soever of the selfe-righteous Pharisees, dream unto themselves a Legal
perfection in this life: Mat. 5.20
Oh Let our righteousness labor to exceed theirs, but let our opinion of it
come as short, as our endeavor strives to exceed. For how can our Lord but be
a looser by such drowzie-headed servants, that ever and anon are nodding and
slumbring, yea sometimes falling (with Eutychus) into a dead sleep; Act. 20.9
Ioh. 11
if not (with Lazarus) lying four days in this sleep of death till we
stink again, and have need of that loud voice of Christ to awaken us, and by
a new Resurrection, Psalm. 51.10
or Creation, to restore us to the life of grace? The Crabtree, though grafted
with the best grafts, yet sends forth many wild shoots from the native
stock; which if they be not cut off will starve the better fruit: Ioh. 15.2
and in the best branches of the vine of Christ, there is somewhat continually
to be pruned away.

And what greater comfort can there be to a poor Christian, laboring of
infirmities, then to have the several confessions of the best servants of God
in all ages, concurring with this general acknowledgement of the whole Church
militant, and confirming that they were (as the Holy Ghost speaks of Elias)
all subject to the like passions as we are? Iam. 5.17
As ill might we spare such precedents for consolation, as the examples of
their virtues for imitation. For why should we doubt of that mercy from God,
whereof they have had, and recorded the experience? Nay the good Lord will see a
difference between the sleeping Christian, and the dead worldling, and will
say of thee as of Lazarus, Ioh. 11
he is not dead but sleeps: Or if this sleep be (as in it self it is) a
death, yet so dear art thou unto Christ in regard of his work of grace in
thee, and the manifesting of his glory by thee, that he will certainly raise
thee up, and revive thee.

Finally it concerns us all in Christian providence for our souls safety,
Luc. 21.36
as to watch and pray continually, that we be not lead into temptation, so
observing the forementioned times, and advantages of Satan, and our own
corruption, to plant a double guard when the danger is more then ordinary.

And namely in time of prosperity to meditate often and seriously of the
vanity and inconstancy of all earthly comforts, that so we may come to
rejoice, as if we rejoiced not, 1. Cor. 7.30.31
and to use the world as if we used it not. In the day of wrath be of good
comfort says Solomon; Eccles. 7.16
yet even that while the days of darkness are to be remembered, Eccles. 11.8
which shall certainly come, and shall be many.

Eccles. 7.16
In the day of affliction, Consider, says the wise King. He that in the calm
prepares not for a storm, is many times greatly endangered: but he that in
the storm sticks not close to the helm, is sure never to see the port. In
peace to provide for defense is of wholesome policy: but in time of war, and
in the day of battle, to stand upon our guard against a vigilant Enemy is of
mere necessity. Inordinate sleeping is an enemy to the best health; but in a
case of extremity, such as the travail of childbirth, the Lethargy, or the
sweating sickness, even to slumber is accounted mortal. So for a Christian at
any time to be secure imports danger: but in affliction to be senseless,
Ier. 5.3
to be smitten, and not to sorrow (as the Prophet complains of he desperate
Jews) and when the Lord calls unto weeping and mourning, Esa. 22.12, etc.
unto baldness, and sackcloth, then to say with the careless world, 1. Cor.
15.32
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die, is an iniquity
inexpiable, and betokens destruction unavoidable. It is a plausible delusion,
to put far away the evil day, Amos 6.3
and to catch at the Eagle of worldly prosperity, Pro. 23.5
when she has already taken wing: but let that voice sound in our ears,
wherewith the Lord rowzed Baruch, sleeping this very sleep, seek thou great
things for thy self? Ier. 45.5
seek them not; for behold, I bring a plague, etc.

In seed-time the Crow is busy, therefore the Husbandman sleeps not. Satan
if he cannot hinder the Plough, labors to prevent the Sickle; and to that end
follows the Seedesman sowing the Word of grace, Mat. 13.3. etc.
that if it lie uncovered, or vnwatched, he may immediately catch it away. Mar.
4.15. Ec^l^s 4.17
Wherefore the counsel of the wise Preacher is to take heed to thy foot, when
thou entrest into the house of God, and be more near to hear, then to offer
the Sacrifice of fools. Will thou prevent the ravening crow? hide the word in
thine heart, Psalm. 119.11
as one that hears for afterward, and intends to reap, and live upon that
which is sown. Esa. 42.2^
But let it be a poor and contrite heart, trembling at the word of the Lord;
for that will never sleep when God speaks: Esa. 66.2.
Luc. 8.15.
and let it be an honest and good heart; for that will both keep the word,
and bring forth fruit with patience.

To conclude, as often as we receive any portion of the light of grace, it
behooves us to be prepared for some new assault of the enemy of grace. Hebr.
10.32.
After light comes a fight, says the blessed Apostle. We are in this life
continually militant. 1. King. 20.11.
Let not him therefore that puts on the armor boast, or promise himself
rest, as he that puts it off. Iam 4.7.
Sat in being resisted flies; but so flies, as intending to fight again: so
when all his tentations prevailed not with our Savior, he departed from him,
but it was but for a season. Luke 4.13.
He returned shortly in another shape; John. 6.70. Math. 16.23.
in Judas Iscariot, yea in Simon Peter himself. Now he can no more pursue that
m^nchild, Revel. 12.5.
being taken up unto God, and to his throne, he wageth spiteful, and
perpetual war with the Woman, that is the Church, Verse. 13.17.
and with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and
have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

The Panther is said so to hate man, that he wreaketh his rage upon the very
image: such is the hatred of Satan against the Lord. Wherefore the more thou are
transformed into the image of Christ, 2. Cor. 3.18.
the less it behooves thee to sleep, for fear of him, who if he may, will
either bereave thee of it, or persecute thee for it.

And thus much we learn from the consideration of the drowsy estate of the
spouse of Christ: but whereas this is not only affirmed of her, but confessed
by her, we are further to note, that the true children of God, and members of
the Church, do not sleep soundly, or of purpose.

He that sleeps soundly, cannot tell that he sleeps, and he that sleeps
purposely, does not complain that he sleeps. But as the man that faith, I
fall, shows his danger, not his determination; and Peter saying I sink, showed
his fear, not his purpose: so the spouse of Christ saying I sleep, bewrayes
her infirmity, not her resolution; and taking her self in the manner
confesses her weakness, and implores the mercy and aid of Christ to cover and
to cure it. As if she had said, I sleep and should not, I sleep and would not;
which Paul more expressly acknowledges, Romans 7.19.
The evil that I would not that do I. Thus whosoever is borne of God sins
not, 1. John 3.9.
sleeps not; to wit, not of purpose, or with full consent: not as senseless
of the disease, or careless of recovery. David, though he had fallen into a
fearful syncope, and had lain in the sown of sin (under some general and
ouerly repentance) for the space almost of a year; yet pleads for himself,
and proves himself to be fitted for pardon and grace. For, says he, I know
mine iniquities, and my sin is ever before me. Psalm. 51.3.


Eccles. 7.22.
Surely, says the Preacher, there is no man just in the earth, that does good,
and sins not. None so steadfast, but many times falls; Psalm 143, 6. Psalm.
73.23.
yet in falling he reaches God his hand, and the Lord holds him by the right
hand: none so faithful, but many times strayeth; Psalm. 119.176. Romans 7.24.
yet even straying, desires to be sought out, and reduced: none so quickened,
but bears a body of death about him; from which he wrestleth and sigheth to
be delivered.

From hence arises a remarkable difference between the godly and the wicked,
the regenerate and the natural man. Every man sleeps, but every man is not a
sluggard. Every man sins, but every man is not (properly) a sinner. To give
names betokens rule: sin cannot denominate, but where it is predominant.
The regenerate therefore says, I sleep and would not: the natural man says,
I sleep, and will sleep. The one sleeps of infirmity (sins of infirmity
are proper to the regenerate) the other of purpose: the one complaining, the
other boasting, and rejoicing; for the fool makes a mock, and a pastime of
sin. Psalm. 52.1. Pro. 14.9. and 10.23. Psalm 13.3. Pro. 6.10.
The one says with David, Lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death: the
other says with the sluggard, yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little
folding of the hands to sleep. The one so sleeps, that he desires to be
awakened: the other verifies that of the Prophet touching the blind watch men
of Judah, Esaias 56.10.
They lie and sleep, and delight in sleeping. And as he that would sleep,
withdrawes himself from company and noise, lays himself down, puts out the
light, or shuts his eyes against it: so the natural man addresses himself
unto the sleep of sin, avoiding the company of such as would dissuade him,
stopping his ears (with the deaf adder) against the voice of the wise
charmer, Psalm 58.4.5.
sowing a pillow of ease under his elbow, John 3.20. Math. 13.15.
shunning the light of the word of grace, or shutting his eyes against it,
quenching the spirit, despising prophecy; yea turning the light that is in him
into darkness: Math. 6.23.
so that it may be said of him his course is evil, Ier. 23.10.
and his force is not right: he is not surprised of sin, but hunteth after it,
or makes it his plowing and tillage. Hos. 10.13.


Contrariwise the regenerate man is so far from composing himself unto this
sleep, that in sleeping, he may rather be compared to the Hare, which
sleeps with open eyes (the Hare had need, seeing the Lion does so: so had the
Christian, 1. Pet. 5.8.
having a watchful Lion for his adversary) or to the nightingale which is said
to sleep with her breast upon a thorn for fear of the serpent; for even so
the Christian, having the old serpent for his mortal and watchful enemy,
sets to his heart the coming of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.11.
and the terrors of the Lord, that if he once begin to nodde, the prick of
conscience may waken and admonish him. Of such an one, when he does sleep,
well may it be said, sleep has caught him, not he it. In this then are the
children of God known, and the children of the Devil: 1. Ioh. 3.8.9.10
He that commits sin is of the Devil: but whosoever is born of God
sins not; that is, lives not in a trade, Psalm. 139.23.24. Psalm. 1.1.
or way of sin (God himself being Judge) steppeth perhaps, but walks not
in the counsel of the wicked; strayeth, but stands not in the way of
sinners; stumbleth, but sits not upon the chair of the scorners.

This word of truth therefore, duly divided, 2. Tim. 2.15. Pro. 28.13.
on the one side denies favor to him that hides and favors his sins: on
the other side to him that confesses and forsakes them assures mercy.

Nothing is more easy, or familiar, then for a wicked man to deceive himself,
speaking peace unto his own soul, whiles the Lord denounces war and
hostility against him; 2. Pet. 2.19.
and promising himself liberty, whiles he is the servant and bondslaue of
corruption: apt to think that the infirmities of the Saints, confessed, and
complained of should bear him out, resting and rejoicing in the same or the
like sins: loath to be persuaded that any one sin, unrepented of, should
prove and pronounce him to be in the gal of bitterness, Acts 8.23.
and in the bond of iniquity: ready to plead for his sin, as Lot for Zoar, It
is but one, Genesis 19.20.
it is but a little one: and to account it little less then meritorious, that
he observes the public exercises of piety, and is restrained from gross and
odious crimes, by good nature (as they term it, that is, a calm temperature
of body) good nurture, ciuility, policy, fear of shame and punishment, desire
of honor and reward, or some such like snaffle, whereby God keeps
unsanctified men in peace and outward order.

But alas! There is no peace, Esa. 48.22. Psalm. 85.8.
says the Lord, unto the wicked. He speaks peace indeed; but it is only
unto his people, and to his Saints, and that with condition, that they turn
not again to folly. To none therefore, but such as count their sin their
folly, and reproach; Ier. 31.19.
and so turn from it, that they intend never to return thereto again. Peace
shall be upon Israel, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 125.5.
but such as turn aside by their crooked ways, them shall the Lord lead with
the workers of iniquity. Whither? but to fearful destruction. Psalm. 68.21.
For surely God will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalpe of him
that walks in his sins. What a folly for him to dream of liberty, who is
taken by his own iniquities and holden with the cords of his own sin?
Prou. 5.22.
or to rank himself with the penitent saints, who goes far^e beyond them in
sinning, and never assayeth to follow them in repenting? Iam. 2.10.
or to count that one sin, which implies, by just consequence, the breach of
the whole law; and that a little sin, that is not mortified by any measure of
sanctifying grace? not other men's sins (from which the Pharisee thinks he
can clear himself) but thine own wickedness must correct thee, Luke 18.11.
^er. 2.19.
and thine own turnings back reprove thee. Mar. 6.17. etc.
Yea amongst and above the rest, thy special sin, thine Herodias, best
beloved of thee, most prevailing with thee, shall afford a special trial
with, or against thee. Against this, as against the Arch-rebell, every upright
soldier of Christ chiefly warreth; I was [vpright] also with him, Psalm. 18.23.
says David, and have kept me from [my] wickedness. Job. 20.12.13.
This thou fauourest, and wilt not forsake it, but keep it close in thy
mouth, and hidest it under thy tongue; desiring secretly to suck the sweetness
of that morsel, loath by any means to spit it out. Yea so well do thou love
it, that if at any time thy stomach (made queazie by the threats of Gods Law,
or tokens of his wrath) do vomit it up, 2. Pet. 2.22.
it is not long ere, with the dog, thou return, and lick it up again. 1.
Iam. 15.13. etc.
Let such a man say while he will (with Saul) I have fulfilled the
commandment of the Lord, I have slain the Amalekites etc: the lowing of this
fat Ox, the bleating of this choice sheep, this Agag, yet living, and not
fearing death, will convince him of rebellion, and of casting away the Word of
the Lord.

But as for those that (possessed with the spirit of the spouse) do feelingly
acknowledge, and bewail their infirmities and sins, they may assure themselves
to find the same favor from the heavenly Bridegroom; who, in this case, is
faithful and just to forgive our sins, 1. John 1.9.
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. This is that voice of which he
says, Let me hear thy voice, Cant. 2.14.
for thy voice is sweet. So sweet, that it instantly procures both audience
and answer from the Lord. No sooner does the spouse say, I sleep, but
immediately she is both heard of her beloved, and hears the voice of her
beloved, hasting to awaken her. When Ephraim lamented, Ier. 31.18. v. 20.
the Lord hearkened and heard him; and so heard, that his bowels were troubled
for him. Psalm. 32.5.
And David resolving with himself to confess his sin against himself,
found present pardon, both of the guilt, and punishment of his sin. And if
the Lord justify, who shall condemn? If a mourning sinner shall stand before
the great Judge of all the world, what need he fear the judgment of any
consistory, either opposite to that high court, or inferior?

Satan is ready, for his malice unto Christ's kingdom, and subjects, to show
himself the accuser of the brethren; Reu. 12. verse. 10.
traducing those whom he cannot seduce as he desires. Thus he dealt with Job
and with Iehoshua; charging them both with sin, though upon contrary
presumptions: Job. 1.9.10.
the one with temporizing in religion, because of his prosperity: the other
with unworthiness to do God service, by reason of the badge of affliction and
smoke of the fiery trial, Zach. 3.1.2.
which was upon him. But lo the Lord undertakes for his weak servants. Even
the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, reprooueth Satan, and disprooueth his
accusations; causing the iniquities of his elect to depart from them, and
clothing them with change of raiment.

And not Satan only, but even men also, transported with malice, or with
prejudice, are apt, seeing the infirmities of Gods children, to charge their
whole profession with hypocrisy, and to say, Is not this thy fear, thy faith,
Job. 4.6.
thy patience, and the vprightnes of thy ways? It is hard not to be an
hypocrite in his eyes, that makes no profession of godliness. But that man of
all others has set his face farthest from God and goodness, that (do what he
will) fears not the imputation of hypocrisy: such men's censure as it is most
ruthles, and reasonlesse; so it is least of all to be regarded. For what can be
more contrary to the judgment of God, and of truth? The Lord seeing thy
repentance, turns away his eyes from beholding thy sin: but these men are
so glad to see thy sin, that they are loath to take knowledge of thy
repentance.

Against such therefore thy just defense is to appeal to him that judges
righteously; 1. Pet. 2.23. Job. 16.19.
saying with Job, my witness is in the heavens, and my record is on high.

But of all accusations and censures, that of conscience, as it is nearest and
most inward, so does it most usually exercise, and most sharply afflict the
weak Christian. 1. John. 3.20.
For if our heart condemn us, how much more God, who is greater then our
heart, and knows all things? Notwithstanding as David examineth the judgment
of men, Psalm 58.1.
so may we that of conscience; and say, is it true O conscience? speak thou
justly? iudgest thou uprightly? Conscience accusing judges always for God;
not always with God, and as God. For sometimes, as Jobs friends it makes a
lie for God; Job 13.9.
to wit, not purposely, but as misenformed, or not sufficiently instructed.
Thus many times it passes an unjust sentence upon the weak Christian, having
an eye only unto the nature and quality of the sinful action, not unto the
disposition of the heart in sinning. If I regard wickedness in mine heart,
says David, Psalm 66.18.
the Lord will not hear me. Not to fall into some grievous sin, contrary to
thy purpose and course, but to set thy heart upon it, argues a child of wrath.
David committed adultery, as did Absalom, and murder, as did Ioab: but David
was of them that fall by occasion, Gal. 6.1.
they upon deliberation: he with remorse, and they with rejoicing. What
difference between the sin of Judas, and of Peter? Judas for gain sold his
Lord, Peter for fear denied and abiured him. But Judas ever a thief, and an
hypocrite, though now he proceeded to a further degree, was still in the same
way of sin, wherein he had bin from the beginning: Peter had always an
honest heart, and purpose to stand by his Lord unto the death, though now by a
sudden passion of fear, he was for the present driven from his resolution.

In a word to shut up this point; the state of a poor Christian mourning for,
and striving with the greatest sins, yea and sometimes (in this minority of
the new Creature) taking the foil, yet sighting again, is more comfortable
and blessed; then of him that sleeps and snorteth, without resistance or
remorse, in the embracements of the smallest (reputed) sin.

And thus I pass from the acknowledged drowzinesse of the Spouse of Christ
unto the other part of her mixed estate, to wit, her watchfulness.

But mine heart waketh.
THe Spouse of Christ, professing that while her flesh was a sleep, her heart,
or inner man, was still awake, teaches us that

Every true member of the body of Christ, even in sleeping (that is in
sinning) has a wakefull spirit, that sleeps not.

For the better understanding whereof consider, as in the point of sleeping, 1.
What it is to wake. 2. Who they be that are awake.


The spiritual waking will also best appear by comparison with the natural;
which is the act or exercise of the faculties of sense and motion. The proper
cause whereof is the return of the natural heat, and animal spirits into
the members; the vapors, which hindered their passage, being now by means of
digestion consumed. Other accessory causes there are also, as noise, shaking of
the body, daylight; in a word whatsoever restores or calls forth the
spirits. Finally, the end of waking is, Psalm. 104.23
that man may go about his work and day-labour.

Semblably in this spiritual waking we shall observe,

1 The act or exercise of the spiritual senses and motions of grace. The
Church here is not so a sleep but that she both hears the voice of Christ,
Cant. 5.2
and discerns it to be the voice of her beloved, Verse 4
and finds her heart to be affectioned toward him. Matt. 13.16.
And Blessed (says our Savior to his Disciples) are your eyes for they see,
and your ears for they hear; whereas others neither see with their eyes nor
hear with their ears, Verse 15
etc.

2. The proper cause of this waking; which is the return of that (once
natural in the state of Creation, now) supernatural heat of grace, and of
those spiritual abilities, and inclinations unto good. Which by the dead sleep
of sin were extinguished in our nature; Gal. 5.24
the vapors of fleshly lusts, which hindered this return, now in great part
dissolved by grace.

3. The secondary and helping causes, which are

1. The noise of Gods Word, crying, Ephesians. 5.14
Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, etc.

2 The shaking of Afflictions; for thus the Lord opens the ears of men, even
by their corrections, Job. 33.16
which he has sealed.

3. The daylight of the Gospel; which shows that it is now time we should
arise from sleep, Romans 13.11.12
to cast away the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light, etc.

4. The end of our spiritual waking; which is that we may work now it is
da^e, and walk honestly, as in the day. Ioh. 9.4 Romans 13.13
Awake righteously (or unto righteousness) says the Apostle, and sin not:
1. Cor. 15.34 Revel. 3.2
Be awake (says our Savior to the Angel and Church at Sardi) and strengthen
the things that remain, which are ready to die.

Thus we see what is meant by waking: now if it be demanded, who be awake?
it must be answered that the regenerate only do wake, and even they, so
far forth only as they are regenerate. They only are children of light, and
of the day: 1 Thessalonians. 5 Verse 5
the rest are of the night, and of darkness. Therefore Verse 6
let not us sleep (says the Apostle) as do other, but let us watch, etc.
Other therefore, yea all other, do always, only sleep. The regenerate
indeed do now and then take part with them, in some measure, in sleeping;
because there are in the best some remainders of flesh, lusting against the
spirit: Gal. 5.17
but they never in any measure take part with the regenerat in waking; because
they are wholly flesh, Ioh. 3.6
no portion of the sanctifying grace of the spirit in them, to lust against the
slesh.

But because men in these matters are not only apt to be deceived, but also
willing to deceive themselves, thinking they have need of no grace, Revel. 3.17
when they are destitute of all: I hold it necessary, for the clearing of
this point, to remove the false semblances of grace, which may make wicked men
believe they are well awake, whiles they are fast a sleep, yea dead in sin.
Such appearances are taken partly from the forenamed accessorie causes, partly
from some seeming effects of waking.

For, first the unregenerate man may sometimes hear the noise of Gods Word,
and that either with fear as Foelix, or with joye as Herod; and yet never the
more awake. But as the sluggard hears the voice of him that calls him,
Prou. 6.9.10.
and being loath to rise, prays him to hold his peace: so the spiritual
sluggard hears, and starteth, but craves silence. Thus Foelix heard Paul
preaching of righteousness, temperance, Act. 24.25.26
and the judgment to come, and trembled at the hearing; but immediately put
him out of his matter, till a more convenient time. He loves not the loud
alarm of the Trumpet showing sin, Esa. 58.1
and denouncing judgment. the soft music of consolation, pleases him better
of the two. Yet it is but as a song unto him; it tickleth his ear, Ezekiel. 33 32
and happily causes him to make an offer to rise, but presently he sinketh
down into his Couch again: it makes him turn upon his bed, Pro. 26.14
as the door upon the hinges, but not turn off. Thus Herod, at John Baptists
preaching, Mark. 6.20. etc.
turned this way and that way, but hung fast, all the while, upon the hinge of
his beloved sin.

The like may be said of the daylight of the Gospel; which many times
shining upon a carnal man, offers him the good morrow, showing him that it
is both time and reason he should arise from sleep: but neither the Sunshine
of Christ, Mal. 4.2 Ioh. 5.35
nor the candlelight of John Baptist, can be long pleasing unto the carnal
sluggard. 1 Thessalonians. 5.7
They that sleep, sleep in the night, or, which is all one, turn the day into
the night. The morning light is not in them; Esa. 8.20
neither can it be welcome unto them: but is (as unto the murderer, Job.
24.13. etc.
the adulterer, and the thief) even as the shadow of death. Ioh. 3.20
For every man that evil does, hates the light.

Sometimes also this sluggard is shaken with the force of Gods judgments,
lighting either upon others or upon himself; and then he makes God many
fair promises that he will awake and get up, yea that he will rise early,
Psalm. 78.34. etc.
and seek the Lord: but being not of an upright and faithful heart, he does
but slatter God with his mouth, and dissemble with him, with his tongue. He
was frighted with a fearful dream of worldly shame, or of the terrors of
God: but has quickly overcome that fear with the resolution of the valiant
Drunkard, They have stricken me, but I was not sick, Prou. 23.35
they have beaten me, but I felt it not; therefore I will seek it yet still.
Thus notwithstanding the exterior causes of grace, or helps thereto, may
happily not be wanting to the carnal sluggard; yet whiles there is no soul
of spiritual life, no inward operation of the Spirit of Christ to mortify the
deeds and lusts of the body, Romans 8.13
it is impossible that such a man should truly say, mine heart waketh.

And in like manner may we conclude against the apparent effects of grace,
which may seem to plead for the natural man.

He may attain to some general knowledge of God, and the things of God; why
not? Iam. 2.19
seeing even the Devils believe, and tremble: yet is not his understanding
truly awakened, or enlightened. His knowledge of God is but his dream: and as
no man makes his dreams the rules of his life; no more does he make his
knowledge the rule of his practice. And therefore he is not only debarred
from our Lords blessing, Is ye know these things, Ioh. 13.17
blessed are ye, if ye do then: but also denied the honor of his knowledge;
being reckoned among those fools, that understand not, nor seek after God;
Romans 3.11
yea that say in their hearts, There is no God. Psalm. 14.1.


He may have some touch and sense of conscience; Romans 2.15
for even the Gentiles have a conscience bearing witness, and thoughts
accusing, or excusing them: and yet neither is conscience at any time in a
natural man soundly awakened, that is, purged, and pacified; for unto the
unbelieving and unsanctified nothing is pure but even their minds and
consciences are defiled: Tit. 1.15
and as for that peace which wicked men vainly preach unto themselves, it is
but a sleeping joye, like that of the hungry man, who dreameth and behold he
eats, and when he awaketh his soul is empty. Esa. 29 8. True it is, that
Conscience, as Gods Register and Notarie, never sleeps, no not in the bosom
of the greatest sluggard; but keeps a perfect Book of account in Gods
behalf against the sinner, which shall one day be produced and opened: but
being also a deputed Judge to excuse, Revel. 20.12.
or accuse, to justify, or condemn. Herein it is that Conscience shows it
self to be a sleep in the unregenerate man. For sometimes it excuses where it
should accuse; calling evil good, and darkness light; happily at first rather
desiring it were so, then judging it to be so: but at length it becomes as a
lier, that tells his lie so often, till in the end he believes it himself.
Or else it justifies the deed done, and withal the sinful doer, when only
the work it self is justifiable, not the manner of doing. Thus the
Consciences of ignorant Gentiles are said, Romans 2.14.15
by the Apostle, to excuse them, when they do by nature the things required
in the Law: but being performed by direction of natural reason, not by grace
and faith, Heb. 11.6
it is impossible they should be pleasing unto God, Romans 14.23
for whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and not coming to the light of the
Word, for the examination of such deeds, Ioh. 3.21
it cannot be made manifest that such works are wrought according to God.
Sometimes again it accuses, and condemns; which is the ordinary judgment
of conscience in wicked men, unless when it is imperiously put to silence, or
seared with an hot iron, 1. Tim. 4.2
and so brought past feeling, for a time. Ephesians. 4.19 1. Cor. 15.34
But this is not a waking to do righteously; but to make way unto, and to
approve, the righteous judgment of God, who shall one day pronounce
condemnation upon the sinner, thus formerly condemned of himself: For even as
many as have sinned without the Law (written) shall upon this evidence of
conscience perish also without the Law How much more they, Tit. 3.11 Romans 2.12
whose enditement shall be framed both according to the evidence of conscience,
and knowledge of the Word and will of God? Tit. 1.15
Thus it fares with conscience according to the Proverb, It runs with the
Hare, and holds with the hou^d; that is, It shareth with the sinner, as a
guilty defiled member; but it holds with the blood-hound of Gods justice
pursuing the sinner, and (in him) sinful conscience it self unto destruction.

Finally, the unregenerate man may seem not only in his speech, but even in
his practice to show some tokens of an heart awakened by grace. For who so
forward to take the word of God in his mouth, Psalm. 50.16.17
as he that hates to be reformed? and the Gentiles (says the Apostle in the
place forementioned) Romans 2.14
do by nature the things required in the Law? Mark. 6.20
and Herod not only heard John Baptist, and that gladly, but also did many
things by his direction and persuasion. But (alas) all this is but as the
talking of many, and walking of some men in their sleep. For even so in
matters concerning God and his Kingdom, many speak, but not from the heart;
of whom the Lord may say, Deuteronomy. 5, 28.29
as of the Israelites, They have well said all that they have spoken: Oh that
there were such an heart in them to fear me, etc. some others, move and walk
in the practice of some duties; but this argues their heart to be a sleep the
while, Psalm. 119.6
because they neither walk in all, nor wherein they do walk, with respect to
Gods Commandment, but to their own profit, ease, preferment, etc. Therefore
not as the waking children of God, in whose heart are the ways of God, Psalm.
84.5
and who with their heart, enlarged by grace, Psalm. 119.32
do run the way of his Commandments.

Thus the natural man (though professing, and in seeming sort practicing as
the children of God) being, Act. 8.21
with Simon Magus excluded from any true part or fellowship in this grace;
because his heart is not awake, that is, upright in the sight of God: it
remains that only the faithful soul, the Spouse of Christ is able truly to
profess and say, my heart waketh, as being by the powerful grace of God first
mightily wakened and ever after carefully kept awake.

For first every Christian in his conversion is rowzed out of the sleep of
sin; and of a sluggard made one of Gods Watchmen. And this is so great a
work that it is called our second Creation, Ephesians. 2.10 Revel. 20.6
or the first Resurrection: with respect partly to the state of corruption,
Ephesians. 2.1 Ephesians. 1.19.20 and 2.5
whereby we were dead in trespasses and sins; and partly to the Almighty
power, whereby we are raised up and revived, being no other then that, whereby
Christ was raised from the dead. This power is derived unto us from Christ, who
therefore is called the second Adam, 1. Cor. 15.45
and a quickening spirit, that is, the fountain of spiritual life: and it is
conuayed to us by that word of his, of which himself says, that it is spirit
and life; and again, The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, Ioh.
6.63 Ioh. 5.25
and as many as hear it spell live.

Secondly, the heart of a Christian thus awakened, is for ever kept awake by
the never ceasing influence of that grace, which first awakened him. For the
seed of God; where it is once sown, remains, 1. Ioh. 3.9
and keeps continual watch and ward in the heart of the true convert; never
suffering him so to sleep, so (...) sin, as before his conversion. True it
is that this watchman is continually postered with the evil neighborhood of
our sluggish and unregenerate part, whereby we are in danger to be delivered up
sleeping into the power of the enemy but as when the City sleeps, yet it is
safe, because the watchman wakes ready to observe the approaches of the Enemy,
and to put the whole Garrison in Arms; for when a child of God sleeps
through (...) yet Satan fails of his purpose and expectation, because the
watch of the Lord is kept, or rather the Lord himself by his grace keeps
watch, and ward within us. Thus it fared with Peter, Luc. 22.31
whom Satan sisted, and indeed rocked his flesh asleep: but, says our
Savior, Luc. 22.32
I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; as if he should say, that
thy watchman sleep not. And indeed that centinell, under God, saved the City;
for receiving the watch word from Christ, and verse. 61 62
(a beck was enough) it put the whole City in arms, and opened the flood-gate
of repentant tears, whereby the proud Enemy was driven for ever from the
walls.

Thus have we seen both what it is to be awake viz. to have our senses fit for
Heavenly exercises, and spiritual motions; and who they be that are awake, to
wit the regenerate only, and they so farreforth only as regenerate; in whom
the heart, the principal and vital part, which is the grace of
sanctification, never sleeps, never suffers them so to sleep that their
hold should be delivered over into the power of the enemy. Now, to make some
benefit to our selves of this truth of God.

First, let us learn to try and know our selves. What are we? Satan's
sluggards? or the Lords watchmen? All indeed do sleep; and many in show are
awake: and none more apt to arrogate to themselves, then they that can least
avouch it; Prou. 26.16
for the sluggard is wiser (more wakefull) in his own conceit then seven men
that can render a reason. Here then is wisdom; to discern between the
regenerate, the waking sleeper, and the unregenerate hypocrite, the sleeping
waker: between him that may say, with the Church, I sleep, but mine heart
waketh, and him, who, if he know himself, should say, I wake but my heart
sleeps, between the five wise, Mat. 25.1.2 etc
and the five foolish Virgins. All were Virgins, in opinion: all had Lamps, to
betoken their profession: all waited for the Bridegroom, signifying their
joint hope and expectation: all slumbered and slept, bewraying their common
corruption. What then? is there no difference? yes very great. The one sort
are admitted to the wedding: the other are shut out of doors. But this
difference the Bridegroom only puts; and not till the last days. In the
mean time therefore, if thou will know thy self, and foreknow thy judgment,
look in thy Camp: see whether there be with thy light of profession any Oil
of saving faith, and sanctifying grace. Our Savior, for the use of that
Parable, Verse 13
says, Watch therefore, etc. to wit, as the five wife Virgins, with Oil in
your Lamps; intimating that they that sleep through infirmity having the Oil
of grace in their hearts, are accounted to watch: but they that wait through
presumption, with only an empty Lamp of profession in their hands, shall be
surprised and excluded, as careless sluggards.

To this purpose, look back upon those apparances and shadows of grace, by
which we have already showed that many carnal men deceive themselves. And
see whether the word of God which thou hear, do only cause thee to start
and stagger, in an unsettled purpose of obedience: or whether it win thee to
obey from the heart unto the form of the Doctrine, whereunto thou art
delivered. Romans 6.17
Whether the daylight of the Gospel, which thou beholdest, do only show
thee that it is meet thou should arise out of sleep: or whether it make
thee bless God, and embrace the opportunity to cast off the works of
darkness, Romans 13.12
and put on the armor of light; glad that thou live to see such days, and
to enjoy such means. Whether the judgments of God do only terrify and
trouble thee: or whether they cause thee to learn righteousness, Esa. 26.9
and to keep thy self more carefully unto the rule of Gods Word. Psalm. 119.67
Whether thy knowledge of God be a matter only of imagination and discourse:
or whether it frame thee to obedience and care to please him. Whether thy
conscience do therefore only not disquiet thee, because either thou have not
afforded it due information out of the Law of God, or else have silenced and
muzled it, that it may neither bite nor bark: or whether, having by faith and
repentance taken up the quarrel, and ended the account between God and thee,
it make thee a sound and continual feast of peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
Whether thy profession in word and practice, be only mimicall and affected,
grounded on occasion, and confined by limitation: or whether out of the
abundance of the heart; thy mouth speak good things, Math. 12.34.35 Gal. 5.25.
and because thou live in the spirit, thou can not but walk also in the
spirit.

Yea even in the sleep of sin, we may see apparent difference between the
regenerate and the unsanctified man. For as the natural sleep cutteth not off
all the operations and evidences of life, and heat in the body, or of reason
in the soul: no more does sin bereave the regenerate man of all the effects
of grace; but that there remains sufficient proof of his standing therein.

For first, though natural sleep be the image and forerunner of death, yet
does it leave sufficient tokens of life, as the drawing of breath, the moving
of the pulses, so that of the sleeping man it may be said, If he sleep he
shall be safe. John 11.12.
In like manner sin of it own nature imports a body of death and deserves
the hire and wages of eternal death, Romans 6.23.
but yet it leaves not the child of God without breath, and pulse, that is, a
principle of grace and good conscience, maintaining the league between God and
his weak servant, and fetching vital influence from Christ, Col. 3.4.
who is our life. This conjunction with Christ, this Covenant and Commerce with
God, shows that the heart is both alive and awake in the true Christian; even
when he sleeps; moving and fitting him to go to Christ, and expostulate
with him, Esa. 63.17.
saying with the Church, O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways,
and hardened our heart from thy fear? But the carnal man's sleep is a very
death; for he sins without care of reconciliation with God, without sighing
after the grace of repentance, and aid of the spirit of Christ against the
power of sin.

Secondly, when the body is asleep, the natural heat sleeps not, but is
busy in digesting the nourishment, that the vapors ceasing, man may awake out
of sleep, more fresh and active then before. Right so in a Christian, falling
through infirmity into sin, the grace of God is not idle, but bends it
self with all it might to dissolve the tentation, and work in him more
watchfulness for the time to come; thus his sleeping ends in waking. But the
carnal man's waking aymeth at sleeping; for even in doing good he intends
some pleasure or profit of sin: and his sleeping proves Lethargicall, making
him still more and more sleepy; for every sin makes way unto a greater, or
at least to a further degree of the same sin. If his beginning be
foolishness, Eccles. 10.13.
his latter end proves wicked madness.

Lastly though sense be asleep, yet reason in a wise man is awake. The fool
dreams waking, and the wise man contemplates sleeping. In like manner the
carnal man bewrays the folly of his heart both in doing some good things,
yet with our love of goodness, and forbearing some sins, yet without hatred of
evil: but the regenerate man shows the power of grace both in disallowing
the evil which he does and in delighting in the good, Romans 7.15.22.
which he either omitteth or weakly performs. Oh how much more blessed, and
likely to dye the death of the righteous, is he that says, with Paul, Number.
23.10. Romans 7.19.
I do the evil that I would not, then he that faith with Balaam, I fain would
do it, Number. 22.18. etc.
but (alas!) I dare not.

And thus have I set up a stone of partition between Jacob and Laban, Genesis
31.45. etc.
the regenerate and the carnal man; showing how the one even in sleeping
waketh, through the ouer-ruling power of grace, the other even in seeming to
wake sleeps, through the uncontrolled power of corruption. What remains,
but to allot to each of these their due portion? That is, to the one comfort,
to the other terror; and to either of them wholesome admonition.

To begin with the Israel of God whose heart is awake, and ready, though the
flesh in them be at times weak and drowzie. When Eutichus, overcome with
sleep, Acts 20.9. etc.
fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead; it was no small comfort
to the disciples at Troas, to hear Paul say, Trouble not your selves, for his
life is in him: so when a child of God falls, through the steep of sin,
into the desert and danger of death eternal; Matthew. 26.41.
what greater comfort then to hear Christ say, yet the spirit is ready? and
the spouse of Christ, speaking by the spirit of Christ, mine heart waketh? I
know thy poverty (says our merciful Savior) but thou art rich. Revel. 2.9.
Know thy self therefore; but as Christ knows thee. Cant. 1.4.
Look not only on thy blackness to humble thee, but also on thy comeliness,
to encourage and comfort thee. Say not only I sleep, to accuse and condemn
thy self in the flesh; 1. Pet. 4.6.
but also, mine heart waketh, to approve that thou live according to God in
the Spirit. Prou.
To justify the wicked and to condemn the righteous, is alike odious and
injurious to the Lord. The wicked man justifying himself sins against Gods
justice: the regenerate denying the work of grace in himself, sins against
his mercy. They are far the fewer that sin on this side: and much safer
because they are out of love with themselves. But yet when the vicer is in the
skin, God forbid thou should thrust the launcer into thine heart: or when
thou fallest out with thy flesh should pursue the quarrel upon the spirit of
God in thee. It were injustice so to punish the faulty mother, as to destroy
the guiltless babe in her womb: and no less, so to proceed in hatred of thy
corrupt nature, as to do violence to the new creature, Gal. 4.19.
the image of Christ, which begins to be formed in thee. It is our care,
Psalm. 119.133.
and prayer in this life, that none iniquity may have dominion over us: it were
our pride to think it strange we should have any abiding in us. We are not
yet in the land of promise, but in the wilderness of passage. We are not come
to those new heavens and new earth, wherein dwells (only) righteousness; no
sin, no companion of sin, no shame, sorrow, crying, Revel. 21.4.
etc. We are as yet in the region of old things; wherein as our natural life
is sustained by contraries, labor and rest, hunger and satiety, sleeping and
waking etc: so our spiritual and heavenly life is clogged with unwelcome
companions; affoording us trouble with our peace, emptiness with our
abundance, drowsinesse with our watchfulness.

But as for those that are at case in Sion, Amos. 6.1.3. Jam. 5.5.
and put far away the evil day, that they may approach to the seat of
iniquity; that nourish their hearts as in a day of sacrifice, Luke 21.34.
and by surfeting, drunkenness, cares of this life, carelessness of that that
is to come, do what they can to make and keep their heart, their watchman,
asleep; that had rather keep conscience blind, that it may flatter them,
then inform it, that it may give a just verdict against them; counting it
less trouble to believe a favorable false report then to examine whether it
be true; Revel. 3.1.
in a word that have a name to live, but they are dead, to be awake, but their
heart is fast a sleep: to such I have a heavy message from the Lord; even the
same that the vigilant Captain delivered, together with a deaths-wou^d, to his
sleeping watchman, Dead I found thee, dead I leave thee. The watchman must
keep his watch, as his life; else no watch, no man; his life is too little to
satisfy for his vnwatchfulnes. God has planted the heart in every man to be a
waking centinall. If thy watchman sleep therefore, how deep is that
drowsinesse? how desperate is the condition, first of the watchman, and after
of whatsoever may miscarry through his watchfulness? Mat. 24.48. etc.
If the evil servant shall say in his heart, my master deferreth his coming,
and begin to smite his fellows, and to eat and drink with the drunken: that
servants Master will come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour
that he is not aware of; and will cut him off, and give him his portion with
hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

To conclude with admonition, let my counsel, or rather the counsel of our
Lord Jesus, be acceptable unto us all who wills us to watch and pray
continually, Luke 21.36.
that we may be counted worthy to escape all the evils that shall come upon
the secure world, and that we may stand before the son of man. And this
admonition reaches unto both sorts before mentioned. Mar. 13.37.
All must watch: therefore they that are asleep must wake, and they that wake
must keep themselves awake.

Ephesians. 5.14.
Unto the first, the Lord says, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the
dead, 1. Cor. 15.34
etc. And again, Awake to live righteously, and sin not. What is that? but
to break off thy sins by righteousness, Dan. 4.24. Psalm. 95.10.
that there may be an healing of thine error. And because the error of sin
breeds, and festreth in the heart, therefore upon the heart must the cure be
performed* Ezekiel. 18.31.
make you a new heart, and a new spirit says the Lord; for why will ye dye, O
house of Israel? Every one naturally has a drowsy and heavy heart, like that
of Nabal, not only sleeping but dying within him: an heart of stone, making
him like a very stone. How shall this stone be made a child of Abraham, 1. Sam.
25.37.
unless the stony heart be changed into an heart of flesh? Math, 3.9. Ezekiel.
36.26.
Indeed none but God is able to work this change. But it is our part to
submit our selves to his hand in the conscionable use of the means: Ier.
23.29.
suffering his word as an hammer to beat upon our stony heart, which so and
not otherwise is to be broken; and his spirit to convince and reprove us of
sin; John 16.8.
and his rod to chasten us for our profit, Heb. 12.10.
that we may be partakers of his holiness. These 3. means the Lord uses to
awaken the carnal sluggard, calling him by his word, shaking him by his rod,
and by his spirit knocking at the door of his heart. Oh then quench not his
spirit, 1. These. 5.19.20.
resisting and controlling the holy motions thereof: despise not his word of
Prophecy, stopping thine ears as the deaf Adder against the voice of the
charmer: kick not against his rod, that he should complain of thee as of
the stubborn Jews, Ier. 2.30.
I have smitten your children in vain, they received no correction. In a word,
while it is called; to day hear his voice, and harden not thine heart as in
the day of provocation and temptation.

Love not sleep, says Solomon, least thou come unto poverty: Pro. 20.13.
open thine eyes and thou shall be satisfied with bread. The admonition fitteth
well unto the spiritual sluggard; who wilfully remains in penury, because he
will not take pains to be rich in grace. He is ready to say with the unjust
Steward; Luke 16.3.
I cannot dig, and to beg I am ashamed. One while the travel of repentance
seems too tedious unto his loose heart, and he is afraid of the Lion in the
way; thinking it best policy not to waken the sleeping Lion of an evil
conscience, Pro. 26.13.
nor to disturb Satan, who as a strong man armed keeps peaceable possession
of him. Luke 11.21.
But he considers not that both Satan and his corrupt conscience do sleep,
and suffer him to sleep, but for a time; and when there shall be no more hope
or means of recovery, they will both awake against him, and waken him up unto
everlasting anguish and unquietness. Neither will he understand that the only
way to pacify conscience, and to put Satan for ever to silence, is to set the
controversy on foot betimes. No means to make the Devil fly, but by
resistance. Iam. 4.7.
No means to attain the quiet of a good conscience, but that whereto the
Apostle James advises. Be afflicted, Iam. 4.9.
and sorrow ye, and weep, let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your
joy into heaviness. Iam. 4.10.
Cast down your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.

Another while he sticks at the rebuke of Christ, and the reproach of
sincere profession. He is loath to go out of the Camp, Heb. 13.13.
bearing the badge of his despised Lord. But he considers not that this and
no other way Christ entered into his glory, and sanctified this only way unto
all those that shall be partakers with him of the same glory.

But no one thing does more nusle a sinful soul in the spiritual sleep, then
a fond persuasion and pretense that he is already awake. For as the sluggard
says I am awake, because he would not be troubled: so you shall hardly find
a secure sinner, but being called upon to repent, to renew acquaintance and
make peace with God, he will be ready to answer, All this have I done
already, and continually, even from my youth up. But such an one must anoint
his eyes with eye-salue, Revel. 3.18.
that he may see. And what should he first see but that which he now most
willingly winketh at, Verse. 17.
to wit, that he is wretched and miserable, and poor and blind, and naked?
Until thou emptiest thy self of self-love, and opinion of thine own
perfection, the grace of Christ can find no place or harbor in thee.

Finally, unto such as are truly awake the counsel of the Lord by his Apostle
is, 1. These. 5.6.
Let not us sleep as do others, but let us watch and be sober. All our care
must be to keep our selves awake, especially our heart, that our heart may
keep our whole man awake. Prou. 4.23.
Keep thine heart above all keepings, says Solomon, for from thence proceed
the outgoings of life. And the Prophet Malachie, directing men how to preserve
themselves from sin, Keep your selves, says he, in your Spirit, and
transgress not.

For this purpose it is needful for us all, even such as think themselves
best awake, to hear, as often as we may, the noise of the Word preached; and
that not only when it comes in a still and soft voice, but also when, as a
Trumpet, it sounds the alarm of judgment against secure and impenitent
sinners; that we may say, with the Holy Prophet, Abak. 3.2.
O Lord I have heard thy voice and was afraid. Likewise because motion is an
help to watchfulness, to keep our selves continually in spiritual motion,
stirring up our selves unto the practice of holy duties, as of prayer,
meditation, examination of our hearts and lives, and such like: Revel. 3.2.
and strengthening in our selves the good things which else will be ready to
die, as our Savior speaks. And no less to take care to keep one another
waking (for he that so does shall hardly sleep himself) and to be as the
Cock in the Family, or company where we abide. Also to bind our selves with
David's vow, though in another case, to wit, not to give any sleep to our eyes,
Psalm 132.4.
or slumber to our eie-lids, etc. and having vowed, Psalm 119.106
to resolve (with him) to perform the Oath and Covenant which we have made.
Hereto we must add daily care to avoid that repletion of carnal delights
and worldly desires, which our Savior shows to be a special enemy to
Christian watchfulness: Luke 21.34.
and contrariwise by seasonable obedience to bring our flesh into subjection,
and by perpetual sobriety to fence our city, which else will be broken down
and without walls. Pro. 25.28.
And as the Israelites are commended for keeping the Watch of the Lord, Numb.
9.19.
having always an eye unto the pillar of the cloud by day and of fire by
night, that with it they might either rest or remove: so ought we to observe
the works and dealings of God with men, especially with our selves; whereby one
while he calls us to feasting and rejoicing; another while to mourning and
fasting; one while he puts songs of praise into our mouths; another while he
softneth our heart, opens our ear, Job. 23.16. and 33 16. Psalm. 17.4.
and keeps our eye waking by affliction; oh! happy affliction, that so
wakeneth us, that we cannot forget the Lord. But among all the works of God,
that is least of all to be ouerpassed, which yet is to do, but shall
certainly be done in his due time; I mean the second coming of our Lord
Jesus to judgment: the serious meditation, and daily expectation whereof, is
able to make every servant of Christ to watch and wait with his loins girded,
and his light burning; Luc. 12 35. etc.
that whether his Lord come at even, at the cocke-crowing, in the dawning of
the day, or (as here to his spouse) at midnight, he may readily entertain
him, and be gloriously entertained by him.

Finally, Psalm 127.1.
because unless the Lord keep the City, the Wa^chman waketh but in vain: Let
every one give him his heart to keep. Prou. 4.23. Prou. 23.26.
For therefore he that had charged every man to keep his own heart, calls
for it, himself saying, my son give me thine heart; as if he should say If
thou can not keep it thy self, let me have it, and I will keep it for
thee. Oh then, let us gladly entitle the Lord unto our heart, and give him the
keys of this our Castle; earnestly calling upon him, Psalm 121.4.
who is the Watchman of Israel, that never stumbreth nor sleeps, to make our
heart his Watchtower, and therein so to wake for our defense, that our heart
and spirit may be also kept waking by his means: Psalm. 16.7.
and that he giving us counsel, our reins also may instruct us in the night
seasons. So may we be sure that no danger shall astonish no allurement shall
enchaunt, or cast into a sound sleep, the heart wherein Christ waketh by his
spirit. To the same our Lord Jesus Christ, with his eternal Father, and their
most Holy and Glorious Spirit, let us, together with our souls and bodies,
hearts and lives, gladly ascribe and render all praise, power, thanksgiving
and obedience for evermore. Amen.

THE MINISTERIAL HVSBANDRY and BVILDING.

Preached at the Triennall Visitation at Bath. IVL. 30. 1612.

By SAM. CROOK.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop under Saint Augustines gate. 1615.

TO MY REVEREND FATHERS, and BRETHREN, Fellow Laborers in the work of the
Gospel; especially within the Diocese of BATH and WELS.
WHen the Israelites, after the death of Iosuah, demanded of God, who should
first go up for them against the Canaanites, Josh. 1.1, 2.
the Lord answered, Judah shall go up: but, when Moses, Exodus 32.26.
in behalf of God, stood in the gate of the Camp, and cried, who is on the
Lords side? let him come unto me; all the sons of Leui, gathered themselves
unto him, etc. Who sees not then (Fathers, and Brethren) that, leaving the
conduct of affairs of state to another Tribe, in case of reformation of
manners, it is our part, to rise up first in the Lords quarrel, and to
consecrate our hands unto his service; for as the Prophet says, O ye Priests,
this commandment is for you. Mal. 2.1.


We see the fruitful weeds and thorns of profaneness and iniquity, who
should root them out, but the Lords husbandmen? We see the woeful ruins of
virtue and piety, who should repair them, but the Lords Builders? We see the
troops of armed and audacious enemies, J mean sins, never so bold or so well
backed, and the holds of self love and custom in sinning, never so strongly
fortified: who should attach the battle, or attempt the assault, but we, whom
the Lord has not only sworn his Soldiers, but selected as Captains, and
Centurions, in this spiritual warfare?

It is our part to be domi bellique duellatores, fighters at home, and
fighters abroad, Cant. 1.6.
keepers of our own vines, and keepers of the common vineyard of Christ our
Solomon. Cant. 8.11.
Others have a single, we a double warfare, with others, and for others: with
others, as we are of the house of Israel; for others, as we are of the house
of Aaron: for both regards, we are to take heed; Act. 20.28.
for the first, to our selves: for the second, to all the flock, over which the
holy Ghost has made us ouer-seers.

If we neglect the charge of our own vines, may not the Lord say, that from
the Prophets, Ier. 23.15.
wickedness is gone forth into the whole land? For, how shall we persuade
others to fight against sin, unless we can commend unto them the same
fight, Phil. 1.30.
which they see or bear to be in us? how shall we press to kill our Lords
Enemies in others, if we nourish them in our own bosoms; if we resolve not,
with blessed Paul, 1. Cor. 9.27.
that even our own flesh first, being seeds hostis, shall be seeds belli, and
being seeds peccati, shall be seeds supplicii? Leuies blessing consists of
Thummim, Deuteronomy. 33.8.
as well as Vrim, integrity, as sufficiency: and on the skirt of Aarons Robe,
Exo. 28.33. etc.
there were not only Bells, but pomegranats, a type to be expressed in us,
Ministers of the new Testament, of whom the people must not only hear the
sound, but see the fruit, or else our golden bell will be but as sounding
brass, 1. Cor. 13.1.
or as a tinkling cymball. In a word, as the sin, so the reformation of the
people begins in our Tribe. The Lord so purge and fine us, sons of Leui,
that we first may bring offerings to the Lord in righteousness; Mal. 3.3, 4.
and then the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem may be acceptable to the Lord.

On the other side, if we neglect our charge concerning the vineyard of
Christ: If we sever the work from the worship, the duty from the dignity.
If we think our selves too good, or too great, to till our Lords ground, which
(as one said of the arable of old Rome) rejoices to be turned up vomere
patritio. If we bring no stuff to our Lords building, or instead of stone,
timber, metal, nothing but glass, bright and brittle: If we be like Saul's
Soldiers, without spear or sword in the day of battle; 1. Sam. 13.22.
or having a sword (a gift) do not vnsheathe it, or but vnsheathe it for show,
nor brandish it for use. If we do but muster, not fight, or flourish only, as
Fencers, with a rebated edge, but never draw blood. Ier. 48.10.
If we do cauponari bellum, 2. Cor. 2.17.
not belligerare; make merchandise of our war, and boot-haling in steed of
battle. If we vainly think to discharge our selves of the account of souls,
committed to our keeping, because whiles we had here to do, 1. Kin. 20.39.40
and there to do (not idle but otherwise employed) they slipped away and
miscarried without our knowledge. Ezekiel. 44.8.
Jf we our selves keep not the ordinances of the holy things of God, but set
others for us to take the charge of his Sanctuary. If such be our practizes
and pretenses, Fathers, and Brethren, what shall we answer unto that great
shepherd and Bishop of souls, 1. Pet. 2.25.
at the dreadful day of his oecumenicall visitation?

True it is, the conflict is so great, Ier. 15.10.
to strive with the whole earth; the labor so thanklesse, to vex them that
dwell therein; Revel. 11.10.
the success, oftentimes so uncomfortable, Esa. 49.4.
to spend our strength in vain and for nothing; that no marvel if the best
servants of Christ, taking their hard task to heart, be ready, sometimes to
bewray their frailty, and to cry, Ier. 15.10.
Woe is me, my mother, that thou have borne me, etc. and otherwhiles, to give
over, and resolve, Ier. 20.8, 9.
not to make mention of the Lord, or to offer his word to the daily reproach,
and derision of profane men.

But this tentation cannot long prevail, Ibid.
if either we feel the word of God, as a burning fire shut up in our bones,
and forcing a vent, or see the Lord, Ibid. verse. 11.
as a mighty giant, standing at our right hand, ready to rebuke, Zech. 3.1, 2.
not men only, but also Satan, 2. Cor. 2.14, 15
and to make us always to triumph in Christ, as a sweet savor unto God,
whether in them that are saved, or in them that perish.

Nay rather, if we be truly humbled with the awe of Gods holy Majesty, we
shall see and be wail, even the best of us, our own share in the common
corruptions; and cry out, with the Prophet, Woe is me, Esa. 6.5.
I am undone, for I am a man of polluted lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
people of polluted lips, etc. that mourning, with John Baptist, we may happily
prevail with some to weep after us: and hastening the harvest of conversion,
Matthew. 9.37. Revel. 14.14, 15.
we may prevent the Angel, otherwise ready with his sharp sickle to the
harvest of destruction: Mal. 4.6.
so turning the hearts of the Fathers unto the children, and (that is, Luke
1.17.
of the disobedient to the wisdom of just men) that the Lord may not come and
smite the earth with cursing.

The Lord make us such Pastors after his own heart, Ier. 3.15. and 15.19.
after his own mouth; that we may both save our selves, 1. Tim. 4.16.
and them that hear us: 1. Pet. 5.4.
and that when the chief Shepherd shall appear, being found so doing, Luke
12.43.
we may receive at his hand an incorruptible crown of glory.

S. C.

THE MINISTERIAL HVSBANDRIE.
1. CORIN. 3.9. For we are workers together with God: ye are Gods Husbandry,
ye are Gods building.


RIght Honorable, Reverend; and well-beloved brethren in Christ, being all met
together by the providence of God, in the presence of God, about the work and
business of God, what meditation can there be more suitable and seasonable for
the work in hand, more profitable for us then to consider First, who it is, in
whose presence and about whose work we are met? 2 Who and what we are, that
are met? 3 What the work is, where about we are met?


For which purpose I have made choice of a portion of Scripture, taken out of
the

first Epistle to the Cor. Cha. 3. verse. 9. For we are workers together with
God: ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building.
Which words will lead us into all these considerations, and answer all
these questions.

1 Who it is in whose presence and about whose work we are met?

God the chief worker with us, the only owner of you.

2 Who and what are we?


An. 1 We Ministers, laborers with God upon you. 2 You hearers, the subject
of Gods labor and ours.


3 What is the work of God performed by us on you? An. A spiritual
husbandry and building.

Three maine points therefore. First, concerning God, Secondly, concerning us
Christians, Thirdly, concerning the work: and each of these subdivided into 2.
First, that concerning God according to a two fold relation, to us that are
workers, to you that are wrought upon. Secondly, that concerning us Christians,
according to our different places and functions, we workers, you the thing
wrought upon. Thirdly, that concerning the work, according to a two-folde
similitude, of husbandry and of building. But the latter falling into the
other two, shall not need any several consideration. We are laborers together
with God, ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building.

Being thus to go through the body of the art, not of the Ministry only, but
of Christianity, if Hipocrates said Ars longa, vita breuis, well may I say
Horabreuis: yet unto both respect must be had, that I may in one (...) and
(...), so serve the Lord in handling this large matter, that I may proportion
my self to the scantling of time in regard of the measure. So much the rather
must I crave your Christian attention, that the brevity, whereto the streights
of time necessarily urge me, may not hinder the understanding or benefit of
that that shall be delivered.

And first concerning God, we are occasioned to consider him as a worker, and
as an owner. But first as a worker, then as an owner; not so among men, who
first make land their own, then plant, till, build, etc. First, are owners,
then workers: but God if he did not work and make, should have nothing to
own: Wherefore as in Creation, he first made the World, and all the hosts of
it, and then styled himself the Lord of Hosts, and by his labor proves his
title, Psalm. 95.5.
The Sea is his, for he made it, etc. so in this new Creation, or Regeneration
by the word of truth, (of which here) First, he works men to his own image,
and then owns them: First, purges them, that being purged they may be a
peculiar people to himself: takes the dross from the silver, nay turns the
dross into silver, that there may proceed a vessel for the finer; Psalm. 95.7.
and 100.3.
and here again by his travail proves his title. He has made us, and not we
our selves: we are his people and the sheep of his pasture. First therefore
see how he works, we are laborers together with God, laborers with God not
without; therefore God is one among the rest: Yea with God, not God with us,
but we with him, as the servants with their Mr. therefore God is the principal.

Three things there are (says Bernard) in the work of our salvation, which
God properly challenges to himself from all co-workers, men, and Angels. Viz.
predestination creation, inspiratio^, of the last of which in the sixth verse
it is said God only gives the increase That is blessing to the word preached,
making it fruitful by the grace of his spirit to the conversion of the heart.
Even in material husbandry, a man (says August.) may so far dress a vine,
as to dig, plant, and prune it: but rain upon his vine he cannot. If he can
water it, with whose water? He may ducere riuum, but it is God that does
implere fontem: but when all is done, incrementu^ dare sar mentis non potest,
formare fructus no^ potest, modificare semina no^ potest, tempora gignendi
tempe rare non potest: Deus qui omnia potest agricola noster est. He cannot
give clusters to the branches, form to the fruits, quality to the seeds,
temper to the seasons: God therefore that can do all, is our husbandman.

And such he styles and sets forth himself unto us. I am the vine (says
Christ) and ye are the branches, John 15.1.
and my Father that husbandman. Esa. 5.1.
My beloved, says the Prophet (and who is the Prophets beloved, save God in
Christ, that loved him first?) my beloved had a vine in a very fruit full
hill. Solomon speaking of another Solomon, Cant. 8.11.
greater then Solomon, says thus, Solomon had a vine in Baalhamon, etc.

It is said of Noah that he began to be a man of the earth (so says the
Hebrew) or a man exercising himself in tilling, Genesis 9.20.
or husbanding of the earth: and metaphorically the same may be said of God.
Why not a man of the earth, as well as (Exodus 15.3.) a man of war? Not as
Adam and Noah for tilling the earth from whence they were taken (no, these were
of the earth, earthy, he is the Lord from heaven, heavenly) but for tilling
the earth which he had taken out of the earth, for tilling and husbanding our
earth, is God called an husbandman: that truth might budde out of this our
earth, Psalm. 85.11.
has his righteousness looked down from heaven.

And not our husbandman only, but our mason and our carpenter also, to hew and
square us, to plane and pollish, Heb. 3.4.
to build and beautify us as a spiritual temple unto himself. Wisdom is
her own Architect, Prou. 9.1.
to build her an house and to hew out her seven pillars: and Christ himself
upon that rock which is himself, or faith in himself, Math. 16.18.
will build his Church so strong, that the gates of hell shall not overcome it.
Of other buildings, families, commonwealths, and kingdoms, God is the
builder; How much more of his Church, his own family, and kingdom? how much
more may it be said of this then, which is true of the other building? Except
the Lord build the house, Psalm. 127.1.
they labor in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the City, they watch
in vain that undertake to keep it.

Proper names of pastoral office are no less ascribed to God in Christ, as
Pastor and Bishop (...) as if he should say Archbishop, 1. Pet. 2.25. and 5.4.
Archpastor, being that one Pastor that gives words unto the Wise, Eccles.
12.11.
and Virtue unto their Words, that only Oecumenicall Bishop, John 10.16. Heb.
13.20.
in relation to whom there is but one sheepfold, as but one shepherd, that
great shepherd of the sheep, John 10.11.
that good shepherd, that gives his life for his sheep; Idem pastor et
pascua, idem agnus et leo (says Aug) both pastor and pasture, both Lamb and
Lion, Ipse pastor, ipse pascua, ipse redemptio, says Bernard.

Yea, God is not only thus above all, but through all, and in us all: not
only gives increase without Paul or A^ollos, but planteth by Paul, watreth by
Apollos: Colit per nos, incrementum dat sine nobis: not only prospers and
confirms the building of himself, but foundeth by Paul, edifieth by Apollos:
not only in Paradise preached immediately to Adam (so inchoating, and
sanctifying the Pastoral office) but since by Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses,
Paul, Apollos, and the rest, continued and propagated it. So that sieve per
Angelos, sieve per Prophetas, sieve per Apostolos, etc. Whether by Angels,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Pastors, We shall still find God to be our
Husbandman, says Augustine: and he that labored more abundantly then all the
rest, says, yet not I, 1. Cor. 15.10.
but the grace of God, which is with me, 1. Cor. 15.10.

The Papists abuse that place, as also the words of this text, to the
establishing of the error of free will, that thereon they may build their
gainefull doctrine of merit. How impertinently, every one may judge, that can
but read, and reading consider the purpose of the writer, which is not to
entreat of men in general, but of Ministers: nor to show any concurrence of
nature with grace unto well doing, but of the sanctified instruments of the
Holy Ghost unto the work of the ministry: wherein notwithstanding our blessed
Apostle disclaimeth any sufficiency as of himself, and ascribes all to God,
not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, 2. Cor. 3.5
as of our selves (see how carefully he excludes himself) but our
sufficiency is of God. Sufficiency happily they will yield to be of God, that
is, of grace, but yet liberty is of nature; an insufficient liberty then it
must needs be: and so indeed it is, a liberty to do, but not to do well; a
liberty not constrained, but yet confined unto sin: and confined, not by
Creation, but by the fall: not by Gods default, but by our one forfit: we are
not kept straight in him, but in our own bowels. But the grace of Christ
brings liberty to the captives, Esaias 61.1
and to them that are bound the opening of the prison. 1. And now as Prosper
says, Liberate agimus, sed liberate redempta, we do well freely, but that
freedom is of the grace of redemption. It is not by created liberty, for that
in regard of good was lost in Adam; not by corrupted liberty, for that, though
freely, yet only and necessarily enclineth unto evil: but by the liberty of
grace the grace of Christ; who as he tells us, without me ye can do nothing;
Job. 15.5
so the thankful Christian heart makes answer, and says, Truth Lord, lo I
live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me: I work, yet not I now, Gal. 2.20
but the grace of Christ which is with me: Phil. 4.13
I can do all things, yet not of my self now, but through the help of Christ
which strengthens me.

Thus have we seen how God is a worker, yea the worker, being alone in the
principal work, and principal in the ministerial work: who then can deny
him to be an owner? the husbandry and building, both are Gods. He that made
all things, made them for himself: Prou. 16.4
and if the wicked for the day of evil, how much more us that are his
workmanship created by him in Christ Jesus unto good works? Ephesians. 2.10.
He parts labor, as we shall see, but not possession. It is enough for the
labourer, if he have his hire, his penny: men do not use to divide their ground
with the plowman, or their house with the Mason. John. 3.29.
He that has the Bride, is the Bridegroom, so is not he, that prepares, 2.
Cor. 11.2.
and presents her, so is not he, that stands by, and rejoices to hear
the bridegroomes voice. Thus Christ differed from Moses, both faithful (I say
not alike) but yet both faithful; But Moses as a servant in his Lords house,
Heb. 3.5, 6
Christ as the son over his own house. Thus the Church differs from us
Churchmen, the Church is not ours, but we the Churches, that the Church, with
us, may be Christ's, and he Gods.

God therefore is both a worker, and an owner. 1. Cor. 3.23.
The chief worker, and the only owner. The chief worker, both because he
does the greatest part of the work himself, which Paul in no sort can do:
and because he works by Paul, that which he enableth Paul to do. The only
owner, because as by him only the work is set on foot, so unto him only of
right it tends; for as of him, and through him, so for him are all things;
Romans 11.36.
to him be glory for ever, Amen.

With which words of the Apostle, according to his own Method, I pass from
the doctrinall part of this point, unto some application, for our use, and
benefit.

Is it so then, that God has reserved the greatest part of the work, which is
to give increase, only unto himself? then surely neither is preaching enough
for us, not hearing for you: but it behooves both us, and you to follow the
public action with prayer, both in public and in private, unto that God, who
only is able to give a blessing. Else Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, 1.
Cor. 3.6.7.
and both their labors come to little pass. One shower we see (oh that God
would let us see! but we have seen) that one shower does more good, then a
great deal of pains in watering; so much is God the better husbandman, even in
the earthly husbandry: how much more in the spiritual? When God let fall his
showers of spiritual operation upon the Jews, there were at one sermon 3000
souls added to the Church; Act. 2.41
a great increase, none such in Christ's time. Ioh. 7.46
Why? was Peter the better Preacher? Ioh. 3.34
nay, never man spoke as he spoke, for God gave him the spirit, not by
measure: but now the spirit was given plentifully to the hearers, which before
was either restrained, or very sparingly imparted. Oh then, God forbid the
minister should think all his work done, when he has ended his exhortation!
God forbid he should sin against the Lord, 1. Sam. 12.23
and cease praying for his people, though he have showed them the good and
right way. But if the Lord in judgment, withold his blessing from his own
ordinance, and deny the prayer of his servant, know for thy comfort, it is Gods
part, that is to do not thine; who will one day make it known, why he denied
his blessing upon thy labors and prayers.

Neither let the hearer imagine, that when the sound is out of his ear, he
has done with God, or God with him. For yet the greatest doubt remains,
whether the word heard shall be that savor of life, or of death, unto thee. 2.
Cor. ^.16
Of life, if the Lord, by his spirit, settle it in thy heart and ingraffe it in
thee: of death, if it lie like a surfeit on thy stomach, to breed some deadly
sickness in thee. Iam. 1.21
Wherefore if grace after meat be requisite; surely grace after the word heard,
is much more necessary: and, if much good do it you be good manners after
dinner, surely much good do it us, much good do it my soul, is more then a
complement, after the Sermon. The earth, me thinks, teaches us this lesson,
which not content with the travel of the husbandman, gapeth, and gaspeth for
the rain from heaven. It taught David's soul to thirst after God exceedingly:
it taught the Church, Psalm. 63.1.143
Christ's gard^n, to express her longing desire after his grace. O fountain of
the Gardens, O well of living waters, Ca^t. 4 15
and the springs of Lebanon! It Is lack of this, that depriues thee many times
of Gods blessing, when thou vainly imputest it to the want of gifts or zeal
in the Minister. For as weak stomachs find fault with the Cater, Cook, or
Caruer, and think they could feed better, if there were better provision: so
some queasie hearers, find fault with their pastor, and think they could
edify much better by such or such an other; wherein they say they know not
what; for it is neither Paul, nor Apollos, that can edify, that is, give
increase, make the word effectual, God has reserved that work to himself;
that his ordinance, not the gifts, his blessing, not the commendation of the
speaker might be regarded; That the treasure might not be esteemed for the
vessel, but the vessel for the treasure; and so neither Paul magnified, nor
Apollos despised, nor either, or both relied upon, and God himself neglected:
nor hearing severed from prayer, for that makes prayer abominable, nor prayer
from hearing, for that makes hearing unprofitable; Prou. 28.9.
but that, both being joined together, our obedience in hearing may make our
prayers accepted, our feruency in praying may procure our hearing to be blessed.

Secondly, does God work by his ministers, as the principal agent by his
instruments? Then let not the minister take pride in his gifts, or labors, as
in his own virtue, or deeds. When Peter saw the people gazing on him and John,
Act. 3.11.12.
because of the miracle performed on the Cripple, Ye men of Israel said he, why
marvel ye at this? or why look ye so steadfastly on us, as if we by our own
power or godliness had made this man go? With like modesty our Apostle here,
(verse 5.) puts from himself the glory of the work of conversion. Who is
Paul, (says he) and who is Apollos, but the Ministers, by whom ye believed,
and as the Lord gave to every man? Nos operarij fumus agricola illius, et hoc
ipsum impartitis abipso viribus, et ab ipso donata gratia: We are but the
^^nes of that great husbandman, and that according to the power imparted by
him: Non damus incrementum, sed impendimus adiumentum, sed neque hoc de nostro.
We give not the increase, but afford our assistance, and even that not of our
own; says Augustine. It was impious pride in Nebuchadnezar to boast, and say,
Dan. 4.27.
Is not this great Babel, that I have built, for the house of the kingdom by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? In Pharaoh, the great
Dragon, Ezeck. 29.3
that lying in the midst of his rivers, has said, The river is mine, and I
have made it for my self: No less sacrilegious was the presumption of those,
that preached Christ indeed, Phil. 1.16
that is, the truth of Christ, in regard of the substance, but contentiously,
not purely, in respect of the end, seeking to draw a party or faction of
disciples ^ not unto Christ, but unto themselves. How much better does our
Apostle temper himself, even in his holy boasting, concerning the efficacy of
his ministry? saying no more but this, I have therefore, Romans 15.17
whereof I may rejoice in Christ Jesus in things pertaining unto God. Jacob, of
the children he had begotten, said, Genesis 33.5
They are the children which God of his grace has given me. How much more
should the spiritual Father learn of Christ to say, Behold here am I and the
children which God has given me? Heb. 2.13


Neither let any think to partake with God in this privilege of working by an
instrument; God only can work by another, that can give both virtue unto his
instruments, and success without his instrument. He that works by another,
makes himself a Lord, not a servant. Who then dare think himself discharged
of the labor of this spiritual husbandry, preaching only by a deputy?
Exodus 4.16
unless such one can show a special commission, as Moses, to be Aarons God.
Nay, let every labourer stir up the gift of God, that is in himself: and
pray unto that GOD, Esaias 28.16
who instructs the husbandman to have discretion, and does teach him, to cast
in wheat and by measure, the appointed R^^ and barley in their place. Who gave
of his spirit unto Bazaleel and Aholiab, Exodus 31.2
for the preparing the Tabernacle, and to Hiram of Tyrus, for furnishing the
Temple: and who only can, and will, of weak and insufficient Creatures, yea
sinners, make us able Ministers of the New Testament. 2. Cor. 3.6


And let the hearer take heed he despise not him, that speaks in us, him,
that works by us: 2. Cor. 13.3
but soberly seek experience of Christ, speaking in the Minister, 2. Cor. 8.5
and submissiuely give up himself, first to the Lord, after to the Minister,
by the will of God: that, not setting light by the weak means, he may see,
and find, the mighty power of God, and falling down on his face, 1. Cor. 14.25
may worship God, and say plainly, that God is in us indeed. Finally, is God
the sole owner? his the Husbandry? his the building? who then dares lift up
himself into Lordshippe over the flock, Lordship over the faith? they must
kill the heir, Matthew. 21.38
that pretend to take the inheritance. Enough for Kil-Christs, Jews, and (at
this day) Papists; who that they may give life unto the Image of the Beast,
Revel. 13.15
do make the Lord of life ex-haeredem vinea, ex-haeredem vitae, as far as in
them lies. But let us (Fathers) learn another lesson, sing another song: I
will sing unto my beloved (says Esaias) a song of my beloved, concerning the
Vineyard of my beloved. What is it, to sing unto Christ a song of his Vineyard,
but to give account unto Christ of our care and pains, in husbanding of his
Vineyard?

Let us (Brethren) pray to the Lord of the harvest, that he would thrust forth
laborers into his harvest, loiterers out of his harvest. In the mean time let
us, as his manor and demaines, bear the name, and arms of our Lord Christ
Jesus; Not saying factiously, I am of Paul, Apollos, Cephas: Christ's patrimony
sounds well, Saint Peter's is an usurpation, and which Saint Peter himself
disclaimed. 1. Pet. 5.3
Christian Catholic was a name of blessed note in the Primitive Church, Roman
Catholic is a new and uncouth name, and argues a new Lord; but such a Lord,
whom the true Lord Jesus even now consumes with the breath of his mouth, and
shall shortly abolish with the brightness of his coming. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8


Thus far of God, the Author and Owner of the spiritual husbandry and
building: now we are to come to the work wrought, to the thing owned; but
that we may not, without the mediate consideration of the instruments the
Ministers whom God has set between himself and the people. For so Moses
says, Deuteronomy. 5.5
At that time I stood between the Lord and you, to declare unto you the word
of the Lord: adding a reason, for ye were afraid, etc. which, in the same place
verse 25. and chapter 18.15 is more fully expressed, viz. How the people,
fearing to hear GOD speak by himself, desired that thenceforward he would
speak unto them by Moses, and by a Prophet, succeeding Moses, sitting in Moses
chair. So the Lord established it, as a Law in the Church for ever, that he
would speak to us by an interpreter, an Ambassador. God, Job. 33.23 2. Cor.
5.19
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, and has committed to us
the word of reconciliation. Now are we Ambassadors for Christ, etc. Agreeable
to that here, Cor. 5.20
we are laborers together with God.

Ministers then are fellow laborers with God.

Fellowship with God is to be considered in two respects.

1. In regard of paritie, and equality: so God has no fellow; only the three
that bear record in Heaven, as they are one in essence, so are they equal in
attributes. Phil. 2.6
Christ himself though as God, in the form of God, he thought it no robbery
to be equal with God, yet, as man was, is, and for ever shall be inferior to
his Father. Ioh. 14.28
My father is greater then I, says Christ, And when all things shall be
subdued to the Son, then shall the Son also himself be subdued unto him,
that did subdue all things under him, etc. 1. Cor. 15.28. 1. Cor. 15.28


2 In regard of association, wherein are three degrees:

The first, proper to Christ tho Mediator, in regard of Hypostaticall vninion
of person, and incomprehensible communion of power; whereby, Ioh. 17.22.
as he is one with the Father, so his works, Ioh. 5.17
and the Fathers, are the same, The Father works, and I work. Zech. 13.7.
Hence it is that God calls him, the man my fellow, or next neighbor.

The second, commune to all Christians, consisting 1 In this life in communion
of grace. 1. Ioh. 1.3. That our fellowship may be with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ. 2 In the life to come in communion of glory, John. 17.21.
That they all may be one, as thou, O Father, art in me, and I in thee, etc.


The third between both the former, specially appropriate to Gods Ministers
(of which here) and it is the association of labor, because we concur and
conspire with God, as subordinate unto him in the work of conversion, and
edification of his elect.

God so employeth his Ministers, that they also are coworkers with him says
Augustine: not that we add unto the power of God, but that we obediently
apply our selves unto the working of God, 1. Cor. 2.15
says Aquin. speaking of the things of God, not in the words which man's
wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, says our Apostle. The
words of the wise being pungent as goades to prick forward the slow, and firm
as nails, to fasten the loose and unstable souls: but such, and so far, as
they are given by that one Pastor God, of whom we have already spoken.

The Scripture calls the Ministers Gods servants. The servant of the Lord must
not strive. The Lord, and servant, 2. Tim. 2.24.
are Relatiues, that is Contraries, opposite in the general, yet having
mutual and specificall reference each to other. Hence it is that the Minister
is considered, sometimes with opposition, as he is the servant, not the Lord,
the instrument, not the hand, man, not God; and so his operation is weak and
ineffectuall: sometimes again with reference unto God, to whom he is
subordinate, and so his cooperation is mighty through God, and energeticall;
able to beget children in Christ Jesus through the Gospel, 1. Cor. 4.15
able to save those that hear him, so that Ministers are called Saviors, 1.
Tim. 4.16
able to beat down the strong holds of the imaginations of the proud and
rebellious heart, Obad. verse. 21 2. Cor. 10.3.5 2. Cor. 2.16
able to be the savor of life unto life; and of death unto death, (...)? says
the Apostle there: whereto himself answers, Chap. 3.5. not as of our selves,
but our sufficientie is of God, who also has made us able Ministers of the New
Testament, etc.

In this Relative sense we are here said to be coworkers with God.
Instruments, not laid up, or lying loose, but in the hand of the Artificer:
Ambassadors, not reporting the message only, but representing the authority
of our Master; 2. Cor. 5.20
as though God did beseech you through us: we pray you in Christ's stead, that
ye be reconciled unto God: Laborers, not upon the building, and husbandry,
only of the owner, but in the strength and virtue also of the chief worker.
For we are not only workers for him, but coworkers, or laborers together
with him. And then no marvel, if God, Act. 20.32
and the word of his grace, be able to build men up farther, and to give them
an inheritage among them that are sanctified.

Rather may we marvel, that at any time the Word of GOD should fail of his
effect, or that any of his fellow laborers should say, I have labored in
vain, Esaias 49.4
I have spent my strength in vain, and for nothing. Deuteronomy. 32.47 Esaias 55.10.10
But indeed it is not a vain word, but as the rain that comes down from
Heaven, and returns not, but waters the earth, etc. so shall my word be,
that goes out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, says the
Lord, but shall accomplish that I will, and prosper in the thing, whereto I
sent it. Vain therefore it may be, in regard of the ordinary revealed will
of God, the conversion of sinners, at which the Minister aims: not in regard
of the absolute counsel of GOD, which is, that they, that hear it, shall
either be saved or condemned by it.

God therefore, Mat. 20.1
having a Vineyard to dress, looks out for laborers. At the first indeed, when
there were no laborers, he dressed it wholly himself; as in the days of Adam,
until Seth: after he began to employ the Patriarchs in their generations,
and families, in whom Christ by his eternal Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.9
went and preached. In the day of Moses, he established a perpetual Law of
prophecy, and succession of Prophets, and Priests, with whom (Prophets
especially) he so conspired, that the Prophet Esaias (for one) is bold to say;
Esaias 48.16
The Lord God, and his spirit, has sent me. In these last days, he has
spoken unto us by his son: Ebr. 1.2 Romans 15.8
Who in the days of his flesh, put himself into this rank of laborers, as a
Minister of the circumcision, and ascending into Heaven, Ephesians. 4.11.12
gave gifts unto men; that some might be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, and Teachers, for the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of
Christ, Esaias 54.13
etc. Thus in all ages are all the children of the Church taught of God; and we
especially (from whom God may seem, in comparison, to estrange himself,
because we have now no immediate revelations) yet we, I say especially,
because in our times the outward Ministry is both more plain and plentiful,
and more accompanied with spiritual efficacy. Thus, We are workers together
with God.

To apply this a little. And first to you (Reverend Fathers) and my self with
you; for I will use no other preface, then that of Ambrose, Cum haec ad vos
loqui audeo, simul cum vobis quae loquor audio: neither do I follow any other
direction, then that my text affords, which enioyneth me to labor together
with God, and promises, that God will work together with me.

Unto every one of us therefore, I say (or rather the Lord) know thy self. If
thou know thy self well, thou know thy self to be a labourer, a
fellow laborer, a fellow laborer with God.

A labourer. If I were now in the University, I should be bold, in the name,
and words, of my Master, to demand of some, Why stand ye here all the day
idle? Indeed, Mat 20.6
nemo conduxit is a sufficient answer; but that it is either pity that able
workmen should not be employed, or shame, that any that seek not to enable
themselves, should be tolerated. But I am now before them that have changed the
University for the City, and Country, and their standing for sitting. And
may it not be said to some of us, Cur sedetis hic tota die otiosi? Holy
Barnard thus urges the necessity of pastoral pains upon Eugenius, Pastorem
te populo aut nega, aut exhibe, Either deny thy self to be a Pastor, which
thou dare not, or show thy self to be such, by feeding Gods flock, which
thou do not. Nomen congruit actioni, actio nomini; ne sit nomen inane crimen
immane, says Saint Ambrose. Is it good dealing with our Lord, the better we
are paid, the less work to do? I enjoy not the accession of double, or
treble honor: I only beseech Christ, and us all in the bowels of Christ, that
it may not be a succession unto piety, and good conscience. Sweetly writes
Bernard to Eugenius; In te hanc mutationem factam esse confido, non de te; nec
priori statui promotionem successisse, sed accessisse,

But (alas) it may seem this advice comes out of season. Custom that hardly
ever washes her hands in innocence, has turned painful teaching into
obloquie. I answer, In matters concerning God, there is no prescription. It is
enough we are able to say, Abinitio non fuit sic. In the days of Christ; and
his Apostles; nay I go farther, in the days of Chrysostom; Ambrose, Jerome,
Augustine, etc. to preach ordinarily, popularly, was no discredit. Quod
assuetum fuit in dissuetum potuit venire, redire in insuetum non potuit. Let us
not therefore be ashamed of our name and office, we are laborers,
day-labourers. If any reproach the Husbandman for his base employment, may be
not answer out of Solomon, that even the King is nourished by the field that
is tilled? Eccles. 5.8
So may we say the King of Heaven has no other corn in his barn, bread on
his table, then that which grows by this husbandry. In the best days of Rome
it was a proverb, Vir bonus, bonus colonus: I am sure the Church can have no
good days, when these two are divided in the Ministry, and that any Ministor
is counted a good man, that is not, as here is required, a labourer. And what
labourer? surely an Husbandman, a builder. The Husbandman seldom sits still. It
is no good wind, that blows him leisure, and pleasure. It is merry with him,
when the threshing reaches unto the vintage, and the vintage unto the
seed-time: Amos 9.13
when the plowman touches the mower, and the treader of grapes him that sows
seed. So is it the Ministers joy, when he sees the Regions white, that he may
thrust in the sickle, or the soil soft, that he may thrust in the plowshare.
2. Tim. 2.6
In a word, This Husbandman must labor before he receive the fruits. Amos 5.13
It is an evil time, when the prudent can find in their heart to keep silence.

The builder works for others, not for himself only; a poor Mason or
Carpenter, that does no bodies work, but his own: so for a Minister to build
up himself is not sufficient, he must build more houses, more Temples then his
own (and yet that is not well built, unless he build others also) Si non
erogem, licet pecuniam seruem terret Euangelium, says Augustine: Though I
keep my Lords talent, yet if I employ it not, the sentence of the Gospel
terrifieth me. And again, to fit at home, and search into the divine treasury
of Gods book, without noise, or business, is sweet and delectable: on the
otherside to preach, to reprove, to correct, to edify, to take care of other
men's souls, is a great burden, and irksom charge, who would not abandon it?
but the sentence of the Gospel, terrifieth me, The sentence of the Gospel,
that says, Take the unprofitable servant, Mat. 25.30
cast him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeeh.
Neither is the Law silent, Zach. 11.17
but cries Woe to the Idol Shepherd, that leaves the flock: the sword shall
be upon his arm, and upon his right eye; his arm shall be clean dried up,
and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.

2 A fellow-laborer: not with God only, but with all those, that are
fellow-laborers with God; quae conueniunt in eodem tertio conueniunt inter se.
As for them, that gather not with Christ, Ab his pacem cupio, non cum his. This
imports unity, unanimity, in all Gods laborers. It is not enough for them,
that are the salt of the earth, to have salt in themselves: Mar. 9.50
they must have peace one with another. (...) truthifying, Ephesians. 4.15
or following the truth in love, In this regard, he that planteth, and he that
waters, are said (verse. the 8.) to be one; one thing, not one person: Vnum,
non vnus. How Vnum? Vnum sunt (says Tertull.) dum ipsum sapiunt. To be one
thing, is to mind one and the same thing. This is Cyprians meaning, when he
harpeth so much upon Vnus Episcopatus. As the same beams are many, but the
light one so, says he, there are many Bishops, but one Bishopric. Briefly
Gods laborers (says a late writer) are one; not in number, grace, gifts,
calling, authority, time, labor, or reward, but in that they are servants of
the same God, teachers of the same truth, builders of the same house, workers
after the same model, enabled, every one in his measure, by the same grace,
partakers of the same spirit of amity, and unity. Thus if we were one, oh
what strength, what beauty, what blessing, would accrue unto our spiritual
building?

3 Gods fellow laborer: oh! what an honor? what a burden? what a protection?
what a caution? what an assurance? what a curb to carnal presumption?

What an honor? To communicate with the blessed Angels in office, Revel. 1.20
and name? for Christ's Ministers are Christ's Angels to communicate with Christ,
the Lord of Angels, who in the days of his flesh, vouchsafed to be a Minister
of the Circumcision: and now, in Heaven, remains the Prophet of his Church,
Heb. 3.1
the Apostle and high Priest of our profession. To join hands with God, the
Father of our LORD Jesus Christ, in that work, whereby he principally sets
forth the glory of his wisdom, faithfulness, power, and mercy. Who now will
be ashamed of this honorable office, and pains? yea, though it be his lot
(which was his Lords lot) to feed the sheep of the slaughter, Zech. 11.7
the poor of the flock.

2 What a burden? Honor is not without burden, and this honor least of all.
For had not the servant need be careful, that works in his Masters eye? by
whose diligence, or sloth, his Masters work, and thrift, goes backward, or
forward? So we; least when every private man's field lies like a garden, and his
garden like a Paradise, our Lords garden should be, by our default, Prou.
24.30 31
like the field of the sluggard, It is not sufficient thou have sown no weeds:
thou art culpable of judgment, that thou have not pulled them up. Thou have
hindered Gods work, in not doing thine own part. He would have no season
omitted, and thou, if thou caredst to set forward his business, would be
instant in season, and out of season. 2. Tim. 4 2 Eccles. 11.6
In the morning would thou sow thy seed, and in the evening thy hand should
not rest: because thou know not whether shall prosper, this, or that, or
whether both shall be alike good. Thou would learn wisdom of the
Husbandman, not to wait too long for an opportunity, but, considering the
necessity of the work, make use sometimes of an incommodious season; for he
that observes the winds shall not sow, Eccles. 11.4
and he that regards the clouds shall not reap.

3 What a protection? Our Lord, and we, have common friends, and common foes.
Do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.15 Zech. 3.1.2
says God. If Satan himself stand up against Iehoshuah, to resist him, the
Lord himself is at hand to rebuke Satan. Sinful men are like unruly
Patients, that fall out with their Physician. What then? Sint illi ini mici
medico, tu morbo, says Saint Augustine: Be they, if they will needs be, enemies
to the Physician, but fear not thou to be an enemy to the disease.

4 What a caution? God assures us against others, that we might fear before
him: Fear not their fear, Esaias 8.12.13
but sanctify the Lord God of hosts, and let him be your fear, etc. And he
shall be unto you as a Sanctuary. And the nearer we are admitted unto him,
the greater should be our fear. Moses cried in the mount, I fear, and quake.
The Lord with a fearful example, and vehement asseueration, inculcates this.
When Nadab, Leuit. 10.3
and Abihu, were devoured with fire from heaven, for pressing with strange fire
into the Lords presence, I will be sanctified, says the Lord, in them that
come near me, and before all the people I will be glorified. When the Lord
presented himself to the Prophet Esaias, to set him a work about this
business, the Holy Prophet (not holy enough to endure his presence, before
whom the Seraphins hide their faces) cried out, Esaias 6.5
woe is me I am undone, for I am a man of polluted lips, etc. No man better
knew the mercies of God, then blessed Paul, the pattern of Gods mercy: yet
when he thinks of this work, he calls to mind the terrors of the Lord.
Knowing therefore the terrors of the Lord, 2. Cor. 5.11
we persuade men, etc. Oh! if these terrors of the Lord were well fastened
upon us, we would neither rashly intrude our selves into this ministration;
being Saints and Wise men, but of one days standing, says Nazianz. and as
potters vessels think to be formed able Ministers in one day nor being entered,
look back from the Plough, whereto we have put our hands, Luke 9.62
but study to show our selves approved, 2. Tim. 2.15
workmen that need not be ashamed of our work or afraid of our account.

5 What an assurance? Assurance of success: assurance of reward. Assurance of
success. Say the peoples hearts be stony (as indeed, in this sense, (...)
may well be derived from (...)) Yet, Is not my word like fire (says the Lord)
and like the hammer, that breaks the stone? yea, Ier. 23.29 Mat. 3.9
God is able of these stones, to raise up children unto Abraham, that afterward
of these children of Abraham, 1. Pet. 2.5
he may make stones for his spiritual Temple. But if he do not, yet thy labor
is not in vain. Curam exigeris, no^ curationem, says Bernard: Erogatorem
posui te, non exactorem, says Augustine. Assurance therefore of reward thou
have. Secundum laborem accipies, non secundum prouentum, says Bernard. Esaias
49.4
I have spent my strength in vain, says the Prophet, but my judgment is with
the Lord, and my work with my God. Dan. 12.3
And what reward? To shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the
stars for ever and ever: To sit on twelve thrones, Mat. 19.28
and to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. To be with his Lord, as his Lord.
With his Lord. Job. 12.26
For where I am there shall also my servants be (says Christ). As his Lord.
Mat. 24 Verse. 46.47
For Blessed is the servant whom his Master, when he comes, shall find so
doing; verily I say unto you, he shall make him ruler over all his goods.

6 What a curb to carnal presumption? Most men, even in this work, (well may
I say most, when the Apostle says all; Phil. 2.21
but that all, is almost) most men seek themselves, their own things, not
those that are Christ's. Christi iacturam patientius ferimus, quam nostram. The
credit of the Gospel is subordinate unto our credit: we make Christ a stirrup
to climb to promotion: the word as a trumpet to blazon our own commendation:
the Pulpit as a Stage, or as a shop to set so to view, and sale, our own good
parts. This is (...), 2. Cor. 2.17
not (...). But when I say, we do thus, I mean it is the sin and shame of
our coat, and calling, not the personal crime of us here assembled. Nay we
have learned that we are co-workers with God, and therefore for God, not for
our selves: and therefore to make, in Gods behalf, what good use we can, not
to make show or sale of what is (much less of what is not) in our selves. In a
word not to be as many that make merchandise of the word of God, but as of
sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, so to speak of Christ. Thus
from this point much has bin said, (oh, how much more might be said)
concerning the calling of the Ministry: and yet something remains, not to
be omitted, for the hearers; that so I may pass unto them, and that point
which properly concerns them.

Consider well my brethren, the Minister is Gods fellow laborer; the Minister,
I say, not the hearer: The scholar must not presume to be a teacher, the
timber to be a Carpenter (I speak of ministerial teaching) no man takes
this honor unto himself, Heb. 5.4.
but he that is called of God; as Aaron. But the Church wants laborers. What
then? Ier. 17.16
Thrust not thou thy self in, for a Pastor after God, but pray to the Lord of
the Harvest, Mat. 9.38
to thrust forth laborers, etc. He that is ignorant, 1. Cor. 14.38 Verse. 16
let him be ignorant, that is co^te^t to supply the place of the ignorant. Else
he shall never sing with a good conscience Lord my heart is not haughty, Psalm.
131.1.2
nor my eyes lofty, I have not meddled in matters to high for me. Nay, love and
reverence the Minister of Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13
for his works sake, because he is a laborer: for his Lords sake, because he is
Gods fellow laborer; with whom, in who^ his Lord is received, or despised.
Pau^ commends the Thessalo. Luke 10 16 1 Thessalonians. 2.13
for receiving from him the word of the preching of God not as the word of man,
but as (indeed) the word of God: and not so only, but he commends the
Galatians Gal. 4.14
for receiving him as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus. You understand
this in regard of his office, not of his person. Thus is a Prophet received in
the name of a Prophet and the reward is great, Mat. 10.41
even the reward of a Prophet. So is the peril great, if a Prophet, as a
Prophet, be despised. For is not the sound of his Masters feet behind him? 2.
King. 6.32
David never showed extremity but once (the Kings of Israel were merciful
Kings 1. King. 20.31
) and that once was, when his Ambassadors were abused; 2. Sam. 10.4
Ambassadors of peace. The refusal of peace brought war upon the Ammonites:
and the evil entreatie of the Ambassadors brought the wretched people under
sawes, harrowes, and axes of iron. 2. Sam. 12.31
As God is a greater King, so is the abuse of his Ambassador, the refusal of
his peace and amity, more contemptuous and dishonorable: As he is more just,
so is his wrath more inexorable, as he is more mighty, so is his vengeance
more intolerable.

Ye have heard somewhat of your place and duty from this, that God is the
chief worker and owner: somewhat again from this, that we are Gods
fellow laborers: but now I come wholly to you, my dear brethren, and to that
part of my text, which properly concerns you, Ye are Gods husbandry and Gods
building. First ye are Gods husbandry. Beza translates it Gods arable but, as
I presume, that word is of too narrow signification; seeing God is called an
husbandman, even in respect of his Vineyard, which every man knows is not
arable: and Noah is said to play the Husbandman, planting a vineyard. So then,
from what part of Husbandry soever the metaphor be taken, ye are that
husbandry. From the vineyard? Ioh. 15.1.5
We are branches of the Vine, whereof God is the husbandman. The Vineyard of
the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel, Esaias 5.7
and the men of Judah are his pleasant plant. From the arable? ye are Gods
Corne-ground, that must be fallowed. Ier. 4.4
Break up your fallow grounds, sow not among the thorns. And what other is
meant by the ground, good or badde receiving the seed (Mat. 13. Luc. 8.) but
the bearers of the word preached? From the pleasant pasture? The Church for
pleasure and plenty is Gods Carmel, Es^^. ^2.16 Psalm. 68.15
Iustitia in Charmel sedebit: Gods Bashan. The mountain of God is as the mount
of Bashan: finally upon the Church as upon Jacob, is the smell of a Field that
the Lord has blessed. Genesis 27.27


Ye are Gods building, house, and land, manor, and demaines, make an absolute
possession. The Church is not only Gods vine, but his vine upon his house
sides: Psalm. 128.3
such is the wife to her Husband, Such is Christ's Spouse; or rather Vineyard
and house, and all. His corne-ground, and his barn: but his corne-ground here,
his barn in Heaven. His pleasant pasture, whiles he wanders in her love. His
retrait, Pro. 5.19
and place of habitation, when, turning from the troubles of the world, he
quiets himself in his love. Zeph. 3.17
His husbandry tilled, dressed, fenced, by him: his building, founded,
fashioned, furnished by him: and both husbandry, and building, in one, because
both rooted and built in him: Col. 2.7 Esaias 61.3
Rooted in him, as a tree of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he
might be glorified. Built up in him, Ephesians. 2.21
in whom all the building, coupled together, grows into an holy Temple in
the Lord. In whom ye also are built together to be the habitation Ephesians. 2.22
of God by the spirit. Lo here then a growing-Temple, Psalm. 92.13
in which whosoever be planted, shall flourish in the courts of God. Gods
house, and the furniture of his house, is built of green growing timber. Our
bed is green: of living stones. Can. 1.16 1. Pet. 2.5
Else how should the Church be a spiritual house, as there she is called,
unless she were an house, not inhabited only, but animated also with the
spirit of life; a living house, that she may be the house of the living God. 1.
Tim. 3.15


For application of this point. If ye be Gods husbandry, beloved, and that
labored upon by his servants the Ministers, ye must yield fruit for God, and
fruit for his servants.

Fruit for God. If in all this time, with all this pains, the Regions be not
white to harvest, they are dry, and barren for the fire. But what fruit?
thernes, and weeds? Indeed that is the fruit, our corrupt nature naturally
yeildeth; being as the accursed earth, that brings forth thorns and thistles
to Adam, Genesis 3.18
and his sinful issue. But ye are Gods husbandry: not his possession only,
but his possession husbanded, therefore ye must be, Heb. 6.7.8.
as the ground, which drinking in the Rain, that comes ost upon it, and
bringing forth herbs meet for the use of them, by whom it is dressed,
receives blessing of God: not as that, which, bearing thorns and briars is
nere unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. The Maniches abhorred
husbandry, counting it murder, to kill the weeds, etc. This is no Heresy for
a good husband to be of. Gods ground must not receive seed among thorns, but
into an heart, well manured, purged from the love of sin, and of this world,
into an honest a good and a patient heart. Luke 8.15


If not thorns, then what fruit? surely such as the Lord sows or planteth;
the sweet, mild, and wholesome fruits of sincerity, humility, piety,
mercy, and sobriety, etc. These fruits must they bring forth that will bring
forth fruit unto God, that having their fruit in holiness, Romans 6.22.
they may have in the end eternal life, But (ah!) beloved, if the Lord come to
take a taste of our fruits, how soon shall his teeth be set on edge? If he
look for sincerity, he shall meet with palpable hypocrisy: if for
humility, self-love, and singularity: if for piety, profaneness, and
blasphemy: if for mercy, oppresso^, usury and robberies: if for sobriety,
surfeiting, and drunkenness, all manner of looseness, and superfluity. And
all those under a visor and veil of the profession of Christianity: and with
names of excuse, and pretenses of neighborhood, and good fellowship, of
frugalitie, of liberty, and in genuitie, and I know not what; to blere the
eyes of men, that are easily deceived with sour grapes, with wildings, and
with starued corn, and tares instead of Grapes, Apples, and good grain. Gal.
6.7
But be not deceived, God is not mocked. If these be the fruits we yield, in
recompense of his care and husbandry, Esaias 5.5
he will take away the hedge and wall of protection from bodily and spiritual
enemies: Psalm. 80.12.13.
and then the wild Bore out of the Forest will root us up, and the roaring
Lion that seeks for his prey, may quickly devour us: he will give off his
care, and cost, of dressing us by his word, and then the Briars, and Thorns
will grow up, the seeds of vice will horribly break forth, and over grow us: he
will command the clouds above, Esaias 5.5
that they rain no Rain upon us, that is, he will restrain his grace, even
his restraining grace shall be taken away, and the curse of everlasting
barrenness and filthiness pronounced; Mat. 21.19 Ezekiel. 24.13
never more fruit grow on thee; because I would have purged thee, and thou
would not be purged, never be thou purged from thy filthiness.

Fruit unto Gods servants, 1. Cor. 9.7
and fellow laborers. Who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the
flock? It is a hard bargain that will not maintain both the Householder and
his charge; especially so many, as beslow their travel upon it. The earth is
the Emblem of Justice: and of her, Usury may be taken with a good conscience:
and what usury? one of ten? nay ten for one. Loc then, how God deals with
thee for temporal matters; giving thee (with thy travail, where to he
enables thee) ten for one, he demands of thee, for the maintenance of his
servants the Ministers, one of ten, ten in the hundred. They are bound to
impart to thee, all the counsel of God, the treasures of his wisdom, love,
Act. 20 27
truth, etc. Ought not thou then, that art taught in the word, make him,
Gal. 6.6
that has taught thee, partaker with thee of all thy goods? partaker of all:
that is, of every kind some share must come to Gods fellow-laborer, who whiles
he sowes unto thee spiritual things (an emploiment, 1. Cor. 9.11
that disables him from worldly business, and yet freeth him not from the common
necessities of other me^) is it a great matter, if he reap thy carnal things?
(...), to have the Gospel without cost, were a thing would like this age well.
But the Age is past, that could afford it (and yet did not always afford it,
much less enjoin it for perpetuity) I mean the Apostle age; wherein men,
extraordinarily called were immediately furnished to preach the gospel: called,
without preparation: furnished, without premeditatio^. Now the case is
otherwise, Vbi no^ est farina, ibi non est lex: no maintenance, no Ministry.
Men must serve more then one Apprenticehood in the schools of the Prophets,
ere they be fitted for this calling: and every exercise, if performed with
care and conscience, will set a work both head, and heart. And could thou
find in thy heart, 1. Cor. 9.9
to muzzle the mouth of this Ox, that treads out the corn for thee? 2. Sam.
24.24
David would not serve God of that which cost him nothing. How far from
David's spirit are they that think nothing so well gained, or saved, as from
the allowance, appointed for Christ's Ministers? But how fearfully far off, or
rather contrary are they, who to scrape a little pelf, Act. 8.20
that shall perish with them, open no door unto the pastor of souls, but that
of indirect Symonie, and direct perjury? no marvel if the charg so sold, and so
bought, prove Aceldama, a field of blood, both to the seller, Act. 1.19
and to the buyer. If ye be Gods building, beloved ye must be squared to his
model, fitted and furnished for his entertainme^t: squared to his model. The
pattern, and platform of Gods building, consists in faith, and love.

1 Faith whereby we rely on Christ, the foundation, being spiritually glued
and cimented to him, that we may be one spiritual body with him; in which
sense it is said, He that is glued to the Lord is one spirit, Cords will
bind, 1. Cor. 6.17
so will the cords of love, Hos. 11.4 Zech. 11.7
and bands of discipline, but cords may be unknit: nails will fasten, and we
have the words of the wise, as nails, fastened by the Masters of the
Assembly, but nails may slip, or leave a chinke: But the glue of faith
ioynes close, or rather, all these together will cause us, Act. 11.23
with purpose of heart, to cleave unto the Lord.

2 Love, whereby we are knit one unto another; every stone so fashioned to
that he ioynes withal, that it may seem (as one says) there is not in Gods
building a stone upon a stone, but all the stones are one entire stone. Thus is
Jerusalem built even as a City compact together in it self: Psalm. 122.3. etc.
where there is uniformity of worship, the Tribes go up to praise the Lord:
and uniformity of government, the thrones are set for judgment. Woe worth
they, that, renting themselves, 1. Tim. 1.19
from the foundation by shipwreck of faith, or from the building, by breach of
love (or rather, first falling out with the walls, and then with the
foundation; for this is the Devils dance, first into Schism, then into
Heresy as Augustine observes in the Donatists) woe worth they, I say, who,
thus renting themselves from the Temple of Christ amongst us, do seek with
axes, and hammers (with the axes of their tongues, and the hammers of their
heads) to deface and batter down this beautiful pile. But if any man destroy
the Temple of the Lord, him shall God destroy, says our Apostle, verse 17

Ye must no less be fitted for the Lords entertaiment. Every man, according to
his degree, loves to have his house trim, and delight some. The Devil himself
likes well, when his house is empty, swept, and garnished: Mat. 12.44
empty of good thoughts, swept from good exercises, garnished with
appearances, and incitements unto evil. The Lord, in a contrary sense, loves
to have his house also empty, swept, and garnished: Empty of pride and
vainglory, swept and rid of the sluttish corners of vice and impuritie,
garnished with his own arms of holiness, and with the image of his son,
the new Creature. This shall be a Temple in the Lords eyes more beautiful,
then that of Solomon; yea by his own sentence preferred before it. Esaias 63.1.2
Where is the house, that ye will build unto me? and where is that place of my
rest? To him will I look, even to him, etc. Would thou then entertain this
guest? Dress up thine house, garnish the Temple of thy soul with grace, paue
it with love; so was Salomons palace paued with the love of the Daughters of
Jerusalem. Cant. 3.10
Thus if thou build God an house, 2. Sam. 7
he will build thee an house, as he promised David.

Yea, thus building, thou buildest not for God only, but for thy self, a good
foundation for the time to come; when all other buildings, 1. Tim. 6.19
and their foundation, the Earth, shall fail. For in this world, what buildest
thou? An house? Yea rather a lodge, ^ an Inn, where thou shall be but a guest:
if not, abide there still, or leave it to those, that can abide in it for ever.
A Church? a place for Gods service, as this? A gracious work, and well may we
cry, Zech. 4.7
grace, grace unto it; but (oh!) how much more glorious a Temple, in Gods eyes,
is the heart, that, in an holy desire to further this work of the spiritual
building, was moved either to enterprise, or to finish it!

Thus, Reverend Fathers, and Brethren, have I endeavored to open these
words, and to allot to our several callings, several instructions. Now to
close up text, and book, and withal to remit our professions, thus severed,
give leave for a word of farewell.

First unto you, my fellow laborers with the Lord, in the Lord. We are so
laborers with God, that we are also, with the people, a part of Gods
husbandry, and his building. Inde pasco, vnde pascor, inde vobis appono, vnde
and ego viuo, says S. Augustine. As therefore it is our duty Ministerial, to
preach unto others, so it is our duty Christian and general, to take care, 1.
Cor. 9.27
that whiles we preach unto others, we our selves be not reproved; therefore
to preach that to our selves, which we preach to them. When we preach to
others, we dress the common earth whence we are taken; and it is meet, earth
should till earth: but that is not enough. We must husband our own earth.
They made me a keeper of the vines, Cant. 1.5
says the Church, but I have not kept mine own vine. Indeed we may say Quis
custodiat ipsos Custodes? Psalm. 121.4
Who? but the keeper of Israel. To him let us pray, that whiles we do dolare
lapides, he would vouchsafe dolare artifices.

Secondly, unto you, my dear Brethren; you are not so discharged, either by
Gods sovereign or our subordinate working, but that you must also put to your
hands and work out, Phil. 2.12
not the price but the assurance of your own salvation; yea, of one another. A
duty enjoined all Christians, unto all, so far as we may, by prayer,
example, and such like common duties; especially in your families the little
nurseries, and Seminaries of Church, and Commonwealth, to look that God have
a petty Church and, as it were, a school of petties: a great help unto their
profiting, a great furtherance to the Ministers pains. Finally, when
extraordinary calling brings any of you to assist, as now you do, in the
inspection, and reformation, of the bodies of the Country, to show your selves
men circumspect, and friends to your own consciences; which you cannot be,
unless, with an upright respect, to the religion of your oath, and the good of
the places where you dwell, you carefully, and impartially, discharge the trust
committed unto you. Thus we with you, and you with us, husbanding, and being
husbanded, edifying, and being edified, shall approve our mutual service unto
the great shepherd, 1. Pet. 2.25
and Bishop of our souls, Christ Jesus the Just. To whom, etc.

Errata.
Page 13. lin. last, for prove, read afford. p. 21. l. 25. wrath, r. wealth. p.
54. l. 5. Camp, r. Lamp. p. 63. l. 15. watchfulness, r. watchlesnesse. p.
70. l. 10. obedience, r. abstinence. p. 91. l. 18. r. wheat by measure and the
appointed, etc. Ibid. in Marg. Isay 28.25, 26. Ibid. lin. 20. Bazaliel, read
Bezaliel. p. 98. l. 22. inheritage, r. inheritance. p. 99. lin. 26. day, r.
days. p. 102. l. 9. congruit, read congruat. Ibid. l. 14. enjoy, r. envy. p.
106. l. 12. same beams, r. sun beams. p. 116. l. 6. we, r. ye. p. 127. l.
9. remit, read reunite.

THE DISCOVERY OF THE HEART, TRACED BY HIS Treasure.

Jn a Sermon preached unto an Honorable assembly at BATH, SEPT. 19. 1613.

By SAMVEL CROOK.

PSALM. 4.6. Many say, Who will show us any good? but, Lord, lift up the light
of thy countenance upon us.

LONDON, Printed by Will. Stansby for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop under S. Augustines gate. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL JOHN TONSTAL ESQVIER, GENTLEMAN VSHIER to the Queens
Majesty, health and happiness.
WOrthy Sir,
(Of whom being loved for the truth, J may and must profess with the beloved
Disciple, 2. Ioh. ver. 1.
that I love you in the truth; and not J only, but also all that have known
your unfeigned love unto the truth.

As you were the means to bring these Meditations unto the hearing of many; so
now they are not less glad, then bold, under your name to offer themselves to
the view of all. Wherein my desire and aim has been, to direct both the
worldly hypocrite, and the weak Christian, in the search and knowledge of
himself. A point of no less difficulty, then necessity: but the same light
of the Word, that shows us the necessity, does also aid us against the
difficulty; teaching both the Hypocrite to judge of his worldly, though
disguised, disposition, and the weak Christian to descrie his happy, though
concealed, condition. The one, by his treasure, laid up on earth, is led to the
knowledge of his earthly heart: the other, by his heart, affecting the things
that are above, is assured of his title unto the heavenly treasure. The Lord
open the eyes of both sorts, that being informed of the way wherein, and end
whereto they are walking, the one may be reproved and reduced, the other
comforted and encouraged; and finally of the latter sort all, of the former
some, at the least, may be saved.

And now (Worthy Sir) J commend you to that GOD, who is able to keep you that
you fall not; Iud. ver. 24
and to that word of his grace, Act. 20.32.
which as it has taught you to choose the good part, Luk 10.42
which shall not be taken from you, so it is able to build you up further, and
to give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified; and rest,

Your Worships in the Lord Jesus, to be commanded. Sam. Crook.

THE DISCOVERY Of the Heart.
MATTHEW. 6.21. For where your Treasure is, there will your heart be also.


RIght Honorable, Worshipful, and Beloved, to us all are the words of this
Scripture intended; none so mean, but has a treasure to look to; none so
high, but is content to make his heart his Treasurer. This is it that makes the
Lord, not without jealousy, to enquire after our treasure, because thereby he
sees what right or wrong is done him in the matter of our heart. A part that
he loves so well, that, knowing heart and treasure will go together, he is
content himself to be our treasure, that none but he may have our heart. Well
says the wisdom of God, My delight is with the children of men. Prou. 8.31.
A delight dearly bought; when to have this our heart and soul, this whereby
we are men, for his treasure, he is contented to give himself in exchange.
Great reason then he should take notice how this his Treasure is employed by
us. Great reason that having given it to us at the first, and now redeemed it
of us at so high a rate, he should not only claim it of us, My Son give me
thy heart; Prou. 23.26.
but direct us while it is in our keeping, how to handle and husband it: Prou.
42.3.
Keep thy heart above all keepings, for from thence proceed the outgoings of
life, says Solomon. But lo here a greater then Solomon, Solomon's Lord and
ours, urges the care of this his treasure, and that we might not abuse or
abase his Treasure, wills us to consider what we make our own treasure,
assuring us that we cannot divide the one from the other, But where our
treasure is there will our heart be also.

To him therefore let us all attend, of him let us learn; not regarding what
most men do, for that (as Seneca says) is argumentum pessimi, the best note
of the worst way, but what they should do: nor what we do, but what we say,
that say many times and do not, of whom that is true, which he says of his
Philosophers, Non praestant quod loquuntur, magnum tamen praestant quod
loquuntur: Say they do not that they speak, yet is it much they do for us
that they speak; much indeed, seeing in them Christ speaks, to whom it
becomes every soul to answer, 1. Sam. 3.10.
Speak Lord for thy servant hears.

Our blessed Savior therefore in this excellent Sermon, intending to fashion
in his Disciples, a righteousness exceeding that of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Chap. 5.20.
who both were breakers of the Commandments, and taught men so to do; First,
clears the Law in many particulars from their corrupt and partial
Expositions, Cap. 5.21. And secondly, advises them to shun their
Hypocritical and covetous practices in this Chapter: Thirdly, enioyneth them
to be reformers not only of others (as they were) but also, and that
principally, of themselves, and so leads them farther on unto perfection.
Chap. 7.

That he means the Pharise by the Hypocrite, deciphered in the several
actions of Alms, Prayer, and Fasting, in the former part of this Chapter, is
not greatly questionable; if we consider how elsewhere he entailes this title
unto that family, Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.13. etc.
Hypocrites: But to be worldly and covetous, seems rather the sin of
Gentiles then of Pharisees, men of austere and regular conversation. But even
this also was one of their virtues, as the Evangelist Luke observes in
recording some part of this very dehortation: Luke 16.14.
All these things heard the Pharisees also which were covetous; and proves it
against them, by the same token they mocked him. Indeed the very character of
a worldling, who of all other sinners is most indocible and incorrigible,
having his Religion in numerato, and being resolved what he has to do, and
therefore pleasantly deriding whosoever shall take upon him to give him
direction. Notwithstanding unto such of whom there might be hope, our Savior
addresseth a twofold dehortation against a twofold avarice, the one in keeping
or hoarding, ver. 19. etc. The other in seeking wealth, ver. 25. etc. Touching
the former he shows:

1. Where we should not lay up our Treasure, and why, ver. 19.

2. Where we may and ought to lay it up, and why, ver. 20.

3. In these words he gives a common reason of both, why not on earth but in
Heaven, because where your treasure is, etc. leaving us to make up the
Syllogism, But your heart ought not to be on Earth but in Heaven. In Heaven
therefore not on Earth must your treasure be laid up.

So that here we have to consider.

1. The cohabitation of the heart and the Treasure, wheresoever; from the
Proposition expressed. 2. The habitation of the heart not on Earth but in
Heaven; from the assumption necessarily implied. 3. That which of it own
accord will thereon ensue, That our treasure must be laid up not in Earth but
in Heaven.
For the first, Where the treasure is there is the heart, we need no other
proof of this Proposition (if prouerbiall maxims need any proof at all) but
the opening of the terms of which it consists. Treasure is that that men
set by, and make reckoning of, especially that which is in highest estimation
with every man; whether it be Wealth, Pleasure, Authority, Fame, or
whatsoever. By the Heart we must understand, according to the phrase of the
Holy Ghost, the Soul of man, especially the Will, choosing and affecting this
Treasure. Now betwixt these two, the Treasure, and the Heart, the good thing,
and the appetite, there is such relation, that it is hard to define the one
without the other. In so much that Aristotle commends that definition of good,
A good thing is whatsoever is desired: which if it be so in every thing that
is accounted good, how much more in that which is accounted best, and is
desired for it self? So that where the Treasure is there is the Heart, is as
if one should say, where that is, which the heart best loves, there is the
heart, whether we love it, because we like it, or like it because we love it:
There indeed is the heart, not so much where it Lives (if we believe either
Philosophy or experience) as where it Loves. Admit a Treasure, it is easy to
know both the Treasury, the Heart that imbraceth it, and the Treasurer (or
else he wants his will) the Man that affects it. And if he affect it for it
self, as here is supposed, he bestows his reasonable infinite appetite upon
it; for whatsoever is loved for it self is loved infinitely. The Treasure
therefore and the Heart are never parted (whatsoever the hand be) neither is
the Heart parted unto this Treasure, for it is wholly taken up with the love of
it: Neither can it be imparted or communicated unto any other thing with it,
but is only tied unto this one Treasure, affecting all other things
respectively, as they make with or against this only best beloved.

See this in the several sorts of treasure which men affect: they are but two,
we may the better survey them. One man has his Treasure on earth. Where is his
Heart? In heaven? Nay heaven is hell to such an one, and heavenly exercises are
as hellish torments; Oh torment him not before his time: If you can show him
any good, as he calls good: If you can fill his God-belly with some hidden
treasure, some delicious morsel: If you can prophecy to him of Wine and strong
drink: If you can help him with any of that Godliness which he means, viz.
Gain, then come and wel-come. But if you come with your dreams of another
world, Act. 24.26.
of heaven and hell, of Righteousness, Temperance, and the judgment to come,
you trouble Faelix his felicity, you bring him in danger of a quaking Ague:
either you shall pardon him for hearing you any farther, or you shall give him
leave to hear as Ezekiels hearers; Ezekiel. 33.31.
His mouth making jests at you, his heart going all the while after his
covetousness. Ier. 22.17.
For indeed both Eyes and Heart are only for covetousness, and that which comes
thereof.

Another man has laid up his treasure in heaven: where is his heart? on earth
think you? nay, Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and I have desired none in earth with thee:
Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will require, that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord and to visit his holy Temple. Phil. 3.7.8.
The things that were vantage to me, the same I counted loss for Christ's
sake: yea doubtless I think all things but loss for the excellent knowledge
sake of CHRIST JESUS my LORD; for whom I have counted all things loss, and do
judge them to be dung, that I might win Christ. 2. Cor. 4.18.
For we look not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are not
seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, Psalm. 4.6.
but the things which are not seen are eternal. Wherefore, though many say who
will show us any good? yet Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us.
Let others content themselves with a portion in this life, Psalm. 17.14, 15.
whose bellies thou fillest with thy hidden treasure; but I will behold thy
face in righteousness, and when I awake I shall be satisfied with thine Image.
Do you not note how the heart goes after the treasure? How it is wholly
possessed with it? How it disdaines to entertain a rival? In so much that the
one of these men will not taste of the others delicates. Psalm. 141.4.
What doubt then, but where the treasure is there is the heart also? If in
earth, it gives poise to the soul to sink with all: If in heaven, it gives
wings, not of a Dove, or of an Eagle, but of an Angel, to ascend withal, that
where the treasure is there may the heart be also.

Is there any then among us ( Right Honorable and Beloved) that would know
where his stray heart is? or where his treasure is? he shall be sure to find
the one by the other: but because the heart is most cunning and deceitful above
all things, and who can know it? Ierem. 17.9.
and as Aug. says, Cor omne omni cordi clausu^, no one heart can unlock an
other; let us a little extend this line of our Savior, and by his direction,
that made, and therefore knows the heart, endeavor to find out this same
fugitive. We need seek it but in two places. For by our Saviors division in
the two former verses, every man's treasure is either in earth, or in heaven:
but they are wide you will say. True; but we need but bring conscience to the
door, it will easily discern the Treasure, and by the treasure the heart.

For my part, me thinks, I descry in each of these Regions a twofold order of
hearts; one open and manifest, an other close and concealed, yet with diligence
to be discovered; as we will see in the seueralls.

To begin with the worldling, whose heart points to the earth as the loadstone
to the Pole, we may plainly see this leprosy in most men's foreheads; and yet
they will deny it too. For the worldly man seldom thinks himself worldly;
frugall if ye will, but not covetous: nay, when all men else both see and say
it, then does he shut both his eyes, and ears against it; better known to
any man then himself. But happily even now he has forgot to shut the door,
or the Lord may (we know he can) break open the Iron gate of his heart, that
he may begin to see and to abhor himself. In a manifest worldling therefore
we shall see these apparent characters, proving his heart and treasure to be
upon the earth. First looking to the earth, and earthly treasure, Pro. 21.6.
which as Solomon says, is vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death,
we shall see by the Ball who are the Tennis plaiers: or as a man is known to
travail to Fair or Market, by his cariages, his company, his communication,
so it will appear that most men mind and aim at earthly things, if we
consider.

1. Their course of life and actions; all taken up in buying, and selling,
eating, and drinking, building, and planting, and such like; this is their
business while they live, their story when they are dead, like those of the
old world, and of Sodom, Luke 17.26. etc.
without any care or provision for their spiritual and everlasting estate.

2. Their company, birds of the same feather (I speak of the company which
they choose and delight in) Such as will ioyn with them in excessive sports and
pleasures, such as can advance their worldly proiects, or happily upon whose
ruins they may build their covetous and ambitious designs. But if any man
refrain from iniquity, Esa. 59.15.
refuse to run into the same excess of riot, 1. Pet. 4.4.
or be so bold as to preach righteousness to them by voice, or by example;
either he is their prey, or their laughing stock, or at least so strange, so
humorous, so unsociable, that there is no conuersing with him.

3. Their speech and communication, of earth, not of heaven, the language of
Egypt, not of Canaan: of pleasure profit, preferment; extolling greatness
without goodness, despising goodness without greatness, repyning at it even
in greatness. Nabal, as his name imports, speaks of Nebalah, folly and
wickedness, avarice and worldliness; hereto adulterating the holy name of
good. Who will show us any good? Psa^^.


And can any worldling plead not guilty against these evidences? but let us
turn our faces to heauen-ward, and see how he stands affected that way.

Pro. 17.16.
1. Wherefore (says Solomon) is there a price in the hand of the fool to get
wisdom, and he has no heart? God gives these outward things, as means to
purchase and procure those heavenly tresures. But as if a foolish wretch should
choose rather to starve at the Bakers stall, then lay out his penny in bread,
so (GOD knows) many a wretched man famisheth his soul to spare his purse;
Psalm. 63.1.
contented to live in a barren and dry Wilderness, where there is neither
bread, nor water of life, where there is no vision, no preaching (and there,
says Solomon, Pro. 29.18.
The people are naked) rather then to feed his Kids by the Tents of the
Shepherds, that is, Cant. 1.7.
to dwell where he may hear, or (which were more charitable) to procure that
he with others may hear where he dwells.

2. Whereas in earthly things he envies even Solomon himself, and is ready to
say with him, Who could eat, or who could have to outward things more then I?
Eccles. 2.25,
in heavenly things he is so modest, that he draws back, and gives every man
leave to go before him (scias ibi animum esse) and he can give goodly reasons
why he uses this respect: such an one is better learned then I, at better
leisure then I, elder then I, younger then I, richer then I, poorer then I, has
more health then I, more sickness then I, more trouble then I, more quiet then
I, (any premises will serve when men are willing with the conclusion)
therefore it is fit that he should go before me in zeal, in knowledge, in
piety, in contempt of the World, etc. Too much good manners for a narrow way,
Mat. 7.14.
and a strait gate, Mat. 11.12.
for a City that must suffer violence, and be taken by force; as our Savior
compares the Kingdom of heaven.

3. Whereas for worldly affairs no time can be unseasonable or ouerlong, for
pleasures let the night be transformed to lengthen out the day, for ease let
the day be muffled to make a long night, for gain or advancement no pain to
rise early, Psalm. 127.2.
to lie down late, and to eat the bread of carfulness, to endure any thing
rather then loose an opportunity: bring this man to heavenly exercises, move
him to consideration of his spiritual estate, begin to enter into his
conscience, 2. King. 9.11.
and then wherefore came this mad fellow hither? Act. 24.26.
Depart for this time, and when I have a convenient time I will call for thee:
time enough to think of these matters once in a while, and a little at once; all
repletion is loathsome, but above all to surfeit of Religion: tell me of another
world when I have done with this: repentance does best at the last, when there
is no danger of recalling it. What more apparent badge and recognisance? what
more legible Image and superscription can there be to prove a man to belong to
this earthly Mammon? may we not conclude of such, that the trial of their
countenance testifies against them, Esa. 3.9.
they declare their sins as Sodom, they hide them not?

But there is another pack of worldlings, more secret and subtle, that seek
deep to hide their counsels (if it were possible) from the Lord, Esa. 29.15.
for their works are in darkness, and they say, who sees us and who knows
us? These must be descryed, not by their actions, but by their grounds and
ends, and therefore not by others so well as by themselves. Indeed though every
worldling be not an hypocrite, yet every hypocrite is a worldling; though with
a Visor of piety upon his face, to deceive man that sees him no farther. It is
in vain therefore to look on his outside, for possibly he prays, he fasts
(at least in public) he paies tithe of Mint and Annisse, he gives Alms, he
builds Temples for Gods worship, Sepulchers for the Prophets: In every thing
that may make a show of piety; he is with the most forward, and yet for all
this is but a painted Sepulcher, he has but one heart, and that rotten with
the love of the world, and devoted unto the earthly treasure. Indeed he is
called by St. James (...), Iam. 1.6.
A man of a double mind: and the old Testament ascribes to such an heart, and
an heart, as if we would say an heart for the world, and an heart for God: but
the heart he allows to God, is not a David, 1. Sam. 19.13.
but as Michols Puppet, instead of David, to delude Saul: no; for our Savior
himself proves, that no man can serve two contrary Masters, God and Mammon,
verse 24. Let us see therefore which of these this hyne serves: and first
examine him concerning the world.

1. He looks not right forward upon the world, as the former; but, as Lots
wife, Luke 17.32.
turns his head over the shoulder, 1. Cor. 7.31.
not using this world, as if he used it not, which is the Apostles precept: but
not using it, as if he used it. In which hypocrisy the Regulars among Papists,
especially the Jesuits, are ringleaders; no sort of men so deeply affecting,
so finely fingering these earthly treasures as they, under a show of refusal.
And are there not among us many favorable titles of courtesy, to style a
Nabal Honorable, and a Churl liberal? yes surely; for if he take no usury,
or not above ten in the hundred; if he take not forfeiture of bands, if he
turn not Towns into Pastures, and Villages into sheep-walkes; if he rack not
rents, or exact no more fine, then the greedy emulation of Tennants will cast
upon him: If he enclose not Commons, or engrosse not common commodities; If he
turn not Temples into mony-banks, and seats of justice into receipts of
custom; If he have all these, or any of these to say for himself, who can
deny him to be a good commonwealths man? a man that is content to let earthly
things go their own way, his heart is other where. And yet many an one thus
bearing himself, seeks only his own advantage, in honor, ease, pleasure,
which are no less world, no less earth, no less Ma^mon, then wealth it
self. And not in wealth also? yes; and keeps due account, that whatsoever he
spends, forbeares, or abates one way, shall bring him in as much an other way.

2. Let any trouble befall this man: whether flies he? Job. 31.24.
but to the wedge of gold, to buy his peace, to procure him favor, liberty,
credit, etc. and is not this his God then? his Rock? his confidence? See this
plain difference betwixt the worldly and the heavenly mind. The name of the
Lord is a strong Tower, Pro. 18.10.11.
the righteous runs unto it, and is exalted: The rich man's riches are his
strong City, and as an high wall in his imagination: not every one that maks
use of this treasure, for his safety, but he that flies to it as unto God, to
it before God, to it and not unto God, that takes not God for his strength,
Psalm. 52.7.
but trusts unto the multitude of his riches, or trusts God no farther, but
according to the proportion and quantity he has of riches and worldly means;
this man is a worldling.

3. Let the hand of God be upon him in that he loves best in this world,
whether his wealth, his credit, his place, and then you shall see whether his
heart be there or no: you shall see him (with the young man in the Gospel)
heart-smitten; Mat. 19.22.
for that that touches his treasure, touches his heart; happily with Nabal, his
heart will die within him, 1. Sam. 25.37.
and turn into a stone: 2. Sam. 17.23.
happily with Achitophel, when he sees his credit empayred, his safety
desperate, he will wisely and considerately put his house in order, and make
away with himself; for how can he live without an heart, which is now gone
after his treasure?

Again, bring this man to trial in heavenly things, and set him as it were
face to face before God: There we shall find, at least he shall find, whom it
most concerns to know;

First, that the ground, whereon he builds his profession, is earthly and
worldly, viz. either fear of danger, and detriment (for who would not sleep
in a whole skin) or hope of reward or preferment, whereof he is the more
capable, because he professes. The summer and sunshine of the Gospel, guarded
with authority, brings in these Swallows, and Butter-flies, evil birds, but
good signs; and therefore we may pray for, and bless the days, when there
are many hypocrites, seeing they are Salomons days, Psalm. 72.7.
wherein the righteous flourish (though with the Wheat the Darnell will grow
too:) Esthers days, wherein many Heathens will be Jews, Ester. 8.17.
because the fear of the Jews is fallen upon them. But he that thus
embraces religion, embraces it not as a treasure, but as a means to preserve
or to procure this earthly treasure: Godliness is not his gain, but his gain
is his godliness; he cares not to be rich in grace, but would seem gracious,
that he might become rich. Is not this plain Simony, to make money of the
gifts of the holy Ghost? but what says the answer of God, in the mouth of
the Apostle Peter? Thou have neither part nor fellowship in this business,
Act. 8.21.
for thine heart is not upright in the sight of God. And so it will one day
appear. For hypocrites, like Witches, Revel. 3.17.
are Rich in their own opinion, and want nothing; but when a grain of grace,
as much as a grain of mustard seed, would do them good, in the day of
temptation, and the hour of death; then it vanishes from them, and they are
left wretched, and miserable, poor, and blind, and naked: Job. 8.13.
for the hypocrites hope shall perish.

2. It will appear that this man embraced the treasure of Religion, not as in
wedlock, for better for worse: but upon Articles, and reseruations; and so the
condition disannuls the contract. For as Paul wished King Agrippa to be as
himself, except his bonds, Act. 26.29.
pointing to that which his earrhly heart stumbled at, and which left him but
almost a Christian: so many a worldling wishes and pretends himself to be
a Disciple of Christ, but excepts the first lesson of Christianity, The
denial of himself, and the taking up of the Cross; as if he would enter
into the house, upon condition he might not pass over the threshold; and so
lives and dies, not altogether, but almost a Christian, and is not altogether,
but almost saved, because he refuses that, wherewith others are scarsly saved:
1. Pet. 4.17.18.
oh! how much better to be scarsly saved, saved as by fire, then to content
himself with almost? 1. Cor. 3.15.
Quod vix fit, fit, quod fere fit non fit; he that is scarsly saved, is
certainly saved, though not without difficulty: he that is almost saved, is
certainly damned without redemption.

3. It will appear, that whereas in earthly things he is loath to limit his
good fortune, loath to say so much wealth, honor, etc. shall serve my turn: or
if he once said it, yet when he sees himself so far, vnsaies it again,
and propounds an higher pitch to his desires: In these heavenly things he is
soon come to his stature and period, he can quickly write nil vltra; and
happily retire a little, and think he was too precise, to proceed so far.
A common sickness; many an one thinks himself good enough, scarce any thinks
himself rich enough; why? but because this Treasure has his whole Heart, which
loves infinitely: but that has only what may be spared, and therefore is
loved accordingly.

Thus have I labored to hold out a glass unto the worldling, wherein he may
see himself: and I doubt not, but diverse here present do now discern in
themselves these traces of an Earthly mind: for why should we not look for
Ezekiels lot, to have men look in our faces, as if they were good hearers and
yet their hearts all the while rouing after their Mammon? or that, when men's
bodies are in sacello, their hearts (as Augustine complayneth) are at home in
sacellis suis? but oh beloved, let my counsel be acceptable unto you: remove
your treasure into heaven* that your heart may remove after it, for where, etc.

But to this purpose we shall hear somewhat in the point following: now let me
discharge my promise and find out some, whose Treasure may prove their Heart to
be in heaven.

And of this kind, as of the former, there are two sorts, some plain and
apparently heavenly, others not so readily discerned; yet least of all to be
neglected.

For the former sort, I need but name them, nor all, but some of the
principal: I mean of those primitive Saints, now in glory, who having
attained that which they desired, are the best direction for us, how to seek
what they have attained.

I propound therefore to our consideration the Father and Fountain of the
faithful, Abraham, with Isaac, and Jacob, heirs with him of the same promise;
Heb. 11.9.10. etc.
who all looked for a City having a foundation, whose maker and builder is
God. Who professing themselves strangers and pilgrims upon earth, declared
plainly that they sought a Country: not that from whence they came, for then
they had leisure to have returned: nor that Land of promise, whereto they were
called (or if that, for the promise, not for the land) for they desired a
better then both, even an heavenly; Wherefore God is not ashamed of them, etc.

I propound Moses, that man of God, that chose rather to suffer adversity with
the people of God, Heb. 11.25.26.
then to enjoy the pleasurs of sin for a season; Esteeming the rebuke of
Christ greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt; for he had respect unto
the recompense of the reward.

I propound unto you David, that man after Gods own heart, Psalm. 4.7.
whose heart was more ioyed with the favorable countenance of God, then the
worldling with whatsoever abundance of Corn and Wine.

I propound unto you those twelve Peers of Christendom, the Lambs twelve
Apostles (taking Matthias into the room of Judas that hypocritical thief) who
by their foreman Peter profess, Behold we have forsaken all and followed
thee. Mat. 19.27.


Finally, I propound unto you that chosen vessel, that great Doctor and
Apostle of the Gentiles, Paul, who in the matter of this Earthly treasure,
Phil. 4.12.
could want or abound, be empty or full, could live, or die, as might most
advantage his cause and Gospel, who was to him in life and death advantage:
Phil. 1.20.21.
but as touching the heavenly, forgetful of whatsoever was behind, Phil.
3.13.14.
he endeavored himself unto that which was before, and strove hard toward
the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

To these we may well set up, not Altars, or Images, as the Papists, for
adoration, but yet monuments for co^memoration and admiration; or rather,
seeing God has set forth these unto us as a cloud of witnesses, going before
us into the heavenly Canaan, the place of our treasure, Heb. 12.1.
let us also cast away every thing that presses down (and what presses
so much as this earthly Mammon?) together with the sin that hangs so fast
on, and following these our forefathers in the Faith (though as he says, non
passibus aequis) approve our selves, in our proportion, to be of the same brood
of seekers, Psalm. 24.6.
even of that generation of Jacob, that compriseth all that seek the face of
God.

But our proportion, I take it, will better appear in the latter sort;
wherefore now I come to comfort the mourners in Sion, who would feign find both
heart and treasure in heaven: but of the one complain that they cannot, of the
other doubt that they shall not there find it.

Unto both which I hold forth this truth now in hand, where the treasure is,
there is the heart, they go together. Therefore grant me the heart and I
will easily prove the treasure, or the treasure, and I will as easily prove the
heart to be in heaven: but if neither will be granted (as many times
infirmity makes the one doubtful, and infidelity the other) yet I will
endeavor from that which is and must be granted, to conclude that which is
desired.

Thou doubtest thy treasure is not in heaven, thou have no part in God, no
right unto the inheritance of the Saints in light. Art thou willing to live in
this suspense? Do thou labor to put far away the thought of the evil day?
Do thou resolve to take thy part in the pleasures of sin for a season, Mat.
8.29.
only desiring, with the Devils, thou may not be tormented before thy time?
A woeful disposition, so to be resolved, so to be unresolved. But as I rather
wish, and hope, thou art afflicted with this doubt: thine heart trembles to
think of the event: thy soul longs, and thirsts after that peace, which
arises from the assurance of salvation: there is something in thee, that
strives against this doubt, and though unable for the present to clear and
remove it, yet allows it no quiet entertainment. Be of good cheer, there is a
seed of faith, an immortal seed, a certain and infallible conception of the
new Creature in thee. That it is mixed, or rather assaulted, and exercised with
fear and trembling, mistake not thy condition, it is the more hopeful and
comfortable. For what is it, that has disturbed thy security? that has
provoked, and drawn as it were into the lists thy natural infidelity? what?
but the spark of faith, that when it comes (and it shall certainly come) unto
a flame, will consume whatsoever opposes it self. Faith is not known, in the
Nonage, but by this conflict. Let men presume what they will, the faith that is
not thus militant in the beginning, shall never be triumpha^t in the end. Thus
even doubting, joined with diligence for resolution, argues faith, and so to
call our right in question, proves that we have a right unto Gods Kingdom,
more firm and solid then yet we understand. And if thou be the person I take
thee for, thou would not change this doubtful title, claim, or pretense of
thine, for all that Satan once offered to our Savior, Mat. ^.9.
and is now accepted by the Antichrist of Rome.

Thou complaynest thy heart is not in heaven: how then can thy treasure be
there? do but answer me; who taught thee so to complain? many thousands are
in the same state, which thou imputest unto thy self, yet complain not of it,
but go with pleasure and content in the broad way. Does nature in thee alone,
above all others, find fault with it self for lack of grace? nay, assure thy
self, it is grace, that desires more growth, more strength, more company,
that it may ouer-match and subdue nature. There is no rock more sure, then this
truth of God, that the heart that complains of the want of grace, desires
above al things the supply of that want, uses all holy means for the
procurement of that supply, cannot be destitute of saving grace. Why say I not
destitute? I should say unto such an one, O man, O woman, great is the measure
of the grace of God in thee. Great doubtless, if thy desire be great. For as
the grace desired, 1. Pet. 2.23.
is in part enjoyed, because the taste of grace begets the desire; and the
desire stirred up, must needs be cherished, because God will not famish the
souls of his Servants: Pro. 10.3.
so finally according to the desire, the grace shall be proportioned; else in
vain were that promised beatitude, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after righteousness, Matthew. 5.6.
for they shall be satisfied. Mistake not then in the desire, all is well and
safe. If thy soul long after God in the night, Esa. 26.9.
and thy spirit within thee seek him in the morning, there is a blessing
pronounced upon thee. Psalm. 105.3.
Let the soul of them that seek the Lord rejoice. 2. Chron. 15.2.
For the Lord is with thee if thou be with him, and if thou seek him he will
be found of thee. Pro. 2.4.5.
If thou seek grace as silver, and searchest for her as for treasures (i. e.
not with an idle wish, which slays the foolish, Pro. 21.25.
because his hands refuse to work: but (as the worldling seeks his Mammon,
with the uttermost of pains and endeavor) then shall thou understand the
fear of the Lord; and find the knowledge of God. It is not here as in earthly
treasure; many seek, and find not, many find, and enjoy not, some enjoy, but
keep not; for ere they be aware, they come to the parting place, and either
the treasure takes her wings as an Eagle, Pro. 23.5.
and flies into the heaven, or the man must go to his Mother earth, and she
will not have him, but naked, as she sent him forth. And yet such an one is
said, by a common absurdity, to die rich. Indeed the child of God dies rich,
and none but he. Not he, of whom it is said, Psalm. 49.17.
he shall take nothing away when he dies, neither shall his pomp descend
after him: but he, of whom it is said, he rests from his labor, and his
works follow him: Revel. 14.13.
not he that goes from his treasure, but he that goes to his treasure. That
preferred the heavenly treasures of grace, and of the word of grace, before his
appointed food in time of health, and now finds them better then physic in
his sickness: Psalm. 119.72.
that esteemed them more then thousands of gold and silver, when money might
have don much for him, and now finds them better worth, then all that the wide
bosom of the Sea, and deep entrals of the earth could afford unto him. He
dies rich; and richer then ever he was thought to live. His heart, fastening on
the heavenly treasure in the time of this life, finds his expectation not
deceived, but far surmounted, at the end of this life, and hereafter i^
endless and most glorious life. For as where the treasure is, there will the
heart be also, so where the heart is, there shall the whole man be also.

With great reason then may I come now to enforce the second point, not
expressed, but implied by our Savior, namely that the heart ought to be, not
in earth but in heaven; and withal (for breuities sake) wind up the third,
which, as the conclusion, cleaves to the premises, that therefore the
treasure must be laid up, not in earth, but in heaven.

Consider therefore with me (Right Honorable and beloved) the Heart, the Soul
of man on Earth, how many absurdities, and incongruities it imports. It is a
Spirit, of a Caelestiall, and Angelical, yea I may say of a Divine nature;
created by God immediately, and sent down into this body, not to dwell with the
body on the earth, but to teach the body the way to heaven. And shall this
Spirit, this Angel, this Ambassador, deal so falsely with him that sent it,
as to forget his errand, and take up his dwelling in a strange Country? Shall
it be like Iehorams messengers, 2. King. 9.
that being sent to bring in Iehu, forsook their Master, and turned after his
mortal enemy? Shall it enthral it self so, as to prefer this land of
captivity, before that of her Nativity? Shall it abase it self so, as of a
Lord, and guide, to become a drudge unto the body? Shall it not vti sapientiae
suae bono (as Lactantius speaks) but abiuring it own principles, and
elements, become no better then sale, to keep a carcass from rotting? Shall
it, for love of an Earthly Treasure, become an Earthen Heart (Corluteum as
Augustine speaks) and accordingly frame to it self an Earthen Heaven, and
worship an Earthen God? O curuae in terras animae! (says the Poet) Oh how ill
does it beseem, I say not now the Soul, but the very body of man, which God
has erected, and advanced toward heaven, and toward himself, to stoop down
to the Earth, as if it grieved a man, he had not been made a fourefooted
beast? To the Earth, then which nothing is lower, but only Death and Hell
(says Lactantius) and those so near neighbors, that the Treasure which is
laid up on Earth, sinkes to Hell without stay, and draws the Treasurer after
it without recovery.

But here me thinks I am rounded in the ear, not so peremptorily to condemn
the Having, or the laying up of earthly Treasure, seeing the Holy Patriarchs,
and Saints, were many of them rich, and Joseph is commended for a Storer, by
which means he became the feeder and store of Israel; yea, Genesis 49.24.
the Disciples of Antioch, Act. 11.20.
understanding by the Prophecy of Agabus, of a general Dearth approaching,
sent a provision of store before hand unto Jerusalem: Finally, the Holy
Apostle says, that fathers must (...), 2. Cor. 12.14.
Lay up Treasure for their children; and he that does it not, Is worse then an
Infidel. 1. Tim. 5.8.


Oh! how are we bound to God, that leaves us not without direction concerning
any duty? For it is indeed not a liberty, but a duty, to preserve, and
improve, the good blessings of God, for our own, and others commodity: But so
to do, is not to Lay up Treasure on earth, in our Saviors sense, verse. 19.
Neither is that commandment of the Apostle any warrant for the worldling. For
a man may bring this Treasure in domum, non in animam (says the Philosopher)
into his House, not into his Heart: He may set his mark, or seal, but not
his Heart upon it, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 62.10.
Indeed to set thy Heart upon profit, honor; pleasure, and make it thy chief
delight, this is to be not an Vser but a Lover, nor a Keeper, but a Coyner,
and that is a direct Traitor. For who can bear thee out, to set the stamp of
thine Heart upon Gods metal? To make a God of a base Mineral? And thy self
more then a God, even a God-maker? So strangely do Pride and Vilitie, meet
together in an earthly mind; that he makes himself infinitely both greater,
and baser, then indeed he is. Greater in opinion, and presumption, while he
makes new heavens, and new Gods: Baser in truth, and in proof, while for such
a creature of his own, he forsakes the Creator blessed for ever, and the end
of his own creation, which is to be for ever blessed with his Creator.

But it is not of flesh and blood (beloved) to observe that temper, as to have
riches, and not to be had of them: to Treasure them up, and not to make them
our Treasure. Even wise men among the Heathen have talked peradventure, yet
misled of this wisdom; of whom we may say, as Demodocus of the Miletians,
Insipientes non sunt, faciunt tamen quae insipientes, Fools they are not, yet
their actions are foolish: or rather thus, They say as wisemen say, and do as
fools do; vain men that did pretend the contempt of the world, but that very
contempt was of the world: and therefore our Savior avouches it to be
Impossible with man, Mat. 19.23. etc.
that a rich man should enter into heaven; but with God, says he, every
thing, even this, is possible. He ca^ teach us to rejoice as if we rejoiced
not, to buy as if we possessed not, to use this world as if we used it not: He
can teach us to seek these things, as our daily bread, with a secondarie care,
after his kingdom and righteousness: He can teach us not to resolve and say, I
will be rich (the high way into temptations and snares, 1. Tim. 6.9.
into foolish and noisome lusts which drown men in perdition) but to pray,
with AGVR, Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient
for me: Pro. 30.8.
He can teach us to subordinate all our labors and endeauours unto providence,
saying, If the Lord will, Iam. 4.15.
I will do this and that; He can teach us to keep under these Treasures, as
dangerous subjects, in seruitute, not to set them up, in imperio (eo magis
Domini, quo minus cupidi, says S. Barnard) he can teach us to reckon these
blessings, as our Lords Talents; the only meditation to inure us, both to Use
them with care, for his advantage, and resign them with comfort, as glad of
our discharge: He can teach us to lay up even these earthly possessions in
heaven, by Alms and Well-doing, whereof this Treasure is the fuel, 1. Tim.
6.19.
so laying a good foundation, not of merit, but of assurance, against the time
to come, and making us friends with the riches of iniquity, Luke 16.9.
to bid us welcome into everlasting habitations. And indeed so only are riches
laid up in safety. Lay them up on earth, and make them as sure as thou can,
either the moth and canker, that breed in them, will corrupt them, or the
thief will break thorough and steal them from thee. But he that conuerts
his riches into Alms, and good works, Luke 12.33.
puts Treasure that cannot fail, into bags that cannot wax old: And relies
henceforward, not upon Locks and Bars, but upon the credit and trust of God,
his debtour, both for the principal, and for the interest; for the adventure
and for the return. Oh it is good being Lenders, when God is the borrower, and
Merchants, where Christ is the Assurer.

Let others then distrust their Lord, and put their confidence in their
servant: Psalm. 10.3.
Let them bless themselves in their covetousness, with contempt of God: Let
them trust in incerto diuitiarum, 1. Tim. 6.17.
the doubtful and inconstant lot of Earthly Treasure: But let us take heed of
this Cardiacapassio, this poisonous, and pestilent humor of worldliness, that
by a natural propriety strikes instantly to the Heart; so setting it on fire,
that, as the fire, Pro 30.16.
it never says it is enough: So poisoning it with worldly love, that where it
lights, it kills the love of God, and will make even the Magistrate transgress
for a morsel of bread, as Solomon speaks, Pro. 28.21.
Ezekiel 13.19.
and the Minister to pollute God among his people for handfulls of Barley, as
the Prophet Ezekiel says: and which is yet worse, if worse may be, so
possessing it with self love (which as Aug: says, is vermis diuitiarum, the
canker-worme of riches) that there is little or no hope of amendment; Pro. 28.11.
for the rich man, says Solomon, is wise in his own eyes; Pro. 26.12.
therefore more hope of a fool then of him.

Wherefore let us leave these worldly wretches, these Antipodes to God and his
Kingdom; who as men reenversed, more like trees then men, have rooted both
head and heart into the earth, and set heaven at their heels: who have their
portion in this life, if indeed it may be called a portion, which they shall
answer for, as for pillage and robbery, being without any right in Christ unto
the least morsel of bread, without any assurance by covenant of the
continuance of their wealth, honor, pleasure, etc. who like the horse, are
mastred and commanded by their burden; and yet this is all their consolation,
while they can keep it, and the beginning, and praeludium of hell, when they
are deprived of it: who happily may feel no bands, Psalm. 73.4.
but assuredly shall have no comfort, no peace in their ends: Ier. 17.19.
whose names being written in the earth, Psalm. 49.18.
howsoever while they lived they blessed their souls, and were praised of men,
while they were able to make much of themselves; yet being entered into the
generation of their fathers, Verse. 19.
prove that to be true that man being in honor without understanding becomes
like the beasts that perish: Verse. 20.
who yet herein are worse then the beasts, that they must be dragged out of the
prison of their graves, to behold him whom they have pierced; Revel. 1.7.
at what time there shall be no Moses, to stand in the gap for them, no Aaron,
to step between the living and the dead, no Noah, Daniel, or Job, to pity or
pray for them; yea when there shall be no more mercy, no more patience, no
more repentings in God toward them, but judgment without mercy, or
mitigation; God laughing at their destruction, Pro. 1.26. Psalm. 58.10.
and the Saints rejoicing to see the vengeance, that they may at length wash
their feet in the blood of the wicked; when there shall be no rocks, Revel.
6.16.
nor mountains to fall upon them; 2. Pet. 3.10.
when the earth and works therein, which they made their treasure, shall melt
with heat and be consumed. Oh hopeless wretches! what treasure then will they
have to trust to? shall not the proverb then be verified with them, Mal. 4.1.
(...), their treasure turned into coals? not only because that day of the
Lord, that burns as an Oven, shall consume the earth where they laid up their
treasure, but also because even these treasures, wherein they trusted, shall
then rise up in judgment against them, Iam. 5.3.
and eat their flesh as it were fire; so far are these earthly treasures
from auailing in the day of wrath, Pro. 11.4.
as Solomon speaks.

To leave these men (Beloved) and to conclude, let us embrace those heavenly
treasures of righteousness, which are only able to deliver from death: let us
cast in our lot with the children and friends of God; who like God himself, in
some sort, have heaven for the throne of their heart, and the earth for a
footstool under their feet: who even in this life, have right to all things,
by covenant and promise, and therefore whatsoever they enjoy is their own,
neither Man nor God can impleade them for it: who whatsoever their fare be,
eat of the labor of their hands, Psalm. 128.2.
and are blessed, and it is well with them: to whom whatsoever their lodging
be, the Lord gives rest, as unto his beloved: Psalm. 127.2.
with whom all the creatures are in league, Job. 5.23.
affoording them a commodious through fare, and many a comfortable bait in the
way of this life: who have the Saints for their companions, Psalm. 91.11.
the Angels for their guard, and Ianisaries, for whose sake even Kings are
reproved, Psalm. 105.14.
and curbed, that they can do them no harm: of whom there is no prayer, but
being perfumed with odours by that Angel, Revel. 8.3.4.
our Lord Jesus Christ, it ascends up into remembrance before God: no word
spoken in Gods behalf, but it is written in that book of remembrance, Mal.
3.16.
which the Lord keeps for them that fear him and think upon his name: no
tear, shed for their own or the common sins, Psalm. 56.8.
but it is put into that bottle and register of God: who in the time of this
pilgrimage, have many a mount Nebo, many a Sabbath, many an holy exercise, many
a greeting from the holy Spirit, the comforter, that gives them a token, and
inkling of the land of their inheritance: who in death are full of hope, and
blessed comfort, being now to pass in soul unto the celestial Jerusalem,
Heb. 12.22.23.
to the company of innumerable Angels, to the congregation of the first borne,
to God, the Judge of all, to the Spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus
the Mediator: who shall receive this depositum, this gage of their body, at
the last day, but changed, Phil. 3.21.
and fashioned, according to the glorious body of our Lord Jesus Christ. Oh how
spiritual shall the spirit be, when even the body shall be spiritual! how
glorious, when even the body shall be glorified! oh how blessed shall both
soul and body be, when we shall be one with God our Savior, when God shall be
all in all unto us, 1. Cor. 15.28. Revel. 21.3.
and our God for ever with us; our Sun to shine upon us, our Temple to hallow
us, our food to nourish us, our treasure, our heavenly and everlasting
treasure to enrich us! That we may therefore so choose this better part, the
treasure of grace in this life, as we may not fail of the treasure of glory
in the life to come: The Lord for the riches of his mercy vouchsafe us, in,
and through our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom, etc.

Pro. 10.2. The Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but Righteousness
delivers from death.



