A Deliberat answer made to a rash offer, which a popish Antichristian
Catholic, made to a learned protestant (as he says) and caused to be
publyshed in printe: Anno. Do. 1575.

Wherein the Protestant has plainly and substantially proved, that the
papists that do now call themselves Catholics are in deed Antichristian
schismatiks: and that the religious protestants, are in deed the right
Catholics: Written by Robert Crowley: in the year, 1587.

LONDON. Printed by I. Charlwood, and are to be sold at the sign of the black
Bear, in Paul's Church y^rde. 1588.

Falts escaped in the print.
In the 7. leaf, and in the last line of the first page, and in the first of
the second page: read thus, innocence of life: for, not continue in
ignorance, etc. In the 9. leaf, and 15. line of the first page: read thus,
and not, let us have peace And in the last line save one, of the second page:
read thus, they are all become unprofitable. In the 10. leaf, and 14. line of
the second page: read thus, traxerit. In the 16. leaf, and 6. line of the
first page: read tend, for bend. In the 25. leaf, and 12. line of the second
page: read, conuenticles. In the 26. leaf, and 18. line of the 1. page: read,
fasts, for feasts. In the 27. leaf, and 9. line of the 1. page: read, cases,
for causes. In the 31. leaf, and 12. line of the eight Offer: read, at all
times, the continuance, etc. In the 36. leaf, and 7. line of the 2. page:
read, such, for those. In the 39. leaf, and last line save 4. of the 1. page:
read, Qui pridie. In the 50. leaf, and last line save 6. of the 2. page: read,
at any time. In the 53. leaf, and 29. line of the 1. page: read, which are
not, etc. In the 55. leaf, and 33. line of the 1. page: read, perceive by
that, etc. In the 72. leaf, and 12. line of the 1. page: read, Linus. In the
75. leaf, and 1. line of the 1 page: read, or does seem to be. In the 77.
leaf, and 1. line of the 1. page: this word (them) is to much. In 78. leaf,
and 4. line of the 2. page: read, admonition. In the 80. leaf, and 22. line of
the 1. page: read, they for then.

In the 81. leaf, and in the title of the 1. sign: read, of false prophets.
In the 84 and 20. line of the first page: read, some of them, contrary to the
express, etc.

To all and singular popish Recusants.
SVpposing that all such papists as do refuse to join with us in the
profession and exercise of religion (and are therefore called Recusants) be of
one and the same mind with that popish Offerer, that first wrote these Offers,
and did publish them in print: I have thought it a thing very meet, to request
the same Offerer (if he be yet living) and all the rest that be of his
mind, to afforde me so much favor, as to read over their own Offers, and
that answer that I have made thereunto I trust you will not deny me this
request: for your Offerer has in the end of every part of his Offer, used
these words (or the like) prove this, and then I will relent and recant, and
not before I know that there be many amongst you, that are worshipful, wise,
and learned: such (I hope) will not blemish their worship, wisdom, and
learning, by fore-iudging ought that is or shall be written in answer to any
Offer that any of their mind has or shall make, and require answer
thereunto. I do not require any of you to give credit to that which I have
written: before you have tried the same, and found it worthy of credit. And
therefore I have set over the heads of the pages of this my book: this
admonition: First try, and then trust: If you shall find that I have
sufficiently proved all those things that your Offerer requires the
protestant to prove: then I hope you will redily perform, those Offers that he
has made. And if you shall find any insufficiency in mine answers: I hope,
that some of the learned on your side, will use some means whereby I may have
knowledge of that insufficiency. And in the word and faith of a Christian, I
do promise you, that what soever any of you shall write touching this matter: I
will read it deliberatly, and without all parciall affection, with earnest
prayer to the almighty, for the direction of his holy spirit, whereby I may be
stayed from straying out of the way of truth. I know that there is but one way
to everlasting life, and I do know that Christ only is that way: if any of
your sort therefore, can make it plain unto me, that your popish Catholic
church does walk in that way, then will I leave that way wherein we
protestants do walk, and run with you for I tell you truly, that none of you
can have a greater or more earnest desire, to enter with the Bridgrome Christ,
then I have, and (as I hope) shall have to the end. My pen would gladly
proceed, in paynting my paper with more sentences to the like effect: but I
have thought good to stay it, for that I do persuade my self, that you do
think the time long before you can take in hand to perform that request that
I have herein made. Frare you well. From my house at S. Gyles without
Creplegate of London. The Lord Jesus direct you in all that you shall do. Amen.

January. 16. An. 1587. Your well willer. Robert Crovvley.

The deliberate answer that Robert Crowley (a Protestant Christian) has made
to that rash offer, that a popish Antichristan Catholic made to a learned
Protestant: Imprinted in Dovvaie, (as he says.) Anno Domini. 1575.
Crowley.

IN the year of our Lord. 1586. there came to my hands (by what mean I do
not well know, but by the providence of God, I am sure) a certain book, that
had been imprinted and published in Doway in France, (in the year 1575.) in
the English Tongue. That book is entitled: A notable discourse, plainly and
truly discussing, who are the right ministers of the Catholic Church:
written against Calvin and his disciples, by one Master John de Albine, called
De Seres, Archdeacon of Tolossa in France. Whereunto are annexed certain
Offers, made by a popish Catholic, to a learned Protestant. etc.

This book lay by me (as a thing whereof I made small account) till the month
of May in the year.1587. When having (by occasion) more spare time, then in
long time before I had, or could have: I took this book in hand, and did
deliberately read over, both ye book and the offers. I found both the book
and the offers, to stuffed with color of piety, truth and sincerity: that
I could not but think that the having of this book in secret, has been
one great cause of the Apostacy, of so many young men, as have in late years
fallen away from the pure profession of the gospel, and have embraced and
professed, and do still profess most vnpure Popish religion.

The book was first written, by the above named John de Albine (as it may be
thought) either in the Latin, or in the French tongue: Wherefore I mean not to
bestow any time in the answering of it, supposing that either Beza, or some
other French Protestant has already dealt therein sufficiently.

But because the offers seem to be made by some English man, and have not (as
I think) been answered by any man: I have thought good to supply the place
of that learned Protestant, that the Popish Catholic, meant to make the offers
unto.

And that the Offerer (if he be yet living) or any freende of his (if he be
departed this life) may not have any cause to mislike with my dealing herein: I
mind to setfoorth to the view of the Reader, all the words of the Offerer,
even as I find them, and as I have them to show, in his printed Coppie, which
I have, and do mind to keep, in a readiness to show, not abiding or
dimnishing, altering or changing, one sentence, word, syllable, letter or
title. The Offerer begins thus.

The Offerer.

First, seeing it cannot be denied, that our savior Christ before his
departure, and ascension, did commit the charge and government of his Church,
the testimony of his word, the truth of his gospel, the ministration of his
Sacraments to his Apostles and Disciples, and that not only for them selves,
but to their successors Bishops and Priests, and to none other, saying only to
them: Euntes docete omnes gentes. Math. 28. Marc. 16.
Go ye and teach all people and nations of the world, baptizing them in the
name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost, teaching them to
observe and keep all things which I have commanded you.

Further, the Apostle Saint Paul being at Miletum, in executing of his charge
and government, gave this admonition to the Bishops, and Priests there
assembled before him, saying: Atte^dite vobis, et vniuer so gregi. Act. 20.
Take heed unto your selves, and unto the whole flock of Christ, in the which
the holy ghost has ordained you Bishops: Regere ecclesiam Dei, To govern the
Church of God. And in the thirteenth Chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews he
does commanded all other sorts of men, without exception of Emperors,
Kings, Queens, and Princes, to obey their Bishops and priests, saying: Heb.
13.
Obedite praepositis vestris, and subiacete eis, ipsi enim peruigilant, quasi
rationem pro animabus vestris reddituri. Obey your Prelates, and do what they
appoint you, for they do watch, as men that shall render accomptes for your
souls.

Seeing that by the testimonies before alleged it can not be denied, but
that the charge and government of Christ his Church, the preaching of his
doctrine, the admninistration of his Sacraments, was by him committed to his
Apostles and Dysciples, and to all Bishops and Priests as Successors of
them, to plant Chrystian faith and Religion in his Catholic Church
universally throughout all Nations, Coasts, and Quarters of the world. Seeing
this is by the playnnesse of the said testimonies of such an undoubted truth,
that it cannot be denied: now let the learned protestant, affirming princes to
be the supreme heads of the Church, either show by some such other like
plain testymonies of the Scriptures, that our Savior Christ did commit the
chyefe charge and supreme government of his Church to Emperors, Kings,
Queens and Princes, to plant Christian faith and Religion in the same, or that
any one of Christ his Apostles or Disciples did convert any people, Land, or
Country, from their Idolatry and Ethnike kind of living, to Christian faith
and Religion by preaching the doctrine of the Protestants: as of only faith to
justify, the contempt of good works, and that they be all unclean in sight
of GOD, the denial of free will, of the real presence of Christ's body in the
holy Eucharist, of the Sacrifice of the most blessed Mass, the abolishing
Christ his Sacraments, and of all grace and goodness by them conferred unto
us, then I shall yield and recant, and not before. Thus far, the first part
of the Offer.

Crowley.

This Offerer has divided this offer of his, into 22. parts, adding to the
last part, six certain and assured signs and tokens of false Prophets,
Heretics and Schismatickes. This division I mean to follow in mine answer.
To this first part: therefore, I say thus, master Offerer. I confess, that our
Savior Christ did (as you have said) commit the charge and government of
his Church, the testimonye of his word, the truth of his Gospel, and the
ministration of his Sacraments, to his Apostles and Scholars: and to their
successors. But not to such successors only as you do name: that is to
Bishops and Priests only, and to none other. For S. Paul, in the 12. Chapter
of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, and in the 4. to the Ephesians,
writing of the same matter, says thus. Et ipse dedit, quosdam quidem
Apostolos, Ephesians, 4.
quosdam autem Prophetas, alios vero Euangelistas, alios autem Pastores and
Doctores. And he has given some, Apostles or Messengers, and some Prophettes,
and other some Evangelists, and some others Pastors and teachers. And again,
in the 12. of the first to the Corinthians, he writes thus. 1, Cor, 12.
Et quosdam posuit Deus in Ecclesia, primum Apostolos, secundo Prophetas,
tertio Doctores, deinde virtutes, exinde gratias curationum, opitulationes,
gubernationes, genera linguarum. God has place in his Church, certain degrees
of men: first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly teachers, then powers, after
that gifts of healings, helps, gouernements, kinds of tongues. Least you
should quarrel about the translating of S. Paul's words out of the Greek? I
have set them down as I find them in that translation, that your Tridentine
council has allowed of. But I pray you (good M. Offerer) what meant S. Paul,
that in the rehearsal of those sundry degrees of men, that God has placed in
his Church, he would make no mentiion at al, of your Bishops and Priests, to
whom only (as to the only successors of his Apostles and Disciples,) Christ
spoke (if you have written truly) when he said thus. Math. 28
Euntes, docete omnes gentes. Go ye, and teach all nations of the world, etc.
Without all doubt, S. Paul did know (and so do we) that God did never place
in his Church, or appoint to succeed his Apostles and Disciples, any such
Bishops and Priests as you mean of. That is, Lording, and loitring Bishops,
exercising dominion over the peoples that are allotted unto them: and sawsie
sacrificing Preests, which presume to occupy the place of Christ himself, and
to execute his office, in offering sacrifice for the sins of the people. S.
Peter disaloweth the one: 1. Pet. 5. and S. Paul the other. Hebr. 10. Hebr, 1^
1, Peter, ^
Yea if our Savior Christ did speak only to such Bishops and Preests, as you
do appoint to be the successors of the Apostles and disciples of Christ, when
he said. Euntes, etc. Go, and teach all nations of the world, etc. How has
that his commandment been, or how is it executed, since they (commonly)
neither do nor can teach, those things that our Savior commanded his
Apostles, and scholars to teach and to do? The successors of the Apostles and
scholars of our Savior Christ, to whom those words were at the first and be
still spoken: must be such as God has, does, and shall make meet to do his
message to men of all sorts, to foreshewe unto them by the Scriptures, what
hangs over their heads, if they will not regard the message, to comfort
them, with the assurance of the performaunce of the sweet promises, which God
has made in the blood of his son Christ Jesus, to foster, feed and nourishe
them, with the food of his heavenly word, and to teach and instruct them in
the way of the truth, so that they may be able to discern between the broad
way yt leads to destruction, and that narrow way that leads to life
everlasting, and to continue walking in that way, even to the end of their
life in this transitory state. Thus much do those words signify, which I
have cited out of the fourth Chapter of S. Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians. And
in the words that I have cited, out of the 12. Chapter of the first to
Corinth: Saint Paul has added, that these words of our Savior Christ were
spoken to them also, whom God has, does, or shall make mighty, endueinge them
with power from above, making them able to stand against, and to withstand,
yea and vanquishe the ghostly enemies, that is, the devil, the world, and the
flesh, to cure sicknesses and diseases, to succor, help and comfort the
weak and feeble, to govern the simple, and to understand and speak diverse
languages. All this may be understood in these words of S. Paul: God has
placed in his Church, certain degrees of men, first Apostles, secondly
prophets, thirdly teachers, after that, powers, after that gifts of healing,
helpings, gouernementes, and diversities of tongues. So that these words, go
and teach all nations. etc. Were spoken first to the Apostles and Scholars of
our Savior Christ, and then to all such (their successors) as God has, does
or shall make meet, any way, to teach those things that he has commanded to
be taught and practiced.

But now M. Offerer has found, that S. Paul being at Miletum, has admonished
ye Bishops and Priests that were assembled before him there: saying. Atte^dite
vobis, etc. Take heed to your selves, and unto the whole flock of Christ, in
which the holy Ghost has ordained you Bishops, Act. 10.
Regere Ecclesiam Dei. To govern the Church of God. And again in the 13.
Chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews, Saint Paul does command all other
sorts of men, without exception of Emperors, Kings, Queens and Princes, to
obey their Bishops and Priests, saying: Obedite praepositis vostris, and
subiacete eis, ipsi enim peruigilant, quasi rationem pro animabus vestris
reddituri. Obey your Prelates, and do what they appoint you to do, for they
do watch, as men that shall render an account for your souls.

Here is subtle Sophistry, in the steed of probable reasoning, and profound
Divinity. These testimonies be so plain, that it can not be denied, but that
as the charge and government of Christ's Church, etc. was committed to Christ's
Apostles and Disciples: so the same is committed to Popish Bishops and
Priests, as to their successors. But I pray you (good M. Offerer) let us
consider of these two places that you have cited.

Saint Luke, reporting the Acts or deeds of the Apostles, says, that Saint
Paul hasting toward Jerusalem, would spend no time in Asia, and therefore
determining to pass by Ephesus, sent messengers thither, to require the Elders
of the congregation, to repair unto him, being then in the Island Mil^t^ (which
is now called M^l^a.) These Elders you do name Bishops and Priests. But the
Greek word that S. Luke uses there, can not by any means signify either a
Bishop or Priest, of that sort that you speak of. For (...) does signify
one that is elder or more ancient in years, or more honorable then they be
amongst whom he lives. And such were they, that commonly were chosen in those
days, to be teachers, instructours and governors in the congregations or
Churches of Christians: and therefore they were called (...) Obseruers
watchmen, searchers, and such as had the oversight of things committed to them.
But your Bishops and Priests, most be such as the Grecians do call by the
name of (...) or (...) That is, a Priest that offers sacrifices. But here I
will make you one offer (M. Offerer) which shall be thus. If you can find in any
of the Books of the new Testament, that either our Savior Christ speaking of
the ministers of the new Testament, or any of the Apostles writing of the
several sorts of ministers that our Savior Christ has ordained to serve or
minister in his Church, have used either of these Greek words (...) or
(...) which do signify a sacrificing Priest: then will I recante the
Protestants doctrine, and subscribe to your Papisticall doctrine, and not
before. In the place that you have cited out of the 20. Chapter of the Acts of
the Apostles, S. Paul calls the ministers of Ephesus, (...) that is, watch
men or overseers, appointed by the holy Ghost (...) that is, to govern the
Church of God, in such sort as a shepherd does govern and feed his
flock, but not (...) that is to exercise lordlike authority over them, as your
meaning must needs be, that your Bishops and Priests should. For you say
that S. Paul does command all other sorts of men, without exception, etc. To
obey their Bishops and Priests: saying. Obedite, etc. Obey your prelates, etc.
And here I must needs note your corrupt manner of handling of this place of S.
Paul. He himself does beseech those Hebrews that he worte unto, to suffer,
or to take in good part, that short exhortation that he gave them: but you say,
that he commanded them (yea though they were Emperors, Kings, Queens or
Princes) to obaye their Prelates, and to do what they appoint. In the Latin
you cite the words, Hebr, 13.
as they are in the vulgar translation, allowed in the Tridentine council,
Obedite, etc. It pleases you to set down for Praepositis, Prelates, minding
(as it seems) to make us believe, that such Prelates as you call Bishops and
Preests, must (by S, Paul's commandment) be so obeyed of all Emperors,
Kings, Queens and Princes (and so by good consequence, of all persons that are
inferior to these) that whatsoever these Prelates shall appoint to be done,
must of necessity be done, by all men and women of every degree, as though
such Prelates only, (and none other) might be in the Latin called Praepositi,
and in the Greek, (...) Which Latin and Greek words do signify all manner
of superiors, whether they be of the ecclesticall or civil state. Yea and
that duty of watching, as men that shall render an account for the souls of
men: is common to all those superiors of all sorts, wherefore you have dealt
very injuriously, in that you have restrained that duty of watching to your
Prelates only.

Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, the 13. Chapter, writes thus.
Omnis anima, Romans 13.
potestatibus sublimioribus sub dit a sit. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, etc. If you had seen and considered what Chrysostom writteth
upon these words of Saint Paul: I think you would never have written as you
have done, affirming that saint Paul has commanded all manner men, without
exception, (yea, though they were Emperors, Kings, Queens, or Princes) so to
obey your Prelates, as to do whatsoever they shall appoint them to do:
Chrysostom. in Romans 13.
for Chrysostom writes thus. Etiam si Apostolus sis, si Euangelista, si
Propheta, sieve quisquis tandem fueris. Neque enim pietatem subuertit ista
subiectio, Et non simpliciter dicit, obediat, sed subiecta sit. Although thou
should be an Apostle, an Evangelist, or a Prophet, or what manner of man
soever thou should be. For this subjection, does not subvert piety, or
godliness. And he does not simply say, Let every soul obey, but (he says)
Let it be in subjection. Thus much Chrysostom, writing upon the first words
of the thirteenth to the Romans.

And in the same Chapter that you cite out of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
saint Paul seems to have the same meaning that he had when he wrote to the
Romans. For thus he writes to the Hebrews, in the latter end of the
thirteenth Chapter. Salutate omnes qui praesunt vobis, and omnes Sanctos.
Salute all them that are your Rulers, and all the Saints.

If these Rulers that saint Paul wills the Hebrews to salute, were such as
you say they were, when he commands them to obey (that is to say Bishops,
and Priests) then was not this Epistle written to them, but to the inferior
sort amongst the Hebrews, which is a thing too absurd to be granted. For
what civility, honesty, or wisdom, may that man be thought to have, that
would write such an Epistle as this, to the inferiors of any congregation of
Christians, and not to the superiors of the same congregation? These Hebrews
were Christians, and dwelt (as my be thought) in sundry Cities, within the
Dominions of the Emperor of Rome. As in Jerusalem, or in any other of those
Cities that had belonged to ye kingdom of Israel, or in any other kingdom or
province. And it is like, that the Apostle (being in Italy when he wrote this
Epistle) had some occasion to admonish them, of that opinion which commonly the
posterity of Abraham held: which was, that they ought not to live in
subjection to any rulers that were not of the same posterity: And therefore
he wrote unto them as before, Obedite, etc. Obey your Superiors, and submit
your selves unto them. And as in this place, Salutate, etc. Salute all those
that be in authority over you. As though he should have said thus. I know that
you would gladly be governed (as you are Hebrews borne) by such as be
Hebrews, as you are, and (as you are Christians) by Christians as your selves
be: But since you see, that God will have it otherwise: let such as God has
set over you, have their due honor at your hands: Obey them, honor them,
serve them, give them all tributes and customs due unto them, and pray to God
for them, that you may lead a peaceable and quiet life under them. And that
they may the rather be moved to be favorable to you: salute them in my
name, and in like manner, salute all saitns, that is, all Christians, though
they be of the Greeks, that they may know, that both I and you, do esteem
of them, as of fellow members of that one body, whereof Christ is the head.

This may be the meaning of the Apostle, in those words that you have cited,
and in the other that follow. But it may be that some of your sort will say,
that in the seventh verse of the same Chapter: the Apostle has written thus,
Hebr, 13.
Memores estote, etc. Be mindful of those your rulers, that have spoken unto
you the word of God, and follow their faith, considering what the end of
their conversation was. Here you will say that these rulers must needs be
preachers of the word. I confess that the Apostle does in these words
mean of such. But shall we therefore say that they were Bishops and Priests,
such as you have affirmed them to be? It appears manifestly by the Apostles
words, that they were the same that had preached the gospel unto them, and had
continued constant, in preaching the same doctrine to the end of their lives:
and had sealed it with their blood. For the Apostle says thus. Considering
what the end of their conversation has bin: which can not be meant of any,
that did then presently govern or teach them. Yea, and how could the Apostle
take upon him to command Emperors, Kings, Queens, and Princes: to obey such
Bishops, and Priests, as the Hebrews (being a simple sort of Christians) could
have to rule and teach them?

The testimonies therefore, that you allege (M. Offerer) may right well be
denied, for they testify not that which you would affirm by them. For
although the charge and government of the Church of Christ, the preaching of
the doctrine of the gospel, and the ministration of the sacraments of Christ,
were committed, to the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, and to their
successors: yet are not the same committed to your Bishops and Priests, for
they are not the successors either of Christ or any Apostle, or Dysciple of
Christ, except you will needs have them the successors of Judas Iscariot, or
of Simon Magus.

But now, the learned Protestant that you make your offer unto, must either
prove by some such other like plain testimonies of the Scriptures, that our
Savior Christ did commit the chief charge, and supreme government of his
Church, to Emperors, Kings, Queens, and Princes, to plant Chrystian faith
and Religion in the same: or else, that some one of Christ's Apostles, or
Disciples, did convert some one People, Land, or Country, from their
Idolatry, and Ethinke kind of living, to Christian faith and Religion, by
preaching the doctrine of the Protestants, etc.

For Protestants to prove by plain testimonies of the Scriptures, that our
Savior Christ did commit the chief charge and supreme government of his
Church, etc. Is altogether unnecessary: for never did any of that sort
affirm that to be true. We do all know that our Savior Christ did not call
Emperors, Kings, Queens, nor Princes, to make them his messengers or
Apostles: but he called Fisher men and such other, and made them able and meet
to do his message, even to Princes and Emperors, and to all other, the
greatest personages in the world; As saint Paul writes 1. Cor. 1. 1, Cor, 1,
Quae stulta sunt mundi, eleg^ Deus, vt confundat sapientes, etc. God has
chosen the foolish things of the world that he might confound the wise, and
God chose the weak things of the world to confound the strong, and the base
and despised things of the world, has God chosen: yea, and those things that
be not, that he might destroy those things that be: Yea, and we do know,
that God did not prepare the hearts of the Princes and chief men of the world,
to receive the doctrine of the gospel with the first: so that the Apostle
Paul had occasion to write thus to the same Corinthians. 1. Cor. 1. 1, Cor, 1,
Videte vocationem vestram, etc. Brethren, consider your calling, for there are
not amongst you many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many of
noble Parentage, etc. Yea, and in the days wherein Saint Augustine cliued,
(which was 400. years after the ascension of our savior Christ) it seemed a
strange thing, even in the City of Rome, that any man of any account in the
world, would become a Christian man. For when Victorinus (a famous Rhethorician
in that City) would profess the Religion of Christ and be baptized: he did it
(as Saint Augustine has written,) Confessionum. lib. 8. cap. 2. Mirante Roma,
gau^^nte Ecclesia. August, lib, 8, Cap, 2:
Rome meruelling, and the Church of Christ in Rome, reioyceing. There is
therefore no cause why you should require the learned Protestant to prove by
plain Scriptures, that our Savior Christ, did commit ye chief charge and
supreme government of his Church, to Emperors, etc.

But this the Protestants do hold, and are able to prove by plain places of
the Scriptures: that Emperors, Kings, Queens, Princes, Dukes, and all other
Potentates, are the supreme governors of those peoples over whom God has
placed them, whether the same people be (by profession) Christians, or
Miscreants. Yea, and that the chief charge that every of these Potentates have
from God: is that they shall in their own persons walk in the Lords ways,
and lead their people in the same. And for that cause, they are in the
Scriptures called Pastores, that is Sheepeheards, as in the 44. Cha. of his
Prophecies, Esaias, 44,
Esaie speaking in the person of God, says, Qui dico Cyro. Pastor meus, (...),
and omnem voluntatem meam complebis: That is, Which do say unto Cyrus, thou
art my Sheepeheard, and thou shall fulfill all my will. Cyrus was an Heathen
prince: and yet the Lord calls him his Sheepeheard: and commands him to
fulfill all his will and pleasure. King David being a Shepherd in deed, was
taken from the Sheepefold, and made king over all Israel, that he might feed
that people of the Lord, even as a Sheepeheard feeds his flock. And he did
rule them prudently, with all his possible power. Psalm. 78. Psalm. 78,
And that these Potentates might be able to discharge that duty that the Lord
God has appointed them to do: he has given unto them the power of the
Sword, as in the 13. Rom, 13.
Chapter to the Romans it appears. Principes (says Saint Paul) non sunt
timori boni operis, sed mali, etc. Princes are not to be feared of them that
do well, but of them that do evil. Will thou be without fear of the
Potentate? Do well, and thou shall be praised of him. For he is Gods
minister to do the good. But if thou do evil: then fear him, for he
bears not a Sword for naught. He is Gods minister, to take vengeance on him
that does evil, etc.

At that time, wherein the Apostle wrote those words to the Romans, there
was not one Christian Prince (as it may be thought) in all the world. And yet
he does certify the Romans, that even those heathen Princes, were ordained
of GOD, for the benefit of Christians (as of all other sorts of men) that
world bend them selves to walk in his ways, and not continue in ignorance of
life. And for the punishment of all such as should give them selves to lead a
dissolute life.

Yea, and it belonged to the office, even of those Princes, not only to use
the power of the Sword in defending Innocents; and in punishing wicked doers:
but also to set forth, advance, and maintain, right and true Religion, as in
the holy Histories it does appear that they did, as often as by any occasion,
their hearts were touched with the fear of GOD, As Darius, the Persian
Emperor when he had seen the mighty power of GOD in preserving Daniell in
the Lions den, did he not write immediately to all his subjects, commanding
them to fear and to stand in awe of Daniels God: confessing him to be the
living and everlasting God, and that his kingdom and power is everlasting, and
that it is he that delivers and saves, and works woonders both in Heaven
and in Earth. Daniel. 6. Daniel. 6.
The same Darius, (as it appears in the sixth Chapter of ye first book of
Esdras) commanded that the Temple in Jerusalem (which had bin destroyed by
the Babylonians) should be reedified, (as king Cyrus had commanded) and that
it should be furnished with all things necessary, and meet for the service of
God 1. Esdras. 1. and 6. 1. Esd. 1. and 6


And amongst the good kings of Israel, and Judah, David (not without a secret
motion from God, I am sure) did cause the Arc of Gods covenant to be brought
to Jerusalem, and placed in a Tabernacle, which he had prepared for it there:
yea, and in his own person, he used all such behavior, as might tend to the
setting forth of the glory of God, and abase him self in the sight of God,
and at his own charges, he caused much sacrifice to be offered to the Lord,
and afterward, he blessed the people of the Lord, and gave rewards of meat
and drink to every one of them, as well the women as the men. As appears in
the sixth Chapter of the second book of Samuel, which you call the second of
the kings. 2. Reg. 6


And I pray you (good M. Offerer) who was he, whom God appointed to build his
Temple in Jerusalem: was it not Solomon the king? And did not he build it in
deed: and furnish it according as the Lord had commanded him? Tertij, Reg. 5.
etc. And who reformed Religion, destroyed the Idols that king Achas had caused
to be set up in the Temple? was it not his son Ezechias? And did not the
same Ezechias brake the brazen Serpent, 4. Reg. 18.
because the people had burned Incense to it? Yea, and when the Priests did
any thing in the reformation of Religion: did they it not by the appointment,
and at the commandment of those good kings, David, Solomon, Ezechias, and
Josias? Read the History of the kings: and you shall see.

And what? did Christ come to take this Authority from Princes? And has he
taken it from them, and given it to Peter and his Successors? He him self
has acknowledged that authority in Princes: in that he paid Tribute to the
Emperor, both for him self and for Peter. Math. 17. In the 13. Chapter to the
Romans, Math, 17.
saint Paul declares that the paying of Tribute, is an acknowledging of the
highest authority in Princes.

Chrysostom, Chrysostom in Romans 13.
expounding that place of Saint Paul's Epistle, writes thus. Cur enim, inquit,
vectigalia Regi damus? Nunquid tanquam prospicienti? Nunquid tanquam
praesidenti, curae, tuitionisque mercedem soluentes? For why (says he) do
we give Tribute to the king? Do we not give it, as unto him that has a
provident care for us? Do we it not, as men that pay unto him that has the
rule of us, the wages or hyer that is due to him, for the care that he has to
defend us? 1, Peter, 2
And does not Saint Peter (from whom your Bishops and Priests do claim their
high authority) write thus in the second Chapter of his first Epistle? Subdite
igitur estote, etc. Be ye subject therefore, to every human creature, even
for the Lords cause, whether it be to ye king, as to him that excels, either
to Dukes, as to them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil dooers,
but for ^he praise of them that be good. For so is the will of God: that
behauing your selves well, you may stop ye mouths of foolish and Ignorant
men: as being free, and not having the liberty for a cloak of maliciousnes, but
as the servants of God.

Thus, if you have eyes to see, you may see, that the very testimonies that you
have alleged (being taken in their right sense) do prove sufficiently, that
though no learned Protestant, can prove, or does or has affirmed, that our
Savior Christ did commit the chief charge and supreme government of his
Chruch, to Emperors, kings. etc. Yet the chief charge and sepreme government
of men of all sorts, has bin always, is still, and ever shall be in such
Potentats, even by the ordinance of God him self: as by the other testimonies
that I have alleged does most manifestly appear.

And where as you require the learned Protestant to prove, that any one of
Christ's Apostles or Disciples, did (by preaching the Protestants doctrine)
convert any people, land, or country, from their Idolatry, and Ethnike kind
of living, to Christian faith, and Religion, as of only faith to justify,
etc. I say, that never any one of the Apostles or Disciples of Christ, were the
means that God used in the converting of any one land, people, or country,
by the preaching of any other doctrine, then that which you call the
Protestants doctrine.

You note six points of doctrine, preached by the Protestants, which (as you
say) neither the Apostles, nor any Disciple of Christ, preached. First, that
faith only justifies. Secondly, that all good works are unclean in the sight
of God. Thirdly, that there is no free will. Fourthly, that the body of Christ
is not really present in the Eucharist. Fifthly, that the blessed Mass is not a
Sacrifice. And sixthly, the abolishing of Christ's Sacraments, and all the
graces, and goodness that is conferred to us by them.

For the first (I say) that Christ him self has taught it, in that he has
said thus. Mar. 16. Qui crediderit, and baptizatus fuerit: saluus erit. Qui
vere non crediderit: co^demnabitur. Marci, 16,
He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved. But he that shall not
believe shall be condemned.

Saint Paul has taught it to the Romans, Chap. 5. Romans 5.
in these words, Justificati ergo ex fide, pacem habeamus ad Deum, per Dominum
nostrum Iesum Christum: per quem habemus accessum per fidem, in gratiam istam
in qua stamus, and gloriamar in spe gloriae filiorum Dei. Being justified by
faith, therefore let us be at peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ:
by whom we have access through faith, into this grace wherein we stand, and
do rejoice in the hope of the glory of the children of God. To take from you
all occasion of quarrelling: I have cited the words of S. Paul as I find them
in your allowed latin translation. Although I do know that in the greek it
is thus, (...) Pacem habemus, And not habeamus. We have peace, and let us not
have peace, but to a simple meaning mind: the sense is all one, whether we
say, we have peace or let us have peace. And in the end of the sentence: it
makes no difference to say, we glory or rejoice in the hope of ye sons of
God, or we rejoice in the hope of the glory of God. For take it which way ye
will: Saint Paul's meaning must needs be, that we are justified, that is,
we apprehend and lay hold upon, free discharge of our sins that we have by
the mediation of Christ, only by faith, and by none other mean.

And again, in the second Chapter to the Ephesians, Ephe. 2.
Saint Paul writes thus, Gratia enim estis saluati per fidem and hoc non ex
vobis. Dei enim d^num est: non ex operibus, ne quis glorietur. For by grace
(that is free mercy) you are saved thorough faith: and that not (...) selves.
For it is the gift of God, and comes not of works, least any man should
boaste. The Epistles of the Apostle Paul are full of matter, to prove this
point of doctrine to be true.

The second point of doctrine, is (as you do term it) the contempt of good
works, and that they be all unclean in the sight of God. We contemn not
good works, but we esteem of them as they ought to be esteemed of: that is,
as of the good fruits of a good faith. And we teach, that no works may be
accounted good, otherwise, or in any other respect, but as they be the fruits
of a good faith. This point of doctrine was taught by our savior Christ, when
he said thus, Lucae. 17. Cum feceritis omnia quae praecepta sunt vobis, Lucae.
17.
dicite, serui inutiles sumus: Quod de buimus facere fecimus. When ye shall
have done all that you are commanded to do, then say: we are unprofitable
servants. We have done that our duty was to do. And again, in the 20. of
Matthew, Math. 20.
in the Parable of the laborers that labored in the Vineyarde. Volo autem and
huic nouissimo dare sicut and tibi. I will give unto this that came last, even
as unto thee. He that had labored but one hour, received as great a reward,
as he yt had labored the whole day. The penny that is spoken of there, is the
Kingdom of Heaven, and is not deserved by labor, but is freely given to them
that do labor, not in respect of their labor, but at the pleasure of the
heavenly Lord, of that heavenly Vineyarde, wherein they labor.

You do therefore charge us unjustly, when you say that we contemn good
works, or that we do say that they are unclean in the sight of God. But
thus we say, that our good works, (yea, our best works) as they be wrought
by us: are so unclean, that they are not meet to be called good. And herein
we are of one mind with the Apostle Paul, who writes thus to the Romans,
taking the matter upon him self, and in his own person, painting our the
best amongst men. Scio (says Saint Paul) quia non habitat in me, Rom 7.
hoc est, in carne mea, bonum. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, there
dwells no good thing. And again, in the third Chapter of the same Epistle,
the Apostle Paul cites the words of the Prophet David, Psa. 14. Psalm. 14.
saying, Non est iustus quisquam, and. There is no man just, there is none that
has understanding, there is none that seeks after God. They are all gone out
of the way, they are al become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no
not on^.

These places may suffice to prove, ye works wrought by us, cannot rightly be
called good, as they be wrought by us. But as God works them in us, so his
works wrought in us, or by as his instruments, are in deed good. And we
contemn them not: but as S. Paul teaches ye Hebrews, so do we teach. To
do good, and to distribute, forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased. Yea, we teach, as S. Augustine did. Tom. 7. De gratia and libero arb.
Cap. 7. August. lib. de great. and libero arb. Cap. 7. Tom. 7.
Si ergo Dei dona sunt, bona merita tua, Deus coronat merita tua non tanquam
merita tua, sed tanqua^ dona sua. If therefore, thy good merits, be the
gifts of God: then does not GOD crown thy merits, as thy merits, but as
his own gifts. For as those merits may be said to be ours: they are too
filthy: yea, although they be such works as may be, and commonly are called
righteous works. According to the saying of Esaias. 64. Esaias. 64.
Facti sumus vt immundis omnes nos, and quisi paunus menstruatae vniuersae
iustitiae nostrae. All we are become as an unclean person: and all our
righteousnesses, are as the cloth of a menstruous woman.

I hope that M. Offerer does now see, that the second point of doctrine that
he requires the learned Protestant to show, by plain testimonies of
Scripture, to be such as the Apostles and Disciples of Christ preached, when
they did by their doctrine convert Peoples, Lands, and Countries, etc. Is by
that which I have before written, proved to be such doctrine in deed.

The third point of doctrine, is the denial of free will. Herein also, M.
Offerer does abuse us (whom he calls Protestants.) For no learned
Protestant either has, does, or will deny man's will to be free, although it
may (in some sense) be affirmed to be bound. Free it is, because it neither
is nor can be enforced to consent to any action, although the outward action
may be so enforced by violence, that it may be done or left undone, contrary
to the inward will of the person that either does the action, or does leave
it undone. As when a man falls into ye hands of thieves, and fearing to be
murdered by them, does deliver to them his money, which notwithstanding, he
is willing to retain and keep from them, if with saftie of his life he might
do it. And yet in this case, it may be said, that the will consents to
deliver the money, being drawn (but not enforced) by the consideration of the
hard choice, which is either to deliver the money, or to die presently by the
bloody tyranny of the thieves.

The question therefore is not; whether the will of man be free: but whether
the power of man's free will be such, that it is able of it self to make
choice of that which is good and to embrace it: and to refuse that which is
evil, and to shun it. In the sixth of Saint John's gospel, our Savior Christ
has said thus: Nemo potest venire ad me, nisi Pater qui misit me traherit
eum, No man can come unto me, except the Father that sent me shall draw him.
Saint Augustine, August. in Joan. tract. 26.
In Iohannem. Tract. 26. writes thus upon this place, Magna gratiae
commendatio. Nemo venit nisi tractus. Quem trahat, and quem non trahat: quare
illum trahat, and illum non trahat, noli velle iudicare, si non vis errare:
semel accede and intellige, etc. This is a great commendation of grace or free
mercy. No man does come without drawing. If thou will not err, be not
willing to judge, whom he draws, and whom he draws not: why he draws
one man, and why he draws not another: receive it and understand it at once.
Thou art not drawn, pray that thou may be drawn: But here, what do we
say brethren? If we be drawn unto Christ: then do we believe against our
wills. Then is not the will stirred up, but violence is used. Any man being
unwilling, may enter into the Church, he may come unto the altar, being
unwilling, he may come unto the Sacrament, being unwilling: but believe he
can not, except he be willing. If belief were an act of the body, then might
it be done in them that be unwilling: but it is not with the body, that we
believe unto Righteousness. Hear what the Apostle says. With the heart we
believe unto righteousness. And what follows? But with the mouth we make
confession to salvation. This confession rises out of the root of the heart,
etc. Thus far S. Augustine.

If there were no more to be said but this: the Of^^rer might be satisfied,
touching our doctrine, seeing we ^^a^h not otherwise therein, then our Savior
Christ did, neither do we descent from the judgment of the ancient fathers,
that have written upon the words of our Savior Christ.

But let us see, what Saint Paul has written to the Corinth. 2. Cor. cap. 3.
Fiduciam autem talem, 2. Cor. 3.
habemus per Christum ad Deum: non quod sufficientes simus cogitare aliquid a
nobis, quasi ex nobis: sed sufficientia nostra ex Deo est. Such assurance to
Godward, have we, through Christ (says S. Paul) not that we be sufficient
of our selves, as of our selves, to think any thing: but our sufficiency is of
God.

And again to the Philippians, Chapter first, Philip. 2.
Saint Paul says thus. Deus enim est, qui operatur in vobis, and velle and
perficere, pro bona voluntate, It is God that works in you, both the will and
the power to perform the will.

And again, to the Romans, Chap. 7. Romans 7.
Velle adiacet mihi: perficere autem bonum non inuenio, etc. I have a will: but
to perform that which is good I find not. For I do not that good thing which
I am willing to do: but the evil thing which I am unwilling to do, that do
I. Now it is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.

By these plain places of Scripture, it appears manifestly, that the learned
Protestants, do teach nothing concerning free will, but that which our Savior
Christ, and his Apostle Paul have taught. But now to the fourth point of
doctrine.

The fourth point of doctrine is, the denial of the real presence of Christ's
body in the holy Eucharist. It is very true that all learned Protestants do
deny, the real presence of Christ's body, in the holy Eucharist. And there
is good cause why they should do so. For touching the real presence of his
body: our Savior Christ him self has said (as we read in the 11. Cha. of
S. John's gospe^l) Lazarus is dead, and I am glad for your sakes, that I was
not there, that you may believe. If you will say, that Christ's body was not
then glorified (as now it is) and therefore could not then (as now it may)
be in more places at once then one: then consider the words of S. Peter. Act.
3. Act. 3.
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the time
of refreshing from the presence of the Lord shall come, and when he shall send
him that has been preached unto you, even Jesus Christ, whom heaven must
contain, even till the time of the restitution of all things, which God has
spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets from the beginning.

By these words of Saint Peter, it appears, that he knew nothing of this
real presence of Christ's body in the holy Eucharist. For he says that
heaven is the place, where the Real body of Christ must be, till that time
wherein he shall appear in judgment, which is the time of the Restitution of
all things, as he has spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have
been since the world began.

According to this does Saint Augustine write to Dardanus. Tim 2. Epist. 57.
Cauendum est enim, ne ita diuinitatem adstruamus hominis: vt veritatem
corporis auferamus. We must take heed, that we do not so build up the
divinity of the manhood, that we take away the truth of the body. For it
follows not, that whatsoever is in God, should be every where as GOD is. By
this it appears that Saint Augustine knew nothing of our Offerers real
presence of the body of our Savior Christ in the holy Eucharist.

All this notwithstanding, we hold, that the body and blood of Christ are in
the holy Eucharist, present to ye faithful receivers, verily and in deed. So
that as many as do with a full assurance of the mercies of God, promised in
Christ, receive ye holy Eucharist: do undoubtedly (by faith) receive into
their souls, the very body and blood of Christ, to their endless comfort.

The learned Protestants do not teach (as you do slau^derously report of us)
that in ye holy Eucharist, there is nothing but bread and wine: for we know
what S. Paul has written to the Corinth. in the 10. Chapter of the first
Epistle. Vt prudentibus loquor: iudicate vos quod dico. 1. Cor. 10.
Poculum benedictionis cui benedicimus, etc. I do speak, as unto wise men:
do you judge that which I do speak. The Cup of blessing, which we do
bless, is it not the common partaking of the blood of Christ? And the bread
which we break, is it not the common partaking of ye body of Christ? The Lord
has made us able to judge of the meaning of ye Apostle in these words, we
do know, that as many as do come worthily to the Lords table, and be
partakers of the holy Eucharist, do not receive the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, only: but they receive his very body and blood. Although
not really, substancially, and bodily, (as you imagine) yet spiritually,
sacramentally, and verily and in deed. And this is according to that which
saint Augustine has written, in his Sermon, De Sacramentis fidelium.
De Sacramentis fidelium. Hoc est ergo manducare illam escam, etc. This is
therefore, to eat that meat and to drink that drink, for a man to dwell in
Christ, and to have Christ dwelling in him. And hereby, he that dwells not
in Christ, and in whom Christ dwells not: without doubt he neither eats
his flesh, nor drinks his blood, although he do eat and drink the
Sacrament of so excellent a thing, to his own condemnation.

This may suffice, to certify any reasonable man, that we deny not that
presence of Christ's body in the holy Eucharist, which is taught in the
Scriptures, and in the writings of S. Augustine.

The fifth point, that the Offerer does charge us with: is, that we deny the
Sacrifice of the most blessed M^sse. You should have said, the most abhomin^ble
M^sse. For what thing can be more abominable, then that thing which is
directly contrary to the scriptures, and derogatorie to that one sacrifice
that Christ Jesus (our high Priest) made of himself, once for all? Saint Paul
to the Hebrews, Chapter 10. Hebre. 10.
(speaking of our Savior Christ) says thus. Hic vero, vna pro peccatis oblata
victima, etc. After this man had offered up one sacrifice for sin: he
sits at the right hand of God for ever, waighting from hence forth, till his
enemies may be made his foot stool. For with one oblation, he has made
perfect for ever, such as are made holy. And the holy Ghost does certify
us, when he says thus. This is the Testament that I will make unto them,
after those days, says the Lord, giving my laws in their hearts, and in
their minds I will write them, and their sins and iniquities will I not
remember any more. And where there is forgiveness of those sins and
iniquities: there is now no Sacrifice for sin. This far Saint Paul.

What can be written or spoken more plainly then this is, for the proof of
that which we hol^e, that is, that in the Mass there is no sacrifice for
sin? Christ our high Priest, having offered up one oblation, is set down on
the right hand of God for ever: and what other thing can be meant by this, then
that which follows, which is, that by that one oblation, he has made perfect
al such as are made holy, that is, all the elected children of God, whom GOD
has by the holy spirit of santification made holy: Yea, and the covenant
that the Apostle speaks of here does assure us, that all the sins and
iniquities of Gods Elected children, are so pardoned and forgiven: that they
shall never be called to memory any more. And here upon saint Paul
concludes, that there is no more sacrifice to be offered for sin. How dare
any Christian (therefore) affirm directly contrary to these words of saint
Paul: that there is a sacrifice daily offered in the Mass, for the sins
both of the quick and of the dead? For that is the doctrine, that this
Offerer and his fellows do maintain.

1. John. 1
See also, what Saint John writes in the first Chapter of his first Epistle, Si
autem in luce ambulamus, sicut and ipse est in luce: societatem habemus ad
inuicem, and sanguis Jesus Christi filij eius, emundat nos ab omni peccato, etc.
If we do walk in light, as he is in light: (meaning GOD, of whom he spoke
before) then have we fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ
his son, does make us clean from all sin. If we shall say that we have
no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess
our sins: he is faithful and just, so that he will remit or forgive us our
sins, and he will cleanse us from all iniquity.

And again, in the second Chapter, 1, John, 2.
the same saint John says thus. My little babes, I write these words unto you,
that you should not sin: but if any man shall sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, even Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the propitiation
for our sins. Not for our sins only: but also for the sins of all the
world.

If we had to do with reasonable men: this that I have cited out of the
writings of these two Apostles, might suffice, for defense of that which the
Protestants do held concerning the Mass, affirming, that there is no
sacrifice offered therein, for the sins either of the quick or of the dead.

But nothing will satisfy this Offerer, and his fellows, the Popish
Chatholiques. The Scriptures have no credit with them, except the same be
confirmed by the writing of men. Because commonly, the Ancient Doctors, have
in their writings used excessive or hyperbolicall manner of speeches, to move
the minds of their Readers reuerendly to esteem of the holy mysteries: these
gross Capernaites, would (by the authority of those ancient Fathers) enforce
us to confess, that the holy Eucharist, is a Sacrifice for the sins, both of
the quick and of the dead. But when their works are thoroughly waighed, it is
found that they meant nothing less, then to give occasion of any such
blasphemous doctrine, as these Blasphemers would build upon their words.

Let us see, what Chrysostom has said in his Homily upon the 95. Psalm.
concerning the Sacrifices of the New testament. Expounding the words of the
Prophet Malachie, in the first Chapter. Chrysostom in Psalm. 95, Malach. 1.
Non est mihi voluntas in vobis, dicit Dominus omnipotens, etc. I have no
pleasure or delight in you, says the Lord Almighty, etc. He says thus, Vide
quam luculenter, quamque dilucide mysticam interpretatus est mensam, quae est
incruenta hostia. Thymiama vero purum appellat sacras preces, etc. See (says
Chrysostom) how plainly and manifestly, he does interpret the mystical
Table, which is the unbloody Sacrifice. He calls the holy prayers, (which
are offered up after the sacrifice) pure incense. For this perfume is it that
refreshes God, not that which is taken from the roots that grow in the earth,
but that is breathed out of a pure heart. And after he has noted, that the
Sacrifices of the old law were very many: he says thus. Quae omnia, noua
gratia superueniens, vno complectitur sacrificio: vnam ac veram statuens
hostiam. All which sacrifices, the new grace that succeeded, does comprehend
in one Sacrifice: ordayning but one, which is the right Sacrifice in deed.

Who can write more plainly for the proof of one only Sacrifice that our
savior Christ offered once for all: then Chrysostom does in this place?

Yea, he proceeds yet further and says thus: Habemus and nos in nobis ipsis
varias immolationes, non quae iuxta legem incedunt: sed quae decent Euangelicam
gr^tiam: visne has cognoscere victimas, quas habet Ecclesia, quum sine
sanguine, sine fumo, sine altari caeterisque ceremonijs, munus euangelicum
sursum ascendit ad Deum, etc. And we also have in our selves sundry
offerings, which proceed not according to the law: but such as are seemly for
the grace of the gospel. But will thou know those Sacrifices which ye Church
has, when the sacrifice of the gospel, ascends up unto God without blood,
without smoke, and without Altar, and the rest of the Ceremonies, which is
also, the clean and unspotted sacrifice? Hearken to the holy Scripture, which
does plainly expound unto thee, this difference and variety. The first
Sacrifice therefore, is that which I have spoken of before: that spiritual and
mystical gift, whereof Paul speaks when he says thus: Jmitatores estote,
Dei, etc. Be ye followers of God, Ephe. 5.
as dearly beloved children: and walk in love, even as Christ loved us, and
gave him self for us, a sacrifice and oblation of a sweet savor unto God,
etc.

It were too long to set down here all the words of Chrysostom in this
place. The Offerer, Tom. 1.
or some of his fellows, may read them, as they stand written in the Homily
before mentioned. It is manifest, that Chrysostomes meaning was not to maintain
the opinion of the popish Catholics, which hold, that in their blessed Mass,
is offered a sacrifice propitiatory for the sins both of the quick and the
dead.

The same Chrysostom (in his 17. Tom. 4. In Epist. ad Heb. hom. 17.
Homily upon the Epistle to the Hebrews) writes thus, Nonne per singulos dies
offerrimus? Offerrimus quidem, sed ad recordationem facientes mortis eius. Et
vna est haec hostia, non multae. Quomodo vna est and non multae? Quia semel
oblata est, etc. Do not we offer every day? In deed, we do offer: but we
do it for a remembrance of his death. And this sacrifice is but one and not
many. And how is it but one and not many? Because it was offered but once, it
was offered in the holiest place of all: and this sacrifice (which we offer) is
the Pattern or example thereof, we do always offer one and the self same
thing. And after many words to the same end: he says thus, Non aliud
sacrificium sicut Pontifex, sed idipsum semper facimus: magis autem
recordationem sacrificij operamur. We offer not another sacrifice, as the high
Priest did, but we do always make one and the same sacrifice: but we do
rather work the remembrance of a sacrifice.

Except our Adversaries have utterly lost the use of Reason, they must needs
see, that Chrysostomes meaning was to teach that it is not the holy Eucharist,
but ye death and passion of Christ (whereof the Eucharist is a remembrance)
that is the sacrifice propitiatory, whereby our sins are taken away. Even in
the judgment of Chrysostom, therefore, the Mass (which you call blessed) is
in deed curssed, because it is derogatory to the office of Christ Jesus: whose
coming into this world was to save sinners. And he only it is, that has
saved his people from their sins: by making a sacrifice of him self once for
all. By which one sacrifice once made, he has made perfect as many and be
made holy, that is, all the Elected and chosen children of God. So that now
there is no more sacrifice for sin. Hebr, 10.
As the Apostle has written to the Hebrews, Chapter 10. But what should I make
any more to do about this matter: since the Scripture is plain on our side?
Sit Deus verax, Psalm. 116.
omnis autem homo mendax. Let GOD (the author of the scriptures) be true, and
every man a liar.

Now, the last point of doctrine that you charge the Protestants with, is the
abolishing of Christ's sacraments, and of all the graces and goodness by them
conferred unto us. To this I say, that no learned Protestant, either has, does
or will abolish, or consent to the abolishing, of any one sacrament that our
savior Christ has instituted, or of any grace or goodness co^ferred to us by
them. We confess with S. Augustine. Ad Ianuarium. Epist. 118. August. ad
Ianuarium. 118.
that our savior Christ has instituted very few sacraments, and that the
same are very effectual, as is Baptism, and the Communion of the body and
blood of our savior Christ. These two sacraments we acknowledge to be
instituted by our savior Christ, as sacraments, that is, outward and visible
signs, representing inward invisible and spiritual graces. In Baptism, the
outward and visible sign is water, and the inward, invisible and spiritual
grace, is forgiveness of sins, and regeneration or new birth: both which we
have by the death and resurrection of Christ, and in that sacrament we receive
a seal and pledge of the same. Yea, and where we are by nature the children
of Gods wrath: we are by Baptism, received into the church, and assured that
we are now the children of God, joined and graffed into the body of Christ,
and are become his members, and that we do grow into one body with him. Yea,
and being assured that Gods covenant and promise made to faithful Abraham and
to his seed, belongs to us and to our seed, because (believing in Christ)
we be the spiritual posterity of Abraham: we are bold to baptize our
children, as fellow members together with us, of the same mystical body of
Christ, that it has pleased our heavenly Father to make us members of, And
when they be able to learn, we do teach them to believe and acknowledge
that they be so: and to endeavor in their life to express that duty both to
God and man, which was at their baptism professed and promised.

In the other sacrament (which we do commonly call the Lords supper) the
outward and visible sign is bread and wine, both which we do (according to
Christ's commandment) receive. For he has said Take, eat, this is my
body: and drink ye all of this: for this is the Cup of the new testament in
my blood, etc. And we are assured by Faith: that as we do receive the bread
and wine into our mouths and stomachs, even so we do by faith, receive into
our souls, the very body and blood of Christ, that heavenly food, whereby our
souls are refreshed and fed unto everlasting life. And this body and blood of
Christ, are the heavenly part of this sacrament, removed from all outward
senses.

But we do not believe (as you popish Catholics would have us believe) that
the substance of the bread and wine in this sacrament, is turned into the
substance of the body and blood of Christ: for so it could not be a
sacrament, which must have in it both an outward and visible sign, and an
inward invisible grace. Wherefore the bread and wine must remain in their
natures and properties.

Neither do we believe, that this sacrament was ordained to be a sacrifice
to God the father, for the remission of sins: for we know that only Christ
Jesus has bin and is able and worthy to offer sacrifice for the deliverance of
mankind from sin. And that he has (by that sacrifice that he made of
himself, once for all) fully satisfied for the sins of the whole world, and
has left nothing for us to do, but firmly to fix our faith in him, and
thankefully to take the use of this eternal sacrifice, which we chiefly do,
when we come worthily to the Lords table, and be partakers of that holy
sacrament.

Now, if you think that I have done that which you required the learned
Protestant to do: then shame not to yield and recant, and be no longer an
obstinate and wilful blind popish Catholic, which is an Antichristian
schismaticke. But be a tractable and an obedient Scholar of Christ Jesus,
hearkening to, and believing the gospel of Christ, which is the glad tidings
of free pardon and full forgiveness of all our sins by the merits and
mediation of our only Lord and savior Jesus Christ, protesting to hold every
gospel that is contrary to this Gospel, accursed, as saint Paul willed the
Galathians to do. So shall you be a right Catholic Christian, holding and
professing that Catholic faith, which Christ himself commanded his
messengers to teach Catholiquely, when he said thus, Euntes in mundum
vniuersum, docete omnes gentes, baptizantes eos in nomine patris, Math. 28.
and filij, and spiritus sancti, etc. Going into all the world, teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the father, of ye son, and of the holy
ghost, teaching them to observe all those things that I have commanded you.
This is the Catholic doctrine that we have heard and learned, and do
believe it. By hearing this word of the gospel or glad tidings of free pardon
and forgiveness of sins: our God has wrought in us such an assurance of
Salvation, that we doubt nothing thereof. And this assurance woorketh in us
an unfeigned love toward him that has adopted, predestined, and called us to
be meet Images of his son: and one of us toward another, although not in
such perfection as he has loved us, and as he commands us to love one
another, yet in some measure, and in such measure as he in mercy allows of.
We protest therefore, that we will hold this faith and still crave the
increase of this faith, and that we may grow rich in those works that our
Lord ye has made us, redeemed us, and consecrated us to his own service, has
prepared for us to walk in. As for works divised by men: we esteem of them
as we find them. If we see that they bend to the setting forth of Gods
glory, in our edification, we use them, otherwise we refuse them. But the
works that God has commanded: we are careful to do. And when by the
infirmity and corruption of our nature, we stumble and fall: we cry unto
our merciful father for help, as being assured that he hears us and in
tender affection toward us, will help us: yea, though he do for a time
suffer us to lie under that too too heavy burden of sin, under which we
are fallen by infirmity. We seek not to our fellow servants, as to Angels or
men: much less to Antichrist, the professed enemy of our Christ and savior.
We trust not in our own strength, nor in any merits that may be in us: but
we trust in our God and our only savior Jesus Christ. And when we have
walked upright, and have done that which we are commanded to do, we say (as
our Savior has taught us to say) we are unprofitable bond slaves: we have
done nothing but that which of duty we ought to do. But now let us see the
second offer that our Offerer makes.

The second offer.
The Offerer.

Second, Christ his Catholic Church being on this had from time to time the
custody of the sacred scriptures, and most safely has preserved them for the
necessary food of Gods people, and from the corruption of the adversaries, as
well Jews and Gentiles, as schismatikes and heretics of all sorts, but only
the common known Catholiqu^ Church of Christ? When therefore the learned
Protestants, shall be able to bring proof to the contrary, that their private
conuenticles and Congregations, were the first bringers forth of this sacred
Bible and word of God written, the chief preseruers and defenders of the same
in all times and ages, from all Jews, Gentiles, betikes and schismatikes: then
will I, as I said before, revolt and recant.

Crowley.

In this his second Offer, the Offerer uses a fallace or disceit, which in
reasoning is called, Petitio principij, That is, he labors to confirm his
assertion, wherein there is no certenty, by that wherein there is, as little or
less certenty) then in that assertion that he holds. And yet he sets a
face upon it, as though nothing were or could be more certain, then both the
assertion, and that whereby he would prove it, be.

His assertion is, that the Church of Rome (which he calls Catholic) is and
ever has bin, from time to time the conseruer and keeper of the sacred
scriptures: and this he would prove by another like assertion, that is, that
the same Church was the first Preacher and Writer of ye same scripture, which
he calls the sacred Bible and holy scriptures.

When the unlearned Reader considers this assertion: he is brought into such
a maze, that he knows not which way to take. For this Offerer would bear
him in hand, that the sacred Bible, which contains those books that are
called the old Testament: were never written before ye church which he calls
Catholic did take in hand to write them. Where as in very deed, some of those
books were written, before the first foundation of Rome was laid. Yea, he
would that men should think, that, that Romish Church which he calls
Catholic: is the same that was first planted amongst the Nations of the
world, by the preaching of the gospel amongst them. Which preaching began at
Jerusalem, and sprang from thence, as from a most plentiful Fountain, and
was by the labor and travel of the Apostles and Disciples of our savior
Christ, in preaching the gospel speedily spread over all the world. And that
it was this Romish Church that did first write the Gospels and other books of
the new Testament, and has discerned of those books that are accounted for
holy scripture, and has severed them from all other writings, what so ever:
and has preserved them from all corruption, etc.

But such as be learned do know, that all the books of the old Testament
(commonly called the Bible) were written before the Incarnation of our savior
Christ: and therefore, before any such Church as this Offerer imagines the
Romish Catholic Church to be, could have any being. Our Savior him self
has said, John. 5. John, 5.
Scrutamini scripturas, etc. Search the Scriptures: for you think to have
everlasting life in them. And those scriptures be they that do give
testimony of me. And again, the Evangelist Luke says thus, Chapt. 24. Et
incipiens a Mose, Luc, 24.
and omnibus Prophetis, etc. And beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets: he
did interpret unto them all the scriptures which were written concerning him.
Saint Peter also, says thus. Act. 3. Act, 3.
Et omnes Prophetae, a Samuele, etc. And all the Prophets, from Samuel forward,
even as many as have spoken, have made mention of these days: yea, and saint
Paul in that Epistle that he directed to those Romans, that were the first
Christians in Rome: Rom, 15.
writes thus. Quaecunque en^m scripta sunt, etc. What so ever things have bin
setdowne in writing, have bin written for our learning, that through patience
and consolation of the scriptures, we might conceive hope. And to Timoth. 2.
Timoth. 3. 2. Timot. 3.
Saint Paul says thus, Omnis scriptura diuinitus inspirata vtilis est, etc.
Every scripture given die divine inspiration, is profitable for teaching, for
reproouing, for rebuking, for instructing, etc.

By all these places of scripture, it appears plainly, that the sacred Bible
was written before the Romish Catholic Church had her beginning: and
therefore could not be first written by that Church, as this Offerer
labors to persuade that it was.

Yea, and the books of the new testament, were written by the Evangelists, and
Apostles, and not by any such Bishops and Priests, as this Offerer would have
us think to be the immediate successors of the Apostles and Disciples of our
savior Christ, and to be the Bishops and Priests of the City of Rome. For
when saint Paul being in prison at Rome, wrote his second Epistle to Timothy:
there were no such Bishops or Priests there, as might worthyly be taken for
Christians. For thus does S. Paul write, In prima mea defensione, nemo mihi
affuit, etc. In my first defense: 2. Timot. 4.
there was not one man that assisted me, but all men left me alone, God
grant it be not laid to their charge, etc.

If this Offerer and his fellows, have any eyes to see, they may see: that
when the Apostle Paul (being in prison in Rome) did write this Epistle to
Timoth. the Bishops and priests yt then were in Rome, were scarce worthy the
name of Christians, because they durst not stand to ye profession of Christian
Religion as S. Paul did, but left him all alone, betraying the Christian
cause, as much as in them lay.

Yea, and hereof it may be probably gathered: that Peter was not then at Rome,
and consequently that he was not Bishop of Rome for the space of xxv. years
together, as the Romish Catholics do affirm that he was. Yea, rather it
may be thought yt he never was Bishop of Rome: for this Epistle was written
in Rome, the 13. year of the reign of Nero, which was the 35. year after
saint Paul was converted to Christ.

But if he were then Bishop of Rome, he was at that time either fled from
Rome, fearing the persecution, or else being in that City, he durst not show
him self to be of one mind with Paul, and so by his example, the rest that
then were Christians in Rome, withdrew them selves from Paul, and left him all
alone.

Thirteen years before this, the Apostle Paul had written to the Romans,
being then at Corinth, in ye last year of the reign of Claudius the Emperor.
And as it appears in the first Chapter of that Epistle: the fame of that
Church was such at that time, that saint Paul wrote thus, Primum quidem
gratias ago Deo meo, Romans 1,
per Iesum Christum, pro omnibus vobis, quia fides vestra annuntiatur in
vniuerso mundo. First of all, I give thanks to my God, thorough Jesus Christ,
on the behalf of you all: for that your faith is declared through out the
whole world. The Church therefore, or Congregation of Christians that then were
in Rome, were of the best sort of Christians. And because that City was then
the chief City that then was in the world: therefore the fame of their faith
was spread over all the world. But yet (as appears by that which is before
alleged) they had their faults and infirmities, which were seen in them more
at one time then at another. At the first, when they received ye doctrine of
the gospel, they were earnest professors and followers of the same (as
commonly men have bin in our days, and are still) but when persecution began
to arise for the professing thereof: they began to show them selves to be like
that seed that being sown, fell in stony ground, and yet being again
moystened with yt dew of Gods grace which fell from above, they took deep
root, and so became more fruitful in the end. For many of that age gave
their lives for the testimony of the truth, and were Martirs or witnesses of
Jesus Christ, as in the Church Histories does appear.

But that these were the writers of the Scriptures, appears not in any
Histories, for they were written before, some by the Prophets, and some by the
Apostles: and such books as were written after the time wherein the other
Apostles lived, were written by the Apostle John, which lived after all the
rest.

As touching the especial care that you say the Catholic Church has from
time to time had, not only of preaching the word, but also of preserving the
same, etc: all learned Protestants do know, that no man could have greater
care to preach the word, to discern the books of holy scripture, from
profane writings, and to preserve them from the corruption of the adversaries,
then they that in the time of the ten first persecutions, professed the
Catholic religion. And amongst those Catholics: none were more forward
therein, then were they, which then were dwelling in the City of Rome. But what
makes this for proof, that the Romish Church has always bin, and is still,
the keeper and preserver of the scriptures? The first Romish Church (which was
Catholic) preached the gospel, as the Apostles and Disciples of Christ had
done: but that Romish church that now is, and has bin for the space of these
last thousand years (almost) being Antichristian, does, and has all this
while preached men's traditions, and is to be noted with that saying that the
Prophet Esaias used, in reprehending the Leuiticall Priests of his time. Esaias.
29. Esaias, 29.
Cited by our savior Christ. Math. 15. Math. 15.
Populus hic labijs me honorat, etc. This people honor me with their lips,
they draw nighe unto me with their mouth, but their heart is far from me:
In vain do they worship me in teaching the doctrines and commandments of
men, etc.

The first Romish Church, used the Sacraments that Christ had instituted,
religiously, and to that end that our savior Christ had instituted them for:
but that Romish Church, which you call Catholic, has for the space of these
1000. years almost, and does still abuse those Sacraments, namely, Baptism,
and the Supper of the Lord, commonly called the Sacrament of the body and blood
of our savior Christ. For that Church does minister that sacrament to
Churches, to Belles, and to Ships that sail on the seas: and of the other
sacrament they make an Idol, lifting it up over their heads to be worshipped,
setting it upon their high alter, or hanging it over the same, burning incense
before it, and using iestures of divine honor before it, and carrying it
abroad in pompous manner, compelling the people to do divine honor to it.
Yea, they offer it up to God as a sacrifice for the sins both of the quick
and the dead: and in tempests of weather, and in coniurations, they make it a
bug to fear the devil withal.

The first Catholic Church, in their exercise of Religion, did use as few
Ceremonies as might be: for they knew that our savior Christ had broken down
that middle wall or particion, which was the law of Ceremonies contained in
the law written, and had (through the flesh) bin the occasion that discord,
whereby the nations of the world were so severed from the people of Israel
that they could never join with them in one religion, till our savior Christ
had made it void, and made of both the peoples but one new man, making peace,
that he might reconcile both in one body. And Ephe. 2. Ephe. 2.
But your Romish Catholic Church, has reedified a new middle wall or
particion, of a law of Ceremonies, not contained in the law written, but
divised by men. And that particion they do still maintain and uphold,
enforcing all men that will bear the name of Christ and be called Christians
to allow of and to use those Ceremonies: and all such as do refuse those
Ceremonies, they do excommunicate and deliver to the secular power to be
consumed to ashes with fire, or otherwise to be tormented, only because they
refuse to use those Ceremonies.

To be brief, the first Catholic church did acknowledge none to be her
universal head, but Christ Jesus only, and she submitted her self to be
governed in matters of faith, by his spirit, which spirit did in deed
govern her in the understanding of the scriptures, which are the rule of
Christian Religion. And in civil government, she submitted herself to
Princes, and other Potentats: acknowledging that God has given unto them the
power of the sword, and has made them his reuengers upon earth, commanding
them to use that power in defending innocents, and in punishing of such as do
transgress his laws. But your Romish Catholic church must have a Pope to
be her universal head, under the name of Christ's vicar general, and he
must have absolute power upon earth, diriued from the Apostle Peter, that never
took upon him self any such power, but willed all Christians to submit
themselves to all estates of men, even for the Lord Jesus sake. Yea, he willed
them to honor all men, to love brotherly fellowship, to fear God, and to
honor the king. 1. Peter. 2. 1. Peter, 2.
But your Pope must have power over all men, even over Princes, to whom Peter
submitted him self, and willed al christians to do the like. Yea, he must
have power to depose all such Princes as will not bow to him, and be his
Executioners, in executing the pains of death upon all such as it pleases him
to take for Heretics. Such Princes does your Pope take upon him to depose,
and to deprive them of all princely dignity, and to set up in their place,
such as will submit them selves unto him, and become his sworn vassalles. And
that he may ye more easily bring these things to pass: he absolueth all the
subjects of such Princes from their dutiful oath of obedience, which they have
dutifully taken to those their leage and natural Princes. Yea, and (as late
and daily practices do teach) they spare not to promise the kingdom of God to
such subjects as will most undutifully, and most unnaturally murder, not only
their natural countrymen, but also their natural Princes.

By these differences, it apreareth how great the difference is betwixt the
first Romish church (which was in deed Catholic) and yours, which you call
catholic, but is in deed Cacolike.

But now you conclude, that if the learned Protestant can prove, that the
private conuenticles and congregations of the Protestants, were the first
bringers forth of the sacred Bible and written word of God, the chief
preseruers and defenders of the same, in all times and ages, from all Jews,
Gentiles, Heretics and schismatiks: then you will revolt, and recant as you
have said before.

To this I say (on the behalf of the learned Protestant) that neither the
Catholic church, nor any other congregations, have bin the first bringers
forth of the sacred Bible, etc. For those books which are called the Bible,
were brought forth and written, before our savior Christ said thus to the
Jews. Scrutamini scripturas, etc. Ioh. 5. Ioh. 5.
Search the scriptures, etc. And as for the preserving and defending of them,
from Jews, Gentiles, etc. I say that it has not bin the work of man but of
God him self, who is the only Author of the same. Apocal. 6.
In the sixth chapter of saint John's Revelations, it is written, that when the
third seal of that book which was sealed with seven seals was opened: there
was a voice which came from the midst of the four beasts, which said to him
that sat upon the black horse, and had a balaunce in his hand. Wine and oil,
see thou do not hurt. In the judgment of all learned interpreters, wine and
oil do in that place signify the scriptures which God would not suffer to
be hurt by any man's interpretation: no not in the time of most deep
Ignorance. The Jews could never corrupt the text of the Canonical scriptures:
although they lacked no good will to have corrupted them. Neither could your
Popish catholics at any time corrupt those scripcures: for God has reserved
a Remnant of the Jews, with whom those scriptures are (and always have bin)
had in such estimation, and reverence, that they would never leave them to any
that would corrupt them, and this has God wrought by them, using them as his
instruments therein. In like manner, the Grecians have bin his instruments, in
keeping the Greek text, both of the old and new testament, from all manner
of Corruption, in all parts thereof that do concern any part of the
substance of our Religion: so that though your Popish Catholics would (as no
doubt they are willing enough) yet they can not corrupt either the Hebrew or
Greek text.

Thus (if you will) you may see (master Offerer) that God alone, by such
means as he has, does, and will use, has bin the bringer forth of the
sacred Bible, and other holy scriptures: for the holy men of God did speak, as
the holy spirit of God did move them to speak. 2. Pet. 1. 2. Peter, 1.
And it is he that has used his good means, both in discerning of the holy
writings from the profane: and also in preserving and defending of them, from
all manner corruption. Wherefore, if you mind to be as good as your word: you
must revolt, and recant.

The third Offer.
The Offerer.



Crowley.

There is no reason, why we should show you good reason why we do that
thing, which none of us either have done, do, or mind to do. In beliuing
that the Bible and scriptures that we have, is the true Bible and scripture:
we do as the people of Sichar did. John the fourth chapter. They said to the
woman that told them of Jesus Iam non propter tuam orationem credimus, etc.
John. 4.
Now do we believe, not because of the tale that thou have told us: for we
our selves have heard, and do know, that this is very Christ, the savior of
the world. Even so, we confess that when we were amongst you, we heard you
talk of a Bible, and scriptures, and we were desirous to see them: but you
kept them from us, by all the means that you could devise, but at the last
(by Gods merciful providence) we gate a sight of them, and had them
translated into such languages as we our selves do understand. But this was
full sore against your wills (as by Hystories it does appear.) We have
therefore no cause to thank you for them, but we do give most hearty and
continual thanks to our heavenly father, that has provided them for us, and
has given the use of them to us. Yea, and finding in the first chapter of S.
James Epistle, Jacob. 1.
that if any man lack wisdom, he must ask it of God, who gives to all men
indifferently, and does not vpbrayde any man with his gifts: we have, and
do still beg of God, his holy Spirit to direct us, both in the discerning
of the Books of the Scriptures, and in the finding out of the true sense of
the same. And we do find the saying of our Savior Christ, written by Saint
Luke (chapter 11.) very true. Luc, 11.
Si vos cum sitis mali, nostis, etc. If you being evil, do know how to give
good gifts to your children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the
holy Spirit to them that crave it of him: we have craved that holy spirit,
and do still crave it of our heavenly Father. We have received it, and do
still receive it in some measure. We are thereby made able to judge the
spirits, and according to the counsel of S. John's first Epistle, 1, John, 4.
and fourth chapter, We believe not every spirit: but we do try the
spirits. And finding that the holy spirit of God did move them that first
wrote the books of the Bible, to write as they did write: therefore we do
thankfully receive those books as holy scripture, and do reuerendly use them,
as a Lantern to our feet, and a light unto our paths.

After this manner did the Catholic men that have lived before us, endeavor to
know the canonical Scriptures, from such as are pro have. And as S. Augustine
writes upon the last Psalm. August, in Psalm. 150. Tom, 5.
Tom. 8. Sunt etiam qui vniuersas omnino scripturas canonicas, vnum librum
vocent: quod valde mirabili and diuina vnitate concordent. There be some men
also (says S. Augustine) that do name all the canonical scriptures but one
book: because they do agree, in a very merueilous and heavenly unity. S.
Augustine in his second book of christian Doctrine, August. de doct. Christ.
lib. 2. Ca. 5.
writes thus, Cap. 8. Totus autem canon scripturarum, in quo istam
considerationem versandam dicimus, his libris continetur. In deed the whole
canon of the Scriptures, wherein we do affirm this consideration is to be
used, is contained in these books. And then he makes rehersall of those 44.
books which are contained in that book, which both you and we do call the
holy Bible, concluding thus. His quadraginta quatuor libris, veteris testamenti
terminatur authoritas. In these four and forty books, is the authority of the
old testament ended. Then he makes rehersall of the books called the New
testament, which are in number, 27. and they are the same that we have in our
books called the New testaments, both in greek and in latin. Of al these
books together, which are in number. 71. S. Austen writes thus. In his
omnibus libris, timentes Deum, and pietate mansueti: quaerunt volu^tatem Dei.
In all these books, they that fear God, and are by godliness made modest, do
seek for the will and pleasure of God. And in the beginning of this 8. chap.
of this second book of christian Doctrine, S. Austen does instruct every
christian after this manner. Erit igitur diuinarum scripturarum solertissimus
indagator, qui primo totas legerit, notasque habuerit, and si non dum
intellectu, iam tamen lectione, duntaxat eas quae appellantur canonicae. He
therefore shall be the wisest searcher of the holy scriptures, which will first
read them through, and will have a perfect knowledge of them, although not in
understanding, as yet, but yet already in reading, those scriptures only,
which are called Canonical. And going forward in this instruction he says
thus: Jn Canonicis autem scripturis, Ecclesiarum catholicarum quam plurimum
authoritatem sequatur: inter quas sane illae sunt, quae Apostolicas seeds
habere, and Epistolas accipere meruerunt. Let him, as much as may be, follow
the authority of ye Catholic churches, in ye canonical scriptures: amongst
which churches, undoubtedly those churches are, which have deserved to have
Apostolical seats, and to receive Epistles. By these words of S. Augustine,
it appears what was meant in S. Augustins time by these words, the Catholic
church, and the canicall scriptures. The scriptures were called canonical,
that do contain the rule of faith and of manners. And the churches were
planted by the preaching of ye doctrine, amongst which those were accounted for
ye chief that had bin planted by ye Apostles them selves, and had, had some
one of ye Apostles resiant amongst them for a time, and therefore ye places
were called Apostolical seats. And these were the congregations that ye
Apostle Paul did direct his Epistles unto. And here I do (by the way) note,
that as Rome was Seeds Apostolicae, an Apostolic seat: so was Corinth,
Galatia, Ephessus, Colossa, Philippos, and Thessalonica. Wherefore these later
were of like authority with ye first. S. Austen therefore adds further, and
says thus. Tenebit igitur hunc modum in scripturis canonicis: vt eas quae ab
omnibus accipiuntur Ecclesijs catholicis, praeponat eis quas quaeda^ non
accipiunt. Let him therefore (that is a searcher of ye scriptures) keep this
meesure in the canonical Scriptures: that he prefer those scriptures that be
received of al Catholic churches, before those scriptures which certain
Catholic churches do not receive.

By all these words of S. Austen, written in the 8. chap. of his second book
De christiana doctrina: it appears manifestly, that ye church of Rome,
although it were then Catholic, and accounted so to be: yet it was not (as
now you do account it to be) the only Catholic church of Christ. For the
other Churches which had bin Apostolic seats, and had received Epistles: were
Catholic, as well as ye church of Rome was: yea, and that all those churches
were but particular churches, and none of them universal, but members of that
universal Church, which consists of all the particular churches that are,
have bin, or shall be upon earth.

Yea, and it appears, that some of those Catholic churches did not receive
(as canonical) all those books yt are contained in the Bible: although they
did in some sort account them canonical, as containing rules necessary for
manners, though not for faith.

In Tom. 4. Tom. 4.
of S. Hieroms works, it appears, ye Ruffinus (a learned Priest, and such a
one as S. Hierome liked well of, living about 400. years after, Christ's
ascension) did not allow for canonical, mo books then these. In ye old
testament (says he) the five books of Moses, that is Genesis, Exodus,
Leuiticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomium. After these Jesus Naue, of the Judges,
together with Ruth. After these, four books of the reigns of kings, which
the Hebrews do account but two. Paralipomenon, which is called the book of
days, and two of Esdras, which they do receive each by it self: and the
book of Hester. And of the Prophets, Esaie, Jeremy, Ezechiell, Daniell:
bisides these, one book of the xii. Prophets: Job also, and the Psalms of
David, are each of them one book. Solomon also, has given unto the churches,
three books: the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Cantica canticorum. In these
books have the fathers shut up the number of the books of the old testament.
And of the New testament, there are four Gospelles of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John. The Acts of the Apostles, which Luke does describe. Fourteen Epistles
of Paul ye Apostle: of Peter the Apostle, two: of James the brother of ye
Lord, and an Apostle, one Epistle: of Judas one: of John, three: and the
Apocalypse of John. These be the volumes which the fathers have shut up within
the canon, and whereof ye father would that the assertions of our faith, should
consist.

Notwithstanding, it is needful to be known, yt there be other books also,
which are not canonical, but our ancestors have called them Ecclesiastical.
That is to say, wisdom, which is said to be Salomons. And another Wisdom,
which is said to be of the son of Sirach: which is by the Latinists, named
by the same general name Ecclesiasticus. By which name, not the author of ye
book, but the quality of the scripture is named. And of ye same Order is the
book of Tobias, and Judith, and the books of Machabies. Thus far Ruffinus, in
his creed or confession of belief, set forth by saint Hierome.

And not many lives after this, he writes thus. These volumes have the
fathers delivered unto us, which (as I have said) it has seemed to me, meet
to note out: for ye instruction of such as do take upon them the first
rudime^ts of the church and of faith: that they may know out of what
fountains, the cups of the word of God must be drawn.

Now (M. Offerer) I pray you confer these words of Ruffinus, with that decree
that was made by your fathers of ye Tridentine council, in their 4. Session,
wherein they allow for canonical, all those books, that have bin and are
contained in that book which is commonly called ye Bible. With them the books
of Tobias, Hester, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the two books of the
Machabies, are of as great authority as the rest: and they do denounce
accursed all such as do not, or shall not, receive for canonical, all those
books and every part of them, making no diffrence betwixt these and the other
which Ruffinus has said the fathers have delivered unto us, as fountains, out
of which the cups of the word of God must be drawn. Let your fathers therefore
denounce accursed, this Ruffinus and those fathers yt he speaks of, for they
be of one mind with us. Let them accursse S. Hierome, that has set forth
this Creed of Ruffinus, as a sound confession of the Christian faith. Let them
excommunicate S. Gregory, Grego. Morali in 29. lib. Cap. 19. Hiero. in
praefacio. prou.
that in the 19. of his moral exposition of the 29. Chapter of Job, does
confess, that the first book of the Machabies is not canonical. Yea, let
them accursse S. Hierome as black as a pot, for that in his preface to the
proverbs of Solomon he says thus. The church does read the books of Judith,
Tobie, and the Machabies, for th'edification of the people: but not to confirm
the authority of the doctrines of the Church. This Hierome, and such other were
the fathers ye Ruffinus says, have delivered to us, the other books of the
Bible, and not these, to be fountains for us to draw the cups of Gods word
out of them. And with these, would we rather be accursed, then blessed with
your popish Catholic fathers, in your Tridentine counsel.

You frame an argument after this manner. If the Catholic church had the true
spirit of God, in discerning and judging the true scriptures of God from the
rest, not scriptures: why should not we believe ye same Catholic church
governed and led by the same spirit, in giving the true sense, meaning, and
understanding of the scriptures? To this I answer. That the romish Catholic
church, which now is, and has continued for the space almost of a thousand
years, is not, neither has bin led by the true spirit of God, either in
discerning or judging the true scriptures of God from the rest, etc. Nor yet in
giving the true sense, etc: but it has bin, and is still led by the spirit of
Antichrist. And that never more apparently then at the Tridentyne counsel, as
by the canons of the same counsel does most manifestly appear, to as many as
with indifferent judgment, can and will read them.

Thus have I showed you sufficient reasons, whereby you might be moved to
yield, and join with us in religion, and no longer to depend upon the
judgment of that Antichristian church, which you call Catholic: for that you
may see (if you be not altogether blinded, that it is not the true spirit of
God, that has and does lead your Catholic church, but (in deed) the false
spirit of Antichrist.

The fourth Offer.
Offerer.

Fourth. Let the Protestants make sufficient proof by

Crowley.

It is very true, yt the known Catholic church has bin, and still is, as for
these fifteen hundredth years last past; it has bin, the mean that God has
used, in the conuinsing and overthrowing of Arians, Nestorians, and the rest of
ye Heretics that you speak of. It is most true also, yt the same Catholic
church has all this time, continued firm and steadfast: but how can you prove
yt your popish Catholic church is that known Catholic church of Christ, that
you speak of? Herein lies ye difficulty. It is not enough for you to say, yt
your romish church is the Catholic church: but you must prove it. Your
antiquity, your universality, and your unity, with your continual succession
of Bishops, will not serve your turn.

Your antiquity is not so ancient as ours by 4600. years (almost.) For ours
began in Adam, and has continued ever since: and yours began to flourish in ye
days of Phocas the Emperor, ye murdered Mauricius, and his wife and children,
and was the first that gave ye title of universal bishop, to Bonifacius the 3.
then bishop of Rome. And this was 600. years after the birth of our savior
Christ. Your church was in hatching, the later 300. years of the 600. but
never perfected before Phocas time, Wherefore your antiquity is nothing.

Your universality was never so large as the Romain Empire, your unity
divided, into more sects then ever the heathen Philosophers were. Your
succession of Bishops, is such that no man can justly prove yt Peter was the
first, nor that ever he was Bishop of Rome. Or if he were Bishop of Rome, no
man can certainly say how long he was there Bishop, nor who it was that was
the next Bishop after him. And by the testimony of your own Hystorians: some
in the succession of your Bishops, were as wicked men as ever lived upon earth:
and one was a woman, and an arrant whore. And bisides all this: your Apostolic
seat of Rome that you brag so much of, has bin void, for the space of one,
yea, two years together and more. You have had also, two: yea, three Popes at
one time, and much blood has bin shed about the trial of their titles.

But our universality is (and ever has bin) as large as the whole world: yea,
when in the judgment of men of the best sort, our Church seemed to be clean
rooted out, as in the days of king Achab it seemed to be in the kingdom of
Israel: yet had God his number known unto him, although not known unto men.
And therefore, when Elias complained, and said, The children of Israel have
forsaken thy covenant, they have overthrown thine alter, they have slain thy
prophets, I alone do remain, and they seek after my life. 3. Reg. 19. 3.
Reg. 19.
Then did the Lord answer, and said unto him, I have reserved for my self
7000. men that have not bowed their knees to Baall. As then, and there: so at
all times and in all places, the Lord has had, has still, and still will have
(in despite of all Turkish and Popish enemies) his number, known unto him
self, and that number is his Catholic and known church. And this church
has God made able at all times, to convince all heresies and Heretics. And at
this day he does, and for ever hereafter he will, make the same church able
to convince, all turkish and popish Heretics and Heresies: although not by the
sword, yet by the word, as at this day, you (M. Offerer) and all your popish
Catholic brethren, may see, if you have eyes to see, and wills to consider
of that which you do and must needs see.

Our unity also, in the substance of religion, is the same that was taught by
the Patriarchs, by the Prophets, and by Jesus Christ, and his Apostles: and
was by the first Christians that were in Room, and in the rest of the Cities
that then were under the dominion of the Roman Emperors, received, holden and
professed. That is, with one full consent, we believe, hol^e and confess all
the Articles that are contained in the three Creedes: namely, the Apostles
Creed, the Nicene Creed, and the Creed of Athanasius. We believe as S. Paul
has taught the Ephesians. to believe: that there is but one Lord, one faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all, which is above all, Ephe, 4.
and in us all. Ephe. 4.

Our succession of Bishops, is such as the succession of the Prophets was. We
make no account of that succession of Bishops in Rome, which you do brag so
much of (for the Scribes and Pharisees might have bragged of such a succession
as well as you do, and might have said to our Savior Christ as you do to us,
where was your Gospel 400. years past?) But we do make account of that
succession wherein God has in his good times, stirred up some in the spirit
of Elias, to deal in doctrine with men of all sorts: as Elias did with Achab,
and the Isralities, and as John Baptist did with Herod, and with the Jews in
his time. The high Priests had their succession even from Aaron, as your Popes
have had from Peter: some of them asspiring to that estate by one sinister
mean and some by an other, as by the Histories it appears. But in the mean
while, God stirred up Prophets but now and then: for the word of God was
precious in the days of Elie the high Priest, when the Lord stirred up Samuel
to be a Prophet. And when John Baptist was stirred up: there had been no
Prophet amongst the Jews, for the space of many years together. This was the
execution of Gods just judgment upon the Jews, because they had not regarded
those Prophets which he had styrred up amongst them. In like manner, in the
time that has been since the Incarnation of our Savior Christ, because men
had given over themselves to believe lies, and did not regard the truth. God
took from them such as had labored to lead them in the way of truth, and
gave them over to the efficacy of error. Yea being wilfully blind: he gave
them blind guides that might lead them the right way into the ditch of
destruction.

Thus you may see, if you have a lust to behold the truth: that not your new
found Popish Catholic Church, but our most ancient Christian Catholic
Church, is that Church that has continued thoroughout firm and steadfast
whiles all other couenticles and congregations as well of Arians. etc, as of
Mahumetans and Popish Antichristians, and the rest of Heretics of all sorts,
have decayed and been convinced, and overthrown, and that by none other
Church, then by the known Catholic Church of Christ, builded upon the rock
Christ, which Peter confessed. Math. 16. Math. 16.
And upon none other foundation. Wherefore I do require you now to yield and
recant according to your promise.

The fifte Offer.
Offerer.

Fifte, if it may sufficiently be proved, that any other Church then the
common known Catholic Church of Christ, has instituted and ordained, all
goodly ceremonies, and solemn observations in the same daily practiced and
used, as the festival days of Christmas, Candelmas, Easter, Whitsontyde, the
feasts of the Apostles and holy Evangelists, Saint Michael the Archangell,
and of all hallowes and blessed Saints, the observation of the holy fast in
lent, and Ember days, the fast of th'apstoles, and of all the aforefayd
fest^uall Euens, besides the weekly fast of Fridayes and Saterdayes, and the
rest yet observed and allowed on both sides, to the honor and glory of God,
then I will recant, and not before.

Crowley.

Under the name of goodly ceremonies: you comprehend all manner of ceremonies,
good and badde, such as are daily practiced and used in your Church. Your
Baptising of Churches or burial places, of Belles and of Ships to sail on
the Seas. are goodly ceremonies. Your hallowing of bread, water or salt, of
Wax and Wax candles, bows beads, garments, fire, and Images: are goodly
ceremonies. Your taking of Ashes, bearing of Palm, displinge with white
rods, creeping to the cross, sencing and kissing of Images, and burning of
candles before them: are goodly ceremonies. Your solemn and pompous
processions, about your Churches and churchyardes weekly, and about your
parishes yearly: are goodly observations. Your solemn and backanall Feasts
that you observe yearly, in the honor of such Angels and men, as you think
to be in high favor with God, and able to further your suits to him, or of
themselves to do you some pleasure: are goodly observations. Your yearly
feasts of Lent, Ember, Saints Vigilles, and weekly Fridayes and Saterdayes:
are goodly observations, with many more, which now I do not remember.

But it may be, that some of your sort will think, that I do use this
Epitheton (Goodly) by a figure in speech, named by the Grecians, (...). And is
used, when men speak one thing and mean the contrary.

Surely, such as do so take my meaning, do not take it amiss: for what
reason is there to move a man, to apply this Epitheton (goodly) in the right
sense thereof, to these (and such other) ceremonies and observations, wherein
there is nothing, that rightly may be called, either good, or goodlye? We are
contented therefore, that your Popish Catholic Church, do take to her self,
the whole praise and commendation, that the invention of these goodly
ceremonies and observations, has or can deserve. Yea, we would be very sorry,
that any of your sort should be able to make good proof, that any of our
sort, had instituted or ordained any of those goodly ceremonies or
observations, that you esteem so highly of.

As for the feasts of Easter and Whitsontyde, we know that God him self did
first institute them, the one (namely Easter) in the remembrance of the
deliverance of the people of Israel out of Egypt: and the other (that is
Whitsontyde, or Pentecost) in the remembrance of the publishing of the Law in
the mount Sinaie. Which as they were remembraunces of things then past: so
they were figures or shadows of things then to come, and now already
fulfilled, in the death and resurrection of our Savior Christ, and in the
sending of the holy Ghost, upon the Apostles, the fifteth day after the
resurrection of our Savior Christ. And we are persuaded that these two feasts
were observed even by the Apostles themselves, in rememberaunce of our
deliverance which we have by the death and resurrection of our Savior Christ:
and of the coming of the holy Ghost, which rested upon the Apostles, in ye
form of fiery tongues divided. Yea, and we do think, that the Saboth or the
Lords day, commonly called the Sunday, was observed by the Apostles: yea and
that shortly after the time of the Apostles, the right catholic Christians
began to observe yearly, certain days in the rememberaunce of holy men which
had suffered for the testimony of Christ: and some days in the remembrance
of those great and inestimable benifits that God has bestowed upon mankind,
in the incarnation, nativity, Epiphanie, and Ascension of our Savior Christ.
But there is no cause to move us to think, that either the Apostles, or the
fathers did iustitute those feasts, as observations necessary to be observed
for ever, but as profitable remembraunces whereby ye congregations of Christ
might be moved to be thankful to God, and encouraged to follow the good
examples of those good men, whose remembraunces they did solemnise. And after
this manner, and for this purpose, we also do observe some of those
seastiuall days. Not having any superstition in the holiness of the times,
neither being persuaded that we do deserve any thing at Gods hand by the
observing of the times, or that we should sin against God, if by a common
consent we should abrogate the observation of those times, or by some private
or urgent occasion employ those times in our honest and necessary businesses.
For our Savior Christ has told us, that even the Saboth (in such causes) is
in man's power. Man was no made for the Saboth: but the Saboth was made for man.
Marc. 2. Marc. 2.


And as touching fasting, we observe Lent, the Ember days, the Fridayes and
Saterdayes in every week, and the vigilles of saints: but not as you do,
superstitiously, but for good policy. We do not account one meat holyer then
another, neither one time better then another: But we abstain from certain
kinds of meats at certain times, that thereby the common weal of our
country may be bettered. And would to God, al would observe that policy more
precisely then any of us does. As touching our own persons: we do not think
our selves to be either ye better or the wursse, by taking or leaving of the
use of Gods creatures. Rom, 14,
But according to S. Paul's rule to the Romans Capit 14. When we take the use
of Gods creatures, we do give thanks unto him for them: and when we do leave
the use of them, we do thank him also. We do know that, that fast is the
right fast, which is commended by Esaias Esaias, 58.
the Prophet: Chap. 58. and by saint Peter, 1. Peter. 2. 1, Peter, 2.
Break thy bread to the hungry. That is, give of the sustinaunce of thine
own body, to him that has no sustinaunce to feed his body withal. And
abstain (says Saint Peter) from fleshly lusts that fight against the soul.

Thus if you will you may see, that the right known Catholic Church has
instituted and ordained all such ceremonies and solemn observations, as may
rightly be called goodly: and that your Popish Catholic Church has
corrupted many of them by superstition and idolatry and has also devised many
other such as may by the figure (...), be called goodly ceremonies and solemn
observations. Wherefore I require you to perform your promise that you make,
when you say. Then I will recant, and not before.

The sixth Offer.
Offerer.

Syxt. Let the Protestants show what Church from Christ his time hitherto,
and for the whole space of these fifteen hundred years past, has exercised
discipline and due correction upon offenders of all degrees, and for that
purpose, has not only provided and made, but continually executed, laws,
Canons and decrees ecclesiastical, by suspension, excommunication,
degradation, and such other like. Let them prove this discipline to have
proceeded of the Protestants congregations, or to have continued from time to
time, in any other Church, then in the common known Catholic Church of
Christ: And I will then recant, and not before.

Crowley.

Here is much a do and little help. The learned protestant must prove that
thing, that no Protestant has, does, or will at any time affirm: for
otherwise the Offerer will in no wise yield to recant. We do know, and have
at all times confessed, that Christ's known Catholic Church only has the
keys of opening and shutting, loosing and binding: and that none other
congregation but that, can either admit any to be of the fellewship of
Christians, or by excommunication cut of any man from that body of Christ, but
only that known Catholic church of Christ, which is builed upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the head
cornerstone. You do therefore offer us great injury, in that you require us
to prove that which we did never affirm.

But I see what stone it is that the Offerer does so often stumble at. He is
persuaded that there can be no known Catholic Church of Christ: but that
Romish Church (whereof he himself is a member) which is now manifestly known
to be an Antichristian congregation, and not the known Catholic Church of
Christ, as the Offerer and his fellows, would bear us in hand that it is.

The known Catholic Church of Christ, has always used to execute
ecclesiastical censures upon such as have been offensive in life and manners,
and upon such as have been disturbers of the common peace of the Church: and
so do we at this day, without respect of any man's person, so far forth as
in dutiful obedience to such as God has made our governor we may. But to
excommunicate and depose Princes we have not learned of S. Paul, nor of the
Fathers that lived in the first six hundred years after the ascension of our
Savior Christ.

Your brag of 1500. years continuance in the executing of your discipline,
must be cut shorter by 600. years for your Catholic Antichristian Church
has not floryshed in her pride, full one thousand years as yet, neither have
you executed your tirannous discipline in such sort as you would seem to have
done: in that time of your tirannous reign. But whenever you took in hand
to execute any discipline: you had (and so ye have still) a special regard
to your own ease and commodity, and to the aduanceing and upholding of your
own honor and dignity. Your own Histories are full of the reports, of your
corrupt and partial dealinges in that behalf.

It is God himself that has prescribed an order of discipline, and has in
all times and ages committed the execution thereof to his Church, which has
had continaunce even from the beginning of the world. This discipline was first
engraven in the hearts of men, and after that, in tables of stone, and last of
all in books, that by those outward means, the discipline graven in the heart
might be daily refreshed: but even the best men that have been in Authority in
the Church, and have had the execution of this discipline, have been to slack
in that he half, as by histories it appears. No marvel therefore, though to
great slacknes in the execution of this discipline be found in that Church
which you and your sort do account to be Schismatic, but is in deed
Catholic, and that known Catholic Church from which your Antechristian
Church is fallen.

That discipline that you make so great a reckoning of, is your cannon law (I
am sure) which your Popes have patched together since they gate the upper hand,
and enforced Princes to do them service and to kiss their feet. That
discipline you execute, with Precipimus, and firmiter iniungendo mandamus. We
charge you (say you) and with firm iniu^ction we command you. And what is it
that you do thus command to be done? That such a man, or such a woman, as
has not appeared in your court, or has refused to pay such fees as your
officers require, or that has failed in doing some act that by that law
they are bound to do: be denounced excommunicated, sub pena iuris. Under pain
of having the penalty of the Law executed upon that minister that will not
denounce such a one excommunicated.

But if a whore or a whoremonger, a drunkarde or a blasphemer of God, an Usurer
or a simmoniacke, or any other wicked person; shall be conuented before your
ecclesiastical judge: if his pursse be weighty, and his hand ready to
reach out money in paying double fees, and in giving to such uses as you call
Godly, so that you may have the disposing thereof: then this party must be
received as a communicant amongst Christians, although it do appear
manyfestly that there is neither amendment of life* nor hope of repentance
showed any way. And would God that our execution of discipline, were more free
from this corruption then it is. But that will not be, so long as so many of
your mind may be suffered to be in office under them that have the execution
of discipline.

I think you do now see, that the right dscipline, has not been provided
and made by men, neither of your sort, nor of ours: but by God himself. And
that there has been, and is still, as great, (yea greater) corruption, used in
the executing of discipline, amongst you, as is or has been amongst us. Yea
and that your Church, (which is Antichristian) has not had the continuance of
1500. years, in that glory that now it does claim unto it self. Wherefore I
do require you now to recant (according to promise) although you would not
before.

The seventh Offer.
Offerer.

Seventh, Let me know of the Protestants, what Church has brought forth for
the space of these fifteen hundred years past, as Children begotten of her
own womb, so many thousands of blessed Martyrs, of stout and bold
confessers, of pure and innocent virgins, and of other holy Saints of all
sorts, and so acknowledged by either party. And if it shall in fine fall out,
that any one of them was of the Protestants congregation, faith or belief,
whiles they lived here, and not of the common known faith and religion of the
Catholic Church of Christ, or that they were approved and canonized for
Saints, when they were dead, by the Protestants congregation, and not only
by the Catholic Church of Christ, I shall then submit, and recant, and not
before.

Crowley.

It seems that M. Offerer has conceived a wrong opinion of us Protestants.
He seems to be persuaded that none of us have seen the Histories of the
Church. Otherwise he had been too too mad to make this large Offer. For any
Protestant that has read any thing of the Ecclesiastical Histories, may
easily enforce him, either to fly from his promise, or else to submit
himself and recant. If any one (says he) amongst the thousands of the
blessed Martyrs, etc. Shall be found to have been of the Protestants faith and
religion, etc. Then he will submit himself and recant.

I am sure of it, that amongst the thousands that suffered Martyrdom within
the space of ye first six hundereth years after Christ's ascension, he can not
name one, that was not whiles he lived, of the same faith and religion yt we be
of now. Al we do believe al ye articles of ye common treed, and so did they we
do believe, yt as there is but one God, so there is but one mediator betwixt
God and man, and yt the same is the man Christ Jesus: and even so did they, 1.
Ti. 2: 1. Timot. 2.
we believe yt Christ Jesus has taken upon him self all our infirmities, and
that the correction that was due to our sins is fallen upon him, and yt by
those wounds that he suffered we are made whole: and so did they. Es, 53. Esaias,
53.
We believe that Christ Jesus is that Lamb of God that has taken aw^y the
sins of the world: and so did they Ioh. 1. 1. John, 1.
We believe, that he is that son of the blessed virgin Mary, whom the Angel
named before he was borne, saying to Joseph (his supposed father) thou shall
call, his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins Mat, 1:
Math. 1.
and so did they. We do believe yt it is he that is our high Priest, and that
he is entered into the holiest place of the tabernacle (not made with hands)
and has made there a sacrifice, not of straying blood (as of a Calfe or of a
Goat) but of his own heart blood, and has thereby obtained us eternal
redemption: Hebr, 9, Heb. 9.
and even so did they. We do believe, yt Christ Jesus has by that one
oblation, made of him self once offered, made perfect, as many as be made holy
(yt is all the elected people of God) and that he has thereby so satisfied to
God for the sins of all such, yt they shall never be charged with their sins any
more: and that where there is remission of sins, theris no more sacrifice to be
offered for sin, Heb. 10. Hebr, 10.
and even so did they. We know and confess, that our duty is to be as careful
as possibly we may, to live with our sin, and that when by infirmity of our
nature we do sin we have an advocate with God ye father, which is Jesus Christ
the righteous, and yt he is the propitiation for our sins. 1, Io, 2: 1, John, 2.
and even so did they. To be brief: we differ not from the^, neither did they
differ from us, in any one point of the substance of faith.

And where as the Offerer says yt those holy Martirs, etc. were not of our
religion: I am sure that we do hold and profess that religion, Jacob. 1.
that S. James does call pure and undefiled before God the father: which is to
visit the fatherless and widdowe in their tribulation, and for a man to keep
himself unspotted of this world. And I think that M. Offerer will not deny
that the holy martirs and the rest that he speaks of, did hold and profess
the same religion. And how can he then say, that they were not of the
Protestants religion

If the Offerer will say that those Martirs, etc. did observe and keep ye
religion, and did perform in deed that which they did profess, so yt they
were in deed unspotted of this world, (which none of us does,) then I must
say, that they all did say, as all we do say, as ye Prophet David has written
Psa. 143. Psa, 143 Esaias, 64,
Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant for no flesh is righteous in thy
sight. And as the Prophet Esaias has written, Cha. 64. Al our righteousnesses,
1, John, 1,
are even like unto a filthy cloth. And as ye Apostle John has written. 1.
Epist, 1. If we shall say that we have no sin, we shall desceiue our self,
and there is no truth in us.

And where as the Offerer has termed his virgins pure and innocent, I think
he would have said immaculate, (for that is an Epithiton, meeter for a virgin
then innocent is) I am sure that none of them was either pure or innocent of
them self, neither did they account them self so to be: but being washed in
the fountain of water, by the word of life, they were members of that
glorious Church, that in Christ is purged and made so clean, that in it is
neither spot nor wrincle or any such thing, but in him, al those Martyrs,
confessors and virgins, and we also that do believe as they did, are holy and
unblameable, and have in us no spot of sin. Ep, 5. Ephe, 5.
For Christ Jesus has washed us in ye soap of his own heart blood, and made us
as white as the most white woole, yea and as shining white as the snow. We
therefore, with the Martirs, confessors and virgins that you speak of: are the
virgins that do and for ever shall accompany the Lamb Christ upon the Mount
Sion, Apo, 14. Apoc, 14.


As for your approouing and cannonizing of these Martirs etc. Whereby you have
made them saints after they were departed out of this life: it may well be
compared to the building and garnishing of the Tombs of the Prophets, by the
Scribes and Phariseis Math, 23. Math. 23.
For although you pretend to have a reverend care for the keeping of the
worthy and valiant acts of those Martirs in remembrance: yet you do daily
murder as many of that sort of men, as God will suffer you to have power over,
and so you show your selves to be the children of those bloody Tyrants that
murdered those Martyrs that you speak of.

I think you can not but see now that all the thousands of Martyrs,
confessors and virgins, that were brought forth in the first six hundredth
years next after the ascension of our Savior Christ: were the children of
that Mother (the holy Catholic Church of Christ) that has brought forth and
nourished up us, whom you call Schismatickes and Heretics.

But now I pray you (good M. Offerer) let me learn of you, the name of one
Martyr, that your mother, (the Popish Catholic Church) has brought forth
since the days of Boniface the third, which was the time wherein your
Apostacy began. I think you can not name me one Martyr that has been
brought forth by that mother of yours, in all that time, which is (almost) the
space of a thousand years. Not one (I am sure) of all your Popes that have
succeeded that Bonifacius has been made a Martyr: except you account for
martyrdom, the poisoning of some of them which has been done by some such
as themselves, that have hasted to be in their place. And the rest of the
Children of that mother, have been whelps of the same hear, namely blood
thirsty bloodhoundes, and bloody Butthers Curres.

Yea it appears manifestly, that the whole state of your Popish Catholic
Church, has been and still is, none other thing, but that which was figured
by that two horned Beast that rose out of the earth, of whom mention is made in
the 13. Chap of the Revelations. So that, Apoc, 13
this mother of yours neither has nor does, bring forth Martirs: but has
and does make Martyrs, whom the holy Catholic Church of Christ (our mother)
has and does daily bring forth and nourishe up. For whosoever in all this
time has refused to worship the image of the Beast (which is the estate of the
Romish Papacy) has dyed for it (if he were caught) or else been enforced to
abjure: and so goes it with such at this day, and so is it like to continue so
long as your Antechristian mother shall be able to do any thing. The thousands
which that mother of your has (in this time of the last thousand years,)
murdered, in Italy, in Bohemie, in Germany, in Portinggale, in Spain, in
England, in Scotland, and in the late massacre in France: do all with one
voice cry under our Alter Christ saying. How long Lord, thou that art holy and
true, do thou not judge and revenge our blood upon them that that dwell on
the earth? Apoc, 6. Apocal. 6.


If you had not altogether lost your inward sight, you might see, that the
cry of these holy Martyrs is hearkened unto: for six of the seven Angels,
to whom were given seven Vialles sull of the wrath of God, have already powered
out their Vialles at the commandment of God, and the seventh is ready to
power out his Vial: and shall shortly power it out into the air. And then
shall that great voice proceed out from the temple of Heaven, even from the
throne, saying. Factum est. It is finished. Apoc, 16. Apoc, 16,
This voice shall be terrible to your Popish Catholic mother, and to all you
(her children.) But most comfortable to the true Catholic Church of Christ,
our mother, and to all us, her children. I say therefore unto you, as Christ
Jesus said to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea. Apoc, 3. annoint thine eyes
with eye salve that thou may see, etc.

Apoc, 3,
Thus I hope I have made it plain enough, to as many as will see, that the
Church whereof all right Protestants are members, has brought forth all
those thousands of Martirs that you speak of, when you say, that not one of
them was of our congregation, faith or belief whiles they lived in this
transitory estate. And that she has brought forth and nourished up thousands
more in the time of these latter 1000. years: which your mother the Popish
Catholic Church has murdered and made Martirs. Wherefore submit your self
now and recant, although you would not before.

The eight Offer.
Offerer.

Eight. Whereas the Apostle S. Paul testifies, that Christ gave unto his
church, some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and
Doctors, ad consummationem sanctorum in opus ministerij: and so to continue to
the edifiing of the body the Catholic Church, until his coming again. Now
if the Protestants shall be able to prove by ecclesiastical histories of all
ages, the continuance and use of the said functions and degrees in their
congregations, and that by some orderly succession and plain account made from
Christ his time hitherto, they have never lacked the said appointed officers,
or that any other Church of Christ, has had at all times, and the continuance
of the same: I shall then recant and relent and not before.

Crowley.

Ephe, 4,
It is a strange matter, to see how impudently this Offerer dare set down the
words of the Apostle Paul in the 4. Chapter of his Epistle to ye Ephesians. as
testifying that for an in fallible truth, which is as false as God himself is
true. That is: that our Savior Christ has appointed that his Church shall
have Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, continually till
his coming again, and that in a continual and orderly succession. Amongst
the learned interpreters, there is not one, that has noted any such meaning
in those words of the Apostle.

It is very true, that our Savior Christ made choice of such men as he had
made meet to be his messengers, and sent them forth, first into those Cities
that belonged to the Kingdom of Israel: and after his resurrection he sent
them into all the world, commanding them to teach all nations, Baptising the
believers, in the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy Ghost. And
by the ministry of those and a few others, whom he did afterward stir up
and join in commission with those: he planted his Church in all quarters of
the world.

Those were the Apostles, of whom Saint Paul wrote to the Ephesian, 4.
saying: He gave some Apostles. These continued in executing their office
fathfully, and painefullie, till they had run out the raze of their natural
life. Which course God did not suffer to be ended before the sound of them
had been heard all the world over, as appears by the words of Saint Paul.
Rom, 10, Rom, 10,


When these had executed their office, and were taken out of this life: it was
not needful that other should be sent from God to do that work which these
men had already finished, and so it was altogether unnecessary, that there
should be an orderly succession of Apostles in the Church. But when God shall
see cause, he may at his pleasure, stir up and send forth such messengers
as he shall make meet to do his message. And such he has styrred up sense
the time of those first Apostles: and such he does and will styr up and send
forth at his ^leasure, and such may be called Apostles of Christ, because
they be styrred up by his spirit, and are sent of him. But this can not be
called a continual and orderly succession.

Such Apostles our Church did not lack in ye time of the first, 600, years
next after the ascension of our Savior Christ: as by your own histories it
does most plainly appear. And ever since you fell from us, we have had, (and
have still) as many as our good God knows to be needeful for us: as by the
regesters kept in your consistories may be seen, for therein are written the
horrible sentenses of excommunication that you have pronounced against them,
because they would not worship the image of the Beast, nor take his marcke in
their hands nor forehead.

Our Savior Christ gave unto our Church, Prophets also: such as he made able
to foretell of things to come: as Agabus, Ac. 11. Acts, 11.
ye daughters of Phillip ye Evangelist. Act. 21, Act, 21.
S. Paul himself. Act, 20, 1. Timoth, 4, 2, 3. Act, 20. 1. Timot. 4. 2, Timo,
3.
And John that wrote the Revelations, with many more. Yea when his pleasure is,
he can and does foreshewe unto men things to come, by the ministry of such
as it pleases him to foreshewe those things unto. Yea and he has always
furnyshed, and does still furnish our Church, with such Prophets as S, Paul
writes of, 1. Cor. 14. to whom he gives the gift of interpretation so that
they are able to make plain the dark speeches that are some times used by the
Prophets that speak of things to come. 1, Cor, 14,
Of these Prophets our Church had many in the time of the first six hundredth
years, that were next after the ascension of our Savior: but not so many as
since the time of your Apostacy, which was in the days of Bonifacius the
third, about the end of that 600. years. They that were in the time of the
first. 600, years, were persecuted by the dragan, that is by the estate of
Room under the tirrannous Emperors. And they that have been since, and are
now, have been, and still are persecuted by the beast that has two horns
like a Lamb, that is, the estate of Room under the Papacy, Apoc. 13. Apoc, 13


These Prophets of booth sorts, have been, and are still, styrred up by him
that is the giver of all good gifts, at his ple^sure, to work his will in
such times as he has fore appointed: But there has not been at any time, any
continual and orderly succession of them, such as you require the Protestants
to prove, neither does it help any thing at all for the proof of true and
right Religion, to have any such continual and orderly succession: except all
the successors, do hold the same Religion, and do walk in the same steps,
that their first Predecessor held and walked in.

Amongst your Popes, very few or none can be found, that have held the
religion of Peter, and walked in his steps. Your Boniface the third (which was
the first of your Apostatat Popes) showed him self to be of a far other mind
then Peter was: otherwise, he would never have sought for, and with great
contention have obtained that name of universal Bishop, which Gregory the
first refused as a profane name, and a sign of ye fore runner of Antichrist.
This would have bin a lusty lad, if he might have continued in the estate of a
Pope, many years: but he was cut of by death, in the ninth month after he
was made Pope. The rest that have succeeded (even until this day) have in one
point walked in the steps of this Bonifacius: for they all have taken upon them
and kept the title of universal Bishop, and so does he that does now enjoy
that place. And so (by good consequence) it may be said, that they are all
Antichristian,

But to return to our purpose. That church whereof the Protestants be
members, has had Apostles as long time as the office of an Apostle was
necessary for her. In like manner she has had Prophets of both sorts.
Evangelists also she has had, and has still, whose office is to water that
which the Apostles have planted. Of this sort was Timoth. and so was Apollos,
and others that were when they were, and in the first 600. years after Christ's
ascension. And such be they in these days which are able to instruct, and do
labor to instruct Christians how to lead a christian life, and to be assured
of Salvation, only by the mediation of Christ Jesus, that promised Seed,
through whom, all the nations of the world are promised to be happy and blessed.

Pastors and doctors also, our Church has always had, and now has: The Popes
catholics never had the like. These are they that God has made able to
break ye bread of life, to the flock of Christ, and to teach and instruct
them in all necessary knowledge to salvation. And these (as the others) are
made able and stirred up to work in ye Lords Harvest, by him that (as often as
need is) sends forth laborers into his Harvest. He is not bound to
maintain a continual and orderly succession, but when it pleases him to
punish the unthankfulness of his people, by taking from them such as he has
made meet and able to execute these offices amongst them, he may, and in
justice he does. That so his people may learn to use such good gifts better,
when they shall again enjoy them.

And as for that popish-Catholique church, which your sort do call the known
Catholic church: never had such Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Doctors, as S. Paul meant of in his writing to the Ephesians. For that Church was
not hatched before the days of Boniface the third. And therefore that church
neither had nor could have any such Apostles, Prophets, or Evangelists as our
church had in the six hundredth years next after the ascension of our savior.

I conclude therefore, that neither our Church (which is the right Catholic
church) nor yours (which is ye right Antichristian church) has had any such
continual and orderly succession, as you require the Protestant to prove by
the Ecclesiastical hystories. I see no cause therefore, why you should not
recant and relent, although you have hitherto refused so to do.

The ninth Offer.
Offerer.

thousand years together, without all the foresaid functions and ministrations
of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors of their gospel, faith
and religion, at the least wise to be openly perceived and known: if therefore
they shall be able for the space of that whole time to prove by ancient
writers of Ecclesiastical hystories, any other word, gospel or doctrine to be
universally and openly taught, any other sacraments to be ministered, any other
discipline or correction to be practiced, any other judgments, decrees,
Canons, or laws to be executed, then those which were daily practiced in the
common known Catholic Church of Christ, I will then recant and not before.

Crowley.

This Offerer would bear us in hand that we Protestants, are by the drift of
reason and argument, enforced to confess, etc. He does us great wrong, in yt
he auoutcheth that we confess, that for the space of a thousand years
together, we had no manner function or ministration, etc. As though we should
confess that we had no gospel, no faith, no religion. And yet his own
conscience drives him to say thus: At the least wise to be openly perceived
and known. Well, then his own conscience tells him that we had those
ministrations, and that it was known that we had them, but not openly.

It appears that this man understands nothing of the mystery of that woman
that the Apostle John saw in his vision. Apoc. 12. Apoc. 12.
If these Antichristian Catholics could content them selves to be taught by
such as God has stirred up and made able to open ye meaning of this mystery:
they should see, that the right Catholic church of Christ, has bin in
Wilderness ever since the Male child that she brought forth, was taken up
into heaven. Yea, and although she be clad with the sun, and has the Moon
under her feet: yet do not these men so see her, that they may discern her
from the congregations of the heathen, because their sight is such as the sight
of Howlets and such other night fowls, that cannot endure the brightness of the
sun.

Immediately after our savior Christ was ascended into heaven, the Dragon
(that old serpent, the devil and Satan) being vanquished by Michael and his
Angels, and expelled out of heaven, and cast down to the earth, did persecute
the woman that had borne a son, which is our savior Christ, and the woman is
his Catholic church. This Church did the Dragon (the devil) persecute by the
ministry of the Roman Emperors: by the space of 294. years under Nero,
Domitian, T^a^ant, Seuerus, Commodus, Decius, and Dioclesian. All this while
the Dragon did persecute the Catholic church, and seek by all means
possible to root it out: but Almighty God had in merciful providence provided
for his Church, two wings of a great Egle, whereby she took flight into the
wilderness, into the place that was prepared for her; where she was norished
all that time, out of the sight of the serpent.

Yea, the serpent did cast out of his mouth after the woman, as it had bin a
river of water: that she might have bin violently borne away of the water. But
the earth did help the woman, and opening her mouth did swallow up the River
that the Dragon had cast out of his mouth, after her.

If such as be of the learned sort amongst them that be of the Romish
Catholic church, would with humbled minds read this book of Revelations,
and seek for the true fence and meaning but of this one vision: undoubtedly
they should find (and I hope they would confess) that the true Catholic
church of Christ, that was figured by ye woman: had not the glory of the world,
as the Romish Catholic church has now, but was in this world obscure, and
after a sort, hid from the presence, of such as the serpent had stirred up to
persecute her, which were the mighty Emperors, and other yt were of great power
within the Roman Empire. And yet was she still clad with the sun, and had
the Moon under her feet, etc. That is, she was still glorious in the sight
of God and of all good men. For her garment was Christ the bright shining light
of the world. Under her feet she had the Moon still, for she contemned, and
trod under foot, the vain pomp and glory of this world, which shines
gloriously in the sight of the blind worldlings, even as the Moon does in
the darkness of the night. Yea, and she had her head crowned with the twelve
stars, the Patriarchs which were Fathers to the twelve kinreds of Israel,
or those twelve Messengers, or Apostles, which our savior Christ had sent
forth, as stars to give light in the darkness of this world.

Yea, although she dwelt still in Rome, and in other Cities that belonged to
the Roman Empire: yet she was as in a wilderness, as having nothing, and yet
possessing all things, etc. 2. Cor. 6. 2, Cor, ^,
So that if this Offerer would but consider this, and conceive in his mind,
the countenance that the Catholic church could bear in this world, during ye
time of persecution under ye above named Emperors: surely he would never for
shame say, that our Church is not the Catholic church, because we confess,
that for ye space of one thousand years: it was by the two horned beast (that
is by the papacy) kept under, as that Church (which he him self does
confess to be the right Catholic church of Christ) was by the seven headed
Dragon, which was the Roman Empire.

If the Catholic church might have her Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, and Doctors (as undoubtedly she had) in the time of the first bloody
persecutions, which continued for the space of 294. years almost continually:
why might she not have so many of those ministers as were necessary for her
edification, during the time of ye later persecution which has continued how
almost a thousand years togithers? Yea, and why might not she have ye
ministration of Sacraments, and execution of discipline, as well in the one
time as in the other? And so, by good consequence, Why may not the Protestants
Church be the Catholic church of Christ, as well as that Church was, that
differed as much in all points, from the known Popish Catholic church, as
our Protestant Catholic church does differ now, from the same?

I conclude therefore, that it is altogether unnecessary, to prove any way,
that any other gospel or doctrine, then that which was preached by the
Apostles, or any other Sacraments, then the same that Christ Jesus did first
institute, or any other discipline, then that which ye Catholic church of
Christ has practiced: should he preached, ministered, and practiced
universally and openly, yt thereby we might prove our Church to be
Catholic. For it is manifest by the hystories, that the right Catholic
church has sildome had such freedom upon earth, that she might have her
doctrine publicly, and universally preached, her sacraments ministered and her
discipline practiced. Wherefore, except you will show your self wilful and
obstinate, you must now recant, although heretofore you would not.

The tenth offer.
Offerer.

John Calvin: some for the space of four or five hundred years, as Martin
Luther and his accomplices: some for the whole space of the first six hundred
years, as M. Jewel, and the authors of the Apollogie of the Church of
England, and therein not agreeing amongst themselves (as the manner of
Heretics is) I require some better stayed and certain tale of them, where and
when this sudden change from the Protestants religion to the Papists should
be made as in what year of our Lord, under what Pope and Emperor? by what
persons of name it was so wrought and brought to pass, and upon what occasion,
and what Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors of their
congregations did gainesay or withstand the same? And who does make any
mention of this sudden and merueilous change of the Protestants religion to
Papistrie? what one Ecclesiastical writer, or ancient Father of the whole
world? and when they shall be able resonably to answer and to satisfy these my
demands, then I will recant and yield to them, and not before.

Crowley.

This Offerer minding utterly to discredit the Protestants has with his pen
testified for them, that they do al agree in this one point, which is, that
their Congregation, Faith, and Religion, have bin practiced in the Primative
church of Christ. But here he thinks to discredit them all. Some of them (as
John Calvin, do affirm that this was for the space of the first three
hundredth years, some other (as Martin Luther and his accomplices) for the space
of four or five hundredth years, and some others (as M. Jewel and the authors
of the Apology of the Church of England) for the whole space of the first fix
hundredth years, etc. To this I say: That such amongst us as have said that ye
congregation or Church whereof we be, had continuance for the space of the
whole first six hundredth years, have said truly: and they that have said,
for the space of three, four, or five hundredth years, have kept themselves
within their bounds, and therefore they have not lied. If Calvin had said, that
the Church whereof we be, had continuance for no longer time then the first
three hundredth years, where Luther had said before, that it had continuance
for the space of four, or five hundredth years: And M. Jewel, coming after
them both should have said, the continuance was for the space of the first six
hundredth years, in such perfection as in the first three hundredth years: then
this Offerer might have taken some oecasion to note disagreement, such as is to
be seen amongst Heretics. But now, he has no just occasion at all.

Calvin considered, that during the time of the first 300. years, the Church
of Christ was still under tyrants, and was persecuted, and was thereby kept
occupied in better exercises, then in such pompous and ceremonial divine
service, as now is used in your popish Catholic church. And therefore he is
bold to say, that the Church, whereof we Protestants be, is the same that
was in the first 300. years after Christ: for we have abandoned (as far
forth as we may) all those superfluous ceremonies, as have bin divised by
men, and enforced upon the Church of Christ, since the end of the first 300.
years: which are in deed too too many, as by the words of saint Augustine
Epist. 119. August, in Epist. 119.
Ad Ianuarium. Seruilibus oneribus premunt, vt tolerabilior fit conditio
Iudeorum, etc? They oppress us with servile burdens: so that the condition or
estate of ye Jews, was more tolerable then ours is. None of all those burdens
were laid upon the Church before the end of ye first 300. years: but the
Christians being under the cross of persecution, served God in freedom of
conscience, and were not tied to any necessity of ceremonies, but used a few
such ceremonies as seemed to serve best for their edification in their exercise
of religion, and so do we, and that congregation also amongst whom Calvin
lived, which might move him to say, that the faith and religion that is
professed by us, was practiced in the first 300. years, after the incarnation
of our savior Christ.

But this Offerer requires some better stayed and certain tale, etc. because
Luther and other do differ from Calvin. He must know where and when this
sudden change from ye protestants religion to the papists was made, as in what
year of our Lord, etc. If it shall please him to read it, and advisedly to
weigh every part of it: he shall have here as plain a tale (concerning this
matter) as ever he did read or hear. And thus it begins.

When Christ Jesus had given so large a commission to his Apostles, as to go
into all the world, and to teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of ye
father, of the son, and of ye holy Ghost: they executed that commission, with all painful diligence, not fearing what man either would or could do against
them. And so in short time, the knowledge of the gospel was spread all the
world over: as the Apostle Paul writes to the Romans Cap. 10. Romans 10.
citing the words of the Prophet David. Psalm. 19. Psalm. 19.
Jn omnem terram, etc. The sound of them is gone out into all the world, etc.
But the doctrine of the gospel which they preached was not so regarded in ye
city of Rome as it should have bin, and as it seems that this Offerer and his
fellows be persuaded that it was, at that time, wherein saint Paul was
brought prisoner to Rome: which was in the tenth year of the reign of Nero,
and but four years before S. Paul ended his life. At that time, the chief
amongst the Jews that then lived in Rome, being called together by S. Paul,
and being occasioned by him to speak of the christian Religion, they said
thus. We are willing to hear of thee what thine opinion is: for we do know,
that this sect, is every where spoken against. Act. 28 Act, 28,
Yea, and when S. Paul was first called to his answer before the Emperor: the
Christians then in Rome, were so faint hearted, that they did leave him alone,
as he him self has written to Timoth. 2. Timoth. 4. 2. Timot. 4.
In prima mea defensione, nemo mihi affuit, sed omnes dereliquerunt me: non
illis imputetur, etc. In my first defense, no man did take part with me, but
all did forsake me: God grant that it be not laid to their charge: but the
Lord did assist and strengthen me, etc. And this was more then thirty years
after our Savior Christ had sent forth his Apostles to preach.

If Peter were bishop of Rome at ye time that S. Paul speaks of in that 4.
Cap. 2. Timoth. surely then, he performed not the part of a good bishop,
neither yet of a good christian. For amongst all, he must needs be one. And
S. Paul says that all did forsake him.

But let this pass. The estate of the whole Church was no better in those
days: yea, it was not much better at any time, during the first 300. years
after Christ's ascension. For when Constantinus the first christian Emperor,
began his reign: Syluester, then bishop of Rome, had not his aboade then in
Rome, but made his dwelling place in some cave in a mountain named Soracte,
xx. miles distant from Rome, that so he might be more safe from the tyranny
of the Roman Emperor. But when he understood that Constantinus, was likely
to be favorable to ye Christians: he repaired to ye City. By this it may
appear, of what account the Roman bishops had bin, and what public and open
preaching of the gospel there had bin, in the City of Rome during that time of
the first 300. years.

It appears in Hystories, that they had their places wherein they met, and
had the preaching of the word and ministration of the Sacraments: but those
places were not such as Saint Peter's Church, which is now in Rome. For that
Church, with the rest of the Churches in Rome, were not then builded, as in
Platina, and in other Hystories it appears.

By this, you may see what cause Calvin had to say that the Catholic Religion
(which is the same that we protestants do now profess) was practiced for the
space of the first 300. years after Christ.

From that time forward, Religion began to decline by little, and little, from
that perfection that it had continued in under persecution, and to grow toward
that great decay that it came unto in the days of Bonifacius the third. Martin
Luther therefore, and M. Jewel, with the rest of the authors of the Apology
of the Church of England, had just cause to say that it continued in the Romish
church for the space of the first four, five, yea, six hundredth years after
Christ's ascension: for the Romish church was not altogether fallen away from
the Catholic Religion, before she had taken upon her the title of
Antichrist, which was in the days of Phocas the Emperor, at whose hands
Bonifacius obtained the profane title of universal bishop, whereof Gregory
the first, surnamed the great, writes thus. Grego. Epi. 66.
Epist. 66. ad Mauricium imperatorem. Sed absit a cordibus christianorum, nomen
istud blasphemiae, in quo omnium sacerdotum honor adimitur, dum ab vno sibi
d^m^nter arrogatur. But, let this name of blasphemy be far from christian
hearts, wherein the honor of all Priests is taken away, whils one Priest does
like a mad man, arrogate the same unto him self. And again. Episto. 68.
Grego. Epi. 68.
Ad John Episc. Constantinopol. Tu quid Christo, vniuersalis scilicet Ecclesiae
capiti, in extremi iudicij es dicturus examine, qui cuncta eius membra tibimet
conaris vniuersalis appellatione supponere? What will thou say unto Christ,
that is, to the head of the universal Church (says Gregory to John bishop of
Constantinople) in the trial of the last judgment: which do, by the name
of universal, go about to make subject unto thy self, all his members? who
can write or speak more plainly in this matter, then this Gregory has
written both to Mauricius the Emperor, and to John Bishop of Constantinople?

I hope therefore, you will take this for a stayed and certain tale: and be
therewith satisfied. Considering that after Constantine the first christened
Emperor, had endued the Church with some possessions, and so poisoned the
Church (as by a voice that was heard from heaven, it was signified, which voice
uttered this speech, Hodie datum est venenum in Ecclesiam, This day is the
Church poisoned) that poison did not presently work the effect, but by little
and little. So that the change from the Protestants religion, to Popery was not
sudden (although marvelous) but brought to pass by leisure, and yet with as
much speed as the Dragon could, by his members and ministers bring it to
pass. As for gainesayers it lacked none: amongst whom I think you will allow
Gregory the first to be one of the chiefest. Now therefore I require your
promise, which is, to recant and yield, although you have hitherto refused so
to do.

The eleventh Offer.
Offerer.

Let the learned Protestant show me what order of service their Church had
before Papistrie (as they call it) prevailed in the world. Let him show me one
book, or copy of any communion, or what else you list, that was in English, or
in any vulgar or common tongue, beside the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin: or that
lacked prayer for the fowls departed, or invocation to saints, or sacrifice
for the sins both of the quick and the dead, or that charged a number to
receive with the priest, or that he could not else consecrate, or say Mass
receiving alone, or that the people should take the sacrament for bread and
wine, and not for the real body and blood of Christ, or that they should give
no honor to it, or not reserve the same for the comfort of the sick and
diseased people, or that denied extreme unction, with the rest of the
sacraments, to be behoufull or necessary for them: let the learned Protestant
bring forth and show such a communion book, or any leaf, line, or word of any
such doctrine, or any Church or congregatition, that ever had authentical
service or ministration of the sacraments, other then that which is yet daily
and o-openly practiced in the common known Catholic church of Christ, and I
shall then recant, and not before.

Crowley.

It seems by this Offer, that this Offerer and his fellows are persuaded,
that what soever is now openly practiced, in the popish divine service and
ministration of sacraments; has bin so openly practiced, as now it is, even
ever since the Church of Christ, was first planted in the City of Rome. Which
is a wrong persuasion. For the greatest number of the ceremonies (yea, well
nigh all) that are now used in that ministration, have bin divised since the
end of the first 300. years, as by their own Hystories it does most plainly
appear.

I will therefore answer this offer with another, not much unlike to this: and
thus I say. Let this Offerer show me, what order of service or common prayer,
what order of ministration of sacraments, the Church had, before the end of the
first 300. years. Let him show me one book or copy of any communion, or what
else you list, that was in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, or in any other language,
that had in it prayer for the souls departed, or invocation to saints, or
sacrifice for the quick and the dead, or that did not command a number to
receive with the priest, or that did teach the people not to take the sacrament
for bread and wine, but for the real body and blood of Christ, or that they
should give honor to the outward sacrament, or that they should reserve it
for the sick and diseased people, or that taught extreme unction,
Confirmation, Order, Penance, and Matrimony to be Sacraments, behooufull or
necessary for Christians: let this learned Offerer, bring forth and show,
such a communion book, or any leaf, line, or word of any such doctrine, or
any Church or congregation, that ever had any such authentical service, or
ministration of sacraments, as is now openly practiced, in the commonly known
popish Catholic church, before the end of the first 300. years: And then
will I recant, and be a Papist, as this Offerer is, and not before.

I think I have offered you fair play. If you like the offer take it. I will
not flee from it. If not: for shame brag no more of the antiquity of your
authentike service that is now practiced in your Antichristian Catholic
church. But recant as you have promised.

The first bishop of Rome, that was bold to divise any thing to be added to
that which the Apostles used in the ministration of the Lords supper, was
Alexander the first. And what did he? Platina says, that this man added: Qui
pridem quam pateretur, vsque ad hanc clausulam, hoc est Corpus meum. Which is
thus in English. Which a day before he suffered, even unto this clause: This
is my body. And Platina says, that Alexander did this, that there might be a
remembrance of the passion of Christ. He devised also the making of holy
water, the use whereof, was to drive devils out of Temples and chambers, He
ordained also, that water should be mixed with the wine in the ministration of
the Sacrament, and that the bread should not be leauened, but unleavened, to
take away the occasion that the Ebionits took to find fault in that behalf.
Thus much writes Platina in vita Alexandri. primi. This Alezander was the sixth
bishop of Rome after Peter, Plantina in vita Alexandri primi.
if Platina have written truly: and was made bishop in the year 110. after ye
incarnation of our savior Christ, which was 70. years after (as it is
supposed) yt Peter was made bishop of Rome. So that ye church used none of
those things that were divised by him, for the space of those 70. years, of
the first 300. years.

After this Alexander Sixtus. 1. was made bishop of Rome: in the year 121.
after the incarnation of our savior Christ (if the hystories be true) and the
fourscore year after the supposed entering of Peter into the Byshopricke of
Rome. This man divised sundry things, as Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, to be
song in the celebration of the Lords supper. But here I must note how
unlikely this is to be true: for as saint Augustine has written in ye 7.
August. li. 9. Conf. Ca. 7.
Chapter of the 9. book of his confessions: the custom of singing in churches
was not begun in the Latin church before the days of Ambros, who lived about
the year of our Lord 380. And more over: it can not be proved by any
hystories, that the Christians had any liberty to build any church in the
city Rome, before the time of Constantine the Emperor, who builded at his
own charges, the first churches that the Christians had in Rome. But let it
be as Platina has written, in the life of Sixtus the first. He commanded
that Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, that is, holy, holy, holy, should be song in
the celebration, that is in the ministration of the communion. But I pray you
mark what Platina says further. Nuda primo haec erant, etc. At the first,
those things were bare and naked, and all things were handled simply. For when
Peter did consecrate, he used the prayer, Our father: James, the bishop of
Jerusalem increased or enriched these mysteries: and so did Basil, and other.
For Celestinus, gave the Introite of ye Mass: Gregory, the Kyrie eleison:
Telesphorus, the Gloria in excelsis Deo: Gelasius the first, gave the
Collations: and Hierome the Epistle and the Gospel. Haleluia was taken from
the church of Jerusalem. The Credo, from the counsel of Niece. Pelagius
invented the co^memoration of the dead. Leo the third, invented the Incense.
Innocent the first, invented the kissing of the Paxe: And Sergius, ordained
that Agnus Dei should be song. But seeing that in the days of Sixtus, few
were found (by reason of the often murders or slaughters of Christians) that
durst profess the name of Christ: and the Christians in France did desire to
have a bishop: Sixtus did send unto them one Peregrinus, a citizen of Rome,
etc. Thus far Platina.

By these words of Platina, it appears, that during the first 80. years
after saint Peter's supposed entering into the bishopric of Rome: there was no
more used in the ministration of the Lords supper, but the Lords prayer, which
begins thus, Our father which art in heaven, etc. Celestinus, that gave the
Introite of the Mass, was not bishop in Rome, before the end of 420. years
after Christ: so that for the space of 420. years your Mass had no Introite.
That Gregory, that appointed the Kyrie eleison, was made bishop of Rome in ye
year 590. after Christ: so that your Mass lacked that part, for the space of
600. years almost. Telesphorus, added the Gloria in excelsis: about 130.
years after Christ, so that your Mass did lack that part, so long time.
Gelasius the first, that divised the Collations, was bishop of Rome, about 490.
years after Christ: so that your Mass lacked her Collations, almost 500.
years. Hieronimus, that added the Epistle and Gospel: was never bishop,
either in Rome or else where. He lived in Bethlehem, about 380. years after
Christ: so that your Mass had no Epistle or Gospel, for 380. years after
Christ. And your Halleluia was taken from the church of Jerusalem, by Gregory
ye first, who was bishop of Rome about the year of our Lord, 590. The Nicene
Creed could not be used before that council wherein it was agreed upon: which
was 330. years after Christ. And Pelagius that invented the remembrance of the
dead, was made bishop of Rome, in the year of our Lord 556. so that for the
space of so many years after Christ, there was no remembrance of the dead in
your Mass. Leo the third, that invented ye burning of Incense, was made bishop
of Rome in the year 796. after Christ: so that for the space of so many
years, there was no burning of Incense in churches. Innocent the first, was
made bishop of Rome, in the year 406. he invented the kissing of the Paxe at
Mass: so long therefore was your Mass without that ceremony. And Sergius,
that appointed the singing of Agnus Dei, was made bishop of Rome in the year
after Christ 694. or there about: so that your Mass lacked her Agnus Dei, for
the space almost of 700. years after Christ.

Now M. Offerer, consider with your self (I pray you) whether the learned
Protestant may not as easily prove the antiquity of his communion book, even
from the Apostles time: as you may prove your Authentical service, and
ministration of sacraments, now daily and openly practiced. If you would with
indifferent judgment, weigh all that I have here written: I do not doubt but
you would confess that during ye first 90. years after Christ's ascension:
there was no prescribed order set down in any book for public service or
ministration of sacraments, other then yt which is contained in ye scriptures.
Wherefore there is none so great a cause of misliking in our common book, as
that there be so many of your latter inue^tions allowed of in it. And surely,
if our princes and people would yield to a perfect reformation: we might make
our communion book a great deal less then it is, by blotting out of it all
that has bin invented by your bishops of Rome. Thus I do think I have said
enough to cause you to recant, although you would not before.

The twelfth Offer.
Offerer.

I demand of the learned Protestant to know cause and reason why their
congregations; do admit and receive all bishops, priests, deacons,

Crowley.

This Offer, is altogether frivolous and foolish. For what reason was it that
moved this unreasonable Offerer, to require the learned Protestant to show
cause and reason why our congregations do those things that never any of our
congregations did? Can this Offerer prove that ever any congregation of
Protestants did admit and receive all bishops, priests, deacons, and other
spiritual officers? etc. We do in deed receive the men that have bin
bishops, Priests, and deacons, etc. And finding them meet to serve either in
the places that they served in before, or in any other, we do employ them in
service in those places that we find them meet for. And thus we do, not
because they have bin ordered after your Antichristian manner: but because we
see in them manifest signs of repentance that ever they yielded to be made
ministers of Antichristian religion, and do desire to be admitted to serve God
in the ministration of the true and right religion of Christ. As for your
shauing, your clipping, and annoynting that you do use in the ordring and
consecrating of your bishops, priests, and deacons: we esteem as lightly of it
as you either do or can esteem of our manner of ordering and consecrating of
ministers of all sorts.

We know that no ceremonies that are or can be used in this behalf (either by
you or by us) do or can give any ability to the persons toward whom those
ceremonies are used, in ye admitting of them: but we do use them as means to
put those persons in remembrance of those duties yt do belong to them in the
office and calling, whereunto they are called and admitted. We do not think,
that you do or can by your ceremonies imprimere charactere^ indelebilem, that
is, imprint into such as you do order, a mark that can not be blotted out: so
that your priests being once made priests must continue so for ever. Neither
do we think it necessary, to degrad your priests when they return unto us,
from your Antichristian religion, as you use to do before you deliver them to
the seculer power, when you have condemned them for heresy. For we know that
the mark of the beast (which they received at your hands) is blotted out, by
their hearty, and unfeigned repentance, the signs whereof, we see in them before
we do admit them to serve in any calling amongst us, either Ecclesiastical or
Civil.

You might much better have charged us with consenting unto, and allowing of
the lawfulnes of your priests and bishops, because we be not rebaptised: but
then (perhaps) you think we would charge you with the like consent, and
approouing of ye lawfulnes of our ministry, for that you do not rebaptise
such as have bin baptized by us.

But to be short, I conclude thus. Though we do receive such as do come from
you, as S. Paul was received coming from the Phariseis, and do admit them to
such offices amongst us as we find them meet for, as S. Paul was admitted
to the office of preaching and ministration of sacraments: yet we do not
thereby consent unto, or allow of, the lawfulnes of your Antichristian
ministers, more then the church yt received S. Paul coming from the
Phariseis, did thereby consent unto, or allow of the sect of the Phariseis.

If this be a cause and reason sufficient (as I think it is) why the
Protestants should neither take your Antichristian ministers to be meet
ministers of Christ's religion, so long as they remain amongst you, nor
refuse them when they shall repent, and bring forth fruits worthy and meet for
repentance, and yet notwithstanding account and take your church for
Antichristian: then I require you (M. Offerer) to fulfill your promise and
recant, although you have hitherto refused so to do.

The Thriteenth offer.
Offerer.

Thirteenth. I require of the learned Protestant to express what furniture,

Crowley.

If this Offerer had lived in the days of the prophets or of the Apostles, he
would have kept a jolly stur with them: for none of them were builders of
Temples, Synagogues or Churches, neither were they Founders of universities,
schools, or colleges. And yet was their faith and religion fruitful, and so
is ours, though none such fruits as this Offerer speaks of should spring
thereout. And yet I do know that these are good works: and I hope I shall be
able to prove, that the Protestants Catholic church has not bin, neither is
slack in doing these works when hability and opportunity may serve them.

If I might be so bold, with M. Offerer: I would demand of him, and require
him to express, who it was that builded S. Peter's church in Rome, and the rest
of the most ancient churches in that city. I think he would answer with
speed, and say thus: it was Constantine the first christened Emperor. If he
shall so say, he shall say truly: for so has Platina and other more ancient
Hystorians written. But here is the question, whether this Constantine were a
Protestant Catholic, or such a Catholic as this Offerer is. For we hold that
he was a protestant Catholic, and this Offerer holds the contrary. The
matter then rests upon proof.

I do think that I have already proved sufficiently, yt Constantine living
and reigning in the end of the first 300. years after Christ, could not be an
Antichristian catholic, as this Offerer is: because the great Antichrist was
not as yet spronge up, although many Antichrists (or false Prophets) were in
the world, even when ye Apostle John worte his first Epistle, as in the 4.
Chap. thereof it appears: but that great Antichrist that S. Paul names the
man of sin. 2. These. 2. did not begin to show himself in the world, before ye
days of Bonifacius the third, yt took upon himself ye name and estate of the
universal head of Christ's universal church. And that was ye time wherein your
Schismatic church fell away from that true Catholic church, whereof
Constantine was, and we that bear the name of Protestants, now be.

The bishoprics also, that were appointed or founded, at any time within the
first 600. years after Christ, and all the Universities, Schools, and
Colleges, that were founded with in that time, were founded and builded by
protestant Catholics. For although many corruptions were spronge up in the
Catholic church (whereof we be) before the end of the first 600. years (even
as the tares do spring up amongst the good grain, before the time of
Harvest, and yet the field remains still a corn field, and not a field of
tares) yet ye church was still Catholic, till the whole state did profess
Antichristianisme, and began to persecute such as continued in the profession
of the ancient and true Catholic religion, which is the same that we do now
profess, and you and your sort do persecute. These have not bin the work of
co^uenticles and private congregations (as it pleases you to term all the
particular churches of Christ, that refuse to take the mark of the beast, and
to acknowledge your Antichristian church to be the known Catholic church of
Christ) but they have bin the fruits that have spronge out of the same faith
and religion, that was taught by Christ him self, and by his immediate
Apostles, received, believed, and professed by ye first Catholic christians,
and is still professed by us and is fruitful in us, when ability, and
opportunity does serve.

In the days of king Edward the sixth, of blessed memory, who founded (in
London) Christ's Hospital, for the education of fatherles infants, S.
Bartholmews Hospital in smithfield, and S. Thomas Hospital in Southwarke, for
ye curing of diseased persons, did not the protestant Catholics make those
charitable provisions, and do not they still maintain the same? This Offerer
may remember, that his Antichristian catholics did (in the time of queen
Mary's reign) attempt to overthrow those foundations again.

Who were the founders of Christ's College, S. John's, and Trinity College in
Oxforde, of Emanuell, and Marimagdalen, and Caius College in Cambridge, did
they not bear the name of protestant Catholics that founded them? Many
grammar Schools also might be named, and diverse other provisions that
protestant catholics have made, both for ye maintenance and increase of
learning, and also for the succouring of the poor and needy.

If any tares do spring up amongst this good grain: that have bin sown by the
envious man, it is no fruit yt springs out of that good faith and religion
that we profess. If your word and promise (therefore) be any thing worth: the^
I require you to do ye part of an honest man, in yielding and recanting.

The foureteenth Offer.
Offerer.

Fourteenth. Let the learned protestant name any one fellowship or saving only
the holy and blessed fellowship of the common known Catholic church of
Christ, and I will then recant, and not before.

Crowley.

Understanding by the holy and blessed fellowship of the common known Catholic
church of Christ (as I am assured yt you do) that Antichristian church that
you are of: I confess that there cannot any one fellowship or company of
belieuers in ye whole christian world be named, yt is such a fellowship or
company, as you would have the learned protestant name unto you: for in very
deed, there is not one fellowship or company of belieuers in ye whole world, so
foolish, as to ve^ter ye salvation of their fowls, upon ye judgment of other
men: but only that fellowship whereof you are. But I do utterly deny ye
fellowship to be ye known Catholic church of Christ, and am bold plainly to
affirm, that it is the malignant and cursed church of Antichrist, and the
filthy synagogue of satan.

The known Catholic church of Christ (whereof we he) does agree in one
unity, and in one meaning and belief, in all the Articles of the christian
faith and religion. Yea, and we all (with that whole Catholic church) do
captive and submit our several meanings, to that rule of religion, that the
holy ghost has set down in the scriptures, which rule we do know to be so
perfect, that it needs no addition, alteration or change, that man can
devise. And as for one chief head and Pastor, we acknowledge none amongst men:
being assured that our one only head Christ Jesus, that has promised to be
with us continually even to the end of ye world, neither is, nor will be from
us, but is and still will be with us, and does still, and will (by the working
of his holy spirit) instruct and lead us in the true understanding of that
rule of our religion that he has left unto us, so that we do not, neither
shall we at any time stand in need of any such chief head or Pastor, as this
Offerer speaks of.

As for Prelates and spiritual gouerners, we have, such as be able to break
and minister unto us, the spiritual food of our souls, as well by preaching
and expounding unto us that rule of our religion, as by ministering the
sacraments yt our savior Christ has ordained, and commanded to be used in
his Church. To these we give credit, so long as we see yt they swerve not
from that rule, that both they and we are bound to follow, and they do not
desire to have credit any further. And as touching their example of life, we
do follow it, so far forth as we see that they follow Christ, and no
further. For S. Paul did not wish the Corinthians to follow him further, then
they should see that he followed Christ. If you be not obstinately bent, to
stand to your takling, against all reason, and christian knowledge: this that I
have here written, may suffice to move you to recant, although hitherto you
have refused so to do.

The fifteenth Offer.
Offerer.

Fifteen. Again, I do demand of the learned protestant Lutherans,
Zuinglians, Illirians, Caluinists, Confessionists, Svvinkfildians, Anabaptists,
and such like, be all of one church and congregation or no? And if he be able
to prove these sects, being of such diversity in faith and religion, to make
one church, and that every one of them may give salvation to their fellows,
being so disagreeable one with another in high points of faith and religion,
or that I ought to believe all those, rather then the one true Catholic church
of Christ: or yet any of these, more one then another, all of them making such
a bold challenge of the truth of Gods word and gospel. When the learned
Protestant shall be able by good reason, or drift of argument to satisfy these
my requests: then I shall yield and recant, and not before.

Crowley.

If I did not know that this Offerer is past all shame: I could not meruell
enough to see that he would demand of the learned Protestant, a proof by
good reason and drift of argument: that Luther, Zuinglius, Illiricus, Calvin,
the Confessionists, Swinkfild, and the Anabaptists, should be members all of
one church. For the darkness is no more contrary to the light, neither
falshoode to the truth, nor the devil to God: then the doctrine of Swenkfield
and of the Anabaptists, is to the doctrine of Luther, Calvin, and Zuinglius.

But this is the drift of this Offerer. To bear the world in hand, that we
Protestants, do hold and maintain every point of doctrine, that is contrary
to, or diffreth from that Antichristian doctrine, which he and his fellows
do call Catholic: and that we have none other authors of our religion, but
these whom he has here named, and such like.

Undoubtedly, he is herein very much disceiued. For although we do for good
cause, like very well of the judgment of some of these men that be here
named: yet we have not sworn to believe all that they have written, neither
yet any one word, that they have written, further then they have by the
scriptures made proof of that which they have affirmed in writing. We are not
Lutherans, Zuinglians, nor Caluinists: but we are Christians, as (in our
opinion) Luther, Zuinglius, and Calvin were. They were of one mind with S.
Austen: that desired no credit, further then he proved his assertions, by
scripture. I pray you therefore (good M. Offerer) offer us not such
discurtisie, as to cause the world to conceive such an opinion of us, that we
hold and maintain, we care not and know not what. We thank the Lord our
God, we are not ignorant what we do, and what Christians ought to believe:
and we are ready and able to render an account of the hope that is in us. And
our God has made us able to judge of the spirits, and to discern the spirit
of truth, from the spirit of error. And by that gift of our God, we are
made able to see that your spirit, is the spirit of Antichrist, and your
religion Antichristian. And that the religion that we do profess, is
Catholic, and the same that was professed and practiced, even in Rome, for
the space of 300. years and more, next after the ascension of our Savior
Christ.

And where as you require the learned Protestant to prove that these sects,
being so diverse, etc. or any of them do give salvation to their fellows, and
that you ought to beeleeue them all, or any one of them: we leave to your
self, to be discussed at your leisure. For we know that no company or
society of men, has any power to give any salvation neither to others, or to
themselves: and that no man is bound to believe another, farther then he does
know, that the same has and does speak and write the truth. I see no cause
therefore, why you should not yield and recant, although the learned
Protestant, neither can prove, nor will take upon him to prove the thing that
you have so impudently required him to prove.

The sixteenth Offer.
Offerer.

Sixteenth. When the Protestant shall be able to prove, that those persons which
in their departure made from the Catholic Church of Christ, have more desire
to bear the name of Sectaries, as of Lutherans, Zuinglians, Illerians
Caluinistes, Swenkfieldeans, and Anabaptists, the^ the name of Christians or
Catholics, are the true members of Christ his Church, and not Heretics, and
Schismatickes, nor yet followers therein of their fathers the Arians, which
took their names of Arrius, the Maniches of Manes, the Nestorians of
Nestorius: the Nouatians, the Vigilians, the Iouinians, Pelagians, Eutichians,
and others, then I shall yield and recant, and not before.

Crowley.

Let the Protestant make the like offer, and so the one offer shall be a
sufficient answer to the other. When the Antichristian Catholic shall be able
to prove that such persons, as do desire rather to be called Fraunciscans of
Fraunces, Dominicans, of Dominicke, Benedictines, of Benedict, Augustinia^s, of
Augustine, Barnardines, of Barnard, Brigettines, of Briget, and so forth of
all the several orders of Friars, Monks, Chanons, and Nuns, rather then by
the common name of Christians, be true members of Christ's Catholic Church,
and not Sectaries, Heretics, and Schismatickes, nor yet followers of their
Fathers, the Arrians, which took their name of Arius, etc. Then will the
Protestant yield and recant, and so become an Antichristian Catholic, and
not before.

A man might marvel to see the blindness of this Offerrer, that could not see,
how easily this balde offer of his, might be turned back upon himself. Yea
there is much greater reason to move any man to think, that the Monks,
Friars, and Chanons, Nuns and others of the Popish religious persons, do
desire to be named after the first founders of their religions: then that they
which do favor and follow the doctrine of Luther, Calvin, or any other, do
desire to be called by the names of them whose doctrine they follow or favor.
For were it not that such as do mislike with the doctrine of Luther and the
rest, do in dirision call the favorers of that doctrine by the names of those
chief teachers of the doctrine: we should not amongst thousands find one
that would give any of those names to himself. But the Popes religious
persons, do for the most part, blot out of memory the names that were given
unto them when they were baptized, as Friar John Frauncis Minime of Nigion in
France, was called Debnam by his Progeny, and kindred whereof he came, and at
his Baptism, the name Samuel was given unto him.

I think it will be hard for this Offerer to prove that this is not a flat
renouncing of Christ and Christendom. For in this new name, not only the
progeny of his natural parents is renounced, but that religion also, that
was professed when he was baptized, and in that new profession that he has
made, thereis no promise made of obedience to Christ, or vow to observe
Christian religion, but to obey the Father Prior and all the superiors in that
order: and to observe that rule of S. Frauncis order. If this be not a flat
forsaking of Christ: then undoubtedly, no man can forsake him.

And what may be thought of you Antichristian Catholics? Do not you forsake
Christ, where you choose a man to be his Vicar general, captiueing and
submitting your several meaninges, to the judgment of your Prelates and
spiritual gouerners, and of one chief head and pastor amongst those
Prelates, and that in all Ecclesiastical things and causes?

Well, I would wish you to remember your self better, and to consider from how
good, loouing and faithful a shepherd you are gone astray: and by how many
ways he has, and does still seek to bring you home again to his
sheepfolde, the right and true Catholic Church, consider that you have
willingly wittingly and wilfully made your self captive, to the greatest enemy
that your sheephearde Christ has or can have. Make have to return: your
sheepeheard will with joy receive you. Your sin is great in forsaking such a
shepherd: and yet not so great but it may be pardoned. Repent, and believe
the Gospel: and undoubtedly you shall be saved. Let not the vain estimation of
the world stay you from saying. I yield and recant, although he thereto it have
stayed you so, that you could not so say, notwithstanding that your conscience
has told you, that you ought so to do, and say.

The seventeenth Offer.
Offerer.

Seventeenth. I demand of the learned Protestant, were saved without the
Church of Christ, living in all ignorance, superstition and idolatry, as they
say. If he answer no, and that there was no salvation out of their hyd and
unknown Church, then all men of al degrees, young and old, for the whole
space of the foresaid thousand years, (by the Protestants judgment,)
perished without all hope of Gods mercy, and were damned. When therefore the
learned Protestant shall be able to prove by good reason and argument, either
that there is a way to salvation without the Church of Christ, or that all
people professing Christ, perished for so many hundredth years together, then
will I recant, and not before.

Crowley.

It seems that this Offerer persuades himself, that by making this Offer,
he shall put the learned Protestant to silence for ever. For if he shall open
his mouth, and say yea, to that demand which he makes: then must it needs
follow by good consequence, that there is a way to salvation, without the
Church of Christ (whereof no Christians ears can abide the hearing,) And if he
say no: then it must needs follow (by the like consequence) that all men of
all degrees, young and old, that were borne into the world and professed
Christ for the space of a thousand years together, did all perish, without
all hope of Gods mercy, and were all damned. Thus in the opinion of this
proud Offerer, the poor Protestant, is enforced to give over in the plain
feelde, and to yield and recant, and so to become a Popish Catholic. But I
hope we shall see it fall out far otherwise.

First, the ground whereon this Offerer builds his argument or reason is not
sure. For he imagines that the learned Protestants do hold and affirm, or
grant, that their Church, being suppressed by Papistrie, superstition and
Idolatry, did lie so hid and unknown for the space of a thousand years:
that no man could tell where to find it. But that imagination is vain and
foolish. For although the Catholic Church (which is the Protestants Church)
were, during the time of blindness, sore opressed by Popish tirannie, and
ouercountenaunced by Popish superstition and Idolatry: yet was it (even then)
as a city standing on an hill, and as a candle on a candlestick, yea it was
ye light of the world, and the salt of the earth, Math, 5. Math. 5.
For when was the Church more obscure, or when could it be less regarded, then
it was at that time wherein our Savior spoke those words? As then therefore,
even so afterward in the time of the ten first bloody persecutions: the
Church of Christians was the city on the Hill, etc. And so was it (and is
still) during those 1000. years that the Offerer speaks of. For those
thousand years are not yet fully expired: and although God have given Halsion
days to Christians in some regions, as in Heluesia, and in the upper Germany,
and now for a few years, in England and in Scotland: yet in France, Spain,
Portingale, and in the low countries, and in Italy, the seven headed beast
does still hold battle against the two witnesses, that were slain and are
revived. Apoc. 11. Apoc, 11,


But because our Catholic Church has not at any time flourished in the world,
in such pompous manner as the Antichristian Catholic Church does and ever
has done since it first began: therefore this Offerer imagines, that it
lies hid and unknown, as in deed it does to such as he is: which will not
see nor know, that which most easily may be known of all men.

He imagines also, that none of them that have been or be baptized amongst
them, have been, be, or can be, of our Catholic Church, because such do
when they do first come to years of discretion, profess Christ openly after
their Antichristian manner. But herein he is very much disceiued: for very many
of us were borne and baptized amongst them, of which number, I my self am
one. And when I was grown up to discretion. I professed Christ after the
Antichristian manner. But God, that had fore appointed me, and the rest of his
chosen children, to be vessels unto honor: would not leave us in that filthy
puddle of popish superstition, but did by his good means draw us out, and
has washed us in the fountain of water by the word of life. Ephesians. 6. Ephe, 6,
And we do not doubt but there be yet many amongst you, that in Gods good
time shall be drawn out of that filthy puddle, and washed as we be.

No marvel though such as this Offerer is can not see this: For even Elias
the Prophet could not see the like in Israel in his days. They have says he,
overthrown thine Altar, they have slain thy Prophets, I do remain alone, a
Prophet of the Lord: and they seek to take away my life. But the divine
majesty made answer: I have reserved for my self, 7000. that have not bowed
their knees to Baall, 3. Reg, 19. 3, Reg. 19
Though this Offerer and his fellows, neither could heretofore, nor can now
see any of our sort amongst them: yet God has his number, even in Room under
the Popes nose. And this is that sure seal that S. Paul wrote of to Timoth.
The Lord knows who they be, that are his, 2. Timoth. 2. 2, Timoth,


Cap, 2.
It seems yt this Offerer is persuaded, that baptism in water, and an outward
and open professing of Christ, are infallible signs of salvation. The
Israelites were in like manner persuaded concerning their circumsition and
outward and open professing of the law. But Esaias says Esaias. 29. Esaias, 29,
as our Savior him self has cited his words Ma. 15. Math, 15
In vain do they worship me: teachinge the doctrines and commandments of
men.

Circumcission, was to them, the infallible sign and seal of Gods covenant,
made with their fathers and with them: and God neither did nor could disceiue
them, but he did always perform that covenant toward them, at that time,
even as he had before performed the same toward their fathers: but they
brake the condition of the covenant, which they and their fathers had promised
to keep, which was, to serve him according to his law. When they therefore had
devised ways wherein they would serve God, not according to his law, but in
many points contrary to his law: their circumcission therefore did profit them
nothing, but was turned into vncircumcission. Rom, 2. Rom, 2,


Even so batpisme is unto us, the seal of the new covenant, which God has
made with us, and with our fore fathers: which covenant he neither does nor
can break. But when we break the condition (which is to serve and honor him
in spirit and in truth. Ioh. 4. John, 4,
) then is our baptism made unprofitable to us. For (as S. Peter has written,
1. Peter, 3. 1, Pet, 3,
) The baptism that saves us: is not that which puts away the filth of the
flesh, but that whereby we are made bold with a good conscience to stand
before God, and to call upon him. This is the baptism of the spirit, whereby
we are borne from above, and made the sons and daughters of God, and his spirit
given unto us, which spirit does certify our spirits that we are Gods
children and the same spirit does enbolden us to repair unto God as children
to a Father, and to say unto him, father, father. Yea and this spirit does
lead us as the children of God, and makes us able (in some measure) to serve
him in observing the commandments of God. Rom, 8. Roma, 8,


How can you say that you do observe this condition of honoring and serving
God in spirit and in truth: when in your outward exercise of religion, there
is scarsely any one thing to be seen, that sauoreth any thing at all of the
spirit, but altogether of the flesh? yea very few things that God has
commanded, are to be seen in your outward professing of Christ: but very
many things that God has flatly forbidden. Your temples or Churches stuffed
full of images: and how does the temple of God agree with images? 2, Cor, 6.
2, Cor, 6,
your Churches builded and consecrated to the honor of creatures, as of Angels
and Saints? Your solemn festival days yearly observed in the honor of
creatures. Your inuocations and prayers: Your burning of incence before dead
images and living men, and before that Sacrament, which our Christ ordained to
be received, in the remembrance of his death and passion, and not to be
worshipped: your offering up of this sacrament, as a sacrifice for the sins
both of the quick and of the dead: your hanging of it over your Alters and
your carrying of it about in your pompous processions: your harmonious music,
with the voices of men and children together, and the noise of Organes and
other loud instruments of Music: your ringing of Belles, your burning of
lights in the open daylight, with I wot not how many other toyishe diuises
that are used by you in your exercise of religion: what one spark of
spiritual serving and honoring of God can there be in them?

But your baptism (although you have divised many mad toys which you do
use in the ministration thereof) remains the same in substance that our
Savior Christ did command to be ministered to such as should believe by the
preaching of the Gospel. Math, 28. Math, 28.
Go your way, and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the father,
of the son, and of the holy Ghost. You baptize not in the name of Antichrist,
but in the name of the holy trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
The baptism therefore that we have received amongst you, is as effectual to
us, as the Baptism that we minister to our infantes is to them?

Now you do (I hope) see, that your two horned argument, does not stand upon
so sure a ground, as you seemed to be persuaded that it did. We may say yea to
your question: and yet not affirm that there is an other way to salvation,
then by Christ. And we may say no to your question: and not be enforced
thereby to deny that any of the people that professed Christ for the space of,
1000. years were saved. Now therefore I require you to remember your promise,
and to recant, which you have hitherto refused to do.

The eighteenth Offer.
Offeter.

Eighteenth. Let the learned Protestant make proof

Crowley.

I have already proved sufficiently, that although our Catholic Church, was
by Antichristian tirannie, very sore oppressed, and by Popish supersticion,
and by blasphemous idolatry meruailously ouercountenaunced: yet in all that
time of a thousand years that this Offerer speaks of, it was never so hid,
so unknown or so secret, but that it was still the City on the hill, the
Candle on the candlestick, the salt and the light of the world, even as it was
in the time of Christ's being on earth in our nature, and under ye first ten
horrible persecutions. The doctrine of the Gospel of Christ was taught, and the
sacraments of Christ were ministered in it, as openly as the Tyranny of
Antichriste would suffer. It had the spirit of prophecy in as large mesure as
our head Christ Jesus knew to be meet for us. The rod of correction, or
discipline was as much exercised as it might be by them that had the power of
the sword taken from them, and continually used against them. They lacked
neither Bishops, Priests, nor other ecclesiastical ministers, such as the
heavenly father knew to be necessary for them. These (although they were not
ordered after the Antichristian manner, by receiving the mark of the beast)
had their lawful calling from God by man: and did execute their function
faithfully, and showed therein no slacknesse, but such as was enforced by open
and bloody Tirannie.

These things have been sufficiently proved before, and that our Church was
not so hid, unknown and secret, in the time that is past of the.1000. years
that this Offerer speaks of, neither is it at this day in any part of the
world, so hid, etc. As this Offerer would bear us in hand that it was and is
in places where it is persecuted and shall be till the whole time of the devils
liberty shall be complet and ended. I do not therefore see wherefore you should
not recant, as you have promised.

The ninteenth Offer.
Offerer.

Nineteenth. Again, on the other side, let the learned contention and pride of
Heretics: and I will yield and recant, and not before.

Crowley.

The Protestant has already proved, that the Church whereof this Offerer is a
member: has not been of so long continuance as fifteen hundredth years:
Yea, and that there be not yet a full thousand years past, since that Church
became of such power and estimation in the world, as now it does challendge to
it self, and as this Offerer does brag of.

That Church which is Catholic in deed (whereof all right Protestants be
members) has bad continuance even ever since this promise was made in ye days
of ye first man. I will put enimitie betwixt thee and the woman, betwixt thy
seed and her seed: her seed shall break thy head, and thou shall assalt
his heel. Gen, 3.
These words did God him self speak to the sperpent, and this promise did
the first man and his wife believe, and they, and their faithful posterity,
did from time to time look for and long after the performaunce of this
promise, even till our Savior Christ (which is that blessed seed of the
woman) had in deed performed it. Our Savior Christ speaking of this looking
for and longing after: said thus to his disciples. Many Prophets and Princes
have desired to see those things that you see, and have not seen them, and to
hear those words that you hear, and have not heard them. Luc. 10. Lucae, 10,
And again speaking to the Jews he said. Your father Abraham did advance him
self that he might see my day, and he did see it, and rejoice in it. John, 8.
John. 8.
And this Catholic Church, has continued still, in all troubles and
persecutions, and does continue to this day, and so shall to the end, still
rejoicing in the day of Christ that is already past, and looking and longing
after that day of his that is yet to come: which is the day of his appearing in
glory, when all his shall appear with him in glory, Colo, 3. Coloss, 3


This Church has had the use of Sacraments, ever since Sacraments were
instituted. But before Abraham's time, there was not any Sacrament ordained, for
the first Sacrament was Circumcision, and the other Sacrament was the
Passe-ouer, which was instituted in the days of Moses. By this it appears
that the Church was before the sacraments were: and so it follows by good
consequence, that Sacraments are not necessarily required to the constituting
of a Church. Yea and after those Sairamentes were instituted, the use of them
was by occasion intermitted: and yet the Church that did intermit the use of
those Sacraments, was still the Church of God notwithstanding the intermitting
of the use of the Sacraments. As in the time of the people of Isralites being
in the wilderness, which was forty years: both Circumcission and the Passover
were intermitted, and yet that people were still accounted to be, and were in
deed the Church of God. Even so, our Savior Christ haueing fulfilled the
law, did institute two Sacraments, in the place or steed of those two that
were before his incarnation, namely Baptism, and the Sacrament of his body and
blood, and left them to his Church, with commandment that they should be
used in his Church, and therefore the Church of Christ may not refuse to use
them. But yet, if by just occasion the Church shall be enforced to intermit the
use of them, for as long, or longer time, then the Isralites did intermit ye
use of their Sacraments: this may not be thought to be a just cause to account
that Church to be no Catholic Church, which has for a time intermitted the
use of Sacraments.

But that Catholic Church whereof we Protestants be members: has not any at
time intermitted ye use of these two Sacraments that Christ has ordained, no
not in the time of most bloody persecution, as in most ancient Histories it
does appear. And after the end of those bloody persecutions (which did
continue almost to the end of the first 300. years after Christ's ascension
(the same Church did continue the use of the same Sacraments publicly and
openly, which before that time bloody Tirrannie would not suffer them to do.

But when the time of Apostacy was come, and the man of sin (of whom S.
Paul wrote, 2, Thessa, 2. 2, Thessa, 2
) had gotten the upper hand: then this Church was enforced to leave that open
use yt of Sacraments that it had continued for the space (almost) of 300.
years, and to use them, as before she had done, in the time of the first
bloody persecutions. For the Roman Church being fallen away from the
Catholic Church, became as bloodily minded, as ever the Roman Empire had
been.

Thus the Catholic Church (whereof we be members) has continued and does
still continue the use of those Sacraments that Christ has instituted. As for
confirmation, order, and that which you call penance, matrimony, and extreme
unction: we do not acknowledge to be Sacraments, because they agree not with
the definition or description of a Sacrament, which is, a visible sign of an
invisible spiritual grace, instituted by Christ him self: we know and do
confess that confirmation is a good order, and may be used to the edification
of the Church, and therefore, it is appointed by public Authority, yt when
younglinges shall be instructed so that they shall be able in some measure to make
profession of the Christian faith: they shall be brought to the Bishop, that by
prayer to God for them, and laying on of his hands upon them, they may be the
better confirmed in that faith which they have learned and professed.

The ordering, of ministers, we allow of also, as of a good and profitable
order in the Church: for we know that no man may take upon himself, that
honor, but such as shall be called thereunto as Aron was. And therefore, as
great care as may be is taken in the chosing of such as shall be admitted to the
ministry, and as great circumspection in the admitting. Heb. 5.
If any fault be in this behalf: it is not in the law that prescribes a good
and perfect order to be observed herein, but in the lack of care that may be
in such as have the execution of the law. As touching that which you call
penance, we do neither accept of it as of a Sacrament, (because we know that
it is none) neither do we take it for a good order, because we do know that
it is derogatorie to the glory of Christ. The first part of your penance,
which you call contrition, or inward sorrow of heart, we do like well of, for
as the Prophet David says. Psalm 51. Psalm, 51,
An humble and broken heart (O God) thou will not despise. Yea he says that a
troubled spirit is a sacrifice to God. The second part of your penance, is
confession. That part we do like of also: but not in such order as it is used
amongst you. That is that the penitent person shall make rehearsal of all his
sins in the hearing of a Priest that knows not whether he speak truly or
not. As S. Austin has written in his tenth book of confessions, Augusti.
Conf. li. 10, Capi, 3.
and in the third Chapter thereof. What have I to do with men (says S.
Austine) that they should here my confessions, etc. We do exhort all men, to
confess all their sins to God, against whom they are committed, and in
whose power only it is to forgive them. If our sins be secret, so that none
but God only does know them: then do we think it good to follow the
counsel of Sirach, Eccles, 19,
chap, 19, declare not thy sins, neither to freende nor to foe, etc. But if
we have sinned one of us against an other: then we think it meet to follow
the council of S. James, in his Epistle, chap, 5. Jacob, 5,
Confess your sins one to an other, etc. But if the horror of our sins be
so great, that we can not, by any of these means be assured of forgiveness of
them: then we do resort, not to an ignorant Priest, but to such a one as we
are assured can (or at the least way, we are persuaded yt he can) assure us by
the scriptures, that repenting our sins unfeignedly and purposing to turn away
from them, from thence foreward continually: the merciful God (our father)
does so pardon and forgive them, that he will never lay them to our charge
any more.

But ye third part of your penance, which you call satisfaction: we do
utterly detest and abhor. For that we do know by the scriptures, that
only Christ is able to make satisfaction to God for sin. Because no creature
could be worthy or meet to make satisfaction to God for sin: therefore God
the creator of creatures, would in the second person in Trinity, become man,
that in man's nature he might dye, and be made a sacrifice for the sins of the
world, yea that he might make him self a sacrifice, and by that one sacrifice
take away the sins of the world. If you lust to see what Scriptures we have,
for proof of this that I have here written: look the 53, of Esaies
prophecies, and the, 63, Ephe, 53. and, 63 Math. 1. John, 1, 1. Timot. 1. Heb.
9.10,
Chapter of the same prophecies. The first chapter of Saint Mathewes Gospel,
the first of S. John's Gospel, the first of S. Paul's first Epistle to Timoth.
The ninth, and the tenth Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews. As touching
satisfactions, therefore to be made to God: we renounce and forsake all and all
manner of satisfactions that have been, or shall be devised by men: and we
cleave unto that only, that Christ Jesus has made once for all, by that one
and everlasting sacrifice that he has made of him self once for all.

But when we sin one of us against an other (as too too often we do) or when
we sin against the whole congregation of Christians (as we do to often in
deed) then we think our selves bound, not only to confess our faults one
to an other, or to the whole congregation that is offended by us: but also to
satisfy, by all means possible, those private persons, and also ye
congregation of Christ by making such satisfaction as by any means we may be
able to make And herein we follow the counsel (or rather the commandment) of
our savior Christ, Math. 5. Math, 5.
Agree with thine adversary quickly whilse thou art in ye way with him: least
thine adversary bring thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the
officer, and then thou be cast into prison. I tell thee thou shall not be
delivered out thence, till thou shall have paid the uttermost farthing. The
way wherein we must agree with our adversary, is this life, ye end whereof is most
uncertain: wherefore a speedy agreement is needful. Our adversary is that
party that has cause to charge us with misdemeanour toward him. The judge is
God himself, who being just must needs condemn us to perpetual prison in
hell, because we have not in the way of this life agreed with our adversary.
And from thence we can never be delivered, because we can not there make any
satisfaction to our adversary. The Popes pardons, his Masses, Trentalles,
Obbets Anniuersaries, Chauntries, and the rest of Satisfactory devises, can
help us nothing at all in this case. God grant his grace to us and to all men,
that professing the religion of Christ, we may, as it is seemly for
Christians, be careful to do as Christ has taught, and agree with our
adversary quickly whiles we are with him in the way of this life, and so
escape that terrible judgment that otherwise the righteous judge must needs
pronounce and put in execution.

Matrimony we honor, not as a Sacrament, but as an holy ordinance of God,
instituted by God himself in Paradise, and in the time of man's innocence, and
with Saint Paul, Ephe, 5. Ephe, 5.
we hold, that in it is represented unto us that mystical union that is
betwixt Christ and his Church. And we do marvel much, that the Popes
Catholics can hold this for a sacrament: and yet deny the use of it to such
amongst them as they do account to be most holy. W^ do know, Hebr, 13.
and confess with S. Paul, that Marriage is honorable amongst all men, and
that the bed of the married persons is undefiled. Yea, we know that no estate
or calling amongst men can be so holy, that marriage may be thought to be
profane a thing for that estate or calling. We know also, that the holiness of
it is such, that the holiness of the most holy amongst men, can add nothing to
the holiness thereof, nor yet the vnholines of the most unholy, take any thing
from the holiness thereof. The most honorable amongst men, do not when they
enter into that honorable estate, make it more honorable: neither do the
most base and vile in degree amongst men (when they enter into it) make it
more base and vile, by that vileness or baseness that is in them.

We do not therefore, deny the use of it to any man. But we do wish, that
all men that do find in themselves occasion to use it: would duly consider
wherefore it was ordained, and would use it for the procreation of children to
be brought up in the fear and nurture of the Lord, and to the praise of God:
for the preservation and keeping of their bodies undefiled members of Christ's
body, and for the mutual society, help and comfort, that married persons ought
to have, the one of the other.

Your extreme unction, we do not only deny to be a Sacrament because we
find in Histories, that Pope Foelix the fourth of that name, that occupied the
place of the Papacy about, 525, years after the incarnation of our Savior
Christ, was the first that took order for the anointing of the bodies of such
as lay in dying, with oil: But also because the manner of the using of it, is
too too full of superstition. We allow of a religious visiting of the sick,
according to the council of S. James, chap. 5. And we do understand by the
annoynting with oil that S. James speaks of, the applying of natural
remedies to the sick persons, which being joined with prayer, must needs be
the more effectual, as by that place of S. James it may very well be
gathered. And thus much I have thought meet to write concerning the
Sacraments which Christ has instituted, and are now used in that Church
whereof we Protestants are: and have been used in that Church ever since they
were first instituted by Christ himself. And because your sort do make
accounte of five other Sacraments, in deed: I have written breefely of them
also.

The Catholic Church (whereof we Protestants are members) has from time to
time had the hearing of matters in controuesie, and so has it still, so far
forth as the same may appertain unto her to judge of them. That is, where and
when the parties that be at controversy do submit themselves to her judgment.
For what has she to do with them that be without? As S. Paul wrote to the
Corrinthians, 1. Cor. 5. 1, Cor. 5.
Such as are not of ye society of the members of Christ, are not to be judged
by the church of Christ.

And as touching the orderly succession of Bishops: we are able to show by
the Histories of the Church, that our Church has had above, 60. Bishops in
Rome, successively one after another, whereof the greatest number were good
men, and careful to govern the flock committed to their charge, as S. Paul
wished ye Elders or Bishops of Ephesians. to do Act. 20. But here the Offerer, must
note, yt none of these was called or would be called universal Bishops, or
universal heads, Acts, 20.
of ye universal church of Christ. They knew yt the charge that was committed
unto them in Room and in ye Churches of ye province, was great enough for
them, they sought for no more charge. But when any other Bishops did seek to
them for council: they were ready to help them to the uttermost of their
power, but none of them did claim any power or authority over the rest. The
rest of the Bishops in Room, that succeeded Gregory the first: namely
Boniface the third, and such as succeeded him, were Antichristian Bishops, and
therefore we refuse them as none of ours. Neither is it so necessary a matter
to have so orderly a succession of Bishops in any one City in the christian
world, as in the first 600. hundredth years after Christ, there was in Room.

But because the city Room was then (and had been of long time before) the
chief city of the whole world: the peoples that inhabited in other Cities
and parts of the world, owing service to the state of Room, had occasion to
repair thither, and therefore even the christians that had their dwelling else
where, had the Bishops, and other Church ministers that were in Room, in
greater estimation, then they had those men that were of the like calling, even
in the cities wherein they themselves had their aboade and dwelling.

And hereof it might come that greter account was made of the succession of
those Bishops that were Bishops of Room, then of those that were in Millen,
Constantinople, Jerusalem, Hippo, or in any other part of the whole world, But
if this orderly succession of bishops that so great account is made of were
well weighed, it would not be found so certain as this Offerer and his
fellows, would feign have it seem to be.

S, Austine (whose anthoritie is not to be contemned) having occasion to make
mention of this succession: places Linus next unto Peter, and makes no
mention at all of Cletus, and so he makes in this succession less by one,
then the common account is. Some others do suppose, that Linus and Cletus,
were but Peter's coadiutors, and not Bishops of Room at all: For Peter him
self said unto Clement, I give unto thee, the same power of binding and
loosing that Christ left unto me: and so he made Clement his immediate
successor. Yea there be some that do think, (and I do think yt they have
some good cause so to think) that Peter him self, was never Bishop of Room.

But let the succession of Bishops in the first 600. years, be even such as
this Offerer and his fellows do suppose it to be: yet ye succession that has
been since the end of those first. 600, years: is not so current as they do
avouch it to be.

For it appears in Histories, that the seat of Room has been void for
the space of whole year together, yea for the space of two years and more:
and that there have been two Popes, yea three Popes at one time, where of one
has excommunicated the other, and no man was able to say which of them should
by ye right successor of Peter.

I would gladly understand by this Offerer and his fellows, what manner of
succession that was, when about the year of our Lord, 855. Ioane English,
borne at Mensse, being a woman in sex and nature, was made Pope, and
continued so for the space of two years. I think they will not say that this
was an orderly succession.

To be brief, the succession of the Roman Bishops, since the time of
Bonifacius, 3. has been such as the succession of high Preests was in ye
kingdom of Israel, from the time of the falling away of the ten kindreds
from the house of Judah, even to the time wherein they were carried away by the
Assirians: and like the succession of high Preests amongst the Jews from the
first beginning of the Sects of the Phariseis and Saduces amongst them, even to
that time wherein that kingdom was utterly overthrown by the Romans.

And as the right professors of the law of God in Israel and Judah (which
undoubtedly were many) had in all this time no succession of high Priests: so
such as in these latter 1000 years have been the right Catholics, have had
no succession of Bishops, but have received their spiritual food, at the
hands of such pastors as God has from time to time stirred up, as he stirred
up Prophets in Judah and Israel in those times whereof I have spoken before: and
as often as it has pleased God to give his Church liberty to make public
profession of faith and religion (as now for the space of 29. years together,
he has done in this realm of England) such as be members of the true
Catholic Church, do and have done (by the permission and commandment, of
our Prince, whom God has appointed to govern us) as it becomes Catholic
Christians to do, in open prayer, preaching, and administration of Sacraments.

And to the end that all things may be done orderly and as it beseems, we
have bishops and al other necessary ministers, orderly elected and admitted, to
minister unto us ye word and to exercise public prayer and necessary
discipline, such as the higher powers under whom we live, do think meet to
be exercised.

As for the uniformity of your solemn Ceremonies: that had not had so long
continuance for the space of fifteen hundredth years, nor yet for the space of
fifty years. For by the confession of your holy father Pope Pius quintus the
difference of ceremonies used even in your holy Mass, was such before the time
of your last general Council, which began at Trident. Anno. 1545. that it was
thought meet by them to take order for the reformation thereof. But though it
had been as ancient as you would have it. what great matter is there in it,
to prove thereby that your Church is the true Church of Christ: since it is an
easy matter for any sort of men to agree in outward and solemn Ceremonies,
although the same be never so superstitious, vain and foolish.

But here is a matter of greater weight; yt is the unity of faith that your
Church has had these 1500, years last past continually. I have already
proved that your Antichristian Church has not had continuance so long by 600.
years almost. And it shall be an easy matter to prove yt the faith of your
Church has in ye time that it has had continuance, varied very often, in some
points of greatest wayght, as you do account of them. The general council
of Basil, believed that their authority was above the authority of the Pope,
and that they might depose him, and therefore they did depose Eugenius that
then was Pope, and choose an other in his place. And the same Eugenius, bolding
a Council at Farrary, believed that he had authority to excommucate the
general council. And this article was long doubted of. Whether the Pope, or
the general counsel should have the supreme authority. And about the words
of consecration: I think your Church is not yet agreede, whether the virtue
that turns the substance, do lie in the verb Est, or in the syllable, vm.
And whether the substance of bread and wine be turned into the substance of
the body and blood of Christ, or whether that substance departing and giving
place, the body and blood of Christ, do occupy the place thereof under the
qualities of bread and wine. And whether the mouse that eats the consecrated
rake, do eat the body of Christ or no. In these high points of religion,
and in diverse other of like sort: the unity of your faith has been, and
still is sore shaken. But I perceive that which follows in this conclusion of
this offer: that the faith which you speak of is that faith or belief that
you have in that Church of yours which you call Catholic. You never trouble
your self with the waighting and examining of matters of belief: for you
confess that you must of necessity believe the Church. So that your
determination is to believe whatsoever, that Church has or shall determine,
and command you to believe, although you know not what that Church either
has or shall determine. Thus your late prosilite. Friar John Frauncis of
Nigeon in France, did in his letters that he wrote to his mother instruct her
to believe.

But here rises a doubt, whether this Church be the general council, the
college of Cardinals, or the Popes holiness alone. If it be the general
council: what shifte would you have made when two general councelles: were
holden at one time, and decreede contrary, the one to the other, the one
holden at Basil, and the other at Farrarie? If it be the college of
Cardinals: which way would you have turned your self, when there were three
Popes at one time, and each Pope had his college of Cardinals? If it be the
Pope him self: then tell me upon whom you would have hanged your faith, when
there was no Pope for the space of two years together, and when there were
three Popes at one time, and when haueing but one Pope, the same was an Arrian
or Saddusey, or had given him self to the Devil that he might be made Pope?

I leave this to your discretion, or to the discretion of some one of your
sort that shall take in hand to replye to this answer that I make to these
your offers.

You say, that your Church has in her self all holy functions of the
spirit: as workinge of miracles, remission of sins, and the true sense and
interpretation of Gods word. A strange manner of ennumeration of parts. All
the holy functions of the spyrite are innumerable, and therefore they are
commonly said to be seven: by which number being a perfect number, an
infinite multitude is commonly signified. But you set down three for all. The
working of miracles is one of those holy functions that you speak of. You
mean (I am sure) of those miracles that have been and are wrought in your
places of Pilgrimage, and by the rotten relics of your Saints, whereof I
have heard great boast, and some experience I have seen in England. The holy
maid of Kent with her confederates, wrought many miracles in the days of King
Henry the eight, as in our Chronicles is to be seen: but in the end she was
found to be an arrante Whore, and so was the holy made of Lemster, that was
nothing inferior to the other in working of miracles. The holy Roode of
Bostone, the holy Roode of Boxley, the holy Roode of Chester, the holy Roode
of Northamton, and the holy Roode at the North door of Paul's Church, with
the holy Roode, in Roode Lane in London, were not behind the rest in working
miracles, by ye help of knaves that had the keeping of them. I might speak of
the holy blood at Hailes which was said to be a portion of the blood of
Christ, Saint Thomas of Canterbury, S. Thomas of Hereford, S. William of
Mawuerne, S. Joseph of Shaftesburie, and holy King Henry of Windsore, King
Kenelme of Cowbadge, S. Hugh of Lincoln, and S. Robert of Naseborowe, and a
number of blessed Ladies, to many to be rehearsed by name. The knauerie that
was practiced in these places is so well known in England that your miracles
can have no credit amongst such English men as have not Roomish hearts.

Yea, and our savior Christ has forewarned us, Math, 24. Math, 24,
That in these latter days, many false Christ's and false prophets shall arise,
and shall show great signs and wonders in so much yt if it were possible yt
very elect should be brought into error. But behold (says our savior) I have
told you before hand, etc. The more miracles you do brag of, ye greater cause
we have to suspect you, for these are not ye days wherein credit is to be given
to miracles, but wherein workers of wonders are to be had in suspicion. Your
Church has (you say) remission of sins. In deed, ye true catholic church of
Christ has so: but not according to your meaning as I think. The true
catholic church) whereof we are members) has remission of sins, in Christ,
and by his mediation. And therefore in ye confession of our faith, we say, we
believe the remission of sins. But (as I think) your meaning is yt your church
has power to forgive sins. And hereupon you ground your ingendulces and
pardons, for many years and many Lentes, and in diverse considerations plenary
forgiveness, A paena and a culpa. Both from the pain that the fault has
deserved, and from the fault it self also. This remission of Sins your Pope
bestows at his pleasure: but never for naught But whether he do give or sell
this remission of sins: he does in taking upon himself to forgive sins,
show him self to be that man of sin that S. Paul wrote of the 2. Thessal,
2. 2, Thessa, 2
Who sitting in the temple of God boasts himself to be God. For who can
forgive sins but God only. Marci, 2. Marci, 2,


We do know and confess, that our savior Christ has given power to his
church, both to remit and to retain sins, and that power does our Catholic
church exercise, by certifying the penitent sinners (by the scriptures) that
their sins unfeignedly repented, be undoubtedly pardoned through Christ, in
whom they must believe assuredly, that shall be capable of this remission of
sins. But our Catholic church does not make sale of this remission of
sins, as your popish Catholic Church does. And our Catholic church has
power to retain the sins of such sinners as she finds obstinate and
impenitent, by certifying them by the scriptures, that except they shall repent
unfeignedly, and believe the gospel, (that is, the glad tidings of free pardon
of all their sins in and by Christ) their sins shall never be forgiven.
The scriptures are the keys that Christ gave unto Peter, and in him to his
whole church: as S. Augustine has written in his fiftith treatise upon Ioh. Si
hoc ergo in Ecclesia fit, August, in Io. tract, 50.
Petrus quando claues accepit, Ecclesiam sanctam significauit. If this thing be
done in the church, then when Peter did receive the keys, he did signify the
holy Church. So that the power of loosing and binding, belonged not to Peter
alone, but to him together with the rest of the Apostles, wherefore, the same
power does not now belong to any one person alone in the Church, but to the
whole Church together.

You say further that your church has the true sense and interpretation of the
word of God, so that no sense or interpretation of Gods word, may be taken
for true, but that which is set down by your church, although that which is set
down by your church shall be proved to be directly contrary to the text of
Gods word it self.

In your general counseil holden at Trident, in the year 1563. and in ye
tewenty and fifth Session thereof: your church has anathematized as many as
shall hold or teach, that the Images of Christ, of the virgin his mother, and
of other saints, be not very profitable for Christians, and that they are not
to be worshipped. Their decree concerning this matter begins thus. Jmagines
porro Chrsti, etc. That is, The holy Synod does command, that the Images of
Christ, and of the virgin, the mother of God, and of other saints, to be had
and retained, especially in churches, and that due honor and worship be given
unto them. This is the sense and interpretation that your Catholic church has
set down in that decree, concerning the meaning of these sentences written in
the word of God. Cursed is that man or woman, that shall make a carved or
molten Image (that the Lord abhors the work of the hands of Craftesmen) and
shall set it in a secret place. Deuteronomy. 27. Deuteronomy. 27.
Again, in Esaias. Cap. 44. Quis formauit Deum, etc. Who has fashioned a God,
and has made a carved Image, Esaias 44. Exodus 20.
that is good for nothing? And again, Exodus 20. Non facies tibi scuptile, etc.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing
that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor in the water under the
earth. Thou shall not worship nor serve them, etc. Yea, and S. Paul in his
second Epistle to the Corinthes. 2. Cor. 6. 2. Cor. 6.
What agreement is there betwixt the temple of God and Images? directly,
contrary to the sentences of scripture: your holy mother, the Catholic church,
as you do term her, but in very deed, the church of Antichrist: has in that
general counsel, decreed that the Images of Christ, of the Virgin (the mother
of God) and of other saints, must be had and retained, especially in churches,
and that their due honor and reverence must be given unto them.

Much more might be noted out of your general counselles, where by it might
be made most manifest and plain, that there was never any sort of Heretics,
that swarued further from the true sense and interpretation of the word of God,
even in ye chiefest points of religion, then that Synagogue of Satan, your
Antichristian Catholic church, has done for the space of these 1000. years
now last past (almost) and does still.

But your church is beautified with diversity of states commended by Christ, as
with Martyrs, with Confessors, holy Virgins and such other. If a man should
require you to show your Martyrologie, and to show the causes wherefore these
Martyrs of yours suffered: it would be hard for you to make proof, that any
one of those that you do account for Martyrs, did suffer for any other then
for Antichrist. If you shall begin with Thomas Becket, the best that you can
say for him, is that he died for the liberties of the Church. And what were
those liberties? That all clergy men should be exempted from ye power of their
princes. So that if a clergy man, should commit any manner of felony, murder,
or Treason, or any other capital crime: none of the princes officers might
deal with him, to execute the penalty of the law upon him, as upon a felon,
murderer, or Traitor: but he must be punished by this Ordinary, etc. And what
was this other, then to dye for Antichrist, who contrary to Christ's doctrine,
usurps authority over princes, and will not suffer any of his to be in
subjection to princes, and to princes laws?

To be brief, Bishop Fyshar, Sir Thomas Moore, the Monks of the charter
house, with all the rest of the Popes friends that suffered in the days of
King Henry the eight: and Edmond Campion with his company, and the rest that
have been executed in the time of the reign of our Sovereign that now is: for
what cause have they suffered? was it not for that they affirmed that the Popes
holiness has the supreme power in this realm, and that princes have not the
highest power upon earth, over such as be their subjects? This cause can not
be Christ's cause: for Christ did in his human nature, submit him self to
the Emperor, in that he him self did pay tribute to the Emperor, in token of
subjection. Mat. 17. Mat, 17.
S. Peter wills all christians to submit them selves to all estates of men,
even for the Lords sake, whether it be to the king, as to him that has the
pre-eminence, or to the Dukes or captains, as to men whom the Lord has sent
for the punishment of evil dooers, but for the praise of such as be good, for
so is the will of God, that Christians should by well doing stop the
ignorance of foolish men, etc. 1. Pet. 2. 1, Peter, 2.
S. Paul also wrote thus to the Romans. Omnis anima potestatibus
sublimioribus subdita sit, etc. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, etc. Romans 13. Romans 13.
Chrysostom expounding these words of S. Paul, says thus. Etiam si
Apostolus sis, si Euangelista, si Propheta, sieve quisquis tandem fueris, etc.
Although thou be an Apostle, if thou be an Evangelist, if thou be a Prophet,
and to conclude, who, or what so ever thou be. For (says Chrysostom) this
subjection does not subvert godliness. And he says not simply, he must
obey, but he says, Chrysostom. in Romans 13.
subdita sit. It must be in subjection. By these words of Chrysostom, it
appears what manner of Martyrs they are, that have died for the mainetenaunce
of your Popes supreme power over all Christians upon earth. If Chrysostom were
now living, and would maintain this that he has written: your Pope would
make him a Martyr in deed, if he might catch him, as he has, and still does
make Martyrs of all such as he has and can catch, that be of one mind with
Chrysostom.

Your Confessors are even such as your Martyrs: and so are your Virgins, with
the rest that you mean of, when you say, and such other.

Now let the Protestant prove (say you) that this is not the true Church, that
we are not bound to obey and believe this Church and none other, in all
controversies and doubts, etc.

The Protestant has already proved yt the church that you mean of (which is
the Roman Antichristian church) is not the true Church of Christ, and that it
has not in it those things that you do so much brag of. It has not
continuance (as yet) for the space of 1000. years. It has not, neither does
it exercise preaching, to the conversion of nations to the obedience of the
gospel: but to the obedience of Antichristian doctrine. It has not had,
neither has it, the right administration of the sacraments, but with such
mixture of human diuises as is unseemly in the Church of Christ. It has not
had, neither has it any such orderly succession of bishops, as you brag of:
neither any such uniformity of solemn Ceremonies. It has not had at any
time, neither has it now such unity of faith as you speak of, nor the holy
functions of the spirit: as working of Miracles, remission of sins, nor the
true sense and interpretation of the word of God. Neither is it beautified
with that diversity of states that you speak of: as Martyrs, Confessors, and
Virgins, and such other: wherefore the Protestant concludes: that there is no
cause why he should obey and believe that church of yours, no more is there
that you should not yield and recant.

The Twentieth offer.
Offerer.

Et ego rogabo patrem, et alium paracletum dabit vobis, John. 14.
vt maneat vobiscum in aeternu^, or falsely to interpret any sentence of holy
scripture, or to induce any error among the people, or approve unprofitable
and hurtful vsages among the Christians, or that she suffers any damnable
abuse in her religion, without open repredhension thereof: Let the learned
Protestant prove any of these points, and I will then yield and recant, and
not before.

Crowley.

The true Catholic church of Christ in deed, is never void of Gods spirit.
Yea, there is not one member of that church, which has not that spirit
dwelling in it, in some measure. For thus the Apostle Paul has written to the
Romans. Si quis autem spiritum Christi non habet, hie non est eius. If there
be any that has not ye spirit of Christ, the same belongs not to him. Romans
8. Romans 8,
I do confess therefore, yt the true Catholic church of Christ, is never
void of Gods spirit. But according to the words that this Offerer has cited
out of the 14. cha. of John: John, 14,
our savior Christ has sent another comforter, which is ye holy spirit of
God, to be with his Church for ever. But what makes this for M. Offerers
purpose? He must prove that the church of Rome, being such as now it is, and
has bin, for the space of a thousand years (almost) is that true Catholic
church of Christ: and then these points will serve him to some purpose:
otherwise, they do make flatly against him.

Taking your church to be the true Catholic church of Christ: you offer to
yield and recant, if the Protestant can prove that your church has fasly
interpreted any one sentence of the holy scripture. The Protestant has alreain
his answer to your 19. offer, sufficiently proved, that your whole church
has in the 25. session of your Tridentine counsel, falsely interpreted (or
rather flatly denied) mo then one, two, or three sentences of the holy
scriptures, as to the indifferent Reader it may there most evidently apeere:
wherefore we do look for the performance of your promise in yielding and
recanting.

That your church has induced, and does still induce errors amongst the
people, has approved and does still approve, unprofitable and hurtful vsages
amongst Christians, has suffered and does still suffer, damnable abuses in
religion, without open reprehention: is more manifest then that which lies
open in the clear sun light. Wherefore the Protestant needs not to spend
any time in the proof thereof. It may suffice to put ye reader in mind of
those shameless errors that your church has taught, and does still teach and
maintain, concerning the invocation of Angels, and Saints, the praying for
the dead, the worthynesse of men's works, and the satisfying to God for sins
committed against his majesty. And for your unprofitable and hurtful vsages:
it were enough, to will the reader to remember your gadding on Pilgrimage, your
visiting, kissing and worshipping of Relics, and your burning of Lights
before blind Stocks, and Stones, in the open day and sun light. And for
your damnable abuses, there needs no more, but to wish the reader to consider
of your abominable Mass, which you make a sacrifice for the sins both of
the quick and of the dead, which being done, I see no reason why, the readers
may not cry out and say unto this Offerer and his fellows: yield and recant
for shame.

The one and twenty Offer.
Offerer.

signs and fruits of a false church, Then will I recant, and not before.

Crowley.

How well the unity of the true Christian faith is exercised in your commonly
known Catholic church (that is your Antichristian church) the reader may see
in ye which the protestant has written in answering the 14. Offer. As for your
austeritie of life, your sharpnes of discipline, your greatness of penance, your
largenes of alms, and godliness of devotion: may very well be packed up in a
pocket of Hypocrisy, and superstition, and sent to your holy father the Popes
holiness, the next new year, for a new years gift. And as for your obedience
to higher powers, your gravity and true charity: may right well be seen in
Pope Constantine the first, who admitted the Emperor Justinian, to the kissing
of his foot: about ye year of our Lord, 710. And in Pope Gregory the second,
who caused ye subjects of Leo the Emperor to break out in open rebellion
against their liege Lord the Emperor, because he had taken Images out of
churches. About the year of our Lord, 730. In Pope Steven the 2, who suffered
him self to be borne into ye church called Laterane, upon men's shoulders,
whereby he gave occasion to his successors to be so carried, after the manner
of Heathen princes: About the year of our Lord, 755. In Leo the third, who
being accused before the Emperor Charles the great: suffered the bishops that
then were present, to answer ye Emperor (when he required them to say their
minds, concerning the crimes that were laid to his charge) saying thus. The
Apostles seat, which is the head of other seats ought not to be judged of any
man, especially being a lay man. About the year of our Lord, 800. In Pope Leo
the 4. also, who having obtained a victory against the Sarasens: did offer his
own feet to be kissed of the people. About the year, 850. In Pope Ioane,
who being a woman in man's apparel, was Pope for the space of two years, and
died in travel of child, as she was going in Procession toward Laterane
church in Rome. About the year of our Lord, 855. In Pope Steven the sixth, who
through the hatred that he bare to Formosus his predisessor, did condemn him
and all his acts or ordinances. Yea, and he revenged himself upon the dead
body of Formosus, which deed grew into a custom, from thence forth. This was
about the year of our Lord, 898. In Pope Sergius the third also, who bearing a
pryuate grudge toward the same Formosus: did not only abrogagate all the laws
that had bin made by him, but he did also cause his dead body to be taken out
of the grave, wherein Pope Steven the sixth had caused him to be buried amongst
the common people, and his head and three of his fingers to be cut of, and his
headless body to be cast into ye river Tiber. About the year of our Lord,
910. An example of true charity in these two Popes. Another example of true
love in a Deacon, ye assisting Pope Victor the second, at his Mass, did put
poison into his Challice, and so dispatched him, About the year of our Lord,
1055. In Pope Gregory the seventh, we see a notable example of obedyence to
the higher powers. For, about the year of our Lord 1080. he excommunicated
the Emperor Henry the 4. and absolved all his subjects from their oath of
obedience to him. In Pope Victor the third, there is to be seen a notable
example of true love or charity, in that person that put poison into his
Challice, and so dispatced him, about the year of our Lord, 1090. Alexander
the third, did use Jews king of France, and Henry king of England, as his
Horskeepers: appoynting the one of them to go one foot by his Horses head on
the right side, and the other on the left, each of them holding the reign of
his Bridle. About the year of our Lord, 1160. A singular example of obedience
to the higher powers. Gregory the 8. did decree, that bishops should be
preferred before Princes in degree, about the year of our Lord, 1190. And Pope
Innocent the third, is reported to have said thus, in his bravery, against
Phillip, whom ye seculer Princes had chosen to be Emperor. Let the Pope take
the kingly Diadem from Phillip: or else let Philip take ye Apostolic insigne
from ye Pope. Who would not take this man to be a singular example of
obedience to the higher powers? Yea, in ye decretals yt this Innocent has set
forth, it is decreed, that the Pope ought to have the correcting of the Princes
of the earth, and that he is Emperor whom ye Pope does crown. This was
done, about the year of our Lord, 1200. Pope Gregory the ninth, did promise
everlasting life to as many as would serve in ye field against Frederike, then
Emperor. About ye year of our Lord, 1230. And when this Emperor was reconciled
to the Popes favor again: he did his penance, which was to bring into the
treasury of the church (that is the Popes Coffers) 120000. ownces of gold.
And yet after all this, the same Pope Gregory, did excommunicate the same
Emperor again, and holding a counsel with his Cardinals, he did deprive
him of his Empire, and caused the Cross to be preached against him. Which was
to incite and to stir up all men to make war against him, as against the
greatest enemy of Christian religion. Pope Innocent the fourth, did by a firm
decree make it lawful for the Pope to depose the Emperor. About the year of
our Lord, 1250. Pope Martine the fourth, excommunicated the Emperor and the
king of Arragon, and made war against the said king of Arragon. About the
year of our Lord, 1280. Pope Bonifacius 8. in a great glory, showed him self
twice. First in his pontificalibus, granting large pardons to the people: and
on the next day, in the imperial robes, having a naked sword carried before
him. And as he sat in his majesty, he cried with a loud voice, saying,
Ecce duo gladij hic. Behold, here are two swords. This was about the year,
1300. A Friar of the Order of the popish preachers, did poison Henry the
seventh Emperor, by delivering unto him a consecrated host (as they term it)
wherein he had put a strong poison, which dispatched him. About the year,
1310. Pope Clement the sixth, having excommunicated Jews the Emperor, and all
the Princes and bishops that took part with him: said that now the Empire was
fallen unto him: and therefore he placed captains in ye cities of Italy. This
was about the year, 1340. Pope Vrbane the sixth, in hatred toward Clement the
7. whom the Frenchmen had chosen to be Pope, took five Cardinals, and lapped
them in one sack and drowned them. This was done about the year 1380. A
singular example of true charity. Yea, and a singular example of obedience, is
to be seen in Alexander the third (of whom I spoke before) in that he
admitting the Emperor Frederike, surnamed Barbarossa, to the kissing of his
foot, did set his foot in the Emperors neck, pronouncing these words of the
Psalm. 91. Super aspidem, etc. Upon the Adder and Basiliske shall thou walk,
and thou shall stamp upon the Lion and the Dragon. This was done about the
year, 1170. And Celestinus the fourth, when he crowned the Emperor Henry the
fifth, son to the foresaid Frederike: did set the Imperial crown upon the
head of the Emperor with his feet, and did topple it of again with one of his
feet, in token, that as he had power to make an Emperor, so he had power to
depose him again.

Here M. Offerer may see a number of examples, of obedience to the higher
powers, of great gravity, and of true charity, even in such as have bin the
chief in his Catholic church: if he can show me but one example, amongst
them that have bin of ye protestants Catholic church, like unto these
manifold examples of commanding, controuling, excommunicating, persecuting,
and deposing of ye higher powers, and triumphing over them: then will I recant
the protestants Catholic religion, and profess Popery, as this Offerer
does, and not before.

But now, on the contrary (says this Offerer) if discord in religion,
licentiousnes in living, contempt of discipline, rejecting of penance,
lothsomnes of fasting, lack of zeal and devotion, disobedience to
maiestrates, sacryledge, Apostacy, breaking of vows, unlawful lusts, and
wantonness in all life and manners, do not agree better, and more clear to the
protestants, then to the Catholic, being the plain signs and fraits of a
false church, then will I recant, and not before.

As touching discord in religion, the Offerer may think him self to be
sufficiently answered in that which I have said to the fifteenth Offer. The
rest that he rehearses as fal^^ agreeing to the protestants religion: are
not at all agreeable to that religion, that the Protestants do profess. For
we say as S. James has written. Jacob. 1. Jacob. 1.
If any man do think him self to be religious, and yet refraineth not his
own tongue, but suffers his own heart to go a stray that man's religion is
vain. This is the religion, that is pure and undefiled before God and the
father: for a man to visit the fatherless and widows in their trouble, and
to keep him self unspotted of the world.

Yea, we hold (as saint Paul teaches. Coloss. 3. Coloss. 3.
) that Christians, being risen again together with Christ, should seek those
things that are above where Christ is at the right hand of God: and not things
that are here on earth. Yea, an^ (as the same S. Paul wrote to the Phillip.
3. Philip, 3.
) that Christians should have their conversation in heaven and not upon earth:
so that although our bodies must be here for a while, yet our minds must be
settled in heaven, from whence we look for a Savior, even the Lord Jesus, who
by that mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all thing to him self,
shall transform, alter, and change our vile bodies and make them like unto his
own glorious body. Yea, and we do hold (as S. Paul taught the Romans,
Cap. 6. Romans 6,
that such as are baptized, are baptized to dye, and to be buried with Christ,
unto sin, and to be risen again with him, unto righteousness of life. So that
as naturally, we are inclined to make all our parts, instruments or tools of
unrighteousness, proceeding from one unrighteousness to another: even so, being
baptized, our duty is to endeavor to make our bodies and all our parts,
instruments of righteousness, proceeding from one righteousness to another. Yea,
and (as he writes in the 12. Chap.) we hold that our duty is to make our
bodies a sacrifice to God, that is (as I take it) the most acceptable service
that we can do unto God. Romans 12. Romans 13.
Yea, and (as he writes it the 13. Chap.) we hold that we may make no
provision for the flesh, to satisfy the lusts thereof. But (as he writes, 1.
Tim. 6. 1. Tim. 6.
) having meats and drink, and cloth, and necessary house harbor, we be there
with contented. Yea, we do hold (as S. Peter has taught, 1. Pet. 2. 1, Peter,
2.
) that our duty is to abstain from fleshly lusts that fight against the
soul, and by honest and good conversation, to stop the mouths of malicious
speakers, and if it be possible to win them to join with us in religion,
that we may glorify God together, Now let the indifferent reader judge how
those foul vices yt you do charge our religion with: do agree, with this our
profession.

It may, that there be some (and I confess that there be a great number to
many amongst us) which are not of us, but do only bear the name of protestant
Catholics, and are in deed of no religion. And these are such as you speak
of, and the vices yt you name, do very well agree unto the^. And I pray you,
has your popish Catholic church, at any time lacked a good round number of
such manner of men?

When your Pope (who is the head of your church) was such a one as Platina
reports John the 12. to be, Monstru^ hominis, A monster amongst men: and as
Volateran says, Sceleratum hominem, A man given over to all wickedness, and
that he was slain being taken in adultery. And as the same Platina and
Volateran do say of Syluester the second, that be gave himself to the devil
that he might be made Pope, and that he was made Pope in deed, and did govern
your church four years together.

And your Pope Benedictus the ninth, of whom Volateran says: that he was Vir
plane probrosus and infamis. A man altogether worthy of reproaches, and evil
reports, and infamous. And Platina says that after his death he was seen in
an horrible shape, and that he said thus. Iusto Dei iudicio damnatus sum, quia
sine lege vixi, I am damned, even by the just judgment of God: because I lived
without law. These governed your church, one of them nine years, another,
four years: and the third, fifteen years.

Now, if that did saying be true (as in very deed it is always found to
true) Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis, the whole world do frame them
selves after the example of the Ruler: how could it otherwise be, but that in
the days wherein those men ruled your church, you had great plenty of such men
as they were?

But you will say, this is not to be ascribed to the religion: but to the
persons that professed the religion. Well then I hope you will be contented
that we do say, that the falts wherewith you do charge our religion: are the
falts of such persons as professing our religion, be of no religion, and are
not to be imputed to our religion, but to those irreligious persons.

We wish after, and seek for concord in true Catholic religion, we detest
and abhor licentiousnes of life. We ^raue and beg, both of God and of men,
the reviving of that discipline that God him self commanded to be exercised
by his people. We embrace true and unfeigned repentance, which is (as David
teaches, Psalm. 34. Psalm. 34.
) to turn away from evil, and to do the thing that is good. We love and
practice true fasting: such as Esaias the prophet requires in the people of God.
Esaias. 58. Esaias, 58.
which consists in merciful dealinge toward such as be in our danger, and
in merciful relieuing of such as do lake things necessary that we are able
to help them to. We call upon God for increase of zeal and devotion grounded
upon knowledge. We obey all Magistrates in the Lord, and for the Lord. But how
stands your religion with obedience to magistrates: when you dare assure them
of everlasting life, that will enterprise to murder a prince, as (bisides your
practizes of old, whereof we read in histories) you did of late, assure him
that murdered the Prince of Orendge, and such as should have murdered our
sovereign Lady, that now reigns over us? Yea, that Bull that Felton fixed to
the bishop of Londons gate, does make it manifest, what obedience men of your
mind, do use to show unto Magistrates. Sacrilege we do detest: but you have
taught our Patrons and Princes to rob churches and parishes of tithes, and so
consequently of the food of the soul by due administration of the word and
sacraments, and of the relife of the poor, by liberal hospitality.

Apostacy, we leave to men of your sort which are fallen away from the
ancient, true, and Apostolic catholic church of Christ: and do obstinatly
stand in defense of that schimne that you are fallen into, notwithstanding that
your falling away is made as manifest unto all men, as those things are that
lie open in the clear light of the day. We are careful to keep and perform
that vow that was made in our names when we were baptized: but if any of us
have made an unlawful, or a rash vow, the performance whereof should tend to
ye dishonoring or displeasing of God any way: we do earnestly repent that
ever we made such a vow, choosing rather to stand to the mercy of God in not
performing such a rash and wicked vow, then to commit and greater wickedness in
the perfourming thereof, as Herod and did in cutting of the head of John
Baptist. Math. 14. Mat, 14.


As for unlawful lusts, and wantonness of life and manners, we do flee from,
as it is seemly for Christians. We have learned to possess our vessels
(that is our bodies) in holiness and in honor. Which in deed many of us could
not do, without that remedy that God him self has appointed, which is
honorable and holy Matrimony. Heb. 13. Hebr, 13.
Such therefore amongst us, as otherwise can not have chaste minds in chaste
bodies, do choose to live with chaste wives in chaste marriage: for we have
learned that it is better to marry then to burn. 1. Cor. 7. 1. Cor. 7.
And we know what saint Paul has written to the Ephesians. concerning the
dealing of some of your sort. Ephesians. 5. Ephe, 5.
It is a shame even to speak of those things that they do in secret.

If the indifferent reader will not say, that the vices that you have charged
our profession and religion with, do more clearly agree to the popish
Catholics, then to the protestants, and be in them plain signs and fruits
of false religion: then will I recant and not before.

The two and twenty Offer.
Offerer.

Two and twenty. Let the learned prove unto Lutherans, Zuinglians, Iliricans,
Caluinists, Svvenfeldians, Anabaptists, and such other: or that it might be
called Apostolic, which could never make an account by orderly succession and
descent, from any one of Christ his Apostles, or any other Apostolic man, or
that their secret, hid, and unknown congregation was ever of that majesty or
authority, that it had at any one time or season, the true obedyence of all
christian nations, or that it was ever of that majesty or authority, that it
had at any one time or season, the true obedyence of all christian nations, or
that it was ever able to assemble and gather universal and general counselles
of all nations and Christian people, or to exercise any discipline or
correction upon offenders throughout all kingdoms and regions professing
Christ: or that these titles following properly applied by the scriptures and
doctors to the true church of Christ, could ever be challenged by any right to
their hyd and unknown congregation, I mean these titles: namely, Corpus
Christi, the body of Christ: Sponsa Christi, the spouse of Christ, Amica
Christi, the lover of Christ, Vnice dilecta Christo, dearly beloved of Christ,
Columba speciosa, the beautiful Dove, Domus Dei, the house of God, Columna
veritatis, the Pillar of truth, Ciuitas Dei, the city of God, Ciuitas super
montem posita, a city set upon an hill, Fons signatus, a Spring or Fountain,
surely signed and sealed, Sponsa agni, the spouse of the Lamb, Mulier amicta
sole, a woman clothed with the Sun, Habitatio fratrum inuicem, a dwelling of
brethren all together, Mont Dei, the hill of God, Sacra Anchora, the holy
Anchor: Vinea Domini, our Lords Vyneyarde: Terra viuentium, the Land of the
lyuinge: Ecclesia magna, the great and mighty Church: Arca Noe, Noah's Ark:
Vna, sancta, Catholica, and Apostolic^ Ecclesia, one, Holy, Catholic and
Apostolic Church: Domus pacis, the house of peace: Domus refugij, the house of
refuge: Domus veritatis, the house of truth: Societas Sanctorum, the
fellowship of holy Saints: Nutrix Christianorum, the Norishe of the Christians:
Vxor de latere Christi, the Spouse out of Christ his side, sicut Eua de latere
Adam, like as Eve was out of the side of Adam. Let the learned Protestant make
proof, that these most exellent properties, and peculier denominations and
callinges may possibly agree to their hid and unknown congregations and
private societies, or to any other known society of the whole world, but
only to the holy society, most blessed company and fellowship of the common
known Catholic church of Christ, and I will then relent, yield, and recant,
and not before.

Crowley.

This Offer may be divided into three parts. In the first the Offerer
requires a proof of that which is already proved in the answer to the
seuententh Offer. Wherefore I refer yt reader to that which is written there,
where he shall find that which may satisfy him in that which the Popish
Offerer requires the learn Protestant to prove first. In the second part, he
requires ye Protestant to prove that the church whereof be is, has had at
some one time or other, such power and authority over the whole Christian
world, as the Romish Catholic Antichristian church, has usurped and exercised
and does still claim and exercise, where it may be suffered. To this I do
say, on the behalf of yt learned Protestant: that Christ him self did never
exercise such authority over kingdoms and Nations, as the Antichristian
Popish church has exercised, and does still exercise, so farfoorth as it is
able, and may be suffered. Neither did our Savior Christ, give any such
authority to his Apostles, as to have all Christian Nations under obedience,
or to call them together to general Counsels, or to execute discipline upon
them, and to correct their falts: for that power is given unto Princes, and
Christ did not come to take that power from them, but he has confirmed it in
them. The Apostles therefore, and the Apostolic men that were the immediate
Successors of the Apostles, even as many as God made excellent in his Church,
in the time that was before Antichrist began to show him self in the estate
of the papacy: were contented to leave that power to princes and did both by
doctrine, and by example of life, teach all Christians to show their due
obedience to Princes. But when your Bishops of Rome were become Antichristian:
then they must needs advance them selves above all that is called God (that
is above all Princes) and they must sit in the temple of God, and boast them
selves as though they had bin Gods, that so they might be known to be that
man of sin that Saint Paul meant of, in that he wrote, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. These.
2.


For the third part of this Offer, wherein the Offerer requires the learned
Protestant to prove that the tytles which are in the scriptures and Doctors
given to the church of Christ, could ever be challenged by any right, to
their hid and unknown Congregation, etc. For answer to this: the learned
Protestant: refers the Reader to that answer that he has made to the
seventeenth and to ye eightteenth Offer, with this addition, that if this
Offerer can prove, that ever any of these excellent properties or peculier
denominations and callings, might possibly agree to that known Antichristian
church that he is of: then will this learned Protestant, relent, yield, and
recant, and be an Antichristian Catholic, and not before.

A new Offer, touching the six several signs, that the Offerer calls
certain and sure signs, etc.
Certain and assured signs and tokens of falls prophets, Heretics, and
schismatikes.
Last of all, when these notes following, being most certain and sure signs
and tokens of Antichristians, false Prophets, Heretics, and schismatikes,
mentioned, and manifestly expressed in diverse parts of the scriptures, shall
by the learned protestant be proved more aptly and truly to agree unto us of
the common known church of Christ, then unto the Protestants of so many
sundry and diverse sects and congregations, I shall submit, yield, and recant,
and not before.

Crowley.

When this presumptuous Offerer, shall prove that the Church of Rome that now
is (whereof he glories that he is a member) is the true Catholic church of
Christ, and not Antichristian, Heretical, and schismatic: and that the
notes that he speaks of, do not more aptly and truly agree unto him and to
men of his sort, then unto us that be Protestants, (whom he calls
Antichrists, false Prophets, Heretics, and schismatikes) then will I submit,
yield and recant, and not before.

The first sign and token.
Offerer.

John saying: Ex nobis prodi^runt, 1. John. 2.
sed non erant ex nobis, nam si fuissent ex nobis, permansissent vtique
nobiscum. They departed from us, but they were not of us, for if they had bin
of us (and of our church) they would (says the Apostle S. John) have continued
with us still, and not have departed from us. And now the learned Protestant,
not being able to deny, that they have departed from our common known
Catholic church, from our faith and religion, wherein they were first
baptized, and not we departed from them, but still remaining in the profession
of the same faith and religion that we first received: he must needs by the
drift of Argument and reason grant also, that this first sign and token of
false Prophets, Heretics, and schismatikes was before spoken of the Apostle
S. John, only of them and not of us.

Crowley.

Touching this first sign and token, which this Offerer would appropriate unto
us, as unto Antichristians, false Prophets, Heretics, and schismatikes: I
might very well refer the indifferent Reader to that which I have written in
answer to the tenth Offer. Where I have made it manifest, ye the same faith
and religion that we do profess and practice now, was professed and
practiced in the time of the Apostles, and many years after the ascension of
our savior Christ, although not so purely toward the end of those six
hundredth years, as at the beginning of them, and for the space of 300. years,
and more.

But to let this Offerer and his fellows see wherein they be disceiued: I will
add some thing to ye which I have written there: making it manifest, that this
Offerer and his fellows did depart from us and from our Church, before we did
depart from them and their church. They departed from us and our Church,
without cause: but we did depart from their Church for just cause. When S.
John wrote these words, Ex nobis prodierunt, etc. 1. Ioh. 2.
They went out from us, but they were not of us, etc: the church of Rome was
Catholic, Christian, Holy, and Apostolic. They therefore that did then
depart from them, were Antichristian, and Schismatic: and were not of them
whilse they were amongst them, and therefore they did not tarry with them. And
you and men of your sort, are they, that in the days of Phocas the Emperor,
did openly depart from our Catholic church, and became a schismatic
Antichristian church (or rather Synagogue of Satan) persecuting the true
Catholic church of Christ continually from that day to this.

We therefore being amongst you till it pleased God to open the eyes of our
understanding, so that we might see the abominations of your Antichristian
religion: were not of you, and therefore we did depart from you, not leaving
our Faith and Religion wherein we were baptized, for we were baptized in the
name of Christ, and not of Antichrist. For though God have suffered you to
divise many toys, which you do use in the ministration of baptism: yet he
would never suffer you to alter the institution of that Sacrament, for you do
still baptize in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
And therefore, we seek not to be rebaptized, knowing that the baptism which
we received at your hands, is as effectual as that which we our selves do
minister to our Infants. We are not therefore departed from the true
Catholic church of Christ: but from your Antichristian church, and we are
returned again to that true Catholic church from which your sort departed,
when Boniface the third, took upon him that Antichristian name of universal
bishop. And us (that were borne amongst you) ye have kept from our dear
mother, and have enforced us to taste of the poisoned milk of the dugs of that
purple clothed Whore, your Damme of Rome. But our loving Father has in his
good time, and by his good means, brought us out from amongst you, and
restored us again to our good mother (his dearly beloved spouse) the true
Catholic, Holy, and Apostolic church: out of whose plentiful Dugs we do
daily suck, the sweet, pleasant, and healthsome milk that feeds us unto
everlasting life.

This mother that we are returned to, is that romish Catholic church that
was in the days wherein Saint John wrote those words that you take hold of.
From her did you depart, because you were not her natural children, but
Bastards, borne in her house, but not of her household: and therefore, like a
Bastardly brood you went out of her house, and became most bloody persecutors
of her children, and so you have continued for the space now of a thousand
years almost: yea, and so you do continue still.

By the merciful goodness of our Father, working in us by his holy spirit, we
do now believe, as the children of our mother then in Rome did believe. They
believed then, that there is but one God ye has made all creatures, and him
they glorified in the use of his creatures: and they gave thanks to him alone
for those creatures, and studied to serve him only in spirit and with
spiritual service, flying from the example of the Heathen nations, that
presumed to counterfaite his majesty by Images. To. 1. Romans 1.
and so do we.

They believed and confessed that all men are sinners, and that no man can
justify him self before God: because no man can so keep the law of God, but
that his own conscience shall condemn him as a transgressor, and therefore
they did cleave to the mercy of God, and so do we.

They believed that they were justified (that is, discharged of their sins)
freely by faith, without the deeds of the law: and yet they thought themselves
bound, to do all that God had and should make them able to do, in observing
and fulfilling of the law, and so do we. Romans 2.3.4.5.6.7. Romans 2.3.4.5.6.7.


They believed, that God making choice of them, had in mercy made them his
own children by adoption, inheritors of his kingdom, and heirs annexed with
his only begotten son Christ Jesus: and hereof they were assured by the
spirit of Christ which was given unto them, and cried in their hearts
Abba-pater, Father, Father, and so do we. To. 8. Rom, 8.


They believed, that this election and choice was made, in the fore knowledge
and purpose of God, before they themselves were, and so consequently, before
they either had or could do good or evil: and so do we. Romans 9. Romans 9.


They believed, that as they were by the free mercy of God, Adopted,
Predestined, called, justified, and acquitted of their sins, and in Gods
predestination, glorified, and made like to the Image of his only begotten
son Christ Jesus. Romans 8. Rom, 8.
so their duty was to be careful, to lead a righteous life before men, and
not to be bold to commit sin (because God had in mercy discharged them of
sin) but to live in a reverend awe and fear of his justice, as they that
would show them selves continually thankful for his mercy, in making their
own bodies a Sacrifice to God, living, holy, and acceptable to God, as their
reasonable serving of God. Romans 10.11.12. Romans 10.11.12.
and even so do we.

They believed, that their duty was to submit them selves, to all such as God
had set over them in authority, and to obey them, not only for fear of
punishment, but for conscience sake also: knowing that who soever resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God, and does purchase to him self
damnation. And they believed that their duty was to give every man his own,
and to use loving behavior toward all men: knowing that love is the
fulfilling of the law. And that being baptized, they had apparelled them selves
with Christ, and that they ought to walk and continue their lives in holiness
and in honesty, not making provision for the flesh, to satisfy the lusts
thereof. Romans 13. Romans 13.
and even so do we.

They believed, that although God had given them liberty in the use of all his
creatures: yet their duty was to have a continual regard to the infirmity
of their brethren, and not to use any of those creatures to the offense of any
of them. Romans 14.15. Romans 14.15.
and even so do we.

They believed, that they, together with all other Christians else where in any
part of the world, were fellow members of one body in Christ, and under
Christ alone: acknowledging no universal head of that body, but only Christ
Jesus alone. Romans 12. Romans 12.
and even so do we.

Thus may you see (M. Offerer) that we are not departed from the Catholic
church of Rome, which was in the time of S. John: but from your schismatic
and Antichristian Ramaine church, that did depart from that first Roman
church in the days of Phocas the Emperor, and Boniface the third, your first
Antichristian Pope.

And now, the learned Protestant, having sufficiently proved, that his sort
are not departed from the common known Catholic church, neither from that
faith and religion wherein they were baptized, but do still remain in the
profession of the same faith and religion that they did, by baptism, first
receive: you must needs by the drift of Argument and Reason, grant, that this
first sign and token of false Prophets, Heretics, and Schismatikes, was
before spoken by the Apostle John, only of you and of men of your sort, and
not of the learned Protestant and of his company, For you are fallen from the
faith of the first Roman Church, in that you have reposed trust in Creatures,
and do repose trust in them still. You do call upon them, making prayers to
them. You make Images of them, setting them up in places of honor, and you do
kneel before them: yea, you burn Wax and Incense before them, etc.

You repose trust in your own strength, and persuade your self, that you are
able to fulfill the law of God: and when you have broken any part thereof, you
persuade your self, that you are able by penance that you suffer, to satisfy
to God for the breaking of his law, etc.

Take to your self therefore, this first sign and token of false Prophets,
Heretics, and Schismatikes: we will none of it. It is not ours, but youres,
and you shall have it.

The second sign and token.
Offerer.



Of this sign and token, and great presumption speaks the Apostle Saint
Paul: Quomodo enim praedicabunt nisi mittantur? Romans 10.
How shall men preach except they be sent? And in his Epistle to the Hebrews
he says: Nec quisquam sibi sumit honorem, nisi qui vocatur a Deo, quemadmodum
and Aaron. Let no man take unto him self honor, except he be called of God,
like as Aaron was. Certain it is, that Aaron was called unto the Office and
dignity of a bishop, ordinarily by Moses, Exodus 4.
and by external and visible unction. Moses him self was ordinarily called
and sent of God, approved by miracle, as it appears in the fourth Chapter of
Exodus. And therefore the Apostle S. Paul, names Aaron, and not Moses, to
signify, that all extraordinary vocations by myracies, as ( Moses was) are
now ceased; and we must from henceforth be ordinarily called by external
unction, as Aaron was.

When therefore the learned protestant shall be able to prove their just and
due vocation ordinarily or extraordinarily to proceed of God, and not only of
men, I shall then yield and recant, and not before.

Crowley.

In the first Period, or perfect sentence of this sure mark (as this Offerer
does term it) he charge us unjustly with three crimes. Whereof the first
is, A departing from the Catholic church. The second is, the setting up of a
new faith and religion. And the third is, the assembling of a new church and
congregation. I have in mine answer to the first sign, sufficiently proved,
that not we Protestants, but this Offerer and his fellows, be guilty in
these three points: For they are departed from the true Catholic church, they
have set up a new faith and religion: and they have assembled and set up, and
do still labor to assemble and set up, a new church and congregation.

In the rest of this sure mark of his, he wresteth far out of tune two
sentences that Saint Paul has written, the one to the Romans, and the other
to the Hebrews. To the Romans S. Paul has written thus in the 10. Romans 20.
Chap. Quomodo, etc. How shall men preach, except they be sent? And to the
Hebrews he says thus, Cap. 5. Hebr, 5
Nec quisquam, etc. Let no man take unto him self honor, except he be called
of God, like as Aaron was. By these two places, our Offerer will prove ye we
protestants have no lawful ministers in our Church, because our ministers be
not ordinarily called by outward and visible unction, as Aaron was, and so sent
forth to preach and minister, as their smered and shaven Priests be.

But I hope, the indifferent reader shall plainly see, how violently this man
does rack these sayings of S. Paul, to make them seem to serve his purpose.
In the 10. Cap. of his Epistle to ye Romans: S. Paul makes it plain unto
them, that God does in mercy embrace all men that believing his promise, do
call upon him: and thus he says. Non enim est distinctio Iudaei and Greci: nam
idem Dominus omnium, dives in omnes qui inuocant illum, etc. There is no
difference of Jew, and Greek: for one is Lord of all, and rich toward all,
that do call upon him. For every one whosoever shall call upon ye name of the
Lord shall be saved: how therefore shall they call upon him, in whom they have
not believed? Or how shall they give credit to him, whom they have not heard?
And how shall they hear without a preacher? Esaias, 52.
And how shall they preach except they be sent? as it is written. How glorious
are ye feet of them that preach peace, and that preach good things.

Chrysostom in his 18. Homily upon the Epistle to the Romans, Chrysostom. in
homilia 18. in 10. cap. Ad Romans
and expounding these very words of saint Paul: says thus. Obserua vero,
supra inquit, dixit propheta, quod quisquis inuocauerit nomen domini, salnus
sit futurus. Sed dicet forte quisquam, and quomodo poteru^t inuocare eum in
quem non crediderunt? Deinde and post hanc obiectione^ sequitur ipsius
interrogatio, nimirum quare non crediderint? Post haec and alia obiectio:
poterit enim omnino dici, and quomodo credent, cum non audierint? Atqui
audierunt, inquit. Deinde and alia rursus obiectio. Et quo modo potuissent
audire sine praedicante? Cuius iterum subiungitur solutio. Atqui praedicarunt
multi ad hoc missi scilicet: and vnde manifestum quod isti sint missi illi? Tum
recte prophetam inducit dicentem: Quam speciosi pedes annuntiantium pacem,
annuntiantiu^ bona? Vides, quo modo a praedicationis modo ipsos praedicatores
declaret? Circuibant enim nihil dicentes aliud, quam ineffabilia illa bona,
pacemque quae inter Deum and homines facta erat, etc. In english, Chrysostom
says thus. But mark: He says before, that the prophet has said, ye
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be safe. But some man
peradventure, will say, and how can they call upon him in whom they have not
believed? And then after this objection, follows his question, that is to
say, why have they not believed? And after these words: another objection
follows also: for thus it might be said in deed. And how shall they believe,
when they have not heard? But he says that they have heard. And yet again,
there is another objection. And how could they hear, without a preacher? The
solution whereof is again set down straight after. But many have preached,
which have bin sent for the same purpose. And how is it plainly proved that
these be they that were sent? Then does he very well bring in the prophet
saying. How beautiful are ye feet of them that do declare peace, and that
do declare good things? Do you not see, how he does declare the preachers
themselves, by the manner of their preaching? For they went about, uttering by
speech, none other thing then those ineffable good things, and that peace, that
was made betwixt God and men, etc. Thus far Crysost.

By these words of Chrysostom it is manifest, that in his judgment the note
whereby preachers are known to be sent of God: is the manner of their
preaching. If they preach the unspeakable commodities and benefits, that God
has bestowed upon mankind in the Mediator Christ Jesus, and that peace which
Christ Jesus, the peace maker, ^ath ma^e betwixt God and man: then are they
sent of God (says Chrysostom) for the manner of their preaching does declare
them so to be.

And this judgment of Chrysostom is according to that which S. John has
written in the fourth Chapter of his first Epistle. Charissimi, nolite omni
spiritui credere, 1. John. 4
sed probate spiritus si ex Deo sint: quoniam multi pseudoprophetae exierunt in
mundum. In hoc cognoscitur spiritus Dei. Omnis spiritus qui confitetur Iesum
Christum in carne venisse, ex Deo est: and omnis spiritus qui soluit Iesum, ex
Deo non est, and hic est Antichristus de quo audistis quoniam venit, and nunc
iam in mundo est. Most dearly beloved (says S. John) believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God or no: for many false
prophets are gone out into the world. By this is the spirit of God known.
Every spirit, that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God: and every spirit that deuideth Jesus, is not of God, and the same is
Antichrist, of whom ye have heard that he comes, and even now he is in the
world.

These words of the Apostle S. John, do make manifest and plain that
judgment of Chrysostom: which is, that ye preachers which are sent of God, are
not so well discerned from them that are not sent of God, by any outward sign
or token, as by the manner of their preaching.

If they confess Jesus Christ to be commen in the flesh ( says S. John) then
undoubtedly they be of God: but if they divide Jesus, then without all doubt,
they are not of God, but they are then of Antichrist. But we which be
Catholic Protestants, do confess that Jesus Christ is commen in the flesh,
and the Popish Catholics do deny him to be commen in the flesh: Therefore
we be of God, and be sent of him, and the popish Catholics, are not of
God, neither are they sent of him, but they are of Antichrist, and are his
messengers.

The Offerer and his fellows will deny the latter part of the Minor
proposition (that is) that they deny Christ to be commen in the flesh:
therefore, the learned Protestant must prove it.

For proof that the Popysh Catholic does deny Christ to be commen in the
flesh: the learned Protestant says thus. Who soever does divide Jesus, does
deny him to be commen in the flesh: but the popish Catholic does divide
Jesus: therefore the popish Catholic does deny Christ to be commen in the
flesh.

Here the popish Catholic will deny, that he deuideth Jesus. To this the
learned Protestant must say, that by interpretation Jesus does signify a
Savior. But the popish Catholic does divide the Savior, he does therefore
divide Jesus.

And if the popish Catholic will say, that he deuideth not the Savior, then
the learned protestant must say, that the popish Catholic does ascribe part
of his salvation to Christ, and part to his own works, and to the merits, of
holy Saints. He does therefore divide the Savior: and so consequently, he
denies Jesus to be come in the flesh. For Christ his coming in the flesh was
to save sinners. 1. Timoth. 1. 1. Tim. 1.
Yea, and he was called Jesus, because he should save his people from their
sins. Math. 1. Mat. 1.
And as there is but one God, so there is but one Mediator betwixt God and man,
and the same is the man Christ Jesus. 1. Tim. 2. 1. Timo. 2.
And he it is that has taken upon him our infirmities, and upon whom the
correction due to our sins is fallen, and by whose stripes we are made
whole. Esaias. 53. Esaias, 53.
Yea, and it is he that has trodden the Wynepresse of Gods wrath alone, and
there was none to help him. Esaias. 63. Esaias, 63.


Thus much may the learned protestant conclude against the popish Catholic,
out of the words of S. John, as they he translated out of the Greek and
allowed of by those popish Catholic Fathers of the last general counsel
holden in Trident. If this Offerer or his fellows will find falt with this
translation: Let them take heed of that horrible curse ye those fathers have
denounced, against all such as shall mislike with any thing that ye general
counsel did like well of.

But it may be, that for advantage to be taken against a protestant
Catholic, the holy Father of Rome will dispense with ye decree, and allow
this Offerer to flee to ye greek text, or to some translation that is more
agreeable to the greek then this translation is. But that will not help. For
the greek has it thus. (...). which does not confess: and that is as much as
to say, He that does deny: And by those places of scripture that I have
cited, it appears manifestly, that who soever takes not Christ to be his
only and alone savior, but ascribes some part of his salvation, either to
himself or to some other: the same does in deed deny Christ to be any savior
at all, and so to have taken upon him man's nature, and to be commen in the
flesh.

Thus (by the help of Chrysostom) the learned protestant, has made it plain
to the indifferent reader, that S. Paul, writing thus to the Romans. (How shall
they preach except they be sent?) Had no such meaning as this Offerer does
bear the world in hand that he had. That is: that no preachers can be thought
to be sent of God, but such only as are allowed of, by some popish Prelate.

S. Augustine in his Dialogue of 65. August. in Dialog. 65. questionu^.
questions (if that book may be called his) has this question in the later
end of that book. Quot genera sunt Apostolatus: vel quale nomen sit Apostolus,
volo cognoscere. I am willing to know (says Orosius) how many sorts of
Apostleships there be, or what manner name this name Apostle is. The answer
that saint Augustine is supposed to make, is thus. This name Apostle is
interpreted to signify, sent. Of Apostles or messe^gers there be four sorts
or kings. One sort are sent from God, and not by men: another sort are sent
from God, but yet by me^: a third sort, are sent by men only: and the fourth
sort are sent of them selves. From God only, was Moses sent: from God, and by
man, was Joshua sent: by man only are such sent, as by ye favor of the common
people, are advanced to ye office of priesthood, as in our days many are. Of
themselves are sent, such as be false prophets: then Orosius asks another
question, which is the last question of that book. Quomodo possumus scire, qui
mittatur a Deo? How may we know (says he) who it is that is sent of God?
Augustine answers. Illum cognosce missum a Deo, quem non paucorum hominu^
laudatio, vel potius adulatio eligit, sed illum quem and vita and mores optimi,
and apostolicorum actio commendat sacerdotum: vel etiam qui vniuersorum
populorum iuditio comprobatur, qui non appetit praeesse, qui nec pecuniam dat
vt Episcopatus honorem acquirat. Nam qui praeesse festinat, quidam patrum
eliganter expressit dicens: sciat se non esse Episcopum, qui praeesse cupit,
non prodesse. In english thus, Know this, that not ye man, whom the
commendation, or rather ye flattery of a few men does choose, but he whom
both life and manners of the best sort, and the action of Apostolic priests
does commend, is sent of God: or else that man that is allowed of by the
judgment of all people, such a one as desires not to bear rule, and that does
not give money that he may obtain the honor of a bishop. For he that is hasty
to bear rule, is by one of the Fathers, finely painted out in this saying: let
that man that coueteth to bear rule, and not to do good: know that he is no
bishop.

In these words of S. Augustine, it appears, that in his judgment, it is not
the ordinary calling and external unction, that we should look unto, when
we be desirous to know, what preachers be sent of God: but it is their good
life, and the good liking that good men have of them: yea, and the good opinion
that all men are enforced to have in them, because they see in them no sign of
ambition, or desire of honor, but contrariwise, that they are desirous to be
occupied in doing good. By these signs (says S. Augustine) ye shall know
that they are sent of God. So that as Chrysosostome says, that they are known
by the manner of their preaching: so S. Augustine does say, that they are known
by their life.

But now, the Offerer (or some of his friends) will say, that S. Augustine is
against us in these words, Et apostolicorum actio commendat sacerdotum. In
english thus. And such a one as the action of the Apostolic priests does
commend. These Apostolic priests, must needs be popish Catholics, (in the
judgment of this Offerer and his fellows:) for with them, only Peter is the
Apostle: and Rome, the Apostolic seat, because (as they imagine) Peter was
bishop there 25. year, and left his power, and authority there with his
immediate successor. But who was that successor, they are not yet agreed: for
some of them say it was Clement, and some say it was Limus. But this is their
conclusion: that whosoever is bishop of Rome, must needs have Peter's authority
by succession in that seat, although he be in life, and doctrine, never so
unlike, or contrary to Peter. And none may be accounted Apostolic, but such as
be of or under the obedience of that Apostolic succession: but by ye
circumstance of S. Augustines words, it appears that he takes them for
Apostolic priests, that are most like unto the Apostles in life and in
doctrine, and in painful travel, and in continual care to do good in ye
Church of Christ. Such are not the popish Catholics, for all their care is
(as in the Decrees of their general Counselles it does appear) to advance
them selves in degree, above all other sorts of men, and to maintain them
selves in that high estate. And they are even the same men that are spoken unto
in those last words that I have cyted out of S. Augustine: sciat se non esse
Episcopum, qui praeesse cupit, non prodesse. Let that man, which coueteth to
bear rule, and not to do good, know: that he is no bishop.

But let us now see what this Offerer has cited out of the fifth Chapter to
the Hebrews. Heb. 5.
Nec quisquam sibi sumit honorem, nisi qui vocatur a Deo, quemadmodum and
Aaron. No man takes honor unto him self, except he be called of God, as
Aaron was. First I must note, that this Offerer has not dealt simply, in that
he has translated these wroodes thus: let no man take unto him self, etc. For
by this translation, it seems to be a commandment given, or a rule set
down by the Apostle: which rule must needs be kept in the admitting of all
such as shall be ministers in the church of Christ. So that who soever is not
admitted according to that rule, may not be taken for a Catholic minister,
nor his ministration allowed of.

But let us see in what meaning the Apostle did write the words. The
circumstance of the text does make it plain, that the Apostles purpose was to
prove, that Aarons priesthood was at an end, and that the high priests that
had bin made after the Order of Aaron, were far inferior unto Christ, that
is our high Priest, not after the Order of Aaron, but of Melchizedech. And yet
our Savior Christ was no usurper: for he was called of God as Aaron was. And
herein he was like unto Aaron. But in that Aaron, and such as were made high
Priests after his Order, did offer Sacrifice for their own sins, Christ was
nothing like them, for he neded not to offer for any sins of his own, since
there was no sin in him.

But how makes this for our Offerers purpose? The Apostles meaning was to
prove that Aarons Priesthood was now come to an end, and must now give place
to the Priesthood of Christ, which should never have an end. And our Offerer
would prove by this place, that all such immediate callinges, such as the
calling of Moses was (wherein God used no mean) are now ceased: and that we
must from henceforth, be ordynarily called by external unction, as Aaron
was. And what is this other, then to set up the carnal Priesthood of Aaron
again, and to disanull the spiritual and everlasting Priesthood of Christ,
directly contrary to the meaning of the Apostle in this place alleged by this
Offerer?

We do not hold or teach, that every man may thrust himself into the
ministry without orderly calling: or that any man may take unto himself the
honor of ye calling, not being called of God as Aaron was: but we do both
hold and teach, that such as shall minister in the Church of Christ have an
inward calling from God, and be outwardly admitted by man. But that this
admission must be by outward unction: such as was used in Arons Preesthoode,
or such as the Antichristian Catholics have devised, and do use, that we
do flatly deny, because the Apostles never taught any such manner of
admission, S. Paul has taught. 1. Timoth, 3. 1, Timot, 3,
That such only are to be admitted into the ministry, as be qualified so as
in that place he has prescribed: Yea none is admitted, but such as do confess
that they are inwardly drawn there unto, and have determined to continue the
whole course of their life in that service of God, and to employ themselves
wholly therein, seeking to set forth Gods glory in the edification of his
Church. And then they are not admitted without invocation and prayers made unto
God, and imposition of hands, and such other Ceremonies as have some ground or
foundation in the holy scriptures. Which we use not as things of necessitye,
that may not be altered or left: but as things indifferent, which may be
used so long as the use of them may edify, and left when such as have
authority over us shall see the contrary. But your Antichristian unctions, we
can no skyll of.

Thus having proved (as I think) sufficiently, that we Catholic
Protestants, not being departed from the first Roomish catholic Church, but
continuinge in the same faith and religion, that was professed and holden by
that catholic Church: are not Schismatic, but catholic: And have our
authority from Christ, as that first Roomish catholic Church had, and do by
that authority call and admit such ministers, as by such outward tokens as
saint Paul has mentioned, 1. Timoth, 3. do appear or seem unto us to be
called of God. And haueing thus admitted them: we appoint them to minister in
the church of Christ, (so nighe as possibly may be) even according as Christ
Jesus commanded his Apostles to minister his word and Sacraments.

Now M. Offerer, having thus proved our just and due vocation, ordinarily to
proceed of God: I require you to yield and to recant, as you have promised to
do.

The third sign or token of false Prophets.
Offerer.

The third sign and token, of false Prophets, Heretics and Sismatickes, is,
that they being first departed from the Catholic Church, and secondarily not
called, do forthwith all of themselves preach and teach contentiously and
sediciously against the doctrine before time taught of the common known
Catholic Church of Christ, as against the Sacraments of Christ his Church,
by a flat denial of many of them, against the real presence of Christ his
body in the holy Eucharist, against the blessed sacrifice of the Mass
propitiatory both for the live and dead, against penance, and the worthy
fruits thereof, by fasting, watch, prayer, and all straightnes of life,
against vows, invocation of Saints, prayer for souls departed, and finally
against the Church it self, flatly denying, that Christ has here upon earth
any spouse or visible Church here to be heard speak, perceived or seen. The
Apostle S. Paul in admonition giving unto us, to be ware of this sign and
token says: Hebr, 13,
Doctrinis varijs and peregrinis, nolite abduci. Be not you led and carried
away with these diverse and strange doctrines: so termed of the Apostle S. Paul,
because they are not agreeing, but contrary to the received and common known
doctrine of Christ his catholic Church. When therefore the learned Protestant
shall be able to prove, that they and their congregations are not the raysers
up of these contentions and strifes, by their preaching of these straung
doctrines, but we, that are members of the Catholic Church, then I will
submit and recant, and not before.

Crowley.

To the first part of this sign or token, this Offerer may think himself
sufficiently answered already, more then once. We Protestant Catholics, are
not departed from the true Catholic Church, neither are we without our
ordinary calling from God, and by men. Being ordinarily thereunto called: we
do preach, not contentiouslye and seditiously, but constantly and sincerely.
Not against that doctrine which in time paste has been taught in the commonly
known Catholic Church of Christ: but against the new doctrine of Antichrist,
preached in the commonly known Antichristian catholic Church.

Against the Sacraments of Christ we preach not, neither do we flatly deny
any of them: but we do teach the right use of them, and we do deny those
other to be Sacraments, which your antichristian Church has enforced upon us
as Sacraments, which do not agree with the definition of a Sacrament. As is
already declared, in the answer to the first and to the eleauenth offers.

Against the real presence of Christ's body in the holy Eucharist after that
gross and carnal manner that you do teach it to be present: we do preach in
deed, and are by S. Augustine admonished so to do. Ad Dardanum. Epist, 57.
August. Epistle, 57.
Cauendum est, etc. We must take heed, that we do not so build up the
divinity of the manhood in Christ: that we do take away the truth of his
body. We do know, and we do teach, that our Savior Christ is present in
the holy Eucharist, and does therein exhibit himself to the worthy receiver,
that is to the faithful, that has by due examination prepared himself, and
so comes to the Lords table and receives that holy Eucharist. And we teach
ye such a one so prepared, receives as the faithful Apostles did Panem
Dominum: that bread which is the Lord. But the unfaithful, do as Judas did,
receive Panem Domi^i contra Dominum. The Lords bread against the Lord.
Augustine, Tract, in John, 59. Against the Sacrifice of the Mass, which you
do call blessed, August. in Ioh, Tract. 59
and propitiatory, both for the live and the dead, we do preach in deed:
and that not without just cause. For in the tenth chapter of the Epistle to the
Heberews, Hebr, 10,
it is written. That Christ Jesus has by one Sacrifice made perfect as many as
be made holy. And that the divine majesty, has so blotted out the sins of his
elected, so made perfect, that he will never remember them any more: 1 John,
2,
and yt therefore there is no more sacrifice for sin. And in the second chapter
of S. John's first Epistle, we are assured, that Christ Jesus the righteous, is
the propitiation for our sins. Your opinion therefore concerning a Sacrifice
propitiatory to be offered in your Mass: is blasphemous, and does derogate
from the glory of Christ, who is our only mediator, whose mediation is
sufficient, and needs no help of your massing Preesthoode. Your penance
also, is in some part blasphemous, as in that you teach your ghostly children
to satisfy to God for their sins by such works as you enjoin them to do.
And the fruits thereof (which you call worthy) as fasting, watchinge, praying,
and all straightnes of life, are supersticious and Hipocriticall: and therefore
we speak against them. Your vows, your invocation of Saints, and your prayers
for the souls departed, are superfluous, and in your meaning, superstitious,
and in very deed very wicked and blasphemous. For what need has a Christian
to add any vow, to that which is made in baptism, since no man can truly
say, that either he has or could perform that vow so, but that God might
justly charge him with the lack of performaunce thereof? That vow is to
forsake the devil and all his works and pompes, the vanities of the wicked
world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. To believe all the articles of
the Christian faith: and to keep all the commandments of God, all the days
of our life. If this vow be so straight, that not one amongst thousands can
be sound that does not fail in performing of it: then is it more then
superfluous to add any other, which may seem to be more straight, and hard
to be performed then this is, or seem to be. Your praying unto Saints also
is superfluous. For God himself, that is all sufficient, and able to do for
us all that we do or can desire, yea and much more then we can devise to
crave of him, has commanded us to call upon him: yea and he has promised to
hear us, and to give us cause to glorify him for our deliverance. In the 50.
Psalm, Psalm, 50.
the prophet David says thus in the person of God himself: Jnuoca me in die
tribulationis, erua^ te, and honorificabis me. Call upon me in the day of thy
trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shall honor me. And in ye Psalm, 81, Open
thy mouth wide, Psalm, 81, and, 145.
and I will fill it. And in ye Psa, 145. The Lord is hard at hand with every one
that calls upon him, wc eueryone ye calls upon him faithfully. Esaias ye
Prophet cha, 63. Esaias, 63,
Made his prayer unto God, not to Abraham, not to Isacke, not to Jacob. The
apostle Paul bowed his knees (that is to say, he prayed) to the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that is the divine majesty, not to the Saints or holy
Angels. Ephe, 3. Ephesians, 3,
Our Savior Christ teaching his scholars how they should pray, says thus
When thou will pray, enter into thy chamber, and when thou have shut thy door
pray unto thy father in secret, and thy father which sees in secret shall
give unto thee. And again he says. On this wise therefore shall you pray. Our
father which art in heaven, etc. Math, 6. Math, 6.
By these places of Scripture and many other, we are encouraged to make our
prayers unto God: and to be assured that he does hear us, and that he will
grant our peticions. For he is both able and ready to help us: as a most
mighty and merciful father. It is therefore a thing altogether vain and
superfluous and unnecessary to make any prayers to any other.

In like manner, it is a thing altogether unnecessary to make prayers for the
souls departed. For if they be departed in the Lord, they be happy, and
blessed as we are certified by that voice which came from Heaven Apo, 14.
Apoc, ^^.
And on the contrary, if they departed not in the Lord: then are they most
unhappy and cursed, so that thereis no salvation for them. Nothing that we can
do, can profit them. So that in the one case, they do not stand in need of
our prayers: and in the other, our prayers can do them no good. Your prayer
therefore for the dead, is altogether superfluous, and unnecessary. Your
opinion in this point, is grounded upon no Canonical Scripture, but upon an
imagination that you have conceived, concerning ye meaning of Judas Machabaeus,
2. Match, 12 2, Match, 12.
Of what authority ye book is, may appear in that which Saint Hierome has
written in his preface upon the books of Salmon. Hierom, praef. in pruden.
Solomon.
Thus has Saint Hierome written there. Sicut ergo Judith, and Tobiae, and
Machabeorum libros, legit quidem Ecclesia, sed eos inter canonicas scriptura;
non recipit: sic and haec duo volumina, etc. In English thus Even as the Church
does (in deed) read the books of Iudeth and Tobias, and of the Machabies,
but does not receive them amongst the cannocall Scriptures: even so, she may
read these two books, (meaning the Book of wisdom and Ecclesiasticus) to
the edifying of the people, but not for the confirming of Ecclesiastical
doctrine. By this it appears, that the foundation of your imagination, is
very weak, and not sufficient to bear that weighty buildinge that you do
lay upon it. Which is as weighty as an article of our faith. The authority of
that book, may be seen also, even in the last lines of the book: wherein
the author does show himself to stand in doubt, whether he had done so well
as he wished to do: and in case he had not, he craves pardon at the hands of
his readers And he uses a similitude to move his readers to pardon him. Which
is not found in any of the writers of the Canonical Sriptures. And in the
latter part of the 14. Chapter of that second book of ye Machabies, 2, Macha,
14,
theris great commendation given to one Razias, for that he did murder
himself: which can not make for the credit of the author of the book,
neither of ye matter contained in ye book. But let ye book be of as great
authority as this Offerer would with it to be: what has Judas Machabaeus done,
that may move us to think that he had any such meaning, as this Offerer and
his fellows do imagine ye he had. The Historian says, that after the Army
of Gorgias, was by the mighty power of God put to flight: Judas (having
gathered his army together) came to the City Odolla. And when the seventh
day was come, and they were purified, 2, Match, Chap, 12.
according to the custom: they did in the same place spend the time of the
Saboth. And the next day following, Judas came with his company, to take up the
dead bodies of them that were slain, and to bury them with their fathers, in
the burial places that belonged to them. And they found under the garments of
them that were slain, certain of the gifts that had been offered to the
idols that were at Iamnia, from which the law had commanded the Jews to
abstain. It was therefore made manifest to al men: that this was the cause
wherefore they were slain. The whole company therefore, did commend the just
judgment of the Lord: which had made manifest the deeds that had been
hid, and kept secret. And so they gave themselves to prayer: and besought
God, that the fault which had been committed, might be blotted out of
memory. But, the most valiant man Judas, exhorted the people to keep
themselves without sin, having even before their eyes those things that had
happened, for the sins of them that were slain. And having ended his
Collation, he sent to Jerusalem 12, thousand drachmas of silver: that
sacrifice might be offered for the sins of them that were dead. Thus far
goes the report of that which was done by Judas Machabaeus.

This is translated out of that latin text that the Tridentine council has
allowed of, which text this Offerer and his fellows, may not disalowe of. In
the Greek the sense is uncertain, and hardly can there any certain sense be
gathered in this place. And this one thing I must note, that where as this
vulgar translation has 12. thousand drachmas, the Greek has but two
thousand drachmas, which together with the rest of the circumstaunces of the
text, do cause me to think, that Judas needed not to make any collection of
money to be sent to Jerusalem. For y^ ^^m being no greater, he might very well
spare it out of his own treasure, as it may be supposed. Having therefore ended
his collation or concion which he made to the whole company of his Soldiers,
that then were about him (wherein he exhorted them to consider of that which
had happened, and to take warning thereby, to be careful to keep themselves
from sin, lest the like should fall upon them also) he sent that sum of
money to Jerusalem, that Sacrifice might be offered there, for the sins of
them that were dead. Slain (by the just judgment of God) for that contrary
to the law, they had taken to their own use, some of those things that had
been offered to the Idolles of Iamnia.

But what? Shall we think that Judas Machabeus (being a man so precise in
observing the law of God, as in this History it does appear that he was)
would cause any new kind of Sacrifice to be devised, or that he would cause
any of those Sacrifices, that Moses had by Gods direction commanded to be
offered: to be used for any other purpose, then for those purposes, that God
himself had ordained them for? If you will read the whole Leuiticall law
throughout: you shall not find, that ever God did command any Sacrifice to be
offered for sin, other then that which is called a sin offering, and was to
be offered for penitent sinners, in such sort as the law does prescribe,
which was in the presence of the penitent sinner him self, laying his hand
upon the head of the Sacrifised beast, thereby signifying that it was he that
had deserved that death, which that innocent beast was there and then to
suffer. The sacrifice therefore, which Judas would have to be offered at
Jerusalem, must needs be of that kind which is called a peace offering: and
was to be used for the pacifying of Gods wrath, which should at any time, by
any occasion, be bent, either against the whole people, or against any one
sort of the people, for any offense committed amongst them. Judas therefore,
considering, that God might in justice (as often times he had done) visit the
sin of the fathers upon the children, even to the third and fourth
generation, in them them that committing willing and wilful sin, had showed
themselves to be haters of his majesty: feared least this just judgment should
be executed upon such amongst his people, as remained yet alive, and were of
the posterity of them that were already slain, for that wickedness that they
had committed.

The writer of the history therefore, has done great wrong to Judas, in
that which he adds to the end of this part of this History. Bearing his
readers in hand, that Judas meant to redeem by Sacrifice, the sin that the
flayne had committed, and to teach, that to pray for the dead, that they may
be released of their sins, is an holy, and an wholesome cogitation.

Thus, if this offerer and his fellows will, they may see, upon how slender a
foundation, their opinion conceruing praying for the souls departed, is
builded. I do conclude therefore, that their vows, their invocation of
saints, and praying for souls departed, are superfluous: Yea and as they have
conceived opinion of them: superstitious, and as they do use them, very
impious.

But finally, this Offerer does charge us with speaking against the Church it
self: flatly denying, that Christ has here upon earth, any spouse or visible
Church, to be heard speak, perceived or seen. Here I must say, that this
Popish offerer does offer the Protestants open wrong, in charging them with
that which never any one amongst them (that is learned) has affirmed, spoken
or thought. It may be, that some such amongst the Protestants, as have not had
the knowledge of the art of reasoning, have been by captions manner of
reasoning brought into such a mase that they could not deliver themselves from
the captious Arguments, that these subtyle Popish Catholics do use to
frame. And so have seemed to be convinced, and enforced to grant, that Christ
has no visible Church here upon earth: but such amongst the Protestant
Catholics as do know how to answer such captious arguments, are able and
have always been able, to use such distinction as by the Art of reasoning
are allowed to be used, and thereby to make it plain, to as many as be not
wilfully blind, that Christ's Church that is here upon earth, may in one respect
be said to be visible, and in another respect, ye same Church may be said to
be invisible.

2. Timot, 2.
The Apostle Paul, writing to Timoth, 2, Epist, 2, chapter says thus. Firmum
fundamentum Dei stat, habens signaculum hoc. Cognouit dominus qui sunt sui,
etc. The foundation of God, stands firm and sure, and has this sure seal.
The Lord does know who be his. And let that person that calls upon the name
of the Lord, depart from evil. Here the Apostle Paul does make ye Church of
Christ (here on earth) invisible: as known only to the Lord, and not unto any
man. For none but only God does know, (or can know) who they be, whom he
has chosen to be enheritors of his kingdom. Yea none but only God, which
has chosen them before the beginning of ye world. And such only are, that
Church that may rightly be called ye church of Christ. And such have a care to
do, as Saint Paul does there exhort, when he says: Let every one that
calls upon the name of the Lord, depart from evil. And in so doing, they
do in some sort make it known unto men, that they be the elected and chosen
children of God. But this knowledge can not be so certain, that any one man
may be thereby assured of the election of an other, because he sees him depart
from evil. For gods sercet election can not be certainly known by any outward
signs: and therefore, the church of Christ (as it consists of ye number, that
God has in his secret election appointed to be enheritors of his kingdom) may
rightly be said to be inuisile, as known only to God, and unknown unto men.

2, Timoth, cap. 2,
But as it follows in the same text of S. Paul to Timoth. As in a great house
there are vessels, not only of gold and of silver, but of timber and of
clay also, some appointed to honest uses and some to dishonest: even so is it
in the Church of Christ (which is the household of God) some are of one sort,
and some of an other. And this mixed multitude is visible, and known to be
that number of people that bears the name of Christ and is called christian.
And in this multitude are those elected and chosen children of God that may
rightly be called ye church of Christ: and in this respect, may ye secret
church of Christ, be called visible. Math, 13.


This thing does our Savior Christ set forth plainly in the parable of the
net, that being cast into the sea does draw together fishes of all sorts: but
when this net is drawn to the shore, the fisher men do choose out the good
fishes, and cast away the other as unprofitable. And again in the parable of
ye field: both the good grain and the tares do grow together, and the
feelde is called the corn feeld, and not the feelde of tares, till the time of
the Harvest be come: but then the good grain is gathered into barnes, and the
tares are bound in bundles to be burnte in the fire. Even so the open and
known church, (which is visible, seen and heard) consisting of men, women,
and children of all sorts: continues, and shall continue a myxed multitude
even till the harvest (which is the end of the world) shall come. And then he
that now does (alone) know his chosen Church, shall make the same known to
all men, by receiving them to himself, and by refusing of the rest.

Thus this Offerer and his fellows may see how the Church of Christ may be
said to be invisible, and yet not denied to be visible. But it is manifest
what stone it is that these men do stumble at. They are persuaded, that the
Church of Christ, must needs be always in such floorishing estate here on
earth, as the Church of Room is now, and as it has continued for many years
together: But they should consider, that the woman ye S. John saw Apoc, 12.
Apoc. 12.
was driven into wilderness by the cruelty of the Dragon, (as I have noted in
mine answer to the ninth offer) and yet she is still clothed with the Sun,
and has the moon under her feet, and is crowned with the 12. stars. Yea
she is the City situated on the hill, the light of the world, and the candle
set on the candlestick: as she was even in those days of horrible
persecution, when the Bishops of Room, had no dwelling place in Room, nor the
Christians in Room, any open Church to meet in, for their exercise of
Christian religion. Look well to that which I have written in answer to the
ninth offer: and then I hope you will not charge us as you have done.

As touching ye admonitton that S. Paul gave to the Hebrews, Hebr, 13.
in the 13, Chapter of that Epistle: I wish you to weighe it well, and to
consider the time, and what doctrine was usual in that time wherein the words
of that admonition were written. Which if ye would do, you should find that
your doctrine, for the real presence of Christ's body in the holy Eucharist:
for the Sacrifice of the mass, and the propitiation of sins, both of the
quick and the dead thereby: for your penance, with the fruits thereof: your
straightnes of life, your vows, invocation of Saints, and your prayer for
souls departed, and such like: are the various and strange doctrines, that
Saint Paul does warn you of. For all those doctrines were straung in those
days, and scarcely was any one of them heard of. Think therefore that S.
Paul says unto you be not led or carried away, with the diverse and straung
doctrines, of Transubstantiation, of massing for the quick and the dead, of
satisfying for sins, by penance enjoined by a ghostly father, by fasting,
watching, praying, vowing, inuocating of Saints, etc. For they are not
agreeing, but contrary to, the received and commonly known doctrine of
Christ's Catholic church. When ye Popish antichristian catholics can be
able to prove that the high Preests, Scribes and Phariseis, were not the
raysers up of those contentions and strifes, that were styrred up, in the
days wherein Christ and his apostles preached in Jerusalem and Iewrie, but
Christ and his apostles, by preaching the doctrine of the Gospel. And that the
contentions and strifes, that have been, and be still styrred up in our
days, have not been, nor are still styrred up by them, by their preaching and
maintayning of their strange doctrines of transubstantiation and such like: but
by us, that being members of the most ancient Catholic Church do preach the
same catholic doctrine, that Christ and his Apoles did preach and none other:
then will I recant and become a Papist and not before.

And because I have (in the judgment of all indifferent readers) sufficiently
proved, that which this Offerer has in this Offer required the learned
Protestant to prove: I do require him to do as becomes an honest man in
performing his promise. Which is to submit him self, and to recant, although
hitherto he have refused so to do.

The fourth sign and token of false Prophets.
Offerer.

Fourth sign and token of false Prophets, Heretics Schisma in Ecclesiam
introducere. To bring into the Church of Christ by their doctrine, schism,
division and separation of one member from another, and of the whole mistical
body from the true head Jesus Christ. For where as the health and salvation of
Christ his flock and people does most cheefely consist in peace, concord, and
unity, they therefore which by Schism do divide and disperse his flock, and
of one society and fellowship before, do make many and diverse, they in not
spareinge nor preserving in unity the flock of Christ, are become ravening
Wolves. The Apostle S. Paul knowing the great danger and hurt vprising of
Schism, does most humbly beseech us with all dilligent circumspection to
avoid the same, saying: Obsecro vos fratres per nomen domini nostri Jesu
Christi, vt idipsum dicatis omnes, and no^ sint in vobis schismata, sitis autem
perfecti in eodem sensu, and in eadem sententia. 1. Cor, 1.
I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you say all
one thing, and that there be no schism amongst you, but be perfect in one
mind, and one meaning. Now if the learned Protestant shall be able to prove,
that where as about the time of threescore years and above, we were all (not
only in this realm, but universally in all other realms professing Christ) of
one church of one faith and religion, and of one unity therein: if he shall be
able to prove, that this late Schism, whereby we are so divided and
dispersed, that some are become Lutherans, some Zuinglians, some Caluinists,
some Puritans and Annabaptists, did proceed from us, and from the common
known Catholic Church of Christ, and not wholly from their private Church and
congregations, and of the deceitful and false doctrine by them preached and
taught, I shall then stay no longer, but yield and recant, and not before.

Crowley.

They that be the bringers of Schisms and divisions into the Church of Christ,
etc? may rightly be said to be false Prophettes, Heretics, and Schismatiques.
And the apostle Paul does very well and loouingly exhort and beseech us, even
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be all of one mind and that there be
no Schisms amongst us, etc. But now, the learned Protestant must prove that
the late Schism (whereby the people of all Christian realms, are divided into
Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluinistes, Puritans and Anabaptists,) did proceed
from the common known Catholic Church of Christ, and not wholly from the
Protestants congregations and from their deceitful doctrine: otherwise, there
is no hope that ever this Offerer will recant and yield.

Well, let us see what may be said to this offer. First (as I do understand
the words of this Offerer) he affirms that till it was within the space of
threescore, and some odd years, last past, there had been no Schism brought
into the Church of Christ: so that before that time, al were of one Church, of
one faith and religion, and of one unity therein. And thus he has discharged
all those old Heretics yt troubled the Church of Christ in the beginning of
ye preaching of the Gospel amongst the nations, and from thense forth, till it
was within threescore and odd years, before the time wherein he made this
offer. None of them may be taken for false Prophets, Heretics, or
Schismatiques: if this be the meaning of this offerers words, as I think it
must needs be. But how soever this offerer and his fellows, do account of
these men that then brought Schisms into the Church of Christ: we Protestants
do deem them to be false Prophets, Heretics, and Schismatickes, yea and
members of antichrist, and we do by all means possible shun their doctrine,
and teach all other Christians to shun them also.

It may be that this offerer meant not of any other false Prophets, Heretics
or Schismatickes: then such as have troubled the Church of Christ within these
threescore and odd years last past: and therefore he begins with Luther,
Zuinglius, etc. But if that were his meaning, then I must tell him, that he and
his fellows (the antichristian catholics) are the false Prophets, Heretics
and Schismatiques, that have troubled the Catholic Church of Christ all this
while, and many hundrethes of years before, even ever since the days of
Phocas the Emperor, and the days of Boniface the third, their first
Apostatate Bishop of Room.

As for Luther. Zuinglius, and Calvin, they did but depart from the
antichristian Schismatic Church, wherein then had been fostered, and joined
themselves to the true catholic Church of Christ: even as the Apostle Paul
leaving the Hipocriticall profession of a Pharisey, wherein he had been brought
up even at the feet of Gamaliell (the good Pharisey) joined himself to the
Church and religion of Christ, which was not a forsaking of the law, but a
cleaving unto him that is the perfection of the Law.

Luther, Zuinglius, and Calvin, did not take upon them to be authors of any
new religions: but they embraced, and labored to maintain, that old
religion, that had been planted by the Apostles, and professed by their
immediate. successors. And as they could, they did endeavor, to purge it of al
such filth as you (M. Offerer,) and your predissessors had begrimed it with.

If in this business, they did not so well in all points as they wished: yet
their meaning being good, they are to be held excused. Though they did now
and then build timber, straw and stubble: yet so long as they did lay no new
foundation, but did set all their building, upon the rock Christ which is the
right foundation, and the only foundation, for Christians to build upon: they
shall be saved, as S. Paul has assured us. 1, Cor, 3. 1, Cor, 3.


We Protestant Catholics, do esteem of these men, none otherwise, then as
of faithful laborers in the Lords harvest, and careful followers of Christ
Jesus. If they did in any point go astray (as being men they might, and
undoubtedly did) our profession is not to follow them. Their profession was to
follow Christ, and so is ours.

The learned Protestant therefore may conclude, that not the known catholic
Church of Christ, but ye known antichristian Church of Room (whereof this
Offerer and his fellows are members) have by their doctrine, brought into the
Church of Christ, Schism Division and separation of one member from another,
and of the whole mystical body, from the true head Jesus Christ. For you
enforce all such as will enjoy any outward peace in this life, to submit
themselves to the state of the papasie, as to their universal head here upon
earth, directly contrary to the commandment of Christ, Math, 23. Math, 23,
See that you do not name any man, your common father upon earth: for one is
your father which is in heaven. Neither be ye called masters: for Christ only
is your master. If we will enjoy peace amongst you, we must learn to say
thus. Our most holy father the Popes holiness: is head of the universal Church
of Christ. And we must acknowledge, that his college of Cardinals, and the
Prelates, that he calls together in his general councelles, binding them by
an oath to maintain the estate of your antichristian Church, are our masters
or teachers (for such masters our savior Christ spoke of at that time) and
what so ever they shall teach, that must we believe, although we do know and
see, that they do teach directly contrary to that which is taught by the holy
ghost in the Scriptures.

The peace therefore, the concord, and the unity, that you do maintain is
not in verity and truth: but in impiety and false religion. By your Schism,
(wherein you are grown exceeding strong) you have dispersed the flock of
Christ, which was at the first but one society and fellowship. In not sparing
nor preserving the unity of that flock: you have made your selves known to
be, the same ravening wolves, that the Apostle S. Paul spoke of Acts, 20.
Act, 20.
Ego scio, (says S. Paul) I do know, that after my departing from you
raueninge wolves shall enter in amongst you, not sparing the flock. And from
amongst your selves, there shall rise up men that shall utter froward
speeches, that they may draw scholars after them.

Not from the common known Catholic Church of Christ therefore (whereof we
Protestants are members) but from the now known antichristian Church (whereof
this offerer and his fellows are members) did that Schism, proceed, that
this Offerer speaks of. For by the deceitful and false doctrine that they
have taught, and by their bloody tyranny they have drawn many from the unity
in Christ (which is the verity) and joined them to the Schism of Antichristian
impiety.

This matter being made so plain, as to me it does seem to be: I do
think, that every indifferent reader here of, will in his heart say thus to
this Offerer: for shame stay no longer, but yield and recant out of hand, lest
the heavy wrath of God fall upon thee, for that thou have not yielded and
recanted before.

The fifth sign and token false Prophets.
Offerer.

Fifth sign and token of false Prophets, Schismatickes, and Et non obedire, sed
resistere eis qui praesunt in Ecclesia Dei. And not to obey, but resist those
which do bear rule, and govern in the Church of God: of the which sort of
men, the Apostle S. Paul gives us warning: Quemadmodum Iamnes and Mambres
restiterunt Moysi, ita and hi resistunt veritati, homines corrupti mente,
reprobi circa fidem. 2. Timot, 5. Exodus, 7
Like as Iamnes and Mambres did resist Moises, even so do these resist the
truth, being men of corrupt mind, and reprobates in faith. Now, when the
learned Protestant shall be able to prove, that this rebellion and disobedience
to all Bishops, Prelattes, and ecclesiastical gouerners, is to be found in the
chatholick Church and not in the private Church and congregations of the
Protestants, then I shall yield, submit and recant, and not before.

Crowley.

As obedience is more acceptable in Gods sight, then sacrifice, 1. Regum, 15.
1, Reg. 15
even so there can nothing displease him more then disobedience does. But we
may not hereof conclude, that God is so displeased with every disobedience, as
he was with Saules disobedience, when he did contrary to that which he had
commanded him to do: neither every obedience is so acceptable to God, as that
obedience should have been, if Saul had done in all points, even as God
had commanded to him to do. For that obedience only is acceptable to the
Lord, that is done in the Lord, and for the Lords cause: and obedience in
doing that which the Lord has forbidden to be done, and in leaving that
undone, which the Lord has commanded to be done, is not to be accounted for
obedience, but is in deed disobedience.

Let us see therefore what manner of disobedience it is, that this offerer has
charged us with. Even such as was in Iamnes and Mambres when they did resist
Moses. By conjecture, these two that S. Paul names in the third Chap. of his
second Epistle to Timoth: were the Sorcerers that strove against Moses in
Egypt, and did by their sorcerie, work such wonders (in outward appearaunce)
as Moses did by the mighty power of God in very deed, as in the 7. Exodus, 7,
and, 8
and 8. Chapters of Exodus, it appears. But Moses does not name those
sorcerers, neither are they named in any History of the Scriptures: wherefore
it may be thought, that S. Paul had some other writings then are now extant,
whereby he gat the knowledge of the names of those sorcerers that did so
withstand Moses. But how so ever Moses came by their names: this offerer has
not taken their names aright, for both the translation that the Tridentine
council has allowed of, and the Greek text have Iannes and not Iamnes: and
the Greek text has Iambres and not Mambres. But the matter is not great: let
the Offerer and his fellows descide this matter at their leisure.

The Apostle S. Paul, having described such men as by the Spirit of
prophecy, he did foresee should come in the latter days: he says that they
should be such as resist the truth, even as Iannes and Iambres did resist
Moses. How those sorcerers did withstand Moses, does appear in the two
Chapters of Exodus that I have noted before. They did what they could to
discredit all that was done by Moses: and to stay Pharao and the Egiptians
from giving credit to that messadge that Moses did from the Lord God of
Israel. So long as the Lord would suffer them, they made shows of as great
and wonderful works, as those were that were wrought by Moses. Even so (says
S. Paul) those men do withstand the truth: being men corrupted in mind,
and lewd concerning the faith. But they shall prevail no longer. For the
madness of these men shall be made manifest to all men: even as theirs was.

Now, let the indifferent reader judge, who they be in these days, that may
most rightly be said to be like unto Iannes and Iambres: the Popish
Catholics, or we Protestant Catholics. We come in the name of the Lord
God only, and do labor to bring the people of God out of the Egiptian
darcknes of Rome, to serve God in spirit and in truth, for so God delights
to be served John, 4. John, 4.
But the antichristian Popish Catholics, do labor, as Iannes and Iambres
did, to keep them in that darcknes still: and to that end they do what they
can, to cause us to be taken for false Prophets, Heretics and Schismatickes,
and the Gospel of Christ which we do preach, to be false doctrine Heresy,
and Schism.

Yea, let ye indifferent reader judge whether of both ye sorts (protestants or
roomish catholics) may be deemed to be yt men that S. Paul did Prophecy of
in that third chapter of his second Epistle to Timoth. 2. Timot, 3.
They shall be (says S. Paul) loouers of themselves, covetous, high minded,
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, wicked, void of
affection, truse-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, cruel, discourteous,
traitorous, froward, malicious, and such as do love pleasures more then God,
having a show of Godliness, but denying the power thereof.

The Chronicles or Histories of times, do witness: that no men can be, more
like unto these men that saint Paul has here described, then the Popish
prelates have been for ye space of these last, 1000. years (almost) and so
they do continue still: as daily experience does show. Whereunto I do refer
the indifferent reader, for the trial of ye truth herein.

Now therefore (as I think) the learned Protestante may easily prove that
rebellion and disobedience to all such powers as God has ordained and
commanded to be obeyed, (yea, and to God himself) is to be found, not in the
Catholic Church of Christ, but in the antichristian Church of Room, which
does call her self Catholic: and not in the Church and congregations of the
Protestants which it pleases this offerer to call private. Reason would
therefore, that this Offerer should now yield, submit and recant, as long since
he should have done.

The sixth sign, or token of false Prophets.
Offerer.

Sixth sign and token of false Prophets, Heretics, and Schismatickes Quod
quaelibet haeresis, prae catholicae fidei perpetua firmitate facile tra^sit ac
perit. For that every heresy, in comparison of the stabilitie and perpetual
continuance and firmenes of the Catholic faith, does soon perrish and pass
away. The Apostle S. Peter in speaking of these false prophets, says: Magistri
mendaces superducent sibi celerem perditionem, and perditio eorum non dormitat.
These lying masters do bring upon them selves a quick and speedy overthrow,
and their destruction shall not be slacked or slowed, The truth of this
testimony is to be tried by all sectaries, and sorts of Heretics that ever
have bin, as of the Nicholaits, Arrians, Donatists, Maniches, Pelagians,
Iouinists, Nestorians, Nouatians, Sabellians, and the rest of Heretics, whose
errors and heresies being never so stoutlye vpholden by Emperors, Kings, and
Princes, yet by general councels, and censures of Christ his Catholic
Church, they had in fine their just condemnation and overthrow. What should I
here make mention of the Lutherans and Protestants of our time? When the
Lutherans in this realm have taken their just overthrow already, for the
great desire the Protestants had to prefer the doctrine of Oecolampadians,
Zuinglians and Caluinistes. The Zuinglians and Caluinists with the rest,
Sectaries of all sorts are now here in this realm at the very near and like
point, they being now ready to yield up the Ghost, and to tilte up their
heels for the great desire the common and baser sort of the people have to be
Precisians and Puritans. And they being wincked at of the maiestrates, there
be no small number of all degrees and sorts of men that do further and favor
them in this their attempt, to the great increase of them. It can not therefore
be denied, but that all Sectaries and Heresies are on this wise moving,
flitting, and ever passing from one sect to an other, without any long time of
continuance or stay in any one of them, until they come ad profundum malorum,
unto a most plain and open apostacy, to be Miscreants, Turks, and of
Mahomets religion, not caring or setting by God, nor the devil, neither for
heaven nor hell.

Now, Heresies being thus fickle and moving, the final end of them thus
lamentable and horrible in the sight of God, let any learned Protestant living
answer directly and plainly without all cavil, color or fraud of words,
without all unprofitable and impertinent digressions, not only to this, but to
all the foresaid signs, tokens and demandes, and I shall for company and good
fellowship with them, leave the common known Church, and the plain way of
salvation, beaten by our fathers for the space of these, 1500. years past, and
now wander with them in their uncertain by paths, through unknown deserts,
rough woods, brambles and briars, to seek in the end we can not tell what.

Crowley.

The learned Protestant will not deny that errors and heresies be fickle,
weak, and slippery: neither will he deny that this ficklenes, weakness and
slipperines, may be signs and tokens of false Prophets, Heretics, and
schismatickes. Yea, he will not stick with you to confess, that in comparison
of the everlasting stabilitie and firmenes of the Catholic faith: every
heresy does easily pass away and perish. And he will say as you do, when
you say that S. Peter spoke of such false Prophets, when he said Magistri
mendaces, etc. But the learned Protestant can not allow of the syncopation that
you do use in taking out of the midst of S. Peter's sentence that which may
give the reader occasion to think, that men of your sort are meet to be
numbered amongst the false Prophets, Heretics and Schismatickes, that you
speak of S. Peter has said thus. 2. Peter, 2. 2, Peter, 2
Fuerunt vero and pseudoprophetae in populo, sicut et in vobis erunt magistri
mendaces, qui introducent sectas perditionis, and eum qui emit eos dominum
negant, super ducentes sibi celerem perditionem. Et multi sequentur eorum
luxurias, per quos via veritatis blasphemabitur: and in auaritia fictis verbis
de vobis negotiabuntur, quibus iudicium iam olim non cessat, et perditio eorum
non dormitat. In English thus. There have been false Prophets amongst the
people (says S. Peter) even as there shall be also amongst you, lying teachers,
which shall bring in sects of perdition, and they do deny the same Lord that
has bought them, bringing upon them selves swift destruction. And many shall
follow their outrages, by whom the way of truth shall be blasphemed: and in
greedy covetousness, they shall with feigned words, make Merchandise of you, for
whom judgment is speedely coming long since, and their destruction sleeps
not. Thus far, the words of Saint Peter.

Are not they false teachers that do deny that Lord which has bought them?
And do not they deny that Lord that has bought them: which deny Christ to
have satisfied for them? And do not they deny that Christ has satisfied for
them, which say they must satisfy for themselves? And do not they say that
they must satisfy for themselves, which say that they must do penance for
the sins that they have committed? And do not they say yt they must do
penance for their sins, which do make confession of all their sins to a
ghostly father, that enioyneth them to do certain penance under the name of
satisfaction for their sins? And is not this the chief point of that
religion that this offerer and his fellows do call Catholic? And do they
not all hold, yt without this there is no salvation. I do therefore conclude,
that as many as be of that mind that this offerer and his fellows be of, do
forsake the Lord that has bought them: and are of that sort of people that S,
Peter does call lying teachers or masters.

The vows that they make, whereby they bind themselves upon pain of
damnation to observe rules divised by men, without any commandment from God,
yea and some of them contrary to the express commandment of God. Their
inuocations and prayers that they make to angels and to Saints. Their
sacrifice that they make daily for the sins, both of the quick and the
dead. Their blasphemous speeches that they do utter against the doctrine of
free justification by Faith. Their Doctrine concerning the worthiness of their
own works. All these, and every one of these, do yield the like conclusion:
for proof that this offerer and his fellows, be such lyinge masters and false
teachers as S. Peter writes of in those words that this offerer aleageth
against us, when they be taken wholly together as S. Peter wrote them.

I trust that the indifferent reader will easily see: how well he may trust
this offerer, when he alleges the scriptures for his purpose, or matter out
of the ancient doctors, for the proof of any thing that he takes in hand to
prove.

The truth of this testimony (says this offerer) is to be tried by all
sectaries and sorts of heretics that ever have been: and then he names
certain sorts of Heretics yt were troublesome to the Catholic Church in
ye primitive time thereof and he affirms that the errors and heresies yt
those sorts of men held: were by the general councels and the censures of
the Catholic Church condemned and overthrown, notwithstanding that Emperors
and kings did stoutly uphold and maintain them. Here this offerer deals as
cunningly as before he has done in citing his sentence out of S. Peter's
Epistle. His meaning is to make it seem to the reader, that this Roomish
Catholic Church has had Emperors and Kings at commandment, even these
1500, years together: and that all the general councelles that have been
holden, have been appointed and called together by the Bishops of Room
only, without the authority of the Emperors and Kings that have reigned in
all this time. Yea, he would have it seem that the stout Emperors and Kings,
which have been the maintainers and vpholders of errors and heresies, have
been bridled by decrees made in general councelles, and by the censures of
the Roomish Church, which have been by the holy fathers the Popes: executed
upon them.

Platina De vitis patru^.
But if this offerer will give any credit to Platina in his history De vitis
patrum: he shall find in the life of Siluester the first of that name, in
whose time the first general council was holden in Nice, that the same
council was called together, by the commandment of Constantinus then
Emperor. And if he will believe Lawrence Surius, that lived in our days, and
was a Carthusian Friar, and gathered all the councels into 4, tomes: he shall
find, that ye Constantinopolitan council (which was the second general
council) holden in the days of Damasus, the first Pope of that name, was
summoned or called together by Theodosius then Emperor. And the first
Ephesian council (which was the third general council) was holden in ye days
of Caelestinus the first Pope of that name: and called together by Theodosius
the younger, and Valentinian, then Emperors. And the Chalcedonian council,
(which was the fourth general council) was holden in the days of Pope Leo,
the first of that name: and was called together by the Emperors
Valentinianus, and Martianus that then reigned. And this was 450, years after
Christ's assencion: whereby it appears, that your account of 1500. years must
be shorter by 450. years. For so long time your Popes were at the commandment
of the Emperors, as it was meet yt they should, and as they ought to be at
this day, as I have sufficiently proved in mine answer to your first Offer.

But now you must have one fling more at the Lutherans and Protestants of our
time. What should you make mention of them (say you) since in this realm, the
Lutherans have taken their just overthrow all ready, etc. This Offerer and his
fellows, building their foundation besid the rock Christ (which is the only
right foundation of right religion) do deem that we Protestants have none
other foundation to build our religion upon, but Luther, Oecolampadius,
Zuinglius and Calvin. But they are disceiued. For (as I have said in mine
answer to the 15. Offer) we do not so esteem of these or of any other men,
that we would build our faith upon them: but we do build upon the rock
Christ (as they did) and we know that Dies declarabit, in English, the day will
declare That is, the time of knowledge, wherein the mist of dark ignorance
shall be done away, and the bright shining beams of the truth shall make
manifest in the hearts of all men, that have eyes to see, and hearts to
understand: whose doctrine, (ours or yours) is meet to be called, goold,
silver, and precious stones, or on the contrary, timber, haie, straw and
stubble. I know that the ancient fathers, having occation to write of that
godly life and conversation that is required in Christians: do understand by
gold, silver and precious stones, such good works as the right christian
faith, that works by love is accustomed to bring forth: and by the hay,
stubble and timber, the contrary. And it is not amiss that in that case they
do so apply the words of the Apostle: But in the circumstance of the text it
appears, yt the apostle meant rather of doctrine then of manners, although the
place may be applied to both, because true christians do teach both by
doctrine, and by life.

But to our purpose. This Offerer dreameth that he sees the Lutherans already
overthrown in this realm: and al other sectaries (for so it pleases him to
term all such as be not of his own sort) yielding up the Ghost, and ready to
tylt up their heels. For the Precisians and Puritans, are in favor with the
common and baser sort of the people, and the magistrates do so wincke at
them, that no small number of men of all sorts, do further and favor them,
to the great increase of them. As touching the sects that this Offerer
speaks of here: enough has been spoken already. We are christians, we never
were Lutherans, Oecolampadians, Zuinglians, nor Caluinistes. But in very deed
many of us were Papists, before it pleased God in mercy to open the eyes of
our understanding, and to show us our salvation in our only mediator Christ
Jesus. To him alone we do now cleave, as to our only shepherd and high
Priest. His voice we do know, and being his sheep, we harken to his voice,
and we do follow him. We can not abide to here the voice of strangers.

Precisians and Puritans we can not mislike of, if they be such as all
christians should be: that is precise in observing and keeping of the
commandments of God, according to that which is written Deuteronomy, 5, Deu, 5
keep and do those things that the Lord God has commanded you: you shall
not bow to the right hand, nor to the left, but ye shall walk in that way,
that your Lord God has commanded you, etc. Such Precisians we do like well
of, and we do still beg of God in prayer, that it may please him in mercy, to
make us every day more precise then other. And we are persuaded that no man is
or can be so precise that way, as all Christians ought to be.

Puritans also we must needs like well of, if they be such as the apostle
James discribeth, Jacob, 1 Jacob, 1
If any man do think himself to be religious, and yet refrayneth not his
tongue, but suffers his own heart to be disceiued: this man's religion is
vain. This religion is clean and unspotted before God and the father: For a
man to visit the fatherles and widows in their trouble, and to keep himself
unspotted of this world. Such as have a care to refrain their tongues from all
evil speeches, and all the parts of their bodies from evil actions: And do
delight to be occupied in doing good to all such as do stand in need: (which
is meant by the fatherles and widows) are ye right puritans, and such as al
christians should endeavor to be: and in Christ Jesus all unfeigned christians
are pure: being so made by the blood of Christ, wherein such are washed and made
clean, so that in them there is neither spot nor wrinckle, for Christ has
made them a glorious spouse for himself. Ephesians, 5. Ephe, 5,
And yet, if these will speak truly, they must every one of them say with
the Apostle Paul, Rom, 7. There is nothing in me (yt is to say in my flesh,
understanding thereby, his nature) which is good. And with the apostle, Ioh, 1,
Epi. 1. 1, John, 1
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves and there is no truth in
us. Being baptized in Christ Jesus, we have put Christ upon us: Christ is our
garment, Gala, 3. Gala, 3
Our care should be to continue in that purity yt we have in Christ, and to keep
ye garment of ours unspotted. I have thought it good to take this occasion to
writ thus much, in the defense of right precisenes and pureness of life: because
I do see that our subtle enemy the devil labors to bring into contempt,
that precisenes in observing of Gods commandments yt al christians should
strive to attain unto, and that pureness of life, that is most seemly for all
christians to walk in. And he has prevailed so much already: that to great a
number amongst us, do make little or no consience at all in the transgressing
of any commandment of our good God. Some there be in deed that are noted by
the names of Precisians, and Puritans: which may more rightly be called peevish
ones. These we Protestants do not like of: but would as gladly be rid of
them as you would be of us. And the number of them is not so great, as this
offerer would have it seem to be: neither are they furdered and favored of so
many, as he reports, although their number be greater then we would wish it
to be. It is perceived, that they do profess and hold the true and right
religion of Christ, and would gladly yt it were purged of all Roomish dross,
and that the pure wheat that is in Gods threshing floor, were cleansed from all
roomish chafe: but being carried away with faruent zeal, they run before
them that should lead them, and do hinder the cause yt they would gladly
further. When God will, these shall by his good means be brought to consider
better of the matter: and you (roomish Catholics) shall be confounded. This
offerer concludes against him self and his fellows: for not we, but they, are
the sectaries and heretics yt by moving, flitting and passing from evil to
worse, are now at the last come even ad profundum malorum, to ye very bottom
of evil, and to a plain and open apostasy, and falling away from Christ and
joining with antichrist. Yea, and it appears that you are persuaded, yt being
joined to that antichrist of Room, as to your spiritual head, you need not
to pass either for God or Devil, heaven or hell, for your Pope has absolute
power, both in heaven and on earth, and in his own prison purgatory to. Now
let the offerer and his fellows mark what I shall say. For as much as, the
heresies of the popish Catholics, have been from time to time, so fickle and
moving, and their end (in falling away from Christ) so horrible in the sight
of God: let any roomish Catholic living reply directly and plainly, with out
all cavil, color, or fraud of words, without all unprofitable and
impertinent digressions, not only to this, but to all the answers yt I have
made, to the foresaid signs, tokens and demaundes: and then will I, for
company and good fellowship, leave the true catholic church of Christ,
wherein is ye plain way of salvation, beaten by all our forefathers, the true
Catholic protestants for ye space of these, 5530, and odd years, even from
the time of ye first man, and now wander with the roman Catholics, in their
uncertain by paths of Popish devises, through unknown deserts of popish
opinions, through rough woods, brambles and briers of popish religions, to
seek in the end, we can not tell what.

The offerers exhortation.

And here to conclude, and for my part to minister unto you some occasion in
the relinquishing of these private churches and congregations of sectaries, to
return to the unity and atonement of the common known catholic Church of
Christ, where stability and constancy of faith and religion is only to be
found, I shall here lay before you the worthy example of the blessed martyr
Sebastian, by him brought of a loaf of bread to Genserichus then king of the
Vandalles, a furious and a barbarous nation, which breaking into Affricke, they
found there many valiant Captains placed by the Emperor Theodosius the
second, for the defense and sauegard of the country: amongst the rest was this
Sebastia^, by dignity an earl, and a courageous and valiant Captain, who with
the rest yielding to the force of Genserichus, was, as Victor de persecutione
Vandalorum writes, for his great wisdom and valiantnes not so much beloved
as feared of the king Genserichus, who being an Arrian intended by color of
religion to work his death. For Genserichus knowing Sebastian to be a severe
and perfect christian man, conuented him before the Arrian Bishops, and under
the pretense that Amity and freendship might be the surer, and continue the
longer betwixt them Genserichus moved him to become an Arrian, and to profess
the same faith and religion, as he and his people were of. For answer this holy
martyr Sebastian requested Genserichus the king to command a fine wheaten loaf
to be brought unto him. And taking it in his hand. (And here to omit many of
his words and notable sayings) he requested the King Genserichus, to command
the loaf of bread to be broken in pieces, to be ground, brought to flower, and
boulted a fresh, to be seasoned with water, and salt, and baked again, if then
it should in the end prove better bread then it was before, he would not
fail to accomplish the king Genserichus his will and pleasure: but if it were
not possible by breaking the loaf, and baking it again, to better it, but to
make worse bred then before, he would not, nor cold not consent thereunto: and in
fine suffered death in defense of the christian faith and religion by him
already professed and received, rather then he would condescend to the
imparing, infringing or breaking of any part thereof. And so Genserichus
caused this blessed man Sebastian to die a holy Martyr. Thus much I have
breefly deducted out of the historye of victor, to the intent that so apt and
familier an example of so holy and blessed a martyr, might in these
perplexities and doubts in these often changes and mutations of religion,
comfort the weaklings of Christ his Church, and bring them to some more better
stay, when by this example of Sebastians Loaf, certain and sure we may be,
that the loaf of the unity of Christ his Church, the loaf of his Gospel,
faith and religion, being by Schism and Heresy never so often broken, never so
finely grinded, boulted searced and sifted, kneaded, and baked again and
again, they shall never be able to better it, or to bring it to that
perfection which it had before. And therefore, all their attempts to the
contrary are most vain, the only remembrance of this Sebastians loaf should
suffice to confirm the faithful, to stay the wavering and weakelings, and to
pluck the disceiued bake again, and to cause the^ in leuing of this the^r
fickle wave ringnes of this their proceedings (as they term it) from one sect
to an other, from one congregation to an other, and from their scattering
abroad with antichrist, to stay themselves, and to gather themselves with our
Savior Christ into the unity of his common known catholic Church, where
they shall be sure to find unity of religion, uniformity of al ceremonies and
observation of the same, with th'attonment of christian faith throughout in all
Sacraments and articles of our Creed, to the pa^^sying of many contentions and
s^^^^^ amongst us, to the quietation of men's consciences, in causing us all
professors of Christ, as brethren here to live together in quietness, peace and
unity, to the more better assurance of the public estate of this realm, and
to the great glory and honor of almighty God to whom be al praise, honor and
glory world without end. Amen.

Crowley.

That example, that you say, you will lay before us, to give us occasion to
leave these private churches and congregations of sectaries, and to return to
the unity, etc: is a very meet example to be used by the learned Protestant,
that (if it be possible) he may thereby draw you back again, from your
apostasy, (wherein you run a whoring after Roomish Idols, and delight your self
in antichristian breathing out of blasphemy, against God and all godliness) to
embrace that unity and atonement yt is in verity, professed by that common
known catholic church of Christ: wherein stability and constancy of faith and
religion were to be found in that time wherein Sebastian suffered manfully for
the testimony of Christ, and was made a martyr, yt is a witness of Christ. As
for ye truth of the history that you cite out of Victor, I will not impech it,
although I do find in histories, yt Sebastian suffered martirdom in ye days of
Diocletian, which was 100 years and more before either Theodotius secundus or
Genserichus did bear any rule at al. But let ye history be as true as you
would wish it to be: ye example is the thing that may serve the learned
protestants purpose very well. Sebastian being conuented before the Arian
Bishops, is by king Genserichus required to become an Arian: but for answer he
requesteth the king to command a fine wheaten loaf to be brought unto him,
which being done, he requesteth the king, to command the same loaf to be
broken into pieces. etc. Here the learned Protestant will say, that the wheat
whereof this loaf was made, did not grow in the field of that romish Catholic
Church, that this Offerer does brag so much off, neither was it thresshed in ye
threshing flower, ground in that myll, sifted with that Sieve, or boulted with
that boulter, nor knode in that kneading fat, nor baked in that oven. For at
that time (which was about ye end of the first 300 years after Christ) the
Church that was in Rome, was nothing like that roman Church that now is and
has been ever since the days of the Emperor Phocas.

The learned protestant will say, that this loaf was made of that wheat which
was sowed by that sower yt went forth to sow his seed. Mat. 13. Ma. 13
and being threshed in his threshing floor with the flaile of bitter
persecution, was fanned or wynowed by him yt has his fan in his hand, to
purge his threshing floor. Mat. 3. Ma. 3
and grownd in the Mill of oppression, and sifted or bowlted, with ye sieve or
bowlter of tentation, and knoden with the water of unfeigned and hearty
contrition, and in the end, baked in the Oven of hot and fervent love and
zeal, to true religion. And all this was done in ye time that was past, when
Sebastian required the king to call for a fine wheaten loaf. Many had assaied
(before that time) to make this bread better, by breaking of this loaf, and by
working of it again: but they could never bring it to pass, for the baker yt
did first bake it, is so skillful in baking such bread, that it is not possible
for any to amend that bread yt he baketh, or to bake any of the like goodness.
They that attempted this matter, before Sebastians time, were these, whose
names do ensue. Simon Magus, Alexander the Coppersmyth, Hymenaeus and
Philetus, Nicolas the deacon, Cerinthus, Menander, Ebion, Gnostici, Basilides,
Saturninus, Valentinus, Syrenus, Carpocrates, Marcellina, Montanus, Seuerus,
Tacianus, Alogiana secta, Hierarchas, Berillus, Noetus, Tertulianistae,
Origianistae, Nouatus, Sabellicus, Nepos, Paulus Samosatenus, Martion, Manes.
All these had endeavored (before ye days of Sebastian) to make better bread of
this loaf, then the heavenly baker had made: but it would not be. And even so
have a number more done, since the days wherein Sebastian suffered martyrdom:
but all in vain. Yea, and none have at any time done more in this matter, the^
this Offerer and his fellows have done and do still: but all their labor is
lost, and so shall it be still, let them do what they can to amend it, they
shall find in the end that it is so perfect, that no man can be able to amend
it, or to make ye like. The learned protestant therefore, neither will nor can
consent, to leave that church or congregation (which ye Offerer calls
private) which is in deed most public, and has in it that stability and
constancy of faith and religion, that none other church either has, or can
have: for it has continued even from the beginng, and is rightly figured by
that loaf of Sebastian, that ye Offerer has spoken of: for ye heavenly baker
alone, has mowlded, made and baked it: and has given it virtue to feed unto
everlasting life, al such as do or shall taste thereof, and take pleasure
therein: yea, rather then the learned protestant would forsake this heavenly
Bethlehem, or house of bread, and join himself to the Romish Bethauen, or
house of vanity and confusion: he will yield to suffer most painful death in
his body: for that christian religion and faith, yt he has already received
and professed. Which is in deed the right Catholic faith and religion of
Christ Jesus: to ye impairing, infringing, or breaking of any part whereof, he
will in no case condescend or agree. Thus this Offerer and his fellows may see,
how aptly this example of Sebastian, serves for the staying and confirming of
such protestants in ye church of Christ, as be weak, and are (by these often
chau^ges of religion) brought into perplexities and doubts. For by this example
of Sebastians loaf: we may be most certain and sure, that although ye loaf
of the unity of Christ's church, the loaf of his gospel and religion, be by
schisms and heresies, never so often broken, never so finely grinded, bowlted,
searced, and sifted, kneaded, and baked again, and again: yet it is most
apparent, that no goodness can be added to the first goodness, that is in this
bread, which ye heavenly baker has baked. Let this Offerer and his fellows
therefore, have a due consideration of Sebastians loaf, for thereby they may
be confirmed in the right faith of Christ, stayed from wavering, plucked back
again from their erroures, and caused to proceed from one degree of
perfection to another: yea, and to stay themselves from scattering abroad with
Antichrist, to seek salvation here and there, and they know not where. It may
cause them also, to gather them selves together, with our savior Christ, into
ye unity of his common known Catholic church, wherein they shall be sure to
find unity of true religion, Atonement of right Christian faith, in all
sacraments and Articles of our creed, and no superfluous, or dumb ceremo^ies,
or superstitious obseruances. To ye pacifying of all contentions and striffs,
to ye quieting of all conscience, causing al ye professors of Christ, to live
here in quietness, peace, and unity, to ye better assurance of ye public estate
of this realm, and to the great glory and honor of almighty God: to whom be
all praise, honor, and glory, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

