The three Conformities. OR THE HARMONY AND AGREEMENT OF THE ROMISH Church with
GENTILISME, IVDAISME and ancient HERESIES.

Written in French by FRANCIS DE CROY G. ARTH. and newly translated into
English.

Seen, perused and allowed.

LONDON. Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN, 1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND the most virtuous and Godly Lady, the Lady
Harington.
MADAME,
IF ever any age has been more fertile and abundant then others, in the
multitude of writers in all manner of sciences, learning and knowledge, truly
it is this wherein we live. But chiefly in Divinity and the holy mysteries of
salvation, the knowledge whereof ought verily to be the chief and only scope
of our Christian endeauours, as being the true mirror wherein we may fully
contemplate the true pathway which is able to conduct our pensive souls unto
those supernal mansions, which are in the house of God the Father, and are
prepared for the elect. And among so many learned and godly treatises, of this
kind, which the painful labors of our Pastors and others have set forth
for the comfort of the militant Church, I can find none that does more aptly,
briefly and learnedly convince the errors of this crooked and naughty
generation of the Romish Catholics, then these Conformities, which are most
fit and proper summarily to confound the idle and selfe-pleasing imaginations,
fancies, traditions, additions, fractions, diminutions, substractions, and
mutations which they have distilled out of the naughty and corrupted humors of
their distracted brains, and sown most cunningly in every corner of the true
Church of God. Which things having weighed with my self, as likewise the
utility and comfort which might further be reaped hereof, if the same were
translated into our language, namely in these dangerous and latter days, in
the which Satan our everlasting adversary knowing the end of his kingdom to
be very neereat hand, does so subtlely and carefully watch how to entrappeand
devour us, I have hazarded to expose the same unto the view of my country;
not laboring herein to snatch at any parcel of ambitious and vain glory: but
rather to employ the little piece of a Talent which has been allotted unto
me, in some godly and Christian exercise, to the further increase of Gods
glory, and subversion of Antichrist. Accept therefore (Madame) these three
Conformities, which I have been the bolder to offer to your Honor;
considering as well your most godly and Christian life and conversation,
together with your fervent zeal and affection toward the truth of the Gospel,
as like wise those moral virtues wherewith you are adorned. Which concurring
together in your noble person are able (no doubt) to deserve farremore then
ever has been bestowed on you, or my mean power able to offer unto you. The
world knows how Religiously, Noblely, Virtuously, Faithfully, and with what
painful and long care my Lord your husband and you have trained up our most
Royal Princess the Lady Elizabeth, who in her childehood at her first coming
into this Kingdom, was by his Majesty committed to your charge and custody,
after that he had been surely informed with what rare gifts and noble parts
you were beautified, far above a multitude of your sex and rank. And when
by the happy conjunction of the Prince Elector Palatine with her Highness, it
seemed to be no more necessary that your Honors should give attendance on her
Highness, and that my Lord and you having therefore honorably and with his
Majesty's favor and consent given over the sacred charge of her person, and
thinking now at length to have been rid of so weighty a burden, and that you
might have lived the rest of your days in some secure port of tranquillity.
Yet after a little time his Majesty having had so many years experience of
your Honors prudent and watchful care of her Highness well and prosperous
estate, and knowing that your Honorable presence and attendance on her, were
no less necessary unto her now of late, then your painful care and most
vigilant custody had been in the time of her tender age, did yet once again
summond your Honor to take upon you, though not all, yet a great and
principal part of your wonted charge? namely to admonish and impart your most
wholesome counsels unto her, to the farther increase of all her Royal virtues
and qualities, as well in matters of noble conversation and behavior, as of
true piety and devotion. And although the multitude of your most serious
affairs does afford but small leisure unto your private meditations; Yet I am
sure that this treatise will purchase so much favor at your hands, as to have
some spare hours spent in the reading thereof, wherein you may be not a
little refreshed with the most sweet and delectable variety of these
Conformities which are presented to your Honor, hoping that they shall be
embraced with no less favor and goodwill, then they are given by him, who
remains

Your Honors humble and most devoted, W. HEART.

The Authors Epistle TO MASTER GJGORD Pastor and Professor of holy Divinity in
the Church of MONTPELLIER.
SIR,
I have often been amazed, that men of so great worth in the eyes of the world
(GOD having set before them this universal picture of the salvation and
reparation of mankind through the preaching of the Gospel) could yet still
delight and dally in these errors the abomination whereof has often been
declared unto them. And it is strange that this impiety which durst only
whisper in the ear, does now step up into the Pulpit and there practices,
that she may spew forth her blasphemies against the holy Religion of Christ
Jesus: Which not only our Jesuits do labor apace to set forward and
advance, but also our Apostates, who thinking to show that by good reasons they
have been moved to revolt, have so much the more manifested their wickedness,
or rather foolishness, even in such a time as the verity is made so clear,
and falsehood unmasked with so great advantage. Wherein we may acknowledge the
profound judgments of God, who never having failed to such as sought after his
glory, and having at this day manifested himself in his word as much as ever
he did, to the end that he might make known unto us the foundation stone of
his admirable building of the Church, to wit his son Christ Jesus:
Notwithstanding the greater part of such, as go about to cloth themselves
with this so honorable a Title of Christian, not being content with this
spiritual seed of the regeneration of mankind has invented I know not what
word, which they name unwritten, and in stead of Choosing the true Sion, are
well pleased to dwell among those old ruins of Gentilisme, wherewith they
have beautified the main part of their service. And verily, if we consider
narrowly this great heap of their ceremonies, and that which they hold to
be the principal hindge of Religion, we shall perceive that they have
committed the government of their Church (which ought rather to have been the
holy habitation of God) unto. Numa Pompilius, Pontife of Rome, or to some old
Law-giuers, which established certain Laws, concerning such things as they
reputed sacred, and thought to belong unto the service of their Gods. Behold
then the Heathen returned into the world, and that after a triumphing manner,
who to the end that they might the better fortify themselves against Christ
Jesus, have called great Caiphas and the Scribes to assist them, that they may
deprive him of his spiritual kingdom: Pharisaisme, that they may restore
again the false doctrine of good works: and the Marcionists, that of his
humanirie they may make only a fancy. What further? In a word behold
Gentilisme, Iudaisme and old Heresies erected in the sanctuary, where the
propitiatory ought to have been alone to attend and learn the Oracles of one
only God. But to the end that those against whom we proceed, may have no
cause to complain, as if we had accused them unjustly, I have undertaken to
declare (though briefly) in these three conformities, how that the Romish
Church is very much putrified and corrupted, and that she is full of diseases.
And having had no other desseing at the beginning of this work, but for mine
own particular use, having already dedicated my writes unto a corner of my
closet, yet notwithstanding the advice of my friends has made me step on a
little far there, and publish the same. And I am so much delighted in the
beauty of this subject, that I have taken the boldness to consecrate and
dedicate the first Conformity unto you: first as an homage for so many good
deeds for which I remain your debtour: Next because I have always known
your zeal toward Gods word, whereof not only your learned writs do bear
record, but also your public lectures in Divinity, and other holy exercises of
piety, whereby you are admired and beloved of good people. And truly it is
reason that the fruits of my labors should be yours, seeing the ground is
yours: Take therefore in good part this little essay, as given by him who is

Sir Your very bound servant and fellow servant in the work of the Lord, DE
CROY.

In laudem Libri, triplicis Harmoniae, inscripti, a viro praeclaro, pererudito,
and summo Theologo Francisco Croyo scripti. EPIGRAMMA.
TEr sapies, voluens haec terna volumina, Lector,
Tot referunt terni dogmata sancta libri.
Quod si ter sapias resupina mente reductus,
Vita tibi sapiens tempus in omne fluet.
Quod si didiceris sapienter ducere vitam,
Vita tibi sapiens secta beata dabit.
Innumeros igitur ternos, sanctosque libellos
Qui numero terno tot bona, tanta ferunt!
Tergeminus, rarum, poteritiam viuere partus:
Trigeminos plus quam trigeminique dare.
Iacobus Ortensius Consiliarius Regius Baeterrensis.

LYRICVM Ad Reuerendum Et Clariss. virum Dominum DE CROY. Antistitem Ecclesiae
Vticensis vigilantissimum, Dominum and Fautorem suum colendissimum.
SIc te podagrae terribilis furor
vexat dolorum non vice simplici;
Dilecte Mecoenas, vetatque
Aonidum indugredi recessus?
Phoebus sonoram pollice vix lyram
Vellit supremo: praepete deuolas
Planta inclyti in ripam fluenti, aut
Bicipitis iuga sacra montis.
Iucundus actor Pierij chori,
Podagra quamuis saeuior igneos
Intentat vncos, pristinosque
Mill modis acciat dolores.
Gaudes vel alto currere Menalo,
Vel propter vndas Pegasei vadi,
Melodiam insignem Camaenae
Aut Charitum bibere vsque nectar,
Dilapsa celsis enthea men's polis,
Et hoc, and illud tramite libero
Ergastulum exit, detineri
Nescia, corporeosque nexus
Potentiore discutit impete
Vbique victrix. Corpore languido,
Haud immemor coelestis aurae,
Mortifer as riget inter vmbras.
Sopore morsum dum cerebrum iacet,
Iacentque sensus, illa volucribus
Oberrat alis, ausa coelos
Scandere, coelicolasque viros
Rogare, Olympum quis moueat rigor,
Quae fulcra terrae sustineant onus,
Quae temperetque aethram potestas,
Quae furiae Oceanum inquietent.
Ridere sinon horribiles licet,
Perferre morbos aequo animo decet.
Dolor is expers, men's triumphat,
Nec patitur nisi foeda gleba.
Obseruantiae igitur Johan. Jacob us Grasserus Bas. Philosoph. M. and Poeta C.
EPIGRAMMA. Ad Reuerendum and Nobilissimum virum D. Franciscum De Croy in
librum, De haeresium harmonia.
DVm varias sectas in consona dogmata cogis,
Quaeris and aeternae Relligionis opus:
Ipsa tuas curas celso conspexit Olympo
Relligio, and vegetis indidit ausa animis.
Eia age, dixit, opus long mihi gratius vrges
Vnde meo, vnde tuo nomini inharet honos.
Rudera me Solymae, and magna Capitolia Romae,
Me vocat vsque suam Grecia vana Deam.
Quas meream seeds vnus docet ille Iehova
Filius; ah Solymae, Graecia, Roma vale.
A Monsieur De Croy Sur ses CONFORMITES.
GRand guerrier du grand Dieu, qui de tes arms saints,
Terrasses et abbats les Romans erreurs,
De Croy, tu fais voir aux bigots les plus durs,
Par ces Conformites, leurs chandelles esteintes.
De Croy, tu fais voir, que l' Eglise Roman,
Est l' esgoust des erreurs, que les siecles passes
Auoyent, en diverse temps, peu apeu ramases,
Pour suffoquer l' Eglise, ou la render incertaine.
Mais sile temps pass, tous ces vieux heretics,
Parles Herauts Chrestiens ont este combatus,
Ceux de ce temps ici, par toi sont abatus,
Sous les pieds des escrits Diuins, and Canoniques.
Ton liver est un Tableau, ou toutes heresies,
Sont depeintes par toi, en toute verite
Et lesquelles on voit, auec conformite,
Par l' Eglise Roman estre auiourd' hui suiuies.
La Roman Eglise est, vne Eglise mondaine,
Ornee d' or, d' argent, de richesse, and d' honneurs,
Oul' on est a go-go, pres des ris, lein des pleurs:
Mais l'Eglise de Christ en ce monde est en peine.
Ilse faut estonner de ceux-la qui demeurent
Tresfermes en la foy dedans le Parc Divine:
Non de ces reuoltes qui, rebrossans chemin
Verse ceste port large, eternellement meurent.
Upon Master De Croys Conformities, out of the FRENCH. To the Reader.
SONNET.
AGainst the sacred Church of Christ
Satan, has ever stirred up war:
Now Pagan-like, in strange disguise,
Most wickedly therewith did jar.
And then sometime, even as a Jew,
But yet with much more craft and skill,
Like a cunning heretic toils,
With errors gross the Church to fill.
Since that our Savior left the earth,
By crafty color of Christ's name,
This Serpent liar, most false and fine,
His Church has practiced to defame.
And those errors, as seed thus cast
By him into the holy ground,
Has by degrees, grown and encreast,
And did at last spoil and confound:
The good seed in believing men;
For Antichrist his chair has set;
Even in the Temple of our God,
And therein Peacocke-like does iett.
But in De Croys Conformities,
You may his errors plainly see,
Where all his foul deformities,
To life discou'red fully be.
Objection unto the former SONNET.
What? the Church of Christ, may it be sedus't?
And can it err? and cannot so foully fail?
When Christ himself has said, Devil nor hell
Should have no powr'e, the faith (though small) t'assaile.
Answer.
Know that the church two ways may be co^ceiu'd:
The one (aptly to speak) does comprehend
None but Gods children, such as he elects,
And seals, and graciously will defend.
The other does contain, both good, and bad,
Is that you see, here in the world below,
Which erres so often, as Satan it does hear,
And by an evil life, the same does show.
The first does never err, for she attends
The sweet voice of her spouse to understand,
The last may ever err, and be deceived:
For in foul black blindness she loves to stand.
To those of the Romish CHVRCH.
YOu Roman Catholics, who sees this work,
Is It possible, that it you can behold?
And cannot mark that horrible inchaunt,
Wherein bewitching Satan does you hold?
If the Apostles, those most holy men,
Should now into the world again return,
Would never think that Christians you were,
Because al means, might teach you truth, you shun.
I speak, and pronounce this, not bitterly,
I speak it with a godly loving zeal;
Your piety, of which you make such bragges,
No warrant has, your grievous sins to heal.
For you in humane merits firm your trust,
And that is your anchors-hould, and not in him,
Who sets you free from the eternal death,
And is the only ransom for your sin.
Antichrist by little, and little, and by craft,
And subtle shifts into the Church is slid,
And in Gods holy Temple now, at last
He sits in pomp, trusting there still to bid.
It was often foretold, that he should come,
And for our sins, this revolt was suffr'ed,
And that there must of mere necessity,
Great, and most blind errors be permitted.
Yea, so ordained by our most puissant God,
That his most sacred Church should be oppressed,
For a time in the bonds of Papacy,
For so long time as he would think it best.
But from these crooked and peruersed ways,
Full of dreadful, and most deadly darkness,
God has bin pleased, through his great bounty,
Us for to draw, and eke with peace to bliss.
Even so Christ our Lord, and Jonas were,
The figures of Gods Church, in these last days:
For one was dead, the other prisoner,
Christ in tomb, Jonas in the fish, he prays.
Lift up your eyes, with speed behold this light,
Which shines in you, and Jesus Christ embrace,
By lively faith; cast off those evil Spirits,
Which makes you scorn Gods word to your disgrace.
Christ is the truth, the way, and only life,
The Churches most dear spouse, run then amain
And by a constant faith, live chaste to him,
His company brings comfort, that is your gain.
THE PREFACE, To those of the Romish CHVRCH.
MY Masters, who would discern true coin from that which is adulterated, will
not content himself with looking on the superscription, the stamp, color, and
roundnesse thereof, but going on a little farther, will come to the trial of
the substance of the metal, will take the touchstone, and draw thereon, to
examine the goodness or insufficiency thereof. Even so to discern true
Religion from false, and to know the Church of Jesus Christ in this confusion
of so many, that are like thereunto, we must not be contented with the
judgment of the Church, which you call representative, but we ought to go
straight on to the only Scriptures, which are the foundation and pillars of
the true cause in matters that concern Religion. And if we had stayed there,
we should not see at this day such horrible confusions in Christendom, neither
yet this mixture of cockle with good corn, and there would remain nothing but
pure wheat in the garnar and storehouse of the Church. And would to God that
some of the ancient Bishops could have contented themselves with the marches
established by the holy Ghost, the greatest part of the world should not now be
wandering in the ancient paths and footsteps of Gentilisme, against which the
Apostles, and many other infinite numbers of the most excellent and worthy men
have foughten and obtained the victory, through shedding of their blood.
Should not this exquisite balance, square, and canon of the Scripture, this
rule of right and verity have been sufficient to teach us whatsoever
belongs to the whole perfection of our belief? We ought not to have been
ignorant of these beautiful marks of antiquity: That there is no other
proof of Christian Religion but by the Scriptures, if any controversy arise
where to find the body, that is to say, the Church, that it ought not to be
sought amongst our words, but amongst his words who is the truth, and knows
his body, to wit, Jesus Christ. It was thither that the Bishops should have
led the Gentiles, to teach them to worship one only God, to make them turn
from their old superstitions and idolatrous customs, by the violence whereof
they have been forced to worship their false Gods and creatures, and should
not have given way to so many things, which are so far from having any
warrant in the holy Scriptures, that they are merely contradictory thereunto.
It is after this manner that it has seemed good unto the wisdom of man to
jest and play with the high and holy mysteries of true Religion; It is after
this manner that thinking only to wink at things, and that through tolerating
of the lesser evil, to eschew greater inconvenience, this holy spring of
Christian piety has been infected by the filthy mud of Paganism, from
whence those deludges have proceeded, which have overwhelmed some fundamental
points of our salvation. And would to God that those zealous ones without
knowledge had taught their Neophytes to think it abomination, to suffer
themselves to be led away by degrees unto such things as at first seemed
pleasant, we should not see at this day such pestilent doctrine, neither yet
those superstitions and ridiculous ceremonies, which have caused as well in
times past as in these days, so many troubles in Christendom. But this is
their reward, who have chosen to prefer the Church to the Scripture, and man
to God, as if it were more expedient to find out the head by the proof and
testimony of the members, then the members by the testimony of the head. I am
exceeding sorry to consider, that when the time of appearing before the
tribunal seat of God shall come, the damned Gentiles shall know their marks
and liueries on you, and that in great abundance, as this present table of
your conformities unto their fashions and customs, shall clearly and
faithfully bear record. But let us examine how this filthiness has corrupted
that beauty that was among you. Those poor Gentiles, living under the Empire
of Constantine the great, when the Church of Christ was taking a little breath,
and did enjoy some peace and rest after so many persecutions and martyrdomes of
her children, began to enter therein in great throng, and by multitudes. But
how? having lately renounced the polluted slavery of their Gods, of
Gentilisme, of worshipping of images; and their feet being as yet foul with
the dirt of their Idolatries. And that which helped very much to advance those
old rags, was because they began to profess Christian Religion, being well
ripe in years, and full of gray hairs, which was the cause why they could not
so suddenly shake off such customs as they had sucked with their mothers
milk. But behold here the very final accomplishment of evil fortune, to wit,
the conniuence of the greater part of the Bishops at such errors, who not
having discovered a far off such dangers as might ensue and follow upon this
lenity, and license granted by them, some more some less according to their
humors, having tolerated these abuses, Paganism took its own place, and
Gentilisme passed far above that measure which was prescribed by the Oracles
of God. They thought with themselves that they had labored much for the
advancement of Christian Religion, if at the first they could but only divert
them from worshipping of their Gods, thereafter to send them unto such
Christian Saints as were deceased: but this was nothing else but a changing of
the name and not of the thing it self. They ought in the space of so many ages
to have found out some remedy for this disease: but in stead of abolishing and
reforming of these abuses, we see the same daily confirmed, yea, moreover a
far greater increase of this dirt and dregs of the Heathen, in lieu of the
pure drop of true piety and Christian simplicity. Even so far are we from
any hope to see the same reformed, since the lesuits have undertaken at a set
price to defend those errors, and have published in their writs, that Christian
religigion may lawfully make use of the ceremonies of the Gentiles, which is as
much as if one would say that God makes use of the Devils laws for the weal
of his people. And thus it is that the Romish Church, established by
unreasonable reasons, aduanceth in such manner even unto this day, yea, and
commands and authoriseth evil customs in place of good laws, and the
relics of Gentilisme in great plenty, in stead of the purity of the
Gospel. Your opinion was, that the spiritual kingdom of Jesus Christ should
have been governed like the Monarchies of this world, whose rulers bear with
many of their subjects faults, to the end that they may have peace with
strangers; but it is not so: for as touching so far as directly concerns
the true knowledge of God, and of the purity of his service, of the estate of
the conscience, of the nature of Ecclesiastical government, we ought to have
recourse unto the Canonical books, and not unto popular abuses: they are the
precepts of faith that ought to be laid open unto the people, and not those
preiudicate opinions, colored with devotion, against which the holy Fathers
have foughten so courageously. In the end, this little Treatise will declare
unto you how that your religion is borded with those totters and rags of
Gentilisme. God grant you the grace to acknowledge the difformitie thereof,
that you may depart from thence, and enter in league with her which is most
beautiful, to wit, the Church wherein we live, which is well pleased with such
ornaments, as her spouse Christ Jesus our Savior has given her, to whom be
glory and honor for ever.

Amen.
THE FIRST CONFORMITY.
CHAP. I. Of God.
YOu cannot deny, my Masters, that the Pope of Rome is named God. The gloss
of the Canon law uses these express terms, Cap. Cum inter Extrau. Ioa. 22.
Et lib. 1. Caremoniarum sacrar. sect. 7. c. 6. Seeds Dei 1. seeds Apostolica.
Council. Lateran. sess. 9. Diuina maiestatis tua conspectus, and sess. 3.
Vniuersis populis adorandus and Deo simillimus.
Papa Dominus Deus noster, which in truth is a title of blasphemy, grounded
nevertheless upon antiquity, whereof you make so great show, and which you
have placed and ranked among the essential marks of your Church. It is
ancient, I confess, since that more then a thousand and five hundred years are
expired, since it was attributed to one of the Popes predecessors, Sueton.
Domit. cap. 13. Torrent. Episco. Antuerp. comment. in. Sueton.
even as being sovereign Bishop, to wit, unto Domitian Emperor of Rome. And
if that Poet Martial has been justly taxed by one of your Bishops for
flaterie and lies, for that he calls by the name of God that Tyrant and
horrible monster in nature, in these words, Martial. lib. 5. Epigra. 8.
Edictum Domini Deique nostri; by what means can you free your selves from the
like, or rather a more rigorous censure, since that he was only a Gentile, and
you cloathe your selves with the name of the true Church? Credere Dominu^ Deum
vestruns Papa^ co^ditorem huius Decretalis, etc. Loco supra notato in Gloss.
Extrau cum inter nonnullos.
Those Decrees, Decretals, Sixties, Clementines, Extrauagants, with other such
like, your Euangiles should have been purged and made clean both in their
Texts and Glosses, by those Cardinals, to whom this goodly charge was committed
by one of your Popes Bulla Greg. 23 praefixa nonae edit. Decret. Graet.
. We are still in hope that one day that shall be abolished, which many of your
selves cannot read without horror. Your flatterers keep their course, and
strive apace among themselves who shall yield greatest honor and worship unto
this Popish divinity In Agapet. Iustinianus adorauit Beatissimum Agapetum, and
hanc adoratione^ intelligu^t de qua Psalm. 72. Adorabunt eum omnes reges terrae.
. These verses bear witness:

Oraclo vocis, mundi moderaris habenas, Et merito in terris diceris esse Deus.
Stapl. princip. fid. doct. praefat. ad Greg. 13. 9. did. 95. satis euidenter.
Stapleton names him Supremum, plane supremum numen in terris. Did. 95. satis
euidenter.
Your Decrees make Constantine the great call him God. Steuch. de donat. Constable.
Steuchus gives the reason hereof, if any reason can be found in so
unreasonable a matter. Blond. lib. 3. inflam. Rome.
Blondus will have all Princes to bow down their knees and worship this
Bishop, unto whom also are applied certain passages of Scripture, Cerem. Pont.
lib. 1. tit. 7.
which cannot be spoken of any other then of Christ Jesus. How long will it be
ere you leave off your blasphemies? The poor Gentiles acknowledged one God,
and did attribute the chief and soueragine government to one only. This was
the principal foundation of their old Religion, in so much as concerned the
more learned sort among them. You in like manner leave the supreme government
of the Empire to the great and true God, even as by right it belongs unto
him. But like as the idolatrous Gentiles Plinius of this same purpose vvriteth
thus, Lib. not. hist. cae 7. Fragilis and laboriosamortalitas, in parts ista
digessit, infi^mitatis sue memor, vt portionibus quisque coleret, quo maxim
indigeret. Sic Gulielmus Philander annot. in Vitruuium de Archit. lib 4. c. 8.
ait Christo in cruce pendenti suam esse dandam cellam atque materia^ qua Diuos
fing as dignissima^, etc.
made several distributions of charges and offices amongst a multitude of
fellow-Gods, Tutelare Gods, and Saints, whom they called Diuos; So also you
have erected Temples, Altars, burning of Incense, worship, bowing of the knees,
and all other manner of service unto the Virgin Marie, unto the Saints both
male and female, whom in like manner you call Sic Virgil. Aeneid li. 6. and non
temnere Dives.
Diuos, among whom you distribute the offices of preserving and helping men in
their adversities. What a harmony, I beseech you? Those had their greater and
meaner Plaut. in Casina. Vnus tibi hic dum propitius sit Jupiter, tu istos
minutos cave Deos flocci feceris.
Gods, assigning to each of them his own charge, his Trade, his weapons, his
days journey. Varro in his time makes mention of thirty thousand, or thereby.
The little Saints be such as S. Ledger, S. Fremin, S. Guerlichon, S. Emeneheu,
S. Lupe, S. Vit. etc.
And verily you have gathered together a heap far greater then that of the
ancient Romans, and your Deifications are still multiplied at this day, as it
shall be declared in the own place, God willing.

CHAP. II. Of the antiquity of Religion.
WE approve the antiquity of the word of God, yea, it is eternal, and we
reprove that which is against the truth, seeing that in no ways she can
prescribe or be prejudiced, says Tertullian De Virg. veland.
The Lord commands us expressly by the Prophet Ezechiel Ezech. 30. 18.
, not to walk according to the commandments of our Fathers, neither yet to
observe their laws and statutes, or to defile us with their Idols, but to live
according to his laws, and keep his commandments. And who should speak in
man? Whither the spirit of God, or antiquity? And what other rule has our
understanding then the holy Scriptures, which enableth us to judge of
antiquity? Aug. lib. cont. Petil. c. 2. Ambr. in 1. Cor. cap. 4. Chrysostom.
hom. 49. in ca. 24. Math.
The Fathers have called it an exquisite balance, the square of verity, the
rule of equity, saying, that there is no other proof in the world but by the
same. S. Cyprian Cyp. Epist. 63. ad Caecil.
teaches us that we ought not to have any regard unto that which our
predecessors have thought fit to be done, but unto that which Christ has
done, who was before all those. Vt Vatinius se Pythagoreu^ dicere solebat, and
hominis doctissimi nomen suis immanibus, and barbaris moribus praetendere,
Cicero in Vatin. sic Pontificij suis erroribus praetendunt nomen sanctorum
Patrum, and Gloss in Can. Noli meis did. 9. vult prima scripta omnia enim
authentica, and tenenda esse ad vltimum iota.
And wherefore are you so strictly tied to the institutions of your Fathers,
that you will not yield a jot, not considering if they speak well, or not? If
any press to reform them by the line and rule of the word of God, which is
the anchor of our faith, says S. Athanasius Athan. in Synopsi.
, the foundation and ground of our cause, says Saint Austin Aug. de unit.
Eccl. cap. 16.
, immediately they are pulled and drawn to the fire, that will once attempt
any such holy reformation among you. You have learned this maxim, which is
become so common among you, to wit, that no change or innovation ought to be
made of the religion of your predecessors and Fathers. And who are those
Fathers? Pythagor. in verse. aurat.
Pythagoras, Plato in Timaeo.
Plato, Mecaenas, Agrippa Agrippa apud Dionem.
, and such other Politicians and worldly wise, which have taught you that every
man ought to serve God according to the manner of the Country, The most impure
idolaters do cry out in Prudentius. Hoc sanctu^ ab aeu, est, hoc ab auis
traditum.
and the inueterate custom of his predecessors, and that they ought to die
the death, whosoever do the contrary thereof. And for as much as you are in a
manner buried in the coffin of antiquity Apud Ambro. li. 5. epist. 10. extant
verba Symmachi Ethnici, quibus religione^ Christiana^ nouitatis infimulabat,
suam vero, id est Pampilianam, ceu antiqua^ and veram censebat retinendam.
, Antichrist has found the door open, that he may the more easily snatch and
take hold of your decayed Church, and not only crooked, but pulled down to
the ground, through age of the putrified burden of your traditions and
unwritten word.

CHAP. III. Of School Divinity.
WHat is more sacred among Sciences then Divinity? You have profaned it by
bringing in of that which you term Scholastique, gathered out of Lombard,
Master of the sentences, which has engendered unto us the race of the Thomists,
Scotists, Albertists, Ocamists, Realists, Nominalists, and such others, whose
foundation is laid upon the subtilities of Aristotle. Let any man remarke the
themes of your Sermons, the disputations of your Schools, together with those
great and huge volumes of Commentaries upon the four books of the Sentences,
Oracles are received every where from the Tripus of this Philosopher, and the
Universities that ought to be instituted after a Christian manner, are changed
into the Academies of that heathenish Athens. You spend more time in clearing
that which seems ambiguous and doubtful in the doctrine of that ingrate
disciple toward Plato, then in teaching your flocks the law of the Gospel.
The oaths which the Universities do exact of their initiates and Batchelours,
that they shall not control him, and those Hoods or And may we not liken the
liripipium or Doctorall hoode to those apices and tutuli Flaminum and Salioru^.
Doctorall caps are witnesses of the truth of that which I speak. And your
Divines of Collen have determined, Fran Bernard. de Lutzemb. in Catal, Haeretic.
that as S. John Baptist was the forerunner of Christ Jesus in Diuinis; in like
manner also was Aristotle in Naturalibus.

CHAP. IIII. Of Diseases.
THe whole Scripture declares unto us, that unto God only we ought to have
recourse in all manner of afflictions, as well of the body as of the spirit. The
Pope is in Heaven a marshall which appoints every one his place to camp in.
The Saints, according to your judgment, are more fit to impart their favors
unto you in your diseases. Does it fall out that a woman is in travel and
labor of her child? Behold incontinent S. Margaret in readiness, her aid
and favor is prayed for, of God no news at all. Sic Viues comment lib. 8. c.
27. de ciuitat. Dei, Multi christiani in re bona plerumquod pecca^t, quod diuos
diuasquod non aliter venerantur qua^ Deum. Nec video in mult is, quod sit
diserimen de sanctis, and id quod Gentiles putabant de dijs suu.
Is not this the very same which the Gentiles practiced, who were wont to
commit this charge of attending women that were in this case, unto Diana, or
Juno surnamed Lucina. The examples of this your imitation are so frequent and
ordinary, that it were but superfluous to repeat them. And that old hagge in
time of her sickness could tell some news concerning this purpose, which
being prostrated before the image of the Virgin Marie, and thereafter demanded
by one what she was doing, answered; that she was praying to this good Lady,
to the end that she would make intercession for her at that good Ladies hands
that was in heaven; which answer being accepted with a little nodding of the
head, she thinking to correct her former speech, added moreover that she was
praying to the good Lady in heaven, to the intent that she might recommend her
to this holy image, before which she had bowed down her self. Comment. li. 2.
Pope Pius makes great account of a certain Virgin Marie Prunetane in the
Country of Florence; whom the people do reverence with a most fervent
devotion, for the opinion which they have conceived, that in time of necessity
and drought she is able to send down rain. Her Temple is decored with
incredible riches Diodor. Sicul lib. 5. Strabo lib. 15.
, by reason of the Rain.
propines which are daily sent thither. Pausan. in Attic. Corinth. and Baeot.
The Gentiles in the like case did call upon Jupiter, whom they named Pluuius.
And the Athenians (as says In Atticis.
Pausanias) made an image of Ceres praying to Jupiter, that she might obtain
some rain, Ier. 14. ve. 22. An sunt inter vanitates gentiu^ qui pluuiam edant,
and an celi dant imbres; no^ne tu is es Iehoua Deus noster?
to be a memorial of a certain great drought, which had grievously afflicted
the country. The Egyptians only were void of this sort of Paganism, to
address their prayers to Jupiter, seeing that the river Nilus ought to
perform this task, as Lib. 1. Eleg. 8. Nec pluuio supplicat herba Ioni.
Pestilence.
Tibullus witnesses. Against the pestilence you have S. Sebastian, and his
successor S. Roche, who is worshipped in Venice. The Romans had their Ovid.
in Fast. Ecce leui scutum versatum leuiter aura Decidit, a populo clamor ad
astra venit.
Ancile, that is to say, their Buckler, and as their tradition bears, fallen
down from heaven in the time of Numa, sent from their Gods for the like
disease. And do you not recommend your Hogs to S. Antony? Liuius lib. 4. Dec.
4.
The Romans also vowed and promised to their God such beasts as should happen
to be borne to them during the time of the Spring, which for this reason is
named Ver sacrum. Diana was the patroness of Hunters and Dogs, she had these
in her protection. S. Hubert of the Forest of Ardenne has succeeded her, and
is very devoutly called on against madness, for which Madness.
they say that his Mass is a singular preservative. That Nunc pluit and claro,
nunc Jupiter aethere fulget.
Jupiter of the Gentiles thundering and lightning did send down (as those poor
souls believed) tempests: At this day against hail and such like
intemperature of the air you sing in your Church the Mass of S. Bernard, of
S. Grache, S. Barbara, of S. Aliuergo, of S. Andoche, and others. De invent.
rer. lib. 6. ca. 13. Papistae Raphaeli committunt oculos sanandes, Apolloniae
dentes. Alan. Cop. dialo. 3. cap. 29.
Polydore Virgil complained in his time, that idolatry was in so great account
among those of his Nation, who in time of their sicknesses had recourse unto
images of all fashions. If the heavens threaten the earth with thunder and
lightning, behold the Priest in readiness armed with his host, imprisoned
within his pix or holy box, the purgative Storms.
water is set abroach also, and standing upright at the gate of the Temple, he
Inuocatio ad S. Rochum contra pestem his verbis concipi solet. Tu qui Deo es
tam charus, and in luce valde clarus, sana tuos famulos. Et a peste nos
defend. Open nobis ac impende contra morbi stimulos. Missal. and Breuiar.
Sarish. in Missa. de S. Rocho. (...).
exorciseth the air, and marketh the same with the sign of the cross. You
would say that it were an Augur with his Lituus, or crooked staff, wherewith
he marketh the regions of the heavens. We deny not that God has wrought many
beautiful wonders in heaven, in favor of his Church, but to obtain them, we
must proceed by devout prayers, and not by such Ceremonies as have no
foundation in Gods word. Cleo ordained certain Priests who were called (...),
as who would say, spyers of hail, wardens and procurers of tempests, which are
your predecessors in this manner of doing.

CHAP. V. Of praying to Saints.
WHat Arithmetician is so perfect in the calculations of the Algebra, that he
can number the Virg. Aencid. lib. 7. Ad nos vix tenuis famae perlabitur aura.
infinitenes of diverse patrons, advocates, and tutelare Saints, whom you have
substituted in place of the ancient Gods and Demons of the Gentiles, whose
names are unknown each to another. In Apol c 23. Narnensiu^ Veridianus.
Aesculanorum Ancaria. Volsiniensium Nursia: O ticulanoru^ Valentia: Intrinorum
Noctia. Faliscorum in honorem est primacuris, etc.
Tertullian writes that every Province and City has her own God. The Syrians
have Astartes: the Arabians Diasares: the Treuisans Tibelenus: Afric
Coelestus: Mauritania her petie Kings. Deluentius is adored of the
Crustuminenses, and so forth of the rest. Cont. Celsum lib. 8. passim tomo 2
page 930.
The Pagan Celsus cited by Origin, said, that it could not be displeasing unto
the supreme God, if any did make prayers and supplications to the Demons
Secundum numerum vrbiu^ tuarum sunt Dij tui, ler 2. 28.
(so termed he his Gods) as to his friends, as to those who are subject to him,
and belong to him, etc. In S. Ambrose the Pagans say likewise; Through the
Creatures we may go to God, as by the means of the principal Officers In
epistol. ad Romans 1. tomo quinto.
of a Court we have access to the King. In S. Lib. 8. de ciuit. Dei, cap. 18.
tomo quinto.
Austin the Platonicks teach; That because no God has any meddling with man,
the Demons do present the prayers of men unto the Gods, and return back
again to men the answers of their petitions. In De praeparat. Euang. li. 13.
c. 7.
Eusebius; We believe (says Plato to Hesiode) that when those people of the
golden age are dead, the same having become Demigods, do rid men from their
miseries, and become protectors of others, and for this cause from hence forth
we will serve them as Gods Multi Christiani Diuos Diuasque non aliter
venerantur qua^ Deum, nec video in multis, quod sit discrimen inter eorum
opinione^ di sanctas, and id quod Gentiles putabant de suis Dijs Vines comment.
in August. de ciuit Dei. li. 8. cap. vlt.
, and worship their sepulchers, and those also that have lived well, howsoever
they have dyed, through age or otherways. And thus then did the Pagans. And it
follows after; And these things do agree well with the death of such as are
beloved of God, whom thou can not do amiss to call the champions of piety.
From hence also we have this custom to go to their Sepulchers or shrines,
and power forth our prayers near unto them, and honor their blessed spirits.
Is not this the same error that has gotten ground in your Romish Church? And
who has brought it thither but the zeal without knowledge of such as had
lately of Gentiles become Christians? Cicero lib. 3. de legibus, Diuos and ens
qui coelestes semper habiti sunt, colunto, and illos quos in coelu^ merita
vocauerunt. Ite^: Diuisque alijs, alij sacerdotes, omnibus Pontifices, singulis
flamines sunto.
Cicero makes mention of the laws which commanded to adore them, and to erect
Colleges for them, and Priests to minister unto them. And verily we ought to
deplore the unwary oversight that was committed, chiefly in the time of
Constantine the great, when the Gentiles with their naughty prejudice were
entering into the Christian Church. It was thought, that having diuerted them
from the service of their Gods, they would have kept some measure toward the
Martyrs, and have breathed out that devotion which in times past they used
toward their Gods. But such as thought that they had gained much by causing
them to revolt, have been much deceived, for they have changed the name only,
the same very superstition remaining still. Lib. 3. b^lli Pelopon.
Thucidides speaking of the Plataeans, who were redacted unto great extremity,
brings them in speaking to the Spartanes after this manner. De muneru^ and
officiorum distributione quae sanctus sunt assignata and praefinita, Aug. de
Ethnicis loque^s sic scribit lib. 4. de ciuit. Dei cap. 22. Dicebat Varro ita
esse vtilem cognitionem Deoru^, si sciatur quam quisque Deus vim and potestate^
habeat cuiusque rei. Ex eo enim poterimus inquit, scire que^ cuiusque rei causa
Deum aduocare and inuocare debeamus, ne faciamus vt mimi solent, and optemus a
Libero vini Deo aquam, and a Lymphis aquarum Dealue vinum.
We call upon the common Gods of Grecia, to the end that they would do us so
much favor, as to enable us to persuade you of these things, to the end that
you may remember the oath of your Fathers. We make our humble prayers, being
thus prostrated before the Sepulchers of our ancestors, and call on the dead,
to the end that we may not be made subject unto the Thebanes. Judge now if
you be not fellows with those in praying to Saints.

CHAP. VI. Of the Iubilee.
IN the observation of the Iubilee I remarke an imitation of Indaisme and of
Gentilisme: of Gentilisme, in so far as the Gentiles did celebrate the
secular plays, Julius Capitolinus.
ordained by Valerius Publicola after that the Kings were chased forth of Rome,
and were so called, because they were acted but once Horat. Certos vt denos
decies per annos, etc.
in a hundred years. And for this cause the Heralds, by whom these were
published and proclaimed, cried out, Come and see the The origin of these
places is set down amply by V. Max. in the Treatise of ancient institutions.
plays, which none of you shall ever see again. They acted Comedies,
Histories, and such other sports in honor of the Gods of the Gentiles, which
continued the space of three nights together. And above all others Pluto and
Proserpina were honored, or, as says Festus, Apollo, and Diana. Boniface
Platina in vita Bonif. Clem. et Sixti. et Nauclerus Genesis 44.
the eighth, who brought in the Iubilee among the Christians, has changed
plays into plays The Secular plays into his Iubilee.
, the year 1300. after the example (said he) of the old Testament. It is but
303. years or thereabout since this invention was established, and
consesequently the Church could very well have been without the same the 1300.
years proceeding. And if this Boniface, of whom it is written that he entered
into the Popedom like a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and dyed like a Dog,
would needs institute the Iubilee after the Example of the Law of God, Leuit.
25.
why did he command that it should be celebrated every hundredth year. Truth it
is that the other Romish Pontifes considering that the time of their Popedom
could not reach so far, because of the shortness of their life, which for
the most part is finished by violent death, have abridged the time, that they
might the better fill their bags, and obtain the best part of the spoil
which the poor people under the pretense of indulgences, brings in to them
from all parts. Wherefore Clement the sixth has ordained it to be every
fiftyeth year, and cast of all Sixtus the fourth, to be every 25. years once.
Superstition therefore being vpholden by the insatiable and immoderate ambition
of those that are exalted to this Sea, has framed this Iubilee according to
the pattern of the secular year of the Romans.

CHAP. VII. Of Purgatory.
WE will speak of Purgatory, which is the patrimony of the Romish Clergy,
and the chief foundation of the Masses for the dead. Our writers have declared
by their learned writs, that it was unknown under the Law, was without any
proof or likelihood, let it be never so small, either in the old or new
Testament. And those of the Romish Church could not in the whole Bible, find
out any pretense for their Purgatory, save only in one place of the second of
the Machabees, an Apocryphal book. We will not sound the deepenesse of this
matter, since Purgatory was not holden or delivered as an Article of faith, more
then 400. years after the death of our Savior, and S. Austin himself did
hold it only for a problematicall doctrine, which should not be taught to the
people by the Heralds of the doctrine of salvation. What Who does not perceive
that Pope Gregory has from thence the fables of his dialogues, where he
places the Purgatory of some souls in baths, some in the wind under leaves
of trees, others in the fire.
is the ground thereof then, and who has sown the first seed thereof? Who
but Plato, Homer, Virgil, Mahomet and such other Gentiles? And S. Austin
himself finds such a conformity between the opinion of Plato, and that of
the Christians of his time, that he has termed this decree merely
Platonicall: which the Jesuits with all their subtilities dare not deny. Then
Purgatory is wholly builded after the pattern of the doctrine of the Gentiles,
as it may easily be demonstrated. Eusebius De prepar. Euang. lib. 11. ca. vlt.
making mention of the doctrine of Plato; So soon as the dead are arrived in
the place, whereunto they have bin transported, first of all it is discussed in
judgment who has lived well or naughtily: and if any seem to have lived
after a midway manner, they are carried along the Acheron to a marish, where
they are purged by enduring of heavy punishment, and being delivered from
thence are rewarded with honors according to their merits and good works.
And this does he insist on more at length, using namely these words, to purge
and absolve. And in another place out of Gorgias in Plato: Those that have
sinned, says he, curably, that is to say, easy to be pardoned, are purged by
suffering of torments, both while they are living here, and in hell after their
decease. But as touching those that have sinned incurably, to such no good can
happen, since they are incurable. And thus did Plato Plato lib. 10. de Rep.
Dial. Phoed. Gorg.
make up three degrees of men: of the virtuous, whom he lodges in the fabulous
Elysian fields: of the ungodly and such desperate persons, whom he adiudgeth
unto everlasting fire: and his Purgatory is reserved for those of the third
rank, who have committed sins, but such as are forgiven, and may easily be
remitted in this world with small penance, yea although it were but by the
aspersion of a little holy water. And for these last, I say, he appoints
sometimes burning rivers, and other sorts of punishment for the expiation of
their crimes. And to the intent that they may not lie lingering in these
torments, as you have yearly Masses for the dead, Plato lib. 2 de Rep. Cicero
lib. 1. Tuscul. quaest.
so also has he ordained certain ceremonies and purifyings, which he thought
would yield a singular comfort unto the souls, and relent their dolours. And
to this effect Plato lib. 4. de Repub.
he ordained yearly feasts, and twelve days of February were of purpose
dedicated, for the celebration of the memory of the dead, for visiting of
their sepulchers, and to pray for their weal, where the Silicernium was not
forgotten, as we shall show in the title of the feasts of the dead. Homer wrote
some thing before Plato: and Virgil Virgil. lib. 6. Aeneid. Ergo exercentur
poenis, veterumque malorum supplicia expe^dunt, aliae panduntur inanes.
Suspensae ad ventos, alijs sub gurgite vasto Infectum eluitur scolus, aut
exuritur igni.
his imitator or translator has followed his paths, and makes mention thereof
in his Aeneides, as of a true thing, where with his cunning and accustomed
eloquence he describes the tortures of those poor roasted souls, whom with
time he brings forth cleansed and purified, from that purgatoriall fire, to
make them fly Virg. Aeneid. 6 Donec longa dies perfecto temporis orb
Concreta^ exemit labem, puramque reliquit Aethereum sensu^ atque aurai
simplieis ignem.
up into the mansion of his thundering Jupiter. And who does not perceive the
doctrine of our Masters in these works? And who does not see therein the very
formal text of that which you maintain and teach concerning this cruel fire?
From whence then is Purgatory? truly from Gentilisme. Plutarch Plutarch. lib.
de facie quae visitur in luna, and De sera Numinis vindicta.
places Purgatory between the moon and the earth, and there makes the
souls to lodge, that through diverse sorts of punishment they may be purged of
their sins. And the fear of those torments, and the compassion that they had
of their parents and friends that were dead, was the cause why they made
sacrifices for them, as it was practiced (according as Xenophon writes) upon
the soldier that was slain in the battle. And should not this be all one
with that which ludas Machabeus committed, if we must give credit to the
translation of your Bibles? Mahomet In Alcor. Alzoara. 17.
ordained three ranckes of the dead: some to be citizens of Paradise: others of
hell: and touching the last, he plungeth them in Purgatory, to wash away
their remnant filthiness, and to cleanse their souls, that they may be
refined, and worthy to enter into the Mahometicall Paradise.

CHAP. VIII. Of these Names, Sovereign, Pontife, and Pope.
THose that are read in histories know the etymology of this word Pontife,
which is derived from Pons sublicius: For it was his charge to repair that
bridge whenever the same was exposed to any peril, and in danger of
breaking, through the violence of Tiber; because it is made of timber, without
any iron or other metal, and for this cause it was also reputed holy and
sacred. His dignity was excellent, and for ornament thereof a Sergeant marched
before him. His pontifical hat was such a one as the Cardinals of the Romish
Church wear at this day. In stead of being carried upon men's shoulders, as the
Pope is, he went in a litter, sitting in a Curule chair royally, as the chief
Magistrates of Rome were wont to do: If any prisoner being a malefactor had
encountered him, all that day long he was released from his pain. The
medalles, coins, and monuments of the ancient Roman Emperors do witness,
how that they were named great Pontifes, as this inscription proves. Iul.
Caes. Pont. Max. Which has been imitated by other Emperors in great number.
The Pope faith that he is Christ's successor in his great Pontificat Cone.
Later. sess. 10. impertum sinctitatis vestrae and sess 9. regaie pontificum
geus. Et sess. 3. Papa sacerdos and rex. Et sess ^. Princeps totius orbis. Tomo
3. Council sic Innoc. 3. In retribu^ione iustorum salutis aeternae pol licemur
augmentum vide causam 13. quaest. 5. Can. Omnium C^si Papa. did. 40. et Ca^non
nos. ead did. Quis sanctu^ du. bitet ^sse eu^, que^ tantae dignitatis apex
extollit, in quo sidesunt, etc
notwithstanding that he has reserved for himself this sovereign dignity of
Priesthood exercised by him, and which he does exercise still for ever. Is this
a mark of Antichrist, to call himself successor to an office incommunicable
to any man. Bulla, exurge Domine. Haeresi 27. Lutheri Certum est in manu
Ecclesiaeaut Papae prorsus non esse statuere articulos fidei.
If the debate were concerning the order of Aaron, suppressed and abolished
long ago, and if Iudaisme were not altogether abrogated, we would grant a
successor in this dignity, but to grant one to this sacrifice, which is after
the order of Melchisedech, this is an horrible blasphemy. Wherefore we cannot
liken the Pope of Rome better to any then to the Muphti, and great Caliph
(which is as much to say, as the Lieutenant of God) of the Turks and
Mahumetanes, he calls himself their Lord and Prince on earth, he usurps
the swords both spiritual and temporal, he calls himself the Prophet and
Vicar of God, by virtue of the ancient succession of their great Prophet
Mahomet. And who acts and plays his part better in these affairs then the
Pontife of Rome? He calls himself Pope. Pope.
We confess that about 400. years after Christ Jesus, Galerus praefectus
Cyprianu^ sic interrogat: Tu es quem Christiani Papam suum nominant?
as in the time of S. Austin, this title began to be used among the Bishops, as
it appears in these subscriptions, Cypriano Papae, and in S. Hierome
Beatissimo Papae Augustino. And none can make any question but this word has
proceeded from the Carnus etia^ par tc^ Graece dici Papa^ seu Pappa^ patet ex
Hom. Odyf. l. 6 Id cir^o Guicciardinus hist. l. 1 scribit Alexandru^ sextu^ex
muliertb. filios u^thos quatuor, duas filias tuliss^, quos filios no^ nepotes,
alioru^ sacrificuloru^ more vocaresolitus erat Kissing of slippers.
Grecians. And that so famous idol of Jupiter, worshipped of the Bythinians,
was commonly called (...), O Jupiter Papa. And by what privilege have the
Bishops of Rome reserved it to themselves alone, all others being excluded,
since he whose successors they vaunt themselves to be, did never attribute it to
himself? Let us come to the kissing of slippers. Whereas the Pope will have
them to be kissed, is not this to imitate the ancient Pontifes of Rome, who
being set in their Curulae Chaires, received the same honors of those that
entered into their temples? But let us say better, that this vanity has
proceeded of the invention of Caius Caesar, Seneca de beneficijs l. 2 c. 12.
Caesar Pompeio Poeno oscula^du^ porrexit pede^, vt videre^t homines soc culum
aureu^ mar garitis distinctu^.
who according as Seneca writes, put forth his left foot to be kissed by
Pompeius, surnamed Paenus. Pomponius Laetus writes, that Diocletian Dioclet.
(inquit Pompon. Laet. in Diocl.) edicto san xit vti omnes sine generis
discrimine prostrati pedes ip sius exoscularentur, quibus ctiam venerationem
quanda^adhibuit, exornans calceam nta auro, gemmu and margaritis. Ide^
posteafecisse and Maximu^ narrat Alex ab Alexand.
put forth an edict, whereby he commanded all persons indifferently to kiss
his feet, and to this effect, after the example of Caligula, did he wear
slippers of great value, such as the Popes Pontofles are at this day. And the
greater sort of the Prelates only are exempted from so doing, to whom the Pope
puts forth his right hand to be kissed, a ceremony proceeding from the same
warehouse of the Paganes, as Plinius Plinius lib. 11. religio aliqua est in
dextra, quae in fide porrigilur, quae osculis auersa appetitur.
and Apuleius Apul. As. lib. 2
bear witness. To conclude, if the Pope were diseased of the gout, and lame
of his legs, he might pretend some excuse, when he causes himself to be
carried; but whereas he does it as a point of Religion, it is intolerable. And
from whence should he have learned this delicatnesse, but from the ancient
Romans Iuuen. Quadriuio? um tam sexta ceruice feratur, Hine atque inde patens
ac nuda pene cathedra. Mart. lib. epig 4. Cum tibi non esse^t sex millia
Caeciliane, Ingenti late vectus es hexaphoro.
his forerunners.

CHAP. IX. Of the Popes Arms, and of the Keys.
IN the blasons of the Popes cognizance there is always a pair of Beda
Ecclesiast. hist ge^t. Angl^r. lib. 3. ca. 25. narrat suo tempore omnibus
persuasu^ fuisse ianuam coeli Petro co^missa^, quasi coelum materiale haberet
ostium.

Solue iube^te Deo terrarum Petre catenas, Quifacis vt pateant coelestia regna
beatis.

Cantantur in festo B. Petri ad vincula.


Keys inseparably united with a Tiara triply crowned. This is that great
Lock-smith, of whom others have obtained power to open and shut. And who should
have resigned over this place of key-bearer unto him? From whom has he
borrowed those mantles, blasons, and the two keys made in manner of a
Burgundian Cross? Truly his predecessors are of no small number, and he is
heir to many, whom superstitious antiquity did hold to be Gods, and to whom
this charge was committed. Mercury had the petase, or winged hatt, and the
Caduceum wrapped about with two serpents. Apollo Thyreus had the place of great
Sergeant-porter among the Grecians: Clusius was one of this trade. Patulcius
meddled therewith also: and the Grandfather Ianus King of Italy had two faces,
a token of his wisdom in governing his people, and has been the first
Roman Key-bearer, sovereign patron and Dictator of the ancient Catholic
Roman religion, Prince of the Limentins, Foriculans, Cardians, and other under
officers, and to him belonged Cui reserata mugiunt aurea claustra Pole.
the opening and shutting of the golden gate. The Pope has succeeded him. The
Paganes painted Mercury Imaginem Papae cum triplici tiara vide in Bibl. vulg.
edit. ex typographia Apostolica Vaticana.
with three heads, and named him Tricephalus in place whereof the Pope has his
three crowns, to declare the fullness of his power, which he usurps over
heaven and earth. And touching hell, he has displaced, or made Hecate give way
to him (called of the Gentiles Triuia) together with Cerberus and Gerion, to the
effect that he may send thither, or bring from thence such as pleases Can. Si
Papa. did. 40.
him best: for he braggeth that he may send souls to hell by whole cart lodes
full, without any fear of reproach. Clement In bulla sup. Iub.
the sixth commands the Angels and Devils. Is not this that which is said of
Orpheus, that he descended into hell, to deliver from thence his wife Euridice,
Pollux to release his brother Castor, Theseus and Perithous to ravish
Proserpina, and Hercules to carry away Cerberus?

CHAP. X. Of Vestures, Albes, Amices, Miters, and Crosier Staves.
IT is to be wished that the simplicity in clothing, which shined in Christ
Jesus and his Apostles, had been imitated. In the primitive Church we do not
read that the Bishops differed from others in their apparel, Vt quonda^
vestirentur Episcopi, vide Turtul. de Pallio, and Socratem Ecclesiast. histor.
lib. 4.
as well ordinary, as when they went to preach and proclaim the Gospel, and
to minister the holy sacraments. Those habits therefore that were indifferent,
afterward became different, but simple and without curiosity. It is not
unknown to us what objections you use concerning this matter, and how you
keep your selves close in the sunshine of the authority of some Fathers,
as of Gregory Nazianzene, Greg. Nazian. in insomnio de Anastas. Ecclesia
Chrysostom hom. 83 in 26. cap. Mat. Hieron. de vita Cleric. ad Nepot. and lib. 1.
aduer. Pelagianos.
and others, who report that the Priests and Deacons were apparrelled in white,
during the time of the celebration of the holy mysteries (not that we think it
unlawful to use a comely white roabe in the celebration of Gods service: but
on the contrary we hold the use thereof as fit and decent as it is ancient:)
and thereafter you forget not Saint Austin, who in one of his Epistles August.
epist. 54.
makes mention of a vesture of the head, called Pyrrum (which far from the
purpose you read Byrrum) which was a red hat peradventure such as the Cardinals
of Rome wear at this day. But by the contrary, to prove unto you what modesty
those first Bishops used, I will only produce the example of Babilas Martyr,
and Bishop of Antiochia, whom S. Chrysostom so highly commends, Chrysostom.
lib. aduer. Gentiles.
and among those virtues, wherewith this Father was endued, he makes mention
of his frugalitie, and that his apparel was but after the ordinary fashion of
other Christians. In the ages next following, chiefly under Gregory surnamed
the Great, this natural simplicity was corrupted, through the imitation as well
of Iudaisme as of Gentilisme. Of Iudaisme according to Rabbanus Maurus, Rabban.
Maur. de inst. Cleric. lib. 1. cap. 14. and sequent.
who takes the pains to discipher them one by one. But of Gentilisme in
truth, if we take pleasure to contemplate the figures and fashion of the
Pantheon at Rome, other-wayes called the Rotonda, in whose vault we see cut
with singular artifice, the whole ornaments and ceremonies which the poor
Gentiles were wont to use in their sacrifices. Alexan. ab. Alex. lib. 4. cap
17. Valerius. Philostratus.
That we may enter farther into this matter, we find the statutes of Numa,
concerning the apparel of those whom he ordained to offer sacrifice, and of
other Priests of Paganism, which he would have to be of a white color Cic.
de leg. color albus praecipue decorus Deo est habitus.
(we except not against the color or garment, if it be not made a part of Gods
worship, and applied to a mystical sense, as it is in the Church of Rome) as
the etymology of this ornament called Alba, Apul. Asin. lib. 11. vocat
cataclistam vestem, hoc est, secundum Eeroaldum, vndique clausam.
does sufficiently witness, which is the ordinary garment that your
Massemongers have retained for themselves at this day, and which the Egyptian
Priests used in their service, Herod. lib. 2. and apud Philostratu^ memorat.
Apolonius Tyanaeus.
according to the tradition of Pythagoras, and had in abomination that which
was made of wool. And it were to enter into a labyrinth, out of the which we
could not easily escape, if we should make any stay in that which might be
said, and written of this subject. Plautus mocketh Sane hoc genus mulierosu^
est tunicis demissitijs.
these large and ample robes. Plinius makes mention thereof in diverse places
of his works, and cloatheth the Priests therewith, namely those of Egypt.
Those vestures which you call holy and Virg. Aeneid. li. 3. Fert pictura^as
auri subtegmine vestes. Et lib. 9. Et tunicae manicas, et habent redimicula
mitrae.
mystical, are not all of one fashion, neither yet worn daily, or on every
holy day. You have of all colors and fashions. Some are set out with one sort
of flowers, and some with another. Which makes me call to mind the vestures
of the Salians, that were variable after this manner, as the Divines of the
Gentiles witness, to wit, Virgil, Ovid, and others. And those garments were
not made indifferently of any kind of stuff, the matter was singular, neither
was it lawful to make them of any other thing then of fine linen, whether it
were because it is brought forth of the earth or for the frugalitie and profit
redounding thereof, the same being fit for all seasons: and held such as were
made of wool to be polluted. And from this kind of vesture the Priests of
Egypt were named Linigeri, as well by Herod. in Euterp. Martial. epigr. lib.
12. Iuuen. Sat. 6. Ovid. Metam. li. 1. cum ait: Tum Dea linigeracolitur
celeberrima turba.
Herodote, as by the Poets, and were very careful to have it white and clean,
which caused them wash the same often, like as your Friars do at this day.
Cicero approved Cic. lib. 2. de leg.
those linen garments, chiefly when the fashion was wouen, which he thought
to be most acceptable unto God. And such as were dyed in colors were to no
use, save only in time of wars. This white color was in so great request,
Pers. Sat. 1. Iuppiter haec illi quamuis albata rogarit. Horat. sermon. 2. Ille
repotia, natales, aliosue dierum Festos, albatus celebret.
and was had in such reverence, that the Priests and such as offered sacrifice
among the Gentiles thought it great honor unto them to be surnamed and called
white. And moreover, the Philosophers almost of all sects, after the imitation
of the Egyptian and Romish Priests, had the same in great estimation, and
farther used it in their daily wearing. Apolonius Tyaneus Philost. in eius
vita. O Divine Pythagora, tu prome causa^ dicito: siquidem eius gratia in ius
vocor, cuius tu inuentor, ego imitator sum.
in presence of the Emperor Domitian, was reproved for wearing a white
garment. His excuse was, that that which he did was after the example of
Pythagoras, whose imitator and disciple he named himself. The feast of Ceres
was honored with white apparel Ovid Fast. lib 4 Alba decent Cererem, vestes
Cerealibus albas Sumite, nunc pulli velleris vsus abest.
Isis and Cybele the mother of the Gods, were served after the same manner
(which I speak not, as condemning either the color or the ornament, but
because you put a necessity of religion in these things, and apply them to a
mystical sense, as the Heathen do.) Is not this the same that is observed in
your Churches at the Mass of the virgin Marie? And like as the sacrifices and
ceremonies done to Pluto and Hecate were performed in the night season, Virg.
Aeneid. 6
and the offerings were black: so also they use this color in the Masses of
Requiem, which are said for the dead. Those of quickest sight among the
Gentiles Apul. As. lib. 8.
have mocked these delights, and secretly have accused their Priests, by
calling those Curetes (...).
that were dedicated to the service of the great mother, as who should compare
them unto young Maids that are too curious in their toys. And that veil to
cover the head with, which Aeneas did institute, is it not the Amice of the
Priests Aliud est etiam vestimenti genus Archiepiscopis pro prium, quod magna
pecuniaru^ vi a Romano Pontif. redimitur, in quo dignitatis suae plenitudinem
esse positam arbitra^tur, quod pallium vocant, cuius etiam vis tanta esse
aestimatur, vt eo non donatis nec raparum libram benedicere fas fit. Vide lib.
de sacr. cerem. Romans Eccles. and totum tit. de vsu. pallij. quand^que venditur
30000. aureis, nec successori licet vti pallio sui antecessoris.
of the Romish Church? The cope of your Masse-mongers is by the statute of that
Magician the second King of Rome, who ordained that a coat of diverse colors
should be worn above this white robe. Which also, we say, might be used, if
no necessity were placed in it, nor abused to any superstition. And it cannot
be denied that this cope was made after the fashion of the best cloakes that
were among the Paganes. These are the principal ornaments which Numa ordained
more then seven hundredth years before the incarnation of the son of God; The
Flamen Dialis was honored with the robe praetext, which was a sort of garment
not much different from those ierkins now used in the Churches. And those
tunicles, wherewith the Deacons, De tunicis Diaconorum, in quibus eleemosynas
olim excipiebant vide Raban. and art 4. and 5. Apostolico can.
and subdeacons are clothed, draw very near to the robe Latusclavus, which
was made fast with large buttons of gold or purple. Moreover, the sacrificers
were arrayed outwardly with the skins of those beasts which they had offered:
and is it not from those that the Chanons have borrowed their furs? As
concerning the Miter, Ad defende^das Episcoporum mitras, bicornes aiunt esse
factas, exe^plo faciei Mosis, quam cornuta^ fuisse credu^t. Polyd. Virg. de
invent. ver. lib. 4. cap. 7. Cicero 6. Verr. ex Virg. Aeneid. 10. and Aelian.
Spartiam.
which is your Bishops chief ornament, the sacrificers of the Gentiles did use
the same, as it may be seen in Writers. And the Kings of Persia and Egypt
were decked therewith as with a Diadem. And your sheep-heards clubbe, which you
call the Crosier staff, has no other origin, then from that cudgel without
knottes crooked at the top, which the Augur held in his left hand, while he
went about to remarke the regions of the air upon the top of an high tower
by his divination.

CHAP. XI. Of shaven Crowns, Heads, and Beards.
PLutarch witnesses In vita Thesei. Verissima^ to^surae causam ex historia
Hieronymus ad Sabinianu^ videtur expressisse, cum ait de tonsura virginum: hoc
autem, duplicem ob causa^, de consuetudine versum est in natural, vel quia
lauacru^ non adeunt, vel quia oleum nec capite nec ore norunt, ne a parvis
animalib. quae inter cutem et crinem gigni solent, and concretis sordibus
opprimantur.
that this manner of shauing of the head is very ancient, and does attribute
the invention thereof to certain Nations, which were of the opinion, though
contrary to the custom of our ancient Gaulles, that long and side hair was a
great hinderance to the nimblenesse and agilitie that is requisite in warfare,
which caused them cut away their hair. And mong the Romans, this ceremony was
observed, that such as had been delivered from captivity, whereby they were
made slaves, did follow after the triumphall chariot of their deliverer, having
their heads shaven. Nevertheless this custom ought to be attributed, not to
S. Peter, shaven by derision in Antiochia (as your tradition bears) but to
the Egyptians, Herod. in Euterp.
among whom the Israelites remained certain ages, of whom they have learned
(as by all true likelihood it may be gathered out of the holy Writtes) the
first tradition of shaven Iuuenal. Sat. 6. Qui grege limigero circundatus et
grege caluo.
crowns, heads and beards. The Priests of the Goddess Isis, and the
Babylonian sacrificers took delight to walk thus attired and marked, from
whence the Poets have taken occasion to scorn them, and call them Mart. epig.
l 12. Linigeri fugiunt calui, sistrataque turba, Inter adorantes cum stetit
Hermogenes.
balde. The great Moses while as he was discharging faithfully the calling
which God had committed to his charge, spared no travel in reuoking the Hebrew
people from their Egyptian Idolatries, Nicolaus Leonicenus in varia historia
lib 2. cap 21. Isidis, inquit, Sacerdotes in Aegypto lineis vtebantur vestibus
and semper erant detonso capillo, quodetia^ per manus traditum ad nostra vsque
tempora peruenisse videtur. Siquide^ ij qui apud nos diuino cultui and sacris
altaribus praesident, barba^ comamque nutrire prohibentur, et in sacris vtuntur
lineis amictibus.
they being of themselves inclined and ready to embrace the superstitions of
their hosts, as the melting of the brazen calfe bears sufficient testimony.
And what was more worthy of the admirable wisdom of so excellent a man, then
to keep back and banish from the holy Sanctuary those Heathenish vanities.
He therefore being inspired with the holy Ghost has caused a register in the
book of the law of his express decrees, Leuit. 19.
addressed to the Leuiticall sacrificers, that they should not cut their hair
or their crowns after a round fashion, neither yet shave their beards. In the
time of the Prophets, the Pagans and Infidels, when they worshipped their
Idols had their heads shaven, which gave occasion to Ezechiel Ezech. 44. 20.
and ibi D. Hieronymus.
to repeat the same precept that in old times had been pronounced in the Law.
And that frowardness which was natural to that people, has made this
admonition Ierem. in epistola ad Iud. in Bab. abduc. Ne vertice^ raditote, neue
barbam vellitote. Baruch. 6.
be repeated over again, that they might be ware of the filth of Babylon,
where they were to remain captives for some years. And why make you not use
and profit of these so manifest ordinances? What may we say when we behold your
crowns altogether byas (for they differ each from another as far, as the
regulars and seculars do) but the same which made the Messalian Priests to be
derided Pars maxillarum tonsa est tibi pars tibi rasa est, Pars vulsa est: vnum
quis putet esse caput?
by their own followers? And this Greek proverb, (...), id est circumcidere
comam.
to shave his bush of hair, which was a flowt against this foolish custom,
may be objected against you without doing you any wrong. And this ceremony
makes me remember of the Curetes, (...).
Priests dedicated to the service of the great Mother, whom some have thought
to have taken their name from shauing. And Apuleius Apul. Asin. li. 11. Hi
capillu^ derasi funditus vertice praenitentes, magnae religionis terrena sydera
and Antistit^s sacrorum proceres qui candido linteamine etc.
makes his Priests march forward carrying the relics of the Gods, in this
furniture of crowns and pontifical ornaments, such as we see they are at this
time, and chiefly on the day of the shows and ceremonies of Diana. It is not
unknown to us what you write and teach Durand. rat. li. 2. de minist. et
ordin. eccle. Petrus Val^rianus de sacerdotu^ barbis. Pont. Ro^. par. 2. did.
23. Can. prohibet. can. Clericos. Can. Si quis. Extrauag. de vita et honest.
clericorum.
concerning your crowns, and of the mystical glosses wrested from thence.
This subject has seemed to you to be of such importance, that you have
compiled whole treatises thereof, that we might learn those secrets and
mysteries, which are hid under the operation of a Barbers rasour. Your canons,
decrees, and decretals have not been silent, yea, it is a ceremony annexed to
the essence of your Priesthood, Haec sunt Anazilai paegnia.
and a mark of the character thereof: as in times past that thread of linen,
from whence the Lucan. lib. 1. Et tollens apicem generoso vertice flamen.
Flamines have taken their name, as if we would say filamines was the mark and
token of the dignity of the Heathenish sacrificers. You attribute these
inventions and orders to some Romish Pontifes and Councels, Anicetus. Alexander
3. Anacletus quintus. Council. Tolet. 4. et Agathe^se. can. 15 nempe id sibi
negotij crediderunt solum dari, populo vt placerent quas fecissent fabulas.
by going about to rob your ancestors of the honor due unto them for teaching
you those pretty knackes. It is an ordinary speech among you, to say that you
are free from secular jurisdiction, and to maintain this unlawful liberty,
you have troubled both heaven and earth: and I believe that for a pattern you
have imitated that which was wont to be used toward slaves, whose heads they
shaued, when they did enfranchise them, and gave them bonnets Plaut. in Amphit.
Quod vtina^ ille faxit Jupiter, vt ego hodie raso capite caluus capiam pileum.
for the same. And all this was acted in the Temple of Feronia, whom
superstitious antiquity held to be the Goddess of liberty, to the intent
that you may make the acts of your ceremonies the more authentike, which are
kept in your Monasteries, even unto this day, and especially in those of the
order of S. Benedict. The same Gentiles, Mart. lib. 9. epig. 18.
s being madd after the worship of their Gods, to the effect that they might do
the more honor to them, amongst other offerings, Hos tibi laudatos Diuorum
vocecapillos Ille tuus Latia misit ab vrbe puer.
they sacrificed and offered to them bushes of head hair cut from their
children: in like manner as you do with the hair of the maids and virgins
which are dedicated among you to a Et 27. Consilium formae speculii, dulcesque
capillos Pergameo posuit dona sacrata Deo Et de Eucolpo. Hos tibi Phoebe vouet
totos a vertice crines Eucolpus, domini ce^turionis amor.
Monastical life.

CHAP. XII. Of Benefices and Tithes.
THe second King of Rome was the author of the Religion, and of the officers
thereof, of the Religion (I say) which was observed in this City, sometimes
mistress of the world. The Blond* lib. 1. de Romans triumph.
ministers thereof were the Pontifes, Augurs, Salians, Feciales, Curions, and
others. Now as God ordained certain laws amongst his people, touching the
maintenance of the Levites: in like manner the Devil, who is an ape, persuaded
Numa the sovereign Pontife of his Religion, to find out some means for the
maintenance of those that were consecrated to his service. We will not reprove
the statutes of Christian Emperors, L. Si quis ad declinandum. C. de
Episcopis, and Clericis. L, illud quod L. Sa^cimus. L. vt diuinum. Cod. de
Sacros. Eccles.
touching their donations and legacies proceeding of their Testaments, which
were given to the Churches, and that for the use and weal of the poor. We
wish only that the intention of the testators might have been justly and
duly observed, which was to comfort, to cause receive, and maintain with
those goods that they had left, the strangers, the sick, the distressed, the
orphans, the poor, and to redeem captines. I will seek no other witnesses
then you, how those goods are managed in your Churches. Numa allowed
maintenance for the Vestall virgins, out of the common revenues. Private
persons being either encouraged by this example, or rather provoked through a
superstitious devotion, did after the same manner: and the donations whether
they were in mouable, orin immovable goods, increasing daily more and more,
did enlarge the Benefices, and made them become exceeding rich, whereof some
belonged to the Princes disposition, or to the common wealths, or else
depended of the College of the Pontifes: and the rest belonged to the
presentation of some private persons, by the right of patronage: as at this day
the Emperor, the Kings, the Pope, and others have this right of be stowing
Benefices. And from thence we gather, that the Curia Romana non petit ouem sine
lana.
Offerings, Pledges, Firstfruits, Mortuaties, Anniuersaries, and Legacies,
Fines, Confiscations, and Condemnations were the ordinary reucnues of the
ancient Roman Sacrificers. This is verified by the monuments and sepulchers,
from whence you have taken the model of the foundations for the dead, which at
this day have for their pile the doctrine of Purgatory, notwithstanding that
those foundations were laid a great while after. For the fifteen Councels
which we have extant in the Greek, speak not one word of them, although they
come so far as the eighth hundredth year. We have the testament of Gregory
Nazianzene, Testam. Greg. Nazianz. quod extat in corpore iuris ciuilis
Graeco-Romanl. page 203.
signed after him by five Bishops. All his Legacies tend to the maintenance of
the poor. And such as have written of the antiquities of the Gaulles, doc
attribute those donations made for the dead (which smells altogether of their
Paganism) to the prodigality of Dagobert, King of Du Tillet in his abridged
Chron, of the French Kings.
Frannce, pretending thereby to obtain pardon for his sins, after he had lived
all his days shut up among women. The confiscations have brought no small
gain to graife those Benefices. We read also that Cicero his house was after
his banishment forfeited to the college of Pontifes, and consecrated to the
Goddess of Liberty. You have tolerable and intolerable Benefices (you are
acquainted with your own term.) Concerning the last; the Popes dispensation
is requisite thereto, if any will enjoy a plurality, which was practiced in
old times among the Gentiles (and in some cases we deny not to be just and
lawful among Christians:) for to enjoy two Benefices, the dispensation of the
sovereign Romish Pontife was requisite, as it is recorded in the History of
Fabius Maximus. Tit. Liuius. lib. 30.
Now it is not to day that these contentions, concerning Benefices, have been
engendered. For during the reign of Valentinian the second of that name, there
arose a fierce combat among the Christian Priests, and the Idolaters, upon the
quarrel concerning foundations and legacies. And in this age, the whole life
of man were not sufficient to learn all the cousining practices, wherewith
this Beneficial subject is accompanied, and mingled together. And concerning
Tithes, the matter cannot be cloaked any longer with the Tithes of the Levites,
it is but a wett sack in time of rain, seeing you do rather with them
maintain your prodigality and pride, then sustain the poor. The Romans
paid Tithes to Hercules; Lucullus Plut. in Lucul. Festus.
consecrated the Tithes of the booty which he obtained in the war against
Mithridates. Liber pater, other ways Bacchus, Ovid. li. 3 Fast.
after he had conquered the Scythians, offered the tenth part of the spoil to
Jupiter: Which Cyrus Herodot.
imitated after he had subdued the Lydians. And fith you will not be put from
abusing of Tithes, Gods inheritance to his Priests, why are you not contented
therewith, without adding further to your head-peices, Miters, and Crosier
staffes, Kingdoms, Dukedomes, Marquisats, together with the very fat of the
earth?

CHAP. XIII. Of Friars.
THe Roman Empire has been void of Monkerie, I cannot perceive the print of
their feet in Histories, unless we should attribute Monachisme to that
society of Priests, belonging to the Syrian Goddess, so often mentioned in
old times by Apuleius. Lib. 8. Asini.
And that which I know I have from the Jesuits own mouths, which vnawarres
have discovered themselves like mise, and were very much amassed to see in
Iappan In the Commentary entitled, De rebus Indicis and Iapponicis.
a fraternity and likeness between the ceremonies of those Barbarians, and
their own law-like ceremonies, with other statutes of the Romish Fratrie.
There they found the Iammabuxes, whose austeritie being campared with that of
the best reformed Friars of the Popedom, whether it be in watching, fasting,
meditations, scourging, with other such like exercises, will be fouud to go
far beyond your feueritie. They have their sownings and rauishings in the
spirit, like your Capuchins with their arms spread abroad. They have their
Popes, who censure Kings, even as he of Rome does, and deposes them,
thereafter they cause themselves to be carried upon men's shoulders. The Bonzes
are Friars: the Tundes are Bishops, which have the bestowing of smaller
Benefices, commuand fastes, take order for eating of flesh. Their Monasteries
are like unto Kings palaces: there you may contemplate fair Libraries, dining
rooms, galleries, and chapels, they live in commontie together, they abstain
from marriage, and use poling. They have their belles, their claustrall
devotion, their music, their canonical hours. Sometimes they are busy in
meditation, and have certain hours appointed for their recreation. They have
praying for the dead, and the fire of Purgatory is kindled among them, as it is
among you; lights, perfumes, frankincense, and holy water, are not forgotten,
no more then are the indulgences and strings of beads, which they carry in
their hands, to number their prayers with. Bulls and warrants for souls are
granted. In a word, it is all one thing: if there be any difference, it
consists only in the names. And as you worship the God that is created in
your Mass, whom you keep locked in your prisons far from any use, so also
have they their God Amide, which is gloriously seated on the altar in the
midst of the Temple. S. Christopher also is worshipped under the name of
Xacqua. The Turks have their Friars also, which are divided into several
orders and rules of living. They make profession of austerity of life, and
above all things of chastity, which that they may the better observe, they
pearce their yard and tie it with iron rings which they carry about them all
their life time. They have begging Friars, Solis, matris Deu^, sacerdotibus
stipem Roma cogere licebat, sicut omne mendica^tium Monachorum familijs id
proprium est.
those that go bare footed, and others that go in their shirt, and bare
headed, and such as forget not to tear their flesh with stripes. And from
whence has your Monachisme proceeded but from these. We have made mention
before of the Vestall Virgins: we shall add thereunto, how that the Emperor
Antoninus named Philosophus Julius Capitolinus.
ordained and erected a new order of Virgins, in honor of his Lady Faustina
that was deceased; and from whence have your Sanctimoniall Nuns proceeded but
from this invention.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Flagellants.
THe Council of Latran Holden in An. 1215.
has forbidden to invent any new sect of Religion. The further we go, the
more this sort of merchandise is increased in the world. They contend who shall
labor most: Huius abusus reformation e^ ex igebat Guli. Durant. Episcopas
Mimate^. in tract de mo. celeb. conc. gencr. part. 2. tit 35.
and such as will not be bound so strictly, have invented a new sect, calied of
the Scourged, Whipped, being recommended to the virgin Marie, fellow-brethren
of the Rosarie, A Lupercis Christianos suas flagellationes mu tuatos esse, and
in eundem fine^ instituiss, testatur P olyd. Vir. de inuc^t. lib. 7. cap. 6.
Flagellantes iam pridem habiti fue runt haeretiet. Vide Naucleru^ vo lu^ 2.
generat. 45. Albert. Argent. in Chron. sub an. 1349. Chronicon chronic. sub
anno 1273. Albert. Krantz. Wand li, 8. cap. 29. Joan, Gers. in 1 part. oper.
tract. cont. sect. Flagelse page 22.
Flagellants, which have rancked themselves in black, blew, white, and gray
squadrons. What further? I hope that very shortly we shall have some green
like parets, and some red like Cardinals. These are made companies; and which
are ready at all occasions that may happen and occur for the Popes service. I
will not take the pains to set down in particular what games they use to
practice: a certain learned person Reuis. de Conc. Tridentin.
has done it before me, I shall be content to say only that your Flagellants,
and Jesuits have learned of the Baalites to scourge themselves till they bleed.
1. Reg. 18. ver. 28. Look Deu. 14. verse. 1.
The Lupercians running through the city, bated not only such as they found in
their way, but themselves also. Herod. lib. 2. Sic apud Turcas se gerunt qui
monachismis profitentur. Bartolom. Huingius de Turcarum moribus. Bellonus.
The Egyptians whipped themselus till they bled, and that during the time that
a Cow offered to Isis in a holocaust was consuming. The Priests of the Goddess
Cybele, of Bellona, and of the Syrians, made incisions with knives and graven
irons, till they made the blood spring forth, Apul. Asin. Au. lib. 8.
and this renting was used at processions, as it is practiced among you at this
day, and their sacrifices being finished they scourged themselves. Vide
Tertull. in Apologet. and in lib. ad Martyrs. and Plutarchum in vita Lycurgi.
The Lacedaemonians had their diamastigosis, conform in all points to the
discipline of your Friars. Who has required these things at your hands?

CHAP. XV. Of Celibat.
AS Vesta Ovid. Fast. 6. Non nisi castas; Admittebat Vesta ad sua sacra manus.
admitted none into her service but such Virgins as were picked out of the
chiefest families of Rome, so also the Vest (which is to say a flamme) of your
Romish Church, will have those only to be consecrated to her, that keep their
chastity, or abstain from second marriage: a rule so strictly observed, that
he is holden to be a sacrilegious person, Tibul. lib. 2. eleg. 1. Absistat ab
aris etc.
whosoever will offer to touch the God of your Mass, not having the mark of
Priesthood, whereunto singleness of life is inseparably annexed. If you should
ask Siricius Pope of Rome, what moved him to forbid marriage, doubtless he
would allege the example of Gentilisme, as his Epist 4 in fin.
words do witness, whereof this is the extract. I exhort you, says he, I
admonish you, I pray you let this infamy be removed, which Gentilitie (that is
to say even Paganism it self) might lawfully accuse. Seruius the expounder of
Virgil Ia hunc versum Aeneid. 4. Huic vni forsan poteram succumbere culpae.
witnesses, that such as had been twice married were not admitted to be
Priests. Of these Gentiles, says Josephus, Antiq. Iud. lib. 15 cap. 13.
the Jews, namely the Esseans, learned this superstition in their declining
age. Clement Alexandrin Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 3.
writes, that the Heretics learned their singleness of life of the Paganes,
against whom (says he) our Christian Divines did allege that place of the
Apostle. 1. Tim. 4. In nouissimis temporibus discedent quidam a fide, etc.
Hieron. cont. Iouia. lib. 1. in finc.
The Hierophantes gelded themselves by using of hemlocke: in like manner did
the Priests of the Mother of the Gods; And Apuleius Apul. Asin. lib. 8.
makes mention of horrible things concerning the Sacrificers of Isis, which
had wont to do the same. The virgins that attended Diana, Iauen. Sat. 6. Ille
petit veniam quoties non absii. net vxor Concubitu. sacris obseruandisque
diebus, Magnaque debetur violato poena cadurco.
and the Egyptian Priests observed also this law of chastity, and that with
greater severity then the most chaste Priest that is in your Church, as the
Poets of those times do testify unto us by very sufficient Tibul. lib. 1
eleg. 3. pureque lauari. Te memini, and puro secubuisse thoro.
proofs. As touching women, they abstained from their husbands company when
they were about to celebrate the Thesmophories of Ceres. And as it was a thing
ignominious among the Gentiles to marry the second time, which the Flamen
Dialis in special was forbidden to do, so also those of your Popedom that
have been twice married, are counted irregulars.

CHAP. XVI. Of Marriage.
THe Gentiles had certain days which they marked with the black stone, and
accounted them unhappy, Ovid. Fast. 2. Dum tamen haec fiunt, viduae cessate
puellae, Exoptat purospinea taeda dies. Conde tuas Hymenaee faces, and ab
ignibus atris Aufer: habent alias maesta sepulchra faces.
upon which they would rather loose their lives then marry. And the seasons,
days, and months of these prohibitions and restraints, were set down by
their Divines. February had eleven days that were dedicated to the memory of
the Ovid. Fast. 3. Nubere si qua voles, quamuis properabitis ambo, Differ,
habent paruae commoda magna morae. Arma mouent pugnam pugna est aliena maritis,
Condita cum fucrint aptius omen erit.
dead. March had three during the procession which was solemnized in
remembrance of the victory, that Minerua obtained against Mars the God of
war in defense of her chastity. And do you not believe with the foolish
antiquity, that the month of May is the month of fools? I have known some
so scrupulous and fearful in this regard, that they held such marriages as
were solemnized in May to be unfortunate. Ovid. Fast. 5. Nec viduae tadis
eadem, nec virginis apta Tempora: quae nupsit non diuturna fuit.
This month had three days, on which marriage was not permitted, for the same
cause that we spoke of concerning February, to wit, because of the feast for
the dead, then instituted by Plutarch. in Romulo.
Romulus, and called Lemurales. This is the corner, where the Council of Trent
has forged the restraint of the blessing belonging to marriage, from the first
Sunday of the Aduents unto the feast of the Kings, and from Ashwednesday unto
Quasimodo inclusiuely. For upon what authority of the holy Scripture can this
imitation be grounded, or rather this indecent affectation. And to the intent
that I may not enlarge my volume, I will pass over with silence many
ceremonies which you observe at your weddings, that are common to you, and the
Paganes.

CHAP. XVII. Of Miracles.
ALL the Doctors Chrysostom. in Mat. 24 cap. hom. 49. Cyril. August and alij
passim.
of the holy antiquity teach us, that he that demands miracles, is himself
a new monster of infidelity: and he that seeks after wonders is a great
wonder himself: that miracles add not one jot to the holiness of man, for so
much as they are common to the Reprobate, and because Antichrist is a
sovereign worker Mirabiliter quidem, sed mendaciter operabitur.
of miracles. This is your ordinary note, to call for miracles at our hands,
as the Pharisees did in old times, who asked signs from our Lord Jesus Christ.
And to show that you have whole storehouses furnished with them, to blind the
simpler sort you blase abroad the miracles (although false and supposed.) of
the Crucifix of Muret, of the sweatie Napkin of Cahors, and Chambery, of the
Images of our Lady of Loretto, of Puy, of Montferrat, of Roquemadou, and
others: of the body of S. Claude, of S. James, of S. Antonies arm, and of
other Saints both old and new. What will you answer to the Turks, who would
have us believe that their Saints, whom they term Sehidun, work many wonders,
even as yours do, and have their recourse unto them in time of necessity and
sickness. The De miraculis Ethnicorum vide Valor. Max. lib. tit. 8.
ancient Romans have been as well stored with these, as you that are their
successors: their Chronicles bear witness, as the predictions of Spirits,
that appeared to the living: of Images that have spoken; of the divination of
Calchas in Homer, that Troy should be taken after ten years expired: of the
Vestall Virgin that drew water in a sieve: of Accius Nauius Augur, who in
presence of Tarquinius Priscus cut a whetstone a sunder with a rasour: of
Claudia that hailed a great ship to the bancke side with her girdle only,
which neither the multitude of Oxen, nor the force of man could in any wise
displace. What answer make you to this my Masters? Will you say that the
miracles of these two Vestalles, were only wrought to declare their chastity,
and not for authorizing of Gentilisme? Verily let us say that Satan by such
admirable works would have installed himself in the place of the true God, to
abolish the true and sincere doctrine, and to insinuate his own into the faith
of men. From whence we gather that your miracles being made and forged for
authorizing of your Idols, and confirming of your doctrine already convinced
of lies and falsehood, can be no other but the same fiictions and counterfeiting
with that mask wherewith in old times he deceived the poor Gentiles.

CHAP. XVIII. Conformity between the Gods and Saints.
DArre you deny that you have placed the Virgin Mary in stead of Venus? This
Goddess in time of Gentilisme Horat. lib. 1. Carm. Od. 3. Sic te Diua potens
Cypri. Ovid. Heroid. epi. 15. Jn mare nimiru^ ius habet orta mari. Herod in
Clio. Pausan. in Alticis.
was worshipped of Sailers, vows were made unto her, they would promise to
enrich her Temple, whenever they were in any danger upon the Sea. And this
belief was so much the rather embraced of them, because they were persuaded
that the government of the sea was committed to her charge, because she was
engendered of the frothe thereof. She that has succeeded in her room Bernard.
Breidenb. in peregrin. mo^tis Sinai, narrat se audiuisse nautas canta^tes.
Salve splendour fir mamenti, Tu caliginosae menti de super irradia, placa mare
maris stella, ne inuoluat nos procella, and tempestas obuia.
, is in like manner adored and worshipped with all manner of titles, which in
truth she would refuse as most execrable blasphemies, if she were to converse
again among men. They call her the star Pontificij Mariae tribuu^t titulos
hic descriptos. Vide Offic. B. Mariae Virg. in hymn and antiphon. Litan. B.
Mariae Lauretanae.
of the Sea, the Queen of Heaven, the Lady of the world, the port of
salvation, the life, the hope, and to be brief, they exalt her above Jesus
Christ Coel lect. antiq. lib. 7. cap. 18. Helenus apud Vi. admonet Aeneam:
Iunonis magna primum prece numen adora. Iunoui cano vota libens.
. May it not be that you have learned these titles of the Idolaters, who called
Juno and Diana Queens of Heaven? Cybele wore a Crown made in manner of a
Tower with the Batlements thereof. The Image of the Virgin Mary is thus set up
being Crowned like a Queen in your Temples. The Virgin Mary has commandment
over Purgatory, into the which she descends every Satterday, according to
the doctrine of the Carmes: Hecate Virg. Aeneid. 6
is the Queen of Hell, and the Paganes held her for their Lady. And like as
in March the Paganes ordained a feast to be kept for Minerua, so also you have
the feast of the conception of the Virgin Mary. In old times Jupiter the
Savior, Juno Sospita, and the Goddess Carna had the Keys in custody, and
the charge to open the gates of Heaven: this office is resigned over to the
Virgin Mary. S. George Mantuan. Fast. lib. 4. de S. Georgio. Maxim belloru^
rector que^nostra iuue^tus pro Mauorte colit.
, although he came never into the world, has succeeded the God Mars or
Perseus: S. Katherine to Pallas. S. Cosmus and Damian to the Physician
Aesculapius De Aesculapio, vide Liuium lib. 10. epist lib. 11. and lib. 40.
Orpheum hymn. in Aesculap. Plautum Curc. act. 2.
: S. Urban to Bacchus. In a word, when there is any disease in hand, or other
ways, we may behold incontinent this succession and resignation of offices:
and for conclusion, as there was a certain Diana, named Strongelios, that is
to say, the round, a work of Praxiteles, so also in Rome, there is a Minerua
the round, which is the Pantheon, consecrated in old times to those innumerable
swarms of Gods.

CHAP. XIX. Conformity of the feasts of the Pagans, with those of the Romish
Church.
WE are content to repose on the seventh day: the bountiful hand of God does
offer the rest of the days for our necessity. Whatsoever is above, has
proceeded of man's invention, invention I say, founded upon the imitation of
Gentilisme, upon superstition and idleness. You have not only one sort of
feasts, but there is of all sorts among you, as among the Gentiles the
Lupercalia Ma^tuan. in fastis. Roma, Lupercales ludos antiquitus isto Mo^se
celebrabat: posita graui^ate per vrbis Compita cursaba^t stolidi sine vest
Luperci, Et scuticis olidi tractis de tergore capri Pulsabant nuruum palmas.
, Agonalia, Carmentalia, Consualia, Paganalia, Compitalia, Imperialia, the
days which they termed Statas ferias, from whence I think your stations are
come, as likewise your Popish Indulgences. You have public feasts, popular
Fest. Pomp. Cato, Sacrastata and solennia sancta seruasti Labeo, quia pro
populo fierent.
, peculiar to certain families, such as are the Claudian Feries, the Aemilian,
etc. immovable feasts which are kept on certain days, solemn Virg. Aeueid.
8. vocat annua, quia quotannis agi solebant.
or yearly for the greater Gods, for the meaner Gods, for the celestial, for
the infernal, and for those so much reverenced of Plautus Cist. 5. 46.
. The principal law of the feasts is, to do no work, to shut up their shops,
and Tibul. lib. 2. eleg. 1. Luce sacra requiescat humus, requiescat arator,
Etgraue suspenso vomere cesset opus. Omnia sunt operata Deo, non audeat vlla,
Lanificam pensis imposuisse manu^. Vina diem celebrent, non festa luce madere
Est rubor, erra^tes and male far pedes.
to give themselves over to all manner of idleness, both in Towns and
Country: a law (I say) very hurtful to poor families. All the world
knows, if Tauernes, unlawful games, riotousnesse, and all other manner of
wantonness be forgotten, or not. These complaints are ancient, and in this
matter we have conformed our selves to the order set down by the most sincere
Councels, and to that which the Fathers of the primitive Church have taught.
And if we should accuse of these new institutions Gregory, surnamed the Great,
Bishop of Rome, who conformed himself to the ceremonies of the Pagans, I
think we should do him no injury: for writing to Mellitus an English Abbot,
Lib 9. epist. 71. Nom duris mentibus (says he) simul omnia abscindere
impossible est.
he says that such as did offer oxen for burnt offerings to the Demons, ought
to change that custom into another, and that it shall not be amiss, that at
the dedication of Temples, or on the days of the memory of the nativity of the
Martyrs, the places where the relics repose, be decored with leaves and
boughs of trees, and be frequented, that the solemn feasts may be kept in
their names Natales genialesque dies conuiuijs celebrare solebant Ethnici.
Theodor. lib. 8. de Martyr. and Council. African. c. 27
. And what is that else, but to change the name only, and to establish the
same thing? To chase away idolatry that it may be replanted again more surely?
The custom of the Gentiles was to offer sacrifice unto Jupiter, and Mercury:
Act. 14.
the Lystrians gave the name of Jupiter to Barnabas, and to Paul the name of
Mercury, because he was the speaker. And those holy Apostles, did they embrace
these honors, howbeit they were not ignorant that they were grounded upon
custom? Let us come to the Conformities. Theodoret In the Book which goes
under his name de curandis Graecorum affectibus sermon. 8. sub fine^.
acknowledges this abuse, and how that the feasts of the Christians have
succeeded to those of the Gentiles: In place, says he, of the Pandia, Diasia,
Dionysia, and your other feasts, we celebrate feasts in honor of Peter, Paul,
Thomas, Sergius, Marcellus, Leontius, Antoninus, Mauritius, and other holy
martyrs. So much for the institution. And concerning the abuse upon the
feastiuall days of your Martyrs Refert B Rhena nus in annotat suis ad li.
Tertul. de corona militis hu^c vitu^ Conciliu^ Nicenum damnasse.
and Patrons, do you not make feasts and banquets after the manner of the
Pagans? feasts notwithstanding which S. Austin Deciuit. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 27.
says, that the better sort of Christians did not use? which S. Ambrose (says
the same Doctor Confess. lib. 6. cap. 2. tom. 1.
) forbad because they smelled too much of the superstition of the Gentiles,
being altogether like unto their Parentalia, that is to say, to their funeral
feasts. If Tertullian In Apolog. Gra^ de videlicet officiu^ in focos et choros
in publicu^ ducere, vicatim epulari, ciuitatem tabernae habitu abo le facere,
vino lutumcogere, certa^^^ cursitare ad ^^iurias, ad impudicias, ad libid^nis
illecebras Siccine exprimitur publicu^ gaudium per publicu^ dedecus?
were alive, what just cause should he have, I beseech you, to exclaim against
your dissolute and lewd doings, which you commit on those days that are
dedicated to your tutelare Saints? His Apologeticke bears witness of the
great indignation that he had conceived against that Heathnish madness, which
you cherish so much. Zachary Pope of Rome forbade dancing on feast days,
(and he had done better to abolish the name thereof for ever) wherefore do
you transgress Virg. Pars pedibus plaudunt choreas and carminadicu^t Item:
Immemores nostri festas duxere choreas.
his ordinances? It is because you will not let go a jot of those ancient
observations, and customs, by which you think to discharge your selves of
that duty that you think you owe to the memory of the Saints that are
deceased. It is well known how you term the passion of the Martyrs, birth. It
is known likewise with what devotion the ancients did celebrate their births
Cic. Phil. 2. dat natalitia in hortis. August. lib. 6. Confess. c. 2. refert
Ambrosiu^ Mediolanihaec a Christianis, ijs quoque qui sobrie facere^t fieri
vetuisse: ne vlla occasio daretur ebriosts sese in gurgitantibus: et quia illa
quasi parentalia superstitioni Gentiliu^ essent simillima.
, as it is written of Antoninus, that he caused to celebrate his in his
gardens. And therefore because the antiquity named the martyrdom of Gods
servants, Birth, in those days the people, as in their name, did willingly
heap up offerings, as it is practiced in your Churches upon holy days: and
hereof Apuleius Lib. Asin. 11.
shall bear testimony unto us, who writes that he did celebrate his own
birthday with great solemnity Virg. in Bucol. Phyllida mitte mihi, meus est
natalis Iola.
, where feasting and banqueting was not forgotten. Upon your feast days one
represents the Saint, whose memory is to be celebrated, is not this the
same which in old times was observed among the Gentiles? The testimony of
Apuleius Asin aur. lib. 2.
, and that mock of Tertullians Tertu: Ipsos Deos nostros saepe noxij induunt.
in his Apologeticke, shall suffice me for warrants. The Romans did celebrate
the feast of fools, which was called Quirinalia, on the eighteenth of
February: and you Romish Catholics keep the feast of Innocents after
Christmasse Durand. lib. 7. rubr. de Cathed. Petrus de Natal. l. 3. c. 104.
Baptist Mant Fast. 8.
. The feast of Candlemasse has succeeded to Februalia, Lupercalia,
Proserpinalia, and Floralia, which the Pagans did celebrate on the same day
with torches and lights burning all the night long, in honor of Ceres and
Proserpina, to serve belike for a Beacon unto that distressed mother Sext. Pom.
while she was seeking for her daughter Beat. Rhen. in anno. ad l. 5. Ter.
cont. Marcionem. Negari equidem non potest, inquit arde^tium cereoru^ quos
hodie Christiani eo die, qui purificat Mariae dicatus est, ex more circu^ferunt
a februalib. Romanoru^ sacris originem supsisse. Pertinaci Paganismo mutation^
subuc^tum est, quem rei in totum sublatio potius irritasset.
: during which the processions both in the Cities and Country were not
omitted. In stead of Ianus you place the Circumcision of our Savior. And the
feast of the three Kings, has it not proceeded from the Heathenish feast of
Saturnalia, which was kept at the same time, and with the same ceremonies? In
the beginning of the Spring Macrob. Satur. li. 1 c. 21. Vopiscus in Aureliano.
Herodia. lib. 1.
the feast of the Mother of the Gods was kept with great magnificence, it was
she that had the chiefest place in the Pantheon, as mother to the rest
Lampridius in Alex. Seuero.
: Pantheon, I say, which Boniface has since made a receptacle for all Saints,
that they may be honored Durand. rat li 7 cap. 34 Petrus de Natal lib. 10.
cap. 1. Polyd. lib. 6. c. 8. Beda lib. 2. c. 4. hist. Angl.
on a certain day appointed, which is in the month of November. That great
Mother, I say, had in her troop following her, the commemoration of all the
rest of the Saints her children, and there was no sort of plays or sports
which was not permitted. Maskes also were in request Polydor. Virg. de invent
rer. lib. 5. cap. 2.
, and were the principal part of the feast, to the intent that the lascivious
and villainous facts that they committed, might be the better hid and covered.
None is ignorant of that which is practiced two months before Lent Vide Viuem
comment. lib. 8 ca. 27 de ciuit. Dei. vbi conqueritur, de quibusdam
Christianorum ludis, quos a scenicis illis veteribus non differ affirmat.
: this disease is epidemiall, and shame has taken hold of the wittiest among
you, who would gladly find out some remedy, but in vain: for the sore is
waxed too old. Moreover, the Romans had certain holidaies which they named
Palilia, because they were dedicated to the Goddess Pales, patroness of
Shepherds Ovid. Fast. 4. Pastor ou^s saturas ad prima crepuscula lustret, Vnda
prius spargat, virgaque verrat humum etc. Tibullus. At madidus Baccho sua festa
Palilia pastor Continet, a stabulis tunc procul este lupi.
and pastures: during which they used to drive their flocks about the parkes
with certain coniurations, to the end that their beasts might fare the better
all that year long. And further, their keepers with others did leap over a
fire. Is it not this which you observe with so great solemnity upon the vigill
of S. John Baptists feast Durand. rat. di uin. off. lib. 7. c. 19 number. 1.
Petrus de Natalib. lib. 7. c. 1. Johannes de Vo raginein hist. Lo^. cap. 105.
Bapt. Mant. fast. 8.
? The feast of S. Peter's bands has succeeded to that which was celebrated on
the same day, in honor of the chain of gold that belonged to Augustus: as in
like manner that which they call S. Peter's chair was subrogated in place of
that day, whereon the Pagans offered to their Gods Iuuenal. Sat. 3. Vnde epulum
possis centum dare Pythagoreis. Cicero pro Muraena: Is, cum epulum Q Maximus
Africani patrui sui nomine pop. Romano daret, rogatus est etc.
meats and wine upon the sepulchers of their deceased Parents, from whence
also that day was named in old times the feast of S. Peter's banquet. The
Pagans had feasts for preserving of their wines Vindemia Aesculapy^ festu^
fuit, quod celebrarunt vi^demiatores post vinum expressu^. Arnob. l. 7. cont.
gentes. Pythaegia Graecorum in festum Martis mutata.
, this is your S. Martin. Your Rogations, are they not in place of the feasts
called Robigalia Robigaliorum dies Romae septimo Kale^das Maias celebrabatur.
Plini. lib. 28. cap. 29 Ovid. l. 4 fast.
ordained for preserving of the corns from blasting? In a word, this whole
swarm of feasts both double and single, may by the right of succession be
termed the daughter and lawful heir of Heathenish feasts. And Gregory Greg.
Nazian. in festo Gregor. Thaum.
called Thaumaturgus, that is to say, worker of miracles, has chased away the
false Gods, that he might substitute in their place the feasts of the Martyrs.
The Doctors and Councels Council. Afric. can. 27. et. 28.
have forbidden these abuses, wherefore have you restored them again?

CHAP. XX. Of new years gifts.
THe Romans had the days Sigillares, which were celebrated on the sixteenth
of November, Sueton. lib. 5. de vitis Caesar cap. 5 Volfangus lib. 10 comment.
cap. 9. Polyd. Virg. li. 9. cap. 2. Laxius li. 10. cap. 10. Langius epistola 61.
continuing for the space of seven days, and were almost such as the
Saturnalia: which were called Sigillares, from the Latin word sigillum, which
signifies a little Image, because on those days every one bought of those
little Images, of gold, of silver, of brass Lipsius in Tacitum 4. Annal.
, of plaster, and of Potters clay, to give each to another. And the street
where such wares were sold to be given away, was for this cause named
Sigillaria Plinius epistola ad Macrum de Auunculi sui vita studijsque.
. And the same Romans used every year upon the Kalends of January Prudentius
-- Iano et celebri de mense litatur Auspicijs epulisque sacris, quas inueterato
Heu misili sub honor agitant, and gaudia ducunt Festa Calendarum.
to offer gifts unto Augustus, although he had been absent, and to carry them
into the Capitol. Who does not perceive here a conformity with that which is
practiced among you, from the first day of the year unto the feast named of
the Kings. Though we must not condemn all things which the Gentiles used; yet
you should do better if this affection and good will were begun and ended with
calling on the name of God. And why do you not call to mind that which
Zachary In Docr. causa 26. Si quis Calend. Ianuar. ritu Ethnicoru^ colere.
Vide synod. Turon 2. cap 23. Antissiodore^ some can. 1. De Zacharia decreto vide
26. q. 7.
Bishop of Rome forbade to do?

CHAP. XXI. Of Fasts.
IN approving of such Fasts as are conform to the word of God, we reprove
such as are against it, and have been brought in ^^rough abuse. We call that
abuse whenever any are led only by custom, or when they fast in honor of
the Saints, as it is observed on the Apostles vigils. Leo Bishop of Rome Sermon.
2. de ieiunio Pentec.
forbids such Fasts, as being set in the place of those which were
consecrated to Ceres goddess of the earth, as Tit. Liu. decad. 4. lib. 6.
Ovid. lib. 4. Fast. Qua quia principio posuit teiunia noctis, Tempus habent
mensae fidera visa sibi.
Titus Liuius records. Yea and those were enjoined to fast, who came to seek
counsel of the Oracles, and chiefly of that of Tertul. lib. de anima.
Trophonius. The Turks observe their Lent and many fasting The Ramadam of the
Turks.
days, yea, and far more strictly then you do. Concerning the fasts of the
Imber days, you attribute the invention thereof either to Calixtus or to
Vrbanus, but you might more justly attribute the same to the Ovid. Fast. 3.
Romans, unless it be for that you have four, and they had only three, for
the preservation of the fruits of the ground. The first was to the God
Robigalia septimo Calendas Maias celebrari solita Plin. lib. 18. cap. 28.
Robigus, who was protector of the corns: the second to Bacchus for vines: and
the third was dedicated to Flora, for flowers. Behold then for what cause these
days were called Robigalia, which were solemnized on the seventh of the
Kalendes of May, Vinalia and Floralia.

CHAP. XXII. Of places of Refuge, and Sanctuary.
WE confess that some places of Refuge were granted to the Israelites, Exodus
21. Deuteronomy. 4. Joseph. antiq. l. 4.
but with great restraints, as it may be seen in the decrees which you have
made. And we impugn not those Asyla, provided that such moderation be used,
that vices be not nourished, nor crimes unpunished. But do you contain your
selves within these bounds? We avouch that you exclude not from your Asyla
D^cret. de Immunitate Ecclesia, in cap. Immun.
either brigandes, or night-theeues, and such as have committed any horrible
crime within either Church or Churchyard, and when any such thing happens
the remedy is at hand, they are within the place, from whence they cannot be
taken. But what will you answer to Innocent the De Immunit. Eccles. cap. inter
alia.
third, who makes no exception? And is not this privilege granted to the
most detestable and abominable crimes, as it is practiced Pasquier in his
Epistles.
at the Coffin of S. Roman at Rouen? There is no more chastising of Ioab
holding fast the horns of the 1. Reg. 1.
Altar, nor pulling away of Adonias traitor to the Kingdom: your Churches
receive in differently all manner of transgressors, and this privilege of
Sanctuary, has been granted also to Bishops In Decret. 17. quaest. 4. Can.
Id Constituimus.
houses, though they were not contiguous with the Churches. And from whence
have you learned this manner of doing but from Statius in 12. Theba.
Gentilisme? The Athenians had an Asylum, whose privileges were excessive.
Romulus Ovid Fast. 3. Romulus vt saxo lucum circumdedit alto, Quilibet huc,
inquit, confuge, tutus eris. Virg. Aeneid. 8. ^inc lucu^ ingentem quem Romulus
acer asylum, etc. Vide Dionys. lib. 2. Antiquit. Roman.
did before that time open the same unto all manner offellons, to the end that
his bloody city might be the better inhabited. The Emperors statues had this
privilege, and we should never have done, if we would set down the several
places of Refuge for all sort of crimes, whereof the use was great among the
Gentiles.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Dedication of Temples, and of Changes.
GOd commanded Solomon to build him a De dedicatione templi Iuturnae, vide
Ovid. lib. 1. Fastor. Item te^pli Concordiae, Titu^ Liuium 3. decad. lib. 3.
Item templi Castoris et Pollucis Ovid: lib. 1. fast: fortunae publicae Liuium
li. 9. de bello 2. punico, and lib. 4. de bello Macedonico. Iouis Victoris
Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 3. cap. 18. Nil denique apud Romanos tam solemn fuit
quam dies consecrationis.
Temple, he who may be served in all places, and who in times past was served
in the tabernacles of the desert. That was a common Parish for all the
Israelites to assemble themselves in and call upon the name of God: and Solomon
to the end that he might make it the more glorious, did dedicate the same with
many solemnities, as we may perceive in the holy Bible. In the primitive Church
the Christians served Jesus Christ in desert places, in private houses, in
caves and Churchyards, being let to do it openly, because of the
persecution of Tyrants. We condemn not the building of any places that are
made for Gods service: we build them, you destroy them. That which we cannot
approve; is the cost and charges Apul. de Asin. aur lib. 6. Habent templa
sumptuosissimo and solerti fabrica structa: quorum sacratis foribus et parieti:
speciosa dona suffixa sunt, quae cum gratiafacti, numen Deorum, quibus dicata
sunt, testantur.
of your Temples, which surpass the palaces of the greatest Monarchs, whether
it be in magnificence, ornaments, exquisite gifts, and such other Heathenish
furniture. All things shine with gold, silver, and precious stones, as if God
did require these things at men's hands, or as if Christians knew not that
Origin. cont. Celsum lib. 7.
the whole universe were his Temple, that he finds one every where, and that
he will not be worshipped otherwise then in spirit Joan. 4.
and verity. You reproach unto us (as in old times the Epicurian Celsus did to
the primitive Christians) that we do not celebrate the dedications of Temples,
of Altars, of Images. We answer you with Origin. lib. 8. page 935.
Origin, that we dedicate Altars and Images in our souls, after the imitation
of the son of God: that we sanctify our body and members to him, that they
may be a holy Temple to God. Therefore we will not play the Jews, and in like
manner we curse Paganism Council. 2. Bracar. can. S. Conc. Worma^. ca. 3. De
Consecr. did. 1. Ext au. De Cons. Eccle Council. nation. Colon. part. 9. cap 12.
, from which you have learned to dote and consecrate your Churches; so term
you your Temples. And you cannot deny that such customs as are observed in
your consecrations and dedications have proceeded from those of Testes sunt
dedicationes templo rum Castoris and Pollucis, Concordiae, Fortunae pub licae,
Iouis Victoris, Aesculapij, Iuturnae, Matris Deum, Pacis etc.
the poor Paganes, who gave order to consecrate not only public Temples,
but private houses also, which the Cicero pro d^mo sua, in Orat. ad Pontif.
Augurs dedicated with such ceremonies as were prescribed unto them. They took
hold of one of the posts of the Temple gate, and uttered certain words, which
they behooved to pronounce without stammering in their speech. These dedications
were performed also by the Consuls and Sueton. in Vespas. cap. 7.
Emperors: they had wont also to kindle a little fire, whereunto your tapers
and lights have succeeded: they called upon that God, to whom the Temple was to
be consecrated, your Saints male and female are likewise called on. Thereafter,
with solemn words which the great Pontife spoke to him that was consecrating,
having his head covered Cicero inter suas leges: Constructa a Patribus delubra
habento.
with such an Amice as your Priests use to wear, that he professed to withdraw
and take away from all profane uses, the temple, the chapels, the altars,
tables, and all whatsoever was therein, and to dedicate them wholly to the God
Et posita est meritae multa tabella Dea.
whom he named. Can you deny here that a great part of the ceremonies of the
ancient Romans, has been transferred and made common to the dedication of
the Popish Churches? Enter into one of the Gentiles Temples, remarke it
diligently, whether it be in the chapels and altars thereof, whether in the
Gods and Goddesses, compare the same with one of yours, was there ever greater
resemblance between two eggs, or two drops of water? Why then do you not
observe that which so religiously has been ordained by your Can. Non opertet.
Item can. qui. 5. cause. 26.
Canons, not to use any charms, coniurations, and exorcismes of creatures, by
the which is attributed unto dumb things a virtue and dignity above and beyond
the course of nature? You have no ground or warrant for all your proceedings in
the word of God: Yea, and you Gloss. parag. si enim. de cons. did. 1. Possumus
argume^tari ab exemplis infideliu^ cum in textu Decreti sic habeatur: si enim,
inquit, id. Gentilesfacieba^t, multo magis facere debemus nos. vide Durand
ration. lib. 1. rubr. de eccl. dedic.
acknowledge that the pattern was taken from the Gentiles, who were the
inuentors thereof, and if these things were permitted unto them, that you are
nothing inferior to them, and may assume the like liberty to your selves.
Those temples of the Gentiles are consecrated to your Saints: if there be any
difference, it consists in nothing else, Herman. contract. in suo Chron.
but in changing of the names. In like manner the Pantheon which was builded,
and dedicated by Agrippa unto Jupiter the revenger, or, after the opinion of
others, unto Cybele the mother of the Gods, was given in a propine to the
virgin Marie, and to all the Saints by Boniface the fourth, that parricide
Phocas having also given his consent thereto. Andreas Fuluius.
Andreas Fuluius a Roman Antiquarie in his Book, entitled Antichita di Roma,
makes mention how that not only the Temples of the Paganes of Rome, but those
also of other Kingdoms and Provinces have changed their names, their visages
and apparel, that they might become fit and handsome for the service of your
Saints. To conclude, it is in time of solemn feasts that you deck and decore
your temples, beyond the ordinary custom. Hangings Virg. Nos delubra Deum,
miseri quib. vltimus esset Ille dies, festa velamus fronde per orbem. Item
alibi. Et varijs flore^tia, limina sertis. Iuuenal. Postibus and densos per
limina tend Corymbos.
are no ways spared, no more then are the green boughs, flowers, and herbs,
according to their seasons: this is the same which the Gentiles had wont to
do, who like as they forbad men to enter into the temple of the Goddess Bona,
that was builded on the mount Auentin: so also you forbid to enter into
certain Temples sometimes men, sometimes women.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of Altars.
THe primitive Christians had no altars. When the Gentiles reproched the same
unto them, they sought to call them back from the material altars unto the
Orig. Cont. Celsum. li. 4. 7. et 8.
spiritual. We read sometimes in the Fathers of Arnob. cont. gent. lib. 2.
altars, which they do not understand in their proper signification, but by a
translation the holy tables, dedicated partly for receiving of the August. in
Ioa. tract. 26.
offerings, and partly for receiving of the holy supper. Our altars, says
Cont. Cells. lib. 8. tom. 2. page 934.
Origin, are the spirits of good people that breath forth a sweet incense, the
prayers and supplications of an upright conscience. That which August. in Ioa.
tract 28.
S. Austin says in a certain place to draw near to the altar, to be
partakers of the Eucharist, he expounds it in another place to draw near to
the table. And if he has said in one place; August. in Ioa. tract. 26.
to receive at the Lords table, he says in another, August. ibid.
to receive at the altar, which is but one manner of speech borrowed from the
law unto the grace of the Euangell: as we perceive that there is nothing more
ordinary among the Prophets of the old Testament, then to express and declare
by the terms and ceremonies of the Leuiticall office, that service which was
to be rendered to God spiritually in the Christian Church. Among the Paganes no
sacrifice could be performed without altar and Ovid. Fast. l. 4.
fire. We are not ignorant how your Doctors make some difference inter aram and
altar, and say that ara signified a holy hearth, an altar fit for fire, which
the Christians (say they) have not, but have indeed Altaria, altars without
fire. And who does not perceive that this distinction is frivolous, since it is
Virg. Ecgl. 1. -- Illius aram Saepe tener nostris ab ouilibus imbuet agnus.
said; Thure calent arae, and we read, Altaria fumant? Among the Arguments
which in times past I have heard alleged for proouing of the antiquity of
your Religion, the altars had as it were the first rank, which made me
remember of Clement Stromat. lib. 7.
Alexandrin, that writes, that the Paganes bragged much of a very old altar,
that was in the I Will Delos, to which only it is said that Pythagor as went, as
to that which was not defiled with slaughter or blood. The altars of the
Gentiles had certain patrones Hoc doce^t Chananaeorii arae cum statuis et
simulachris deoru^. Deuteronomy. 12. v. 3. Hoc Graecis quam solemn? and vsitatum
suerit demonstrat Pausanias in At ticis, Corinthiacis and caeteris passim
unto whom they were dedicated: which you follow foot for foot, whiles you say,
this is the altar of the virgin Mary, this is S. Peter's altar, upon such an
altar the Mass of such a Saint must be celebrated. And what answer will you
make to S. De ciuit. Dei li. 22. cap. 10 Altarium lauatio quae fit feria quinta
Dominicae in Ramis palmarum est ex Gentilismo desump^a. In festo enim matris
Deum, aquis, adiuncta cineris frictione, sordes statu^ eius abluebantur. Arnob.
lib. 7. cont. gentes.
Austin, We build not, says he, temples unto our Martyrs as unto Gods, but
monuments as unto dead men, whose spirits are living with the Lord. Neither yet
do we build altars, on which we offer sacrifice unto the Martyrs, but unto God
only, who is the God of the Martyrs and ours also.

CHAP. XXV. Of Lights.
NVma Pompilius Plut. in vita Numae. Apul. Asin. lib. 11..
more then seven hundredth years before the coming of Christ Jesus, ordained
that the sacrificers should execute their office with a lamp, or lighted
taper, which commonly was made of the Teda, or the Virg. Fo^temque ignemque
ferebant Velati ligno.
Pin. It was a mystical sign of the Philosopher Pythagoras not to dispute of
divine matters without light. And that dotish antiquity did attribute to the
fire a faculty of Ovid. Fast. 4. Omnia purgat edau ignis, vitiumque metallis
Excoquit: id circo cum duce purgat o^es.
purging, not only external things but the filthiness of the soul also: and
had the same in so great Juuen. Sat. 3. Cuperent lustrari si qua darentur
Sulphura cum tedis, aut si foret humida laurus. Mos saltandi per ignem apud
Pontificios in festo Iohannis Bapt. ab Ethnicis est mutuatus; quod Lazius lib.
11. de Repub Romans ingenue fatetur.
reverence, that she used it commonly at all occasions, as well for holy
purifyings, as for expiations or magical purgations. At the dedication of
Temples, at sacrifices, at processions the use of fire was not forgotten. Yea
even men, and namely old men Ovid. Terque sinem fla^ma, ter aqua, ter suiphure
lustrat.
were purified, which was observed by Medea having persuaded the daughter to
murder the father, in hope that she would make him become young again. They
dedicated ships unto the Gods, even as at this day little barks Apul. Asin. l.
11
are baptized, the fire was in great request, and from thence were the priests
of the Gentiles named (...).
Fire bearers. Ceres the mother of Proserpina was called Ovid. fast. 4. Illic
accendit geminas pro la^pade pinus: Hinc Cereris sacris nunc quoque tada datur.
Item: Sed si thura abeant, vnctas accendite taedas. Et alibi. Et per taediferae
mystica sacra Dea.
Tedifera: at whose sacrifices this ceremony was religiously observed, namely
to light them with torches, yea, even in the noone day. The history of the
Vestals is known to every one, as likewise that perpetual Ovid Fast. 6. Ignis
inextinctus templo celebratur in illo. Item: Nec tu aliud Vestam quam viua^
intellige fla^mam. Virg. Aeternumque aditiseffert penetralibus ignem. O Sic
act, et manibus vittas, Vestamque potentem.
and never quenched fire consecrated to Vesta: wherefore we will not insist
therein. Let us say rather, that lights have settled themselves in the Church
through imitation of the Paganes, and not before S. Hieromes time. And whereas
Vigilantius found fault with the tapers that were lighted before the sepulchers
of the Martyrs in fair day light, S. Hierome answers, Aduers Vigilant.
epistol. 54. cap. 3. tom. 2. Cereos nonclara luce accendi^us, fed vt noctis
tenebras hoc solatio temperemus.
that it was done by some secular men, or by some devout woman through
ignorance or simplicity, of whom it might truly have been said with the
Apostle, I confess, they have the zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge. Lib. 6. Instit. cap. 2. Idem lib. cap. 2. Nummentis compos putandus
est, qui auctori et datori luminis candelaru^ et cerarum lumen offert pro
m^nere?
Lactantius has very gravely and learnedly exclaimed against this
superstition. Eusebius mocketh Licinius, whose custom was to sacrifice unto
the images Macrob. Satu. lib. 1. cap. 7. et 11
of his Gods with lights, as the altars of Saturn were lighted in like manner.
And before these, Tertul. de idolo. c. 15.
Tertullian cried out, let your works rather shine, and not your gates: But it
is pity to see more of the Paganes gates without these lamps, then of those
of the Christians. That learned man Beatus Rhenan: In lib. 5. Tertul. contra
Marcio. Item Tertul. de Idolat. Accendant quotidie lucernas quibus lux nulla
est.
could not hide that which he thought, writing in these terms: Truly it cannot
be denied that the ceremonies Vide Belethum divine. off. explicat. c. 81.
Pamelium anno. in Tertul. aduers. Marc. cap. 10. Polyd. Virg. de invent. rer.
l. 5. c. 1.
of burning candles, which the Christians are accustomed to carry in our
Processions, on the day that is dedicated to the purification of the Virgin
Mary, have had their beginning from the Februa, or cleansing sacrifices Ovid.
Fast. li. 2.
of the Romans. So by this change men have borne with the frowardnes of
Paganism, which the utter abolishing of the thing would have provoked unto
further wrath. The Doctors Belethus. divine. off. explicat c. 81. Polyd. Virg.
de invent. rer. l. 5. ca. 1.
of your Church do agree with that which is above mentioned. But it shall be
good to hear what one of your most famous Schoolmen James de Voragine Jacob.
de Vorag. ser. 32. de sanctis.
reports concerning this Process: The feast (says he) in honor of the
mother of light, has been changed to the end that we may carry lights in
honor of her which has borne the true Innocent. 3. ser. in Festo. Purificat.
Mariae. Baronius in Annotationib. in martyrol. Romans feb. 2.
light, so that it is not kept any more in honor of Proserpina, spouse to the
God of hell, but in honor of the spouse of the God of heaven: neither yet in
honor of Februa mother of the God of war, but in honor of the Mother of the
God of peace: neither in honor of the Court of hell, but in honor of the
Queen of all the Angels. And that lamp Aug. de temp. in natali Domini ser. 3.
Vouent, inquit, alius oleum, alius ceram ad luminaria noctis.
that burns continually before the God of your Mass, has it not also its
beginning De authore qui luminaria Ethni^corum in candelaria Christianorum
primus commutarit, discrepantes sunt authoru^ sententiae. Sunt qui hoc
institutum tribuu^t Vigilio Papae, alij Sergio, alij Gregorio magno. Eusebius. de
vita Constant. orat. 3. (...).
from that custom observed in old times among the Images of the Persians, of
the Athenians, of the Delphians, which used the same before the Idols of
Apollo and Minerua? or from that fire which was carried before the Emperors
when they went abroad into the city of Rome? When you celebrate your
funerals, the bodies of the dead are environed with tapers, lamps, and
torches together with their scutcheons. Look what Suetonius In Augusto and
Caligula.
writes, and you shall learn that the Gentiles were wont to do the same. And
Seneca Seneca de tranquil. anim.
complains saying: So often among my neighbors have they called out loud on
those, that were deceased, so often have the lights and torches marched before
the entry of my gate, being followed with the funerals of such as were newly
dead.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Organes.
THe Church of Israel used Organes and other musical Instruments, which
nevertheless those that are best versed in antiquities, think to have been
different from our instruments that are used at this day. But (as they are used
among you) you cannot free your selves from Gentilisme, although (to escape and
go away free) you do attribute the first institution of the melody Alexan.
ab. Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17.
of your instruments unto Vitellius Bishop of Rome, and to some other of your
Pontifes. Numa Pompilius was before them more then a thousand and two hundred
years. It was he, that in his time did find out the sounding of Organes,
Flutes, and Violes, to sing Hymns, Peans, and Canticles in honor of the Gods.
The Poets which are keepers of the Charters and Records of those Ceremonies
will be my warrant Ovid. Fast. 6. Cantabat fanis, cantabat tibia ludis,
Cantabat mestis tibia funeribus.
. Judge therefore with an upright conscience, if any Heathenish singing ought
to be admitted into the Christian Church: yet, in so saying we condemn not
the holy use of instruments of Music, and singing, in the Church to the glory
of God.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Images.
IT is a deepenesse without ground to discourse of Images. We will sail
forward thereon with all possible diligence, that we may make no stay in this
navigations, from whence the compass of the word of God is able to deliver us,
that we may arrive at the port in due season. Origin, Arnobius, Minutius
Felix, shall answer unto the Gentiles touching this reproach: You have no
Images: you are rid of this pain, because you have peopled your Temples
therewith. This last Minutius Felix 1 Page 2^. page 72
reproched to the Gentiles, You consecrate Gods of wood, we reproach the same to
them, and you also. The Pagans had a twofold use for their images Volaterr.
lib. 17 Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 5 cap. 24. Valor. Max. lib. 8. cap. 16. Salust. de
bello Ingurth. Plin l. 34 c. 4.
, the one politic, for the history and memory of things past, the other for
religion. We approve the former, and reprove this latter. The Temples of the
Persians had no images Herod. Strabo.
, and one of their Kings pulled down to the ground those of Grecia. The Romans
were commended for honoring their Gods without images Aug. deciuit. Dei lib.
4. cap. 31.
, the space of an hundred and seventy years. And Varro Plutarch. in Numa.
August. ibidem.
one of their Divines has freely confessed, that such as first did set up
images for the Gods among the people, had shaken off all manner of fear, and
had multiplied errors Rex Agrippa epist. ad Calig. Imperat. apud Philon. Iud.
de legate. ad Caium sic s^ribit, Inuisibilem Deum pingere aut fingere nefas
duxerunt nostri maiores.
, seeing the Gods (says he) have been easily vilipended under the stupidity
of images. Behold then the lively effects of images, which is to have taken
away the fear of God out of the world, and to have increased errors Lactant
defalsa relig. l. 1. c. 15. Eusebius. de praepar. Euang. lib. 3. c. 8.
. Truth it is that the affection which those poor people carried toward the
dead, and their parents deceased, was the occasion of this filthy abuse (the
spring whereof is artributed by Isiodore Isid. Orig. lib. 8. de dijs gentium.
unto Prometheus, who was the first that counterfaited the images of men in
clay) as well to solace the heaviness which they had contracted through the
loss of their dead, as to keep them fresh in their memory, and to honor them
the more. But what inventions of men can prejudice the commandments of God?
What matter should Gregory of Nysse Orat. in laudem Basilij.
find here to exclaim against you if he did return from death, wherefore do
you restore again the service of idols, upon pretense of Christianisme? Go to,
let us see how this error has entered and been cherished in the Church. When
the throng of the Gentiles was entering into Christianisme, many things were
tolerated in them, and some of the Pastors thought that they had gained no
small matter, by leaving unto them the images of Saints, in place of their
idols. But in the end, Gregory Bishop of Rome, let all go loose, and in stead
of banding himself against Paganism, as many good Bishops had done, both
before him and in his time, became both a counselor and an example unto them,
that they might frame themselves unto their customs. And behold how he writes
Lib. 9. Epist. 9.
to Serenus Bishop of Marseilles. Thou should have taken heed that thou
did converse, chiefly with the Gentiles, to whom pictures are in stead of
reading, to the end that no slander be raised against them, under color of
lawful zeal, wherewith thou art not cunningly induced. From this carnal
prudence of Gregory's, Idolatry has entered in with a full stream, so far
that she has drowned the service of God, and almost overwhelmed his Church.
But for an antidote against this cruel malady, let us consider diligently, I
beseech you, that, which Baruch has written; Chap. 6. v. 3.
the conclusions which the Prophet gathers, are as well against you, as
against them, considering the true resemblance that is between you both. Among
the Pagans Baron in martyrol. Romans Aug. 16. Sleid. comment. lib. 9.
there was images of Gold, of Silver, and were carried on men's shoulders: do
you not after the same manner to S. Roche, S. Geneuefue, and others? You
prostrate your selves before Idols, you worship them devoutly Council. Trid.
Sess. 25.
the like also was done before Idols by that troop of Chaldeans. Moreover,
those Pagans trimmed their Gods with precious apparel Baruch 6. v. 20 Chaldaei
vestinie^tis induunt and ornant, etc.
, as if they had been living men, this same is your manner of doing, which
some of your principal Doctors Molucius Episcopus Valent Salignacus. Espensaus.
have thought fit to be banished out of the Church. The Chaldeans did not
forget lights, this was Polyd. Virg. de inuen. reru^ l. 2. c. 23. and l. 6. c.
13.
one of the chief ornaments of your Idols: you shall be judges if S. James of
Compostella and other Saints see the better, because they are lighted Baruch.
6. v. 18. Chaldaei Iucernas Dijs accendunt, quarum nullam videre possunt.
with torches that burn near to their images. The continual and frequent use
of burning, made those Images black Baruch 6. v. 20 Chaldaeoru^ Dij atrantur
facie sua ex fumo: id est thure, vt interpretes exponunt.
and smoky. The same incensing and burning is often practiced among you, and is
one of the principal points of the service Missal. Romans tit. de ritu seruando
in celeb. Missis.
which you do to your Images. If any war had happened, the Gentiles would
strive who should hide the poor Gods best, that they might preserve them from
the fury of their enemies, and in that did the chief care of the Sacrificers
consist. The image of the virgin Mary had a privilege above these, to make her
complaint to S. Hyacinthus Baruch. 6. v. 48 Sacerdotesingru. ente bello,
consiliu^ de dijs inneu^t. vbi absconaa^tur simul cum eis.
who was canonised some three days ago, that so happily he had saved
himself, but as for her, she was like to be undone, being left under the
captivity of the Tartarians. You imagine that you have found out an escaping
hole Searuin de vit. mirac. and act Canonis 8. Hyach. l. 1. c. 13. O fili
Hyacinthe, effugis manus Tartaroru^ and medissecanda^ and conculcanda^
relinquis.
whiles you teach that they are the principal persons, whom you honor, and
not the images: and do you think that the Gentiles knew not this shift Falsis
dogma, de imaginum cultu velato ad prototypa: Nam Iudaei: Iehoua^ colentes in
sculptilibus and vitulis erant idolatrae. Augustine Psalm. 113. Conciliat. 2.
? You have therefore like unto the Gentiles defiled the Majesty of the living
God, by comparing him to a representation Romans 1. v. 25.
or remembrance of a corruptible man, and of the most filthy and deformed
beasts Lactant. de fasa relig. l. 1. c. 22. Vt pueri infantes credunt omnia
signa ahena Viuere, and esse homines; si^isti omnia ficta Vera putant, credunt
signis cor in esse a^ (...) Pe^gula pictoru^, etc.
Those have set up their images that they might represent the false Gods: you
have set them up likewise to show that which cannot be represented, as the
Image of the Trinity may bear witness. Those have dishonored God through their
Idols: you do no less through your Images. And does not the Eternal forbid his
own Deuteronomy. 12. v 3^.
to follow the Gentiles in these manner of doings? Remarke, I beseech you, that
he says not, you shall not do so to Mercury and Pallas, for he speaks of
himself, and commands them not to mingle his service with Images; because
such things are an abomination unto him. All do agree Eusebius. li. 7. Eccles.
hist. Hieronym in Hierem. l. 2 c. 10.
in one, that the Gentiles have hatched and brought forth Idols. and that they
might the more easily deceive the simpler sort, the stuff and matter thereof
was exquisite: and behold wherefore Charles the great Carol. Mag de imagine. li.
4 c. 18
calls Images, with the honor and service done to them, the old and
worme-eaten error of Gentilisme. And may we not object unto you the same that
Faustus objected against the Christian Idolaters? You have converted the Images
into Martyrs and Saints, whom you worship with the like affection and
devotion. Your S. Gregory Greg. l. 7. epist. 119. sic Phila^ ler Annot in
Vitru de arthitect. l. 4. c. 5. Confer arbitramur si statu^ in templis
pona^tur, vt imperitorum animis retineantur, dum se Diuos ipsos adire credunt.
is pleasant, while he says (as we touched a little before) to prove the
necessity of Images, that they are the books of Idiots: this is the same
argument that was used by the heathenish Philosophers Athan. Orat. cont.
Iulianu^. Eusebius. l. 3. Euangel praeparat. Cicero. l. 2. de not. Deoru^
that they might attain to the knowledge of God through Images, which were
given to mankind as the true elements of all sciences. O blockish people,
which had more blockish tutors then themselves! And what manner of school?
That those that have mouths and speak not, being void of all humane
functions, should teach Tamen aiunt imaginem Christi crucifixi audita^ fuisse
dicentem Thomae Aquinati, been scripsisti de me Thomae, qua^ ergo mercedem
accipies? In festo S. Thomae de Aquino, lect. 3.
those that speak, and reason. Let the Devil then be master of this college:
and it is he indeed that has caused them to erect Images to him, let it be
at what rate soever. And Durand Durand. rat. divine. offic. l. 1 c. 6.
does not dissemble the matter, writing that the Church of Rome has learned of
Nabuchodonozor the manner of blessing and consecrating of Churches, using the
same manner after which he consecrated his golden Image, that he caused to be
set up that it might be worshipped, like unto that huge and immeasurable
Colossus of S. Christopher, set up in our Ladies Church in Paris. And like as
the Pagans held it for great piety and devotion, to set up in every corner of
the streets and lanes, yea, and above the tops of their gates puppets
representing their Gods, so also there is no corner among you, which is not
decked with this sort of merchandise: and behold wherefore Apollo in the
Tragedies Vide Eurip. in Phaeniss. and ibi scholiast.
is named (...), as if we would say, lodged in the streets and lanes.
Furthermore, you have, after the like manner that the Pagans have, those little
Images, named Oscilla Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 7. and 21 Polyd. Virg. de
iuuent. ver. l. 5. c. 1. Censores Belgici iubent deleri quod addit Polydorus,
hac in re quempiam vere cunde scrupulosum fortassis dicturam, se plane nescire
vtru^ priscorum religione^ an superstitione^ potius emulentur Index Expurgator.
pourtraits made after the likeness of the mouth: and you vow to your saints
the resemblance of your diseased members, and other parts of the body that you
may recover your health: and the walls of your Churches are like unto the
walls of the temples of those Aesculapian Gods, which were pictured with
arms, and legs, and other parcels of men's bodies, which proceeded of the
invention of Hercules, of whom the Grecians, as witnesses Arabon G org l. 8.
have learned to consecrate unto their Gods, tables and boordes containing the
inscription of the diseases, whereof they thought they had been cured through
their help. And your superstition has ouerflowed so far, that you have done
as much for beasts Oscilla pro bestijs.
. And De re rustita.
Cato makes mention of the requests and prayers, which the Romans made for
the health of their bessts, which that poor Gentile mocked. Moreover from
whence come your Agnus De is Cereas puppas, quas Agnes Dei vocant, Deo cuius
sanguine sumus redempti, aequa^t, quando de earis vnaquaque cava^t, Omne
m^lignum peccatumfrangit, vt Christ i sangu is and angit. Ceremon. Romans Eccle.
l. 1. tit. 7. c de co^secratione Agnus Dei.
, and such other trash, to which you attribute so many virtues against all
manner of diseases, but from the ancient sorcerers and magicians, which had
wont to make certain Images for the Angels, for the Demons and Planets, that
they might serve for the like Among the Je suites Gregor a Valentia de Idolis
l. 2 c. 7. holds that some sort of Idolatry is good.
antidote and preservative against dangers? We shall never have done, I will
conclude therefore that you are Gentiles by imitation, who adore your Gods
Agnus Dei and eius distributio ab Ethnecis sumpta est Martial. in Ap phor.
Gloria tam parui non est obscura sigilli. Et, Sumfragilis, sed tu moneo, ne
sperne sigillum. Walafridus Abbas l. de offic. divine. c. 19. Iudaica^ esse
ceremonia^ dicit hanc Agnus Dei consecrationem.
after the same manner, who lodge your Images and relics on Coushions in the
Churches, as these did their Gods on the puluinar, which was a certain place
in the fore part of the Theater, that so they might be the better seen.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Relics.
WHO doubts but Satan is the author of adoring relics? The
Historiographers Ruffinus and Socrates Lib 1. cap. 35. Lib. 3. cap. 18.
bear sufficient record, writing of the body of Babilas Martyr. And the
conclusions which the Fathers made being assembled in council at
Constantinople, in the time of Leo, to wit, that the worshipping of Relics
was mere Idolatry, declares sufficiently in what rank we ought to place
them in the Church of God. The third and fourth age after Jesus Christ, were
ignorant of this new fashion, which smells altogether of Idolatry. S. Austin
August. lib. de cura pro mortuis agend. cap. 13. and de. ciuit. Dei. lib. 8
cap. 27.
would not admit those relics: S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 2 de Match. and
in c. 28. Math. hom. 43.
condemns and reprooueth the same. By what gate then have they entered into
Christianisme? Such as are skillful in profane Histories, are not ignorant of
the transportation of Theseus Plutareh, in vit. Thesei and Dem^trij.
Contra Julian. lib. 6. columna 141. tom. 3.
his bones, which Simon removed from the Isle Scyros into Athens, and that
Antigonus did in like manner with the relics of Demetrius, which in great
pomp and solemnity he transported from Syria into Grecia. And concerning the
religious honor, wherewith the Gentiles worshipped the relics of their dead,
behold here what S. Cyrillus Alexandrin e says: In old time (says he) when
certain men had hazarded themselves in the battle of Marathon, in defense of
whole Grecia, and had died valiantly fighting against the army of Xerxes:
there was a custom among the Athenians, to assemble themselves at their
sepulchers, and to praise them highly once in the year, Moreover Ibidem.
Plato himself says of those that have lived well, and died nobly, that they
are become like Demons, and that we ought to serve them after their death,
and worship their shrines. Eusebius De praeparat. Euang lib. 3. c. 7.
also makes mention of the same Gentiles, who made their supplications near
to the shrines where the ashes of those were kept whom they thought to have
been valiant. And in these passages of Eusebius Lib. 2. hist. Ecclesiast. c 32.
and Cyrillus, concerning the Gentiles, is this word: (...), which Ruffinus
interprets thecas, These were the shrines and pots wherein the ashes were
kept. This invention therefore has proceeded from the Gentiles O^id Metamorph.
lib. 12. Iam cinis est, and de tam magno restat Ac^hille. Nescio quid, ^aruam
quod non been complete vrnam.
unto the Christians, and these heathenish examples, have been the cause of
this foolish imitation At Cour-chiuerdi is kept the puff or blowing through
labor which Joseph breathed, while he was cleaving Timber, for he was a
Carpenter.
in Constantine the first Christian Monarch, whose chief occupation was, to
study curiously how to find out the bones and ashes of such as were holden
for Saints, before whose pottes and cophins the Emperor Theodosius, did
likewise bow down himself. A custom that has been renewed since in S.
Ambroses Amb. lib. 10. Epist. 8. 5.
age, where they continued to seek after them, to carry them from place to
place, and to recommend them to people Vide August de opere Monachor c. 28.
. From this custom which the Pagans had to conserve religiously the spoils of
their Gods (for according to Apuleius they did so term their relics)
proceeded the difficulty which De Asin. aux. lib
was made in granting to the Christians the body of their Bishop Polycarpus,
thinking that they would make a God thereof and adore the same. And Eusebius
Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 4.
does learnedly remarke the answer returned by the Christians, protesting that
it was not unto the true God alone that they did this homage. And these Tit.
Liu. lib. 2 Dec. 3. cap. 15.
puluinares, or beds finely trimmed in the fore part of the Theater, where
those relics were, do they not argue from whence they have proceeded, and to
whom the first invention of this Idolatry ought to be attributed? In the time
of Paganism, they carried them at Processions Plautus in Amphit. Tibul. lib.
1. eleg. 7. Et tyriae restes, and dulcis tibia cantu, Et leuis occultis con
sciacista sacris.
, they were showed on the Theaters, as they use to do with the napkin of
Chambery, which is now transported into Thurin. It is the same worship, it is
the same service, that is used now in your Churches toward the bones of your
dead. The Turks and Mahumetans Marin. Barl. de vita and reb. gest. Scanderb.
lib. 13 ait eius ossa a Turcis e sepulchro effossa fuisse honoris causa, ac in
argento and auro inclusa.
have also the relics and ashes of their Saints, whom they name Sehidun, and
yield the same honor to them, that you do to yours.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the feast Corpus Christi.
Where have you found that the bread of the holy Supper ought to be adored?
And what is the foundation of your adoration? Truly Gentilisme Onid. Fast. 6.
Posse fame vinei, spes excidit host repulso, Candida Pistori ponitur ara Ioui.
is the groundstone and pile whereon you lean, which adored one Jupiter
Pistor. It is true that you have other presuppositio^s: to wit, that the bread
is changd into the true body, and the wine into the true blood of Christ Jesus:
the body must needs be accompanied with the blood, and the blood must needs be
accompanied with the body In solemni Per^ioris regu^ pompa ignis
circumferebitur, qu^m pro Deo colebant Persae, and Orunasda nuncupabant.
: and both being together cannot be without a soul: and Christ's soul cannotbe
without the Deity: and there upon, as on the top and final end of your
building you ground this adoration, which is the only Helena, for whose cause
this war was enterprised. Pope Honorius was the author Extrau de Miss celeb.
Clem. lib. 3 tit 16. Can 51. D minum.
thereof, the year 1226. Vrbane increased the same much through eestablishing
of the solemn feast of sacri Sic Romae palam and pub^i e nominant Crustulum vt
vid, re est apud Anasta. Germoniu^, Protonot. Apostolicum, de sacros. immunit
lib. 3. cap. 1. 5. 20. ex typographya Apostolica Vaticana ad Gregorium 14.
Crustuli, as you term it, the year 1264. which was ordained to continue for
ever by the council of Vienne, the year 1310. And this feast is commonly
called among you, the day or the feast of the holy Sacrament, which you believe
to be the Sacrament of miracles. And that day which is so solemn, is dedicated
for promenying your Host too and fro through the towns and country, with as
much mirth and gladness as the Romans were wont to use in certain plays,
whereof Suetonius Lib. 2. de vitis Caesar. cap. 31.
makes mention, at which time they builded up scaffolds in the streets and
lanes, and there did lay upon tables the Gods whomthey kept in their houses,
whom they decored with flowers and costly apparel, and in these general
supplications, the Priests of the Gentiles had also their heads decked Cicero
lib. Tus cul. 1. and ad atticum.
with Garlands and Flowers. And this pomp of your God Hercaeus, puts me in
mind of that which the Heathen observed Nazianzen. ad H^roue^deritib.
ilt^usmodi indecoris quibusdam sua quoqueetate i. ta quaeri videtur: Quod
refera^ sacra mysteria in co^adias co^uersa?
in old times, at the feast of Ceres, Juno, Mars Isis and others of the like
kind, to whom (as Ca to Cat. l 1 dererust
says) they offered wine and milk, and after they had promenied those Gods
about the fields in open show and procession, they sacrificed unto them a hog.
And to show that I speak not this of my self, to authorize that which I say, I
will have recourse to that which the Divines of the Pagans have Virg. Georg l.
1. In prin is venera. re Deos, atque annuamagnae Sacrarefer Cereri latis
operatus in lierhis. Et paulo post, Cuncta tibi Cererem pabes agrestis adoret,
Terque nouas circum soelix eat hostia fruges, Omnis qua^ chorus and socij
comitentur onantes.
written. Virgill shall here be placed in the first rank, who in the first of
his Georgicks describes the pomp of Ceres, and of that which was observed at
the feasts Ambaruales and other Ceremonies. Apuleius Apul. Asin. aur.
in his golden Ass names it hostia^ circumforaneam, after the same manner
that we may term the God which you carry abroad in as great, or rather
greater state and triumph then the poor Pagans did, when they pulled Isis out
of her temple, that she might view the fields and be merry, as the Poet
Claudian Claudianus-Sic numina Me^phis In vulgus proferre solet: penetralibus
exit Effigiesbreuis illa quidem: sed plurimus infra. Liniger imposita suspirans
voce Sacerdos Testatur sudore deam: Nilotica sistris Ripa sonat, variosque
modos Aegyptia ducit, Tibia.
has learnedly represented it, whom you would say had set down all your
Ceremonies in writ. Your Host is carried by one of your Ptiests: the canopie
is vpholden by the chief inhabitants thereabout. Those whom you name
Ecclesiastics, are in the first rank, apparrelled in their white surplices
and fine linnens: music is not forgotten, no more then are the melodious
sounds of all kind Apud Asin lib. 11. symphonae debinc suanes, fistula,
tibiaque modulis dulcissimis personant. Ibant and dicatimagno Serapitibicines.
of instruments, as of drums, pipes, trumpets and harpes, together with that
thundering noise which bombards and canons are accustomed to vomit forth. And
who would not be afraid of such fearful crashes and noyses? Hereunto may be
applied Lucans Mox iubet and totam pauidis a ciuibus vrbem Ambiri, and festo
purgantes maenia lustro Iuuenal Sat. 6.
verses: And Bellona never heard any such tempests during her feast, as the God
Elicius works when he is drawn out of his sacred habitation. We may insert
here that which Apul. Asin. li. 11. Ecce pompae magna paulatim praecedunt
anteludia, vocibus cuiusque; studijs exornata pulcherime. Et mox, Inter has
oblectationes ludicras popularium, quae passim vagabantur, iam sospitatricis
deae peculiaris pompa moliebatur. Mulieres candido spiendentes amicimine,
varioque; laetantes gest amine, verno florentes coronamine, qua sacer incedebat
comitatus, solum sternebant flosculis.
Apuleius writes of the pomp of Diana, which is a place worthy to be
remarked, for the true and manifest declaration of the conformities which are
between the procession that was observed then, and that which is used in your
Church upon the day mentioned, whether it be in the ornaments of the streets,
in the ornaments of men and woman's apparel, and in the order which was
observed: That which is said already shall suffice to declare how you are
inuolued in the like crime of Idolatry, that the Pagans your predecessors
were, who (if they were now alive) should have cause to be Atro cum mc^bra
fluentia tabo Manderet and trepidi tremerent sub dentibas artus.
astonished, for as much as of a Christian, you have made a Polyphemus eater of
men. And the opinion that you have concerning your transubstantiation and
corporal eating is it not mocked by nature? What, to worship a creature, yea an
insensible creature, in stead of the living God? What, yea and to eat God
substantially? Beware of Cicero Cicero lib. 3. de not. Deorum. Et quis tam
amentem esse putet, qui illud, quo vescatur, Deum esse credat?
his verdict, and of that mock of Auerr in 12.
Auerroes, as like wise of that Satyrick, who by mocking of you as well as of
the Egyptians, has said

O sanct as gentes, quibus haec nascuntur in hortis
Numina.
CHAP. XXX. Of Processions.
Metap. Quandoquidem Christiani Deum quem aedorans manducant, sit anima mea cum
Philosophis.
TErtullian Tert. de cult foemin.
conuinceth of Gentilisme the processions that are used in our days, And I
beseech you in what school have you learned these Processions Amburbiales,
Ambaruales Aruales dicti, vt aruae fruges ferreut, quorum insigne fuit spicia
corona.
, Ambecclesiales, with the pompes, Lectisternia, Puluinaria or pillowes, with
other circumstances as well of necessity as of decency, but in the school of
the Gentiles? If there be any difference, it shall not be in the thing but in
the name, seeing the Romans Tit. Liu. in his Decads Die quo Bacchi solemnia
siebant and antecedente ^lia^, cum processione pergebant ad templum Castoris
and Pollucis, quod consecratu^ fuit apud aquam Iuturnam ijs in locis quae
appellata sunt Argea. sic Ovid. lib. 3 Fast. Itur ad Argeos (qui sunt suapagina
dicet.) Hac sicut memini praeteritaque; a^e.
called them supplications. And you cannot deny the conformity that is
between your processions and the supplications of the ancient Idolaters. It
is but folly to attribute the invention thereof to Agapetus Bishop of Rome, and
further to pretend that the Fathers of the Primitive Church have made any
mention thereof, as they would have us to believe of Tertul de praescript. c. 43
and de cult. foem. c. 21.
Tertullian, because he used these Latin words, Procedere and Processio, in a
certain place of his works. For it is as much as if we would say that the
Roman Emperors reigned in the time of the commonwealth, the consulship, or
tribuneship, because the captains that commanded over the armies were named
Imperatores. Numa Pompilius was the inuentor Supplicationes fiebant circa
delubrafanaque; and puluinaria, in quibus honos dijs dabatur. Blond us lib 2.
de Romans triumph. Alev. ab Alex. lib. 5. c. 27.
thereof more then a thousand years before, and the use of this statute
tended, either to pacify their Gods, or to enjoy peace, or to the preservation
of the fruits of the ground. Apul de Asin. lib. 11.
Apuleius describes the order and ceremonies thereof. Trebellius Pollio Pollio
in Galleno.
does in like manner. Who doubts therefore but you have learned all these
ceremonies of the Pompilian religion? Let us see how they marched. We have made
mention hereof in the title of the feast of Corpus Christi, wherefore to be
brief, we shall say only, that they sung responsarie Letanies with their
little verses, and Peans in honor of their Gods, and carried lights Virg de
Pal. laute. -Lucet via longo Ordine flammarum, and late discriminat agros.
with them. I have often remarked in Paris the chief city of this kingdom,
those solemn processions, where the relics of all the Churches were carried,
and chiefly those of the holy Sic Baruch 6. v. 3. Chaldei dicuntur dees
argenteos aureosque; and ligneos humeris portasse, sicut de Rotho Baronius
testatur in annotationib. in Martyrol. Rem. Aug. 16.
Chapel, and amongst others were also the chests and cabinets of S. Marcell,
and S. Geneuiefue, the goddess of the Parisians: and in truth I called to
remembrance at that time the relics of Jupiter and Anubis, which were carried
solemnly by the Heathenish Priests, having garlands on their shaven heads,
like unto the Monks of S. Geneuiefue. And this honor De sacrificali pompa
apud priscos vide Diouys. lib. 7. Apul. Asin. lib. 2. Catonem in Marc. Cacil.
Plautum in Rudente.
was so highly valued, that Commodus Antoninus the great Roman Pontife, to the
end that he might become worthy, both of that garland of flowers, and to touch
the chest wherein Anubis was carried, caused his head to be shaven after a
round fashion. The Senators made up the last part of the pomp: and sometimes
the common people was mingled with them indifferently. Sometimes the Matrons,
when any peril or dangerous war Tit Liu. lib. 6. bells Punici Ma. tronae
circam Deum delubra discurrant, aras verrentes, nixae genibus, supinas manus ad
Deum and coelestendentes.
was like to invade the commonwealth, environed their temples, marched about
them in procession, sweeped the altars with veruen, prayed on their knees,
lifted up their hands toward heaven, called upon their Gods, with as fervent
devotion, as you do upon your Saints. There was many lights, resting places
Apul. Asin. lib. 2.
were made to serve for stations, where the Chest-bearers might take breath a
little: the streets were hung Val. Flaccus.
and covered, and at such time as the procession was to pass by, it was not
permitted to look down from the windows above, Dij ^n m^deorsum versum non
erant^ spi^iendi.
as I have seen this observed in some places: The trumpets brayed; as the
sound of your belles does now, the altars and images were perfumed with
incense, the shops and palaces of justice were shut up, and August. de ciuit.
Dei lib. 7. ca. 7. ait fuisse apud veteres and Ethnicos Romans sacrifisium
quod sacrum purgatorium vocarent.
such devotion was among them that even the prisoners were in some part eased
of their bands. And those rogations or processions, which you make before the
ascension of Christ, from whence have they taken their beginning? Truly from
the Pagans. Virgil Lib. 1. Georg.
holds not his peace. Cicero Cicero de ligib. lib. 2. Sacerdotes vineta and
salute^ populi auguranto, diuorumque iras prouidento, ijsque pirento coelique
fuigur a regionibus ratis temperanto, fulgura pianto, vrbemque and agros and
templa liberata et effata habe^to. Processio aute^ fiebat a flamine quirinali
et populo albis vestibus induto in lucum Rubigini consecratum. de hocsacro
Quid. lib. 4. Fast. Aspera rubigo parcas cerealibus herbis, Et trem^t-in
summalene cacumen bumo etc.
himself does approve them, for preserving of the fruits of the ground, to
repel thunder, and such other intemperature of the air, for the health of the
people. And behold wherefore the Athenians did send every year to Delphos a
branch of the Olive tree full of fruit, for the preservation of the fruits of
the ground. This is the end and use of the processions that are used in your
Church. The matrones and maids of Segesta, atowne of Sicilie Cic. act. 6. in
Verrem.
, being crowned with garlands followed with incensing the image of Diana, which
was carried solemnly throughout all their Country. In the end, as the Persians
in their processions carried Coel. Rodig. lect. antiq. lib 8. cap. 2 Alex. ab
Alex. lib. 1. ca. 2. et 28.
their Orimasda before their King, so do you promenie abroad in the fields the
chests and cophins of your Saints.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Church Banners.
I Had almost forgotten the Banner and Cornet which they display in the wind.
Antenor was the inuentor thereof, and caused draw thereon a hog Ex libris
Messalae ad Octauiam August.
. And as he was addicted unto the service of Juno, whom the foolish antiquity
held to be the Queen of Heaven, so also he dedicated unto her his Labarum, and
commanded the same to be set up in her Temple; and not without some mystery,
seeing the hog was the offering that was sacrificed unto her, an offering
worthy truly of her incestuous unchasteness Sozom. lib. 9. cap. 4.
. The Romans called also their banner Labarum, wherein was painted Mercuries
white rod, with two serpents linked together and in the ages following they had
the Apul. Asin. lib. 11.
Minotaur, and last of all the Eagle. This warre-like ensign was adorned with
gold and precious stones, which the Roman Dictators, the Emperors and
soldiers had in great reverence. Behold here what writers say. Dionysius
Halicarnasseus Dion. Halicar. lib. 6.
: the ensigns are sacred unto them, even as the images of their Gods are.
Tacit. Annal. lib. 12.
Tacitus called these banners the Gods of the legions. Tertul Apolog. cap. 16.
Tertullian, the religion of the Romans (says he) is altogether warre-like,
for she worshippeth the ensigns, swears by the ensigns, and prefers them
before all other Gods. Is it not from thence that you have taken your banners
to plant them in your processions? So Sozom lib. 1. ca. 4. histor ecclesi.
that it is no wonder, if the cross entering into this place, if by degrees
from this improper signification she is turned into devotion, into
superstition, and mere Idolatry. To conclude, if there be any difference it
consists only in this that the banners of the Paganes were dedicated to the
Gods, and those of your religion to the Saints that are the patrones and
protectors of your Parishes. S. Amb de obit. Theod. tom. 3.
Ambrose names all such doings an Heathenish error, and a vanity of the
ungodly to adore the wood of the cross. We are not ignorant of the reformation
made by Constantine the great touching those banners: for he commanded to be
graven in his Labarum, (...) Niceph. lib. 8. lib. 32.
, not to the intent that it might be worshipped, or carried at general
supplications, but to serve for colors to the regiments in his army, and to
declare that Jesus Christ was the anchor of his hope.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Litanies.
AS the adoration of Saints has not been taught in the primitive Church,
neither yet many ages after: so also we do not find any footsteps of those
Litanies, which you cry out so loud whether it be at your processions, or in
your temples. We deny not that the Church triumphant has a care of the
militant, and it is because she being void of all cares of this world, is now
the more fervent in charity and zeal toward the glory of God. But to draw
from thence any consequence for your Litanies, no good logic is able to
persuade us: unless you will be pleased with the objection made by Celsus
against Orig. cont. Celsum.
Origin, That it cannot be displeasing unto the sovereign Gods, that prayers
and supplications be made to the Demons, as unto their friends: the answer
returned to him by the Doctor tends to this, that worship belongs only to
God. And concerning your Litanies we have the form thereof set down in the
Records of the heathenish Ovid. Fast. 4. Pace Ceres laeta est, and vos orate
coloni, Perpetuamque pacem, perpetuumque ducem.
divines, who describe unto us after what manner Ceres was worshipped, chiefly
by the Country people, which adored her above all other Heathenish Diuinities.
And De invent. rer. lib. cap. 11.
Polydore Virgil writes that the Roman Litanies have gotten entry into the
Church, and it is to be remarked that the interpreter of Virgil understands
those to be Litanies and supplications which are mentioned in these verses that
we have set down here:

Sic memorat, simul Aenean in regia ducit
Tecta, simul divum templis indicit honorem.
CHAP. XXXIII. Of holy Water.
YOu say that you have the custom of holy Water from the tradition and
institution of the Apostles: and the ceremony of consecrating the same, for
watering of those that assist the sacrifices, is attributed by you unto Pope
Alexander the first of that name De consecrat. did. 3. Can. Aquam.
. We deny that the Apostles did ever ordain any such thing, and you cannot
find one place throughout all their writes, as one of your greatest Jesuits
Bellar. tom. 2. page 12. 6. in noua impress. De aqua benedicta sic August.
Steuchus in lib. number. ca. 19. Non inane institutum est, inquit, quod aquas sale
erationibus sanctificamus, vt ad earum aspersu^ nostra delicta deleantur. Copus
dial. 1. page 18. 6. a quodam Iesuita acceptum narrat aquam sacratam salubrem
vim apud Indos habere ad abige^dos mur^s, et ad st rilium foeminarum (...).
has very well acknowledged. Let us therefore attribute the first invention
thereof unto Numa the second king of Rome, author of the coniuration and
exorcisme of seawater, or salt water, because (said he) the salt is partaker
of the fiery nature, which is very fit for purification. Wherefore, seven
hundredth years before the coming of the son of God, this water was used
among the Romish Gentiles Histor. trip. lib. 6. eap. 35.
, and more then three hundredth and seventy years after, witness the Emperor
Valentinian, who having been sprinkled with this water by the Sacricer of the
goddess Fortune, to whom he had gone in, smote him immediately thereafter,
saying, that he was rather pulluted then purged thereby. But what do I say
seven hundredth years, seeing Iliad. A.
Homer brings in Agamemnon, commanding the people to purge themselves by
water, and to throw their bodily filthiness into the sea? From whence it may be
perceived, that these expiations are not found out lately, it is a great while
since Satan devised this purging water, this holy water. The Pagans had their
water Lauatio matris Deum.
, you have yours also, it is all one water, both in virtue and consecration.
When that poor people went about to do service unto their celestial Gods,
they washed their bodies Ovid. in Fastis.
all over, thinking that for the rest it was enough if they used but one simple
Terque senem fla^ma, ter aqua, ter sulphur lustrat. Macrob. Saturn. lib. 3.
cap. 1. Virg. Aeneid. 6. -Ter socios pura circu^tulit vnda, Spargens rore leui,
and ramo felicis oliuae, Lustrauitque viros.
purgation, or aspersion to perfect and finish the sacrifices of the infernal
Gods. The Turks hold it an abomination, to enter into their Moskees unless
they have first washed and purged themselves with water. You and al these
people have attributed the like virtue unto this water to serve for the Aqua
benedic^^ sit nobis salus and vita.
purging of sins: and you all together have applied it both to the living and
to the dead; and you have assured your selves that all your wicked deeds were
wiped away Eius aquae aspersione peceata praesertim periuria mendaciaque dilui
credebant. Blondus lib. de Romans triumph.
through this only benefit of aspersion: and for your part, you have put it in
the place of the blood of Christ Aqua benedicta sit nobis salus and vita.
Jesus, which you cannot deny. And would God that the Poets, who were the
Divines of the Gentiles Ovid. Fast. 2. Ahnimium faciles, qui tristia crimina
caedis Exiguatolli posse putetis aqua.
, might perceive your superstitions, and most of all this false belief that
you have concerning the virtue of purging water, they would not fail to mock
you: and one of their Lawyers Cic. lib. 2. de legib. Quandoquidem animi labes
nec aspersione aquae, nec manibus elui, nec dierum numero ac diuturnitate
van^scere tollique potest.
should have very good reason to anoint your head with his grave censure, even
as you wash the same with water. It is not unknown to any, that among diverse
trades which men use, such as be merchants, are commonly accused of lying and
perjury (I speak only of the worser sort and such as have played bankrupt to
an upright conscience) but the remedy against those crimes was at hand, and
there needed but one drop of this water, to take away the wound, and the scarre
thereof both together, which was named Mercuriall from the God Ovid. Fast. 5.
Est aqua Mercurij portae vicina Capenae: Si iunat expertis credere numen habet.
Mercury, surueyer of the gain of such as traffiked. If they had gone about
to touch those things which they accounted sacred, they prepared themselves
first by sprinkling Virg. Aeneid. 2 Tu genitor cape sacra manu patriosque
penates, Me bello ex tanto digressum and caede recenti Attrectare nefas, donec
me flumine viuo, Abluero.
of this water. Seeing therefore this water was ordained for so many uses, it
was carefully kept and much reverenced: and for this purpose they had two sorts
of holy water pots: the one great, which was made fast at the entry of their
Temples, and the other portatiue, for the daily use of their domesticke
purifications. Is it not the same that is practiced among you at this day? You
cover your selves with the example of Exodus 15.
Moses, who cleansed the water with wood: and of Eliseus 2. Reg. 2.
, who did in like manner with salt. But what difference is there, I pray you?
For that which they did, tended to the nourishing of the corporal life, and
you extend the same to the cleansing of souls. And Gregory the first 1
Gregor. in respons. 10. ad interrogat. August. 33. quaest. 4. c. Vir.
commanded, that he that had slept with his own wife, should not enter into
the Church, unless he had first washed himself with water. He shows the
reason; to wit, that although marriage be permitted by God, yet man cannot enjoy
the company of his wife without sinning a little, and therefore he ought to
purge himself. Is not this the same that the Pagans had wont to practice Pers.
Sat. 2.
in old times?

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of Pilgrimages.
THe custom of Pilgrimages began only in the time of Constantine: and
thereafter through succession of time, was refuted by Gregory of Nysse Gregor.
Nyss. in orat. cont. peregr.
in a very learned and eloquent Oration, which he made upon that subject, and
contained three principal points: First, that Jesus Christ in the fifth Chapter
of S. Matthew, had not placed Pilgrimages among those works, which are the
cause of men's salvation: Secondly, that there was many spiritual dangers in
such iourneys, and chiefly for women: Thirdly, that we could find nothing in
Jerusalem, that was not in our own countries, since there are temples every
where Hier. ad Paul. suisse Hierosolymis parum, sed bear vixisse multum.
. These reasons are to a purpose, and are grounded upon the holy Scriptures:
but our Grandfathers being come from Paganism, could not cleanse themselves
so well, but many spots remained still on them, and amongst others this
madness of travailing to places that were reputed more holy then others, which
no doubt the Gentiles have left to you as an inheritance, who before you,
toyled themselus with these foreign voyages, which they undertook through
the devotion and religion that they carried toward the Oracles of Delphos, and
Opinabantur Ethnici adesse deos solere simulachris suis auxilio gratiaque
Proclus de sacrificio and magia. Porphyrius apud Eusebiu^ praepar. euangel. l.
3. and 5. sic and Papistae.
Jupiter Ammon, with other infinite places that were more honored then others
by Gentilisme. The Turks make these pilgrimages after the like manner that you
do, and go to the Mequis Mequis est Mahometi sepulchrum: crepundia vero in
ciuitate Almedina. Bellonus.
with as much zeal, as you would go to Rome, Jerusalem, Compostella, and
other parts.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Oaths.
THe holy spirit wills, if one must swear, that it be by the name of God
Deuteronomy. 6. and 10. Esa. 45. and 65.
only: the manner is set down to us in the holy word, with threatening the
transgressors of this law. Wherefore then do you swear Iuuen. Sat. 3. -Dicisque
facisque quod ipse Non sani esse hominis non sanus iuret Orestes.
by the name, and upon the relics of your Saints, and by your Saints
themselves? The Gentiles did swear Aeneas ad Didonem apud Virg. Funeris heu
tibi causa fui per sydera iuro, Per superos. Horat. l. 2. epist. 1 Praesenti
tibi maturos; -largimur honores, Iurandasque tuum per nomen ponimus aras.
by Jupiter, Hercules, by the fortune of their Caesar's, and by the stars.
Their books are marked all over with such doings. Have you not learned this
lesson of them? And S. Antony upon whose arm you swear, is he not successor
to the Pater Patratus of Rome, who had the charge concerning oaths? You shall
hearken (says the Eternal Exodus 23. 13.
) unto all things which I have said unto you, and you shall make no mention of
the name of other Gods, neither shall they be heard out of your mouths. These
commandments are repeated in another Iosuah. 23. Ierem. 5.
place: and in another Sophon. 1.
he threatens to root out such as swear by Malchom. And are you ignorant
that the Christian Religion teaches us to swear in our need by him Heb. 6.
who is greater then all men?

CHAP, XXXVI. Of Masse-bearers, or Beadles.
IT is true that universities, Justice and Presidiall seats have, by way of
honor, Masse-bearers, of whom the civil laws have made some Lib. 1..
Nunciatio. In.. 115. qui causas. In authent. de Iudic.
mention, and the Lawyer Baldus has not forgotten them. But by what reason
has that stolen in among the Preachers and Ministers of the Church, which was
granted after a civil manner unto the Magistrate, who is the Image of God. The
Vergers walk in their temples with silver rods, or else gilded with gold.
The Masse-bearers march before the Mass Priest with their Masses, howbeit no
living soul does let them to step forward. In your procession, this charge is
committed to some of your Priests, to the end that the show may seem the more
glorious to the company. May it not be that this custom has proceeded of the
Athenians, who had their (...), or of the Romans, who had their Viatores,
fasciferos or lictores that marched Plutar. probl. cap. 3.
before their Kings, Dictators, Pontifes, and vestall Virgins? This was a mark
of an higher dignity Plutarch. in Romulo. In Numa.
whenever they went abroad and passed through the city. Indeed the
Scripture Act. 16.
does attribute those Staffe-bearers unto Magistrates, but not unto the
Apostles. This is not the way therefore to serve God in spirit and verity, but
to restore again the pompes and vanities of Gentilisme.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Praying toward the East, and of Canonical hours, in which
the Popish-Church places Religion.
KNow you not that the Ceremonial Law of the Jews forbad to make any prayers
toward the East, that they might not be like unto the ancient Idolaters? For
this cause, and that they should have no conformity with them, they were
commanded to turn their altars toward the West. Numa ordained Plut. in Numa.
the very contrary, and would needs have his Priests to make their Prayers
being turned toward the b East. A ceremony that was observed, not only Iuuen.
Sat. 6. Lucianin Necro^. Apul. As. lib. 1. and 2. Tunc in eriente^ obuersu^ vel
incrementa solis Augusti tacitus imprecatus, etc. Virg. Aeneid. 2. Illi ad
surgentis conuersi lumina solis Dant fruges manibus falsas. Ovid. Fist 4. His
Dea placanda est: haec tu co^uersus ad ortus, Dic quater, and vini perlue rore
manus.
in the Sacrifices of their Gods, but also in the Deuilish practices of
sorcerie and witchcraft. The reason why the Pagaris did so, and turned
themselves always to that part is; because in so doing, they thought they did
the more honor to the Sun, whom they had placed in the number of the Gods,
and named the same Apollo. And it is known to all men, with what reverence the
Persians worshipped the Sun rising from the Orient, to whom they had wont to
Sacrifice Strabo. lib. 15.
as he was rising and mounting up above our hemisphere. Porphyre continued
this Pompilian witchcraft, and ordained that the Images should be turned toward
the Occident, to the end that such as entered into the Temples, and bowed
themselves down before the Idols, might address their prayers toward that
part of the heaven, so much reverenced by him. With this do the rules of
Vitruuius Vitruuius de Archit. l. 4. c. 5. and 8.
agree, who declaring after what manner a Temple ought to be ordered within,
teaches how that the Images, placed within their little mansions, ought to
have their faces turned toward the West, and the Altars to be turned toward the
East in a Diameter line, to the intent that such as go about to sacrifice, may
the more conveniently behold those Images, and address their prayers unto
them. Clement Alexandrin Clemens Alexand. Strom. l. 7.
witnesses, that the most ancient Temples that were dedicated to Idolatry,
were builded after this manner. Your Church would needs be wiser then God in
this case, for in building Temples Guido de monte Rocherij Encherid sacerd. tit
de sacram. Euchar. ^ Apul. Asin. l. 2. Rebus ita vita consumm ^is, inchoatae
lucis salutationibus Religiosi primam nu^tiantes horam perstrepunt.
after this manner, she would give us to understand that Jesus Christ est
Oriens ex alto, or the bud springing up aloft, which truly is an Hierogliphick
subtilty. And concerning canonical hours, we are not ignorant, that it is a
comely thing to have certain appointed hours to assemble our selves to
prayer: but to tie our Religion thereto smells of Paganism, wherein the same
custom was observed.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Frankincense.
THose that have red Porphyre and such others, shall call to mind how much
they esteemed their perfumings and incensings Cicero lib. 3. de off. Omnibus
vicu statuae posita, ad eas thus and ceri.
to help themselves in witchcraft. The difference between the Sacrifices of
the poorer sort, and those that were rich, consisted in this, that the poor
Propert. l. 2. Pauperibus sacris vilia thura damus. Virg. Aeneid. 1. Thure
Calent arae, diumque altaria fumant.
in respect of their poverty did offer Frankincense, and for this cause, the
Grecians termed their Sacrifices Athysies or Acapnothysies. By the contrary
these rich ones spared no cost, and the smell that went from the Frankincense
was duly offered by them, to the end that those pretended and supposed Deities
might be the more respected: and for this cause they were named A suffitu and
cuaporatione.
Thysies. And it happened but seldomely that any Sacrifices were without burnt
incense. In like manner, there are no Masses Vide Missal. Romans tit. de ritu
seruand. in celebrat. Miss.
(I except those for the dead) where this Heathenish ceremony is not observed.
You do attribute, or at least the greater part of your Alex ab Alexand l. 4.
c. 17. Iulianus thus imaginibus adoleri voluit. Sozo^ hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 16
Doctors, unto Leo the third, this enlarging of the Mass with Frankincense,
about the year 800. But how will you make this invention and supputation agree
with the Liturgia Iacobi Page 5.
Liturgy, which you attribute unto S. James, and was long before, if we will
believe you? The Frankincense is offered to God in these words: O God who have
received the gifts of Abel, the Sacrifice of Noah, of Abraham, the perfuming of
Aaron and of Zachary: receive from our hands that are sinners this incensing
as a sweet smelling savor, for the remission of our sins, and of thy whole
people. The Liturgies that are attributed unto S. Basile Liturg. Basil. Page 60.
and S. Chrysostom Liturg. Chrysostom. page 85.
differ not almost in any thing from that which proceeds, touching incensing.
Let us say therefore, that more then seven hundredth years before Jesus
Christ, the Idolatrous Romans used Frankincense in their Sacrifices, and that
for perfuming of their altars, their Idols and Images, their oblations and
offerings. And those poor people believed, that Ianus and Vesta were well
pleased to be thus served with sweet incense Virg. Ecloga. 1. Busenos cui
nostra dies altaria fumant. Horat. l. 3. Carm. vetus ara multo fumat odore.
and wine. They had likewise great Censers to carry the Frankincense from place
to place, and were richly wrought, even as yours are, and a sweet box for
keeping of their precious odors. And the etymology of this Latin word thus,
which the Romans Tit. Liuius. l. 3. Dec. 3. and lib. 9. Dec. 3.
had from the Greek (...), which signieth to Sacrifice, declares what the use
of Frankincense was, to wit the like unto that, which at this day is in request
in your Massing Sacrifice.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Vessels and Treasures.
IT is to be wished, that modesty and frugality, which are exiled out of your
Churches, might be revoked, and restored into Christendom. We know how
Exuperious In Council. Tiburien.
a worthy Bishop of Tholose did communicate or distribute the mysteries of the
holy Supper. And that mock touching Bishops of wood, and Chalices of gold, the
very contrary of that which had wont to be in times past, ought it not to make
you blush? The ancient Poets Persius Sat. 2. Aurum, vasa Numae, Saturniaque
impulitara, Vestalesque vrnas, and Thuseu^ fictile mutat.
mocked their Pontifes that were wrought over with gold, and have taught very
well, how commendable a thing modesty is, chiefly in those that are the
Ministers of holy things. The Romans contemned the too great curiosity in
providing of rich moueables, and hardly will any man believe, what simple
furniture they had in their houses, before the Asiaticke superffuities had
brought in those abuses, that have been seen Tibul. ad Lares. Nec pudeat
prisco vos esse e stipite factos: Sic veteres seeds incoluistis aui. Tunc
melius tenuere fidem quu^ paupere cultu, Stabat in exigua ligneus ade dominus.
afterward: and as their private houses were furnished, so also were their
Temples, and such simplicity might have been remarked in them, that one day
it shall accuse before God, the royal pomps and superfluous magnificences,
that shine in your Churches. Thereafter it happened that, as their wealth
increased through the spoils of the nations which they had conquered, the
Temples also became more sumptuous and costly. And the ancient Romans have
remarked that, as the rents of their Temples swelled, so faith and hope became
lesser and lesser among them: and those Gods of silver and gold have begotten
men of wood and stones. Is not this the ridle or proverb that is so common,
That Religion has begotten riches, and the daughter has devoured the mother?
You will allege unto us the zeal of David, who was desirous to have the house
of the Lord beautiful and comely. And belike you will not forget Salomons
Temple, the most sumptuous piece that ever has been in the world. But know
you not that all did proceed from Gods commandment, and that such things were
as rudiments and elements to that simple people, that they might the more
easily be led to Christ Jesus? And are you ignorant of that which the Apostle
teaches, that we ought not to think that heavenly things are like unto Gold
or silver, or unto stones cut artificially, or after the invention of man.
After that these superfluities were brought into the Churches, incontinent
godliness was banished Ovid. Fast. 1. laud amus veteres sed nostris viuimus
annis.
, and Charity was strangled among men. You praise the simplicity of the
primitive Church, neither are you able to disprove it, and in the mean while
you will diminish nothing of the sumptuous charges of your vessels and
ornaments serving for the office, which you term Ecclesiastical. And shall it
be said that a Gentil knew very well, that silver and gold were Cicero de
legib. lib. 2. Aur^met a^ge^tum in vr^ibus priuatim, in sa^is odiosares est.
superfluous for the ornament of temples: and you in the mean while in so
great and so clear a light of the Gospel shall be more blind then moles? Those
virgin Mary's of massy gold, those crosses of the same stuff, Non ex quouis
lig no fit Mercurius. Plin. lib. 16. Quidam superstitiosias exquirunt materia^
vnde numen exculpant.
and chiefly that of the city of Tours, in the midst whereof is an Agathe
(wherein the images of Mars, Venus, and Cupid are graven) in a word those
images so finely decked do sufficiently declare, that you make not your Gods
and Goddesses of any sort of stuff, but of the most precious and finest. And
if you be curious in your Idols, so are you likewise in the decoring and
furnishing De Consec. did. 1. Cau. vasa.
of your Churches, in your chalices and ewers; and those little pots which you
use in your Masses for the wine and water, are almost like unto those vessels
of the Iuuen. Sat. 6. Simpunium ridere Numae, nigru^que cumum.
Gentiles, which they named Simpunia To conclude, we need not wonder if your
treasures be heaped so full of riches, surpassing those of Croesus: for you
sell every thing Tertul. Apol. cap 13. Exigitis, inquit, mercedem pro solo
templi, pro aditu sacrificioru^, non licet deos nosse gratis, venal^s sunt
, nothing escapes from your hands, and you give nothing: and the whole sum
of your liberality consists in treating your selves well Cyclops apud
Euripid Non vlla numina ^x^auesco coel^um, Sed victin as v^i ^^orum meximo
^entri offero.
, and making good cheer with the goods of the Crucifixe.

CHAP. XL. Of Baptizing of Bells, and of their use in Popery.
I Shudder and quake, whenever I remember of the execrable blasphemies that
are committed at the baptizing of Belles. And be not offended if I term it
Baptism: for you give me very just cause. I see Godfathers Caldarinus in
tract. de interdict. in 1. part. number. 79.
and Godmothers, which hold the rope in their hand, where the Belles are
Albericus de to satis in Diction. in vocabulo Came. pana.
fastened, to answer Amen, touching that whereof the Suffragants are to
question those belles: a wedding garment: water mingled with salt consecrated
in the name of the Trinity, with which they baptize them both outwardly and
inwardly: the holy oil, crosses, and exorcismes. And what further? One of your
Popes John the 13. of this name.
established this Baptism: and why then do you say that it is an error of
the people? And verily that cannot be termed a popular ceremony, which is
embraced of every one and every where. We did expect a reformation of this
abuse at the Council of Trent, and of an infinite number more, which not the
people, but those that name themselves Prelates have brought in and established
in the Church. And where is she? O God, that this thy institution should be
communicated unto senceles metals! That you may the better make your unwritten
word slide into the belief of simple idiots, you endeavor carefully to prove
that Pedobaptisme, that is to say, the Baptism of little children, has no
warrant in the written word: wherein you have been so often condemned of error
and lies: and in the mean time you Baptize Bells, logs of wood, to warm you
with, during the long and cold mornings of Christmasse-time, and little boats.
O impiety! I would never have believed it, if I had not bin persuaded by mine
own eyes, and by experience. Truly, to return to our conformities, the Ovid
Fast. 5. Proxima Vulcani lux est, quam lustria dicunt: Lustrantur purae, quas
facit ille tuba. Ovid. Fast. 3. Summa dies et quinque tubam lustrare canoram
Admonet et forti sacrificare Deae.
Gentiles had no bells (the invention is attributed to Paulinus Bishop of Nola)
but they had trumpets and flutes in their place, which they purged and hallowed
at the feast of Minerua named Quinquatria, and at one of the feasts of that
poor lamed Vulcane, and for this cause they were both named Durand. rat. lib 1
rubr. de campanis.
Tubilustria. The Bishop while as he is anointing the Bell with oil, and
marking it with many crosses, he prays God to give his holy Spirit to the
Bell, that it may become sanctified for the expelling of all the power, snares,
and illusions of the Devil, for the weal of their souls which are dead: and
above all other things for the auerruncation and chasing away of thunder and
tempests, of winds and raines. These are the same very effects Ovid. Fast. 5.
Rursus aquam tangit, Temesaeaque concrepat era: Etrogat vt tectis exeat vmbra
suis
that the Gentiles hoped for of their flutes and trumpets, which they thought to
be very fit for that purpose, having accompanied them with their purging water,
to the end that all fears happening in the night season might be removed far
from their houses, that all magical coniurations might be expelled, yea, and
to take heed that the Moon were not displaced from her Sphere, at the
invocation of sorcerers Tibul. lib. 1. Eleg. 8. Cantus and e curru lunam
deducere tentat: Et faceret, si non era repulsa sonent.
. The Gentiles had certain Priests, whom the Grecians named Chalazophylaces,
as if we would say keepers and wardens of hail and tempests, which they
thought they were able to chase away by sacrificing of a lamb, of a chickin,
and by the blood which they let go from their finger with a penknife. Cleo
was the author thereof: and Cic. lib. 1. de legib.
Cicero himself makes mention of those in a certain place of his works. At
the consecration of your belles the Suffragant prays to God, that he would
bestow his heavenly blessing upon the Bell, purify Bonif. 8. lib. 5. Sexti
Decret. tit. 11 de senteut. excom. cap. Alma matter.. adijcimus.
it, sanctify it, hallow it, and power down thereupon the dew of his holy
spirit, to the intent that the enemy may always fly before the sound thereof
Greg. 9. tit. 39. de sentent. excom.
, and that the armies of the enemies may be astonished; and by the contrary
that the holy spirit may take pleasure Philippus Fran cus in cap. Alma matter.
therein, and the souls and bodies of the faithful may be saved thereby. Do
you not acknowledge your own words, and the lively shape of your ceremonies?
And will you never be ashamed of these prophanations? But to return to those
Coniurers of hail and Bell-ringers, the Pagans Aristoph. in Vespas. lib. 28.
c. 2
to put away storms smote their hands one against another; to make the thunder
and lightning to be the more favorable unto them, they armed themselves with
boughs of the Bay tree, with the skins of Sea-calues, and the feathers of
eagles, which the Naturalists hold to be free from all injuries of the air.
And you, to save your selves, do you not carry holy boughs on the day, named
Palme-Sunday? And truly you are so much more abominable, then those who were
grounded either upon natural causes, or upon experience, and you have no
reason but your superstitions. So many learned men that are among you, will
they not call to mind, that it is forbidden to use any charms Leuit. 19. v.
26 and 20. v. 27. Deuteronomy. 18. v. 10 11. Council Laodic. cap. 39. Canon,
Nonoportet. Canon Augurijs. Item quaest. 5. cause. 26. in Decret.
, coniurations, or exorcismes of creatures, by the which any virtue or dignity
beyond the course of nature is attributed to dumb things? And your ordinary
service consists in nothing else but in these fopperies, in holy water, in
the oil of the diseased, in your holy Chrisme, which you salute with so great
devotion, Aue sanctum Chrisma, the oil of the Catechumeni, and other things of
the like stuff. And what do these inventions profit, but to make the simpler
sort amazed at them? And what do those peales of Belles, and those shrill
noises Arnob. lib. 7. Quid efficiu^t crepitus scabillorum Item. Etiamne aris
tinnittbus and quassationibus cymbalorum?
profit? And what other thing is in them then those sounds, which the Paganes
were wont to make with their hands, with little bells, trumpets, flutes, and
other instruments? When you march in your Processions this tinkling of Bells is
not forgotten: it is this that makes you keep your ranckes and measures. The
same was practiced among the Coribants and Curats in the Processions of Cybele,
the great mother of the Gods with the like noise of their trumpets.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Canonization of Saints.
THis law was strictly observed among the Romans, that none was inserted in
the Catalogue of the Gods, without express license from the Senate, no more
then it is lawful for any to assume unto themselves the title of Saints,
unless the authority of the Sea of Ex Alexandri tertijstatuto.
Rome has given way thereto, through the benefit of Canonisation Vide lib. 1.
Cerem. Romans Eccles. sect. 6.
, as it befell of late to a Saint newly start up in Poland, named Seuerinus de
vitamiraculis et actis Canonisationis sancti Hyachinti lib. 1. c. 18. and 3.
cap. 32.
Hiacinthus, about three hundredth years after his decease. There are whole
books, containing the ceremonies that are to be observed in the Canonization.
The Vide Plinium lib. 2. cap. 7. Ciceronem lib. 2. de not. Deorum. Eusebium de
praepar. euang. lib. 2. ca. 9 Sabellicum 6. Enn. 1.
Idolaters held those to be Gods who were dead men, but nevertheless had the
prerogative of this honor from Kings, Princes, Senates, and through the common
error of the people. The office of the inferior and Collegiall Pontifes, was
to canonise Emperors, to consecrate temples, and to appoint fit places for the
same. The Hoc decretum inter decretal. epistolas in tit. de reliquijs Sanctorum
scriptum leges.
Popes have reserved for themselves (all others being excluded) the right of
canonizing, and have committed the rest unto your Bishops. Herodote Lib. 4.
describes amply enough the manner of canonizing Emperors and Kings. And
Ciceko lib. 2. de legib. separatim nemo habessit De os, neue nouos, sed ue
aduenas, nisi public ascitos priuatim colunto.
Cicero shows the reason why in old times men of rare virtues obtained this
privilege to be accounted among the Gods. The Turks have in like manner their
Saints canonised by their Caliphes. You ought to call to mind that bitter
jest, which the Emperor Sueton. in Vespasiano. Romani Imperatores Canonisati
Dij indigites dictisunt. Alex. ab Alexa. lib. 6. cap. 4.
Vespatian broke against that foolish manner of doing, already embraced of the
flatteries of his time, to make the Emperors Gods: for being taken with that
disease whereof he died, he said in a scoffing manner, that shortly he would
become a God.

CHAP. XLII. Of free Will.
ALL the holy Scripture, Ioa. 6. et 15. 1. Cor. 2. Phil. 2. Ierem. 31.
and the Councels that are of sound judgment, have overthrown the doctrine of
free will, and justification by works, and have Canon, per Baptismum. Canon.
firmiter tene. Canon. placuit vt quicunque. De Consec. did. 4. Council.
Auransic. can. 123. 4. vsque ad vndecimum. Item 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24.
Augustine. de liberoarbit. et multis in locis alijs.
decreed, that our whole strength depends of the only mere mercy of God
which is freely given: and that it is not in our power or natural faculty, to
prepare our selves for grace, but that all must be received from the
liberality and gift of the holy Ghost. You by the contrary, do nothing else
but proclaim what power you have in spiritual affairs, and your maxims tend
to this, that the grace of God has the smallest part in leading of the will.
It is without all doubt that you have learned this lesson in the school of the
heathenish Philosophers Arist. lib. 3. Ethic. cap. 5.
: of whom (as Seneca reports) some have been bold to say, That this life
indeed is a gift of God, but to live well and religiously depends of us.
Cicero Lib. 2. de not. Deorum.
goes on a little farther: for speaking in the person of Cotta, he thinks
not that he is bound to thank God because he was virtuous, since every one of
himself might attain to virtue. Every one is the maker of his own fortune,
said Salust. Make an union between you and the Turks: for they maintain free
will as you do, saying, that man has free will and power, either to loose
himself or to merit paradise through good works. This is the cause why they
build many Monasteries, Hospitals, Mosquees, and other buildings for the
remission of their sins.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Moral, and Venial Sins.
WE do acknowledge the inequality of sins, and that some are more grievous
then others, as we have learned in the Gospel. We name those venial; for
which we are able to obtain mercy from God Mat. 10. and 11.
: and they are all of this nature, save that only which is committed against
the holy Ghost. That which your Master of the Sentences Lib. Sentent. 2. did.
24. 35. et 42
teaches, is directly opposite to the word of God, as I could easily prove,
if I did not labor to be brief. And from whence then have you drawn this
difference between venial and mortal sins, but from the doctrine of Plato,
the one sort being termed by him curable, and the other incurable?

CHAP. XLIIII. Of hiding the Images in Lent.
THere is no Doctor how mean so ever he be, that does not show a reason of
this ceremony, that is observed in covering your Images both great and small,
male and female in Cranzius in Metrop. l. 3. c. 10. Durand. in rat. lib. 6.
cap. 72.
Lent. Truth it is indeed that they do not please me, and I am amassed that the
poor idiots spit not on your faces, seeing in the time which is dedicated to
repentance, you close their Books, and remove them from their sight. I have
not found this manner of doing either in the one, or the other Testament, and
have taken great pains to hear some news thereof. It is true that after I
had searched the Books of the heathenish Divines Ovid. Fast. 2. Dij quoque
templorum foribus celentur apertis, Thure racent arae, stentque sine igne foci
Item. Fana tamen reteres illis clausere diebus, Vt nunc ferali tempore operta
vides.
, I learned that you had borrowed of them those couerings to hide your Saints
with, whom in like manner you have debarred, for that time only, from the use
of sweet incense.

CHAP. XLV. Of Barbarous and Unknown language.
EVery language is named barbarous, and chiefly that, as says venerable Beda
in 1. Cor. 14.
Beda, wherein we cannot praise God. The whole world knows that you have
banished from your divine service all such languages as could be understood, in
such sort that the people understands nothing. An introduction truly which is
contrary to the word of God, and against nature. And when the Councels Council.
Laodicen. Can. 59. Council. Carthag. 3. Can. 47.
ordain, that the Canonical Scripture only shall be read to the people,
ought not this to be understood of a known language? You think that it
carries some great force to add a greater show and majesty unto your
service. So did the Pagans Arnob. cont. gent.
think their service to be the more honorable, if the hearers could
understand nothing thereof. The enchanters at the invocation of their Demons,
Furies, Erynnes, Hecate and Proserpina Lucianus in Necromant.
, did they not take delight in those barbarous forms of speech, unknown both
to them and their followers? The Jesuits have found out of late a way to
conjure all manner of armor, which they have sold to the soldiers for a
Ducate the piece, to the end that they might go free from all danger of
wounding: the tenor thereof was this, Barnasa] leucias] bucella] agla] agla
tetragrammaton] Adonai.] Darre you deny that these preservatives have proceeded
of the enchanters? To conclude, since you take such delight to speak Greek and
Hebrew, learn to pronounce them well, namely these words, Kyrie eleyson,
Oschianna, Sebaoth, Allelu-iah.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Salt and Spittle.
AMong the additions which you have added to Baptism, you have added salt and
spittle. This imitation is not from Christ, but smells altogether of the
Gentiles, who termed the salt divine Apud Homerum illud epitheton passim
legitur.
and celestial, because (as says Plat. lib. 2 de rep.
Plato) it is fit and agrees well with heavenly Accipe sal sapientiae,
inquiunt Missatici in Eaptis. infant.
things, and chiefly with purifications. And I know not how you can apply unto
little children that are newly borne, that which was not practiced in old
Interpretes Aristoph. in Comed. Nebulas.
times but toward madd and drunken persons, whom they anointed with oil and
salt. And concerning this spittle, what? If you did use the same to illuminate
the blind, with the like success that Jesus Christ did, no man might abide or
come near to you, so far aloft would you be mounted upon your ergoes. And
what need have little children thereof, unless it be that, whereof the
Satyricke Persius Persius Sat. 2. Ecce auiae, aut metuens Diuum matertera cunis
Exemit puerum, frontemque atque vda labella Infamidigito, and lustralibus ante
saliuis Expiat, vrentes oculosinhibere perita.
makes mention?

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Eucharist, or Sacrament of the Altar.
YOu have borrowed from the Gentiles many of those ceremonies which you use in
the celebration of the Eucharist. As touching the mingling of wine and water
together, no doubt it has proceeded from the religion of the ancient
idolaters, which in celebrating their sacrifices used to consecrate wine and
water together in a chalice, chiefly upon the feast that was dedicated to the
sun, which the Persians worshipped, and named Mythros. And upon the feast
named Nephalia they used also water in the wine at the sacrifices Arnob. lib.
7. Mactus hoc vino inferio esto. Vos mero arbitramini honorem diis addi.
. When the primitive Christians were framing their accusations against the
idolaters of their age, they reproched to them their offering of wine, and
namely the consecrating thereof in their sacrifices. If these poor Gentiles
Item Arnob. lib. 6. Non thura ac vina libamus.
were living now, they should have enough to object against you, that believe
that the glory of God is augmented through the wine transubstantiated into his
own blood, as in like manner they believed it to be through the consecration
of their wine. And truly in that more tolerable then you are, as not knowing
what accidents without substance meaned: although this monster was not borne a
great many ages after. Neither yet have you any hands to receive the holy
signs of the Supper, it is an offense to touch your God of the Mass, unless
their fists be greased. You would say that they were birds thrusting food into
the beakes of their young ones. If you had to do with little children, or at
least with sick persons, perhaps you might find out some excuse, and Iuuenal
Iuuen Sat. 10. Pallida labra cibum capiunt digitis alienis.
would be on your side. The Lord has said, Take, eat: Take, drink. What
doubt therefore have you graued in the hearts of your people?

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Pix, or holy Box.
THe idolaters worshipped Jupiter, surnamed Lucan. lib. 10. Hercaeus,
mo^strator ait, nonrespicit aras. Ovid. in Ibin. Nec tibi subsidio praesens sit
numen, vt illi Cui nil Hercaei profuit ara Iouis.
Hercaeus, because he was placed in the most secret part of the temple: and for
this cause he was also named Penetralis, because he was hid, and was not
exposed to the eyes of the people. Do you not make your Parishioners believe
that you call down from heaven, through the virtue of five sacramental words,
the son of God, to the intent you may enclose him within the accidents of
bread and wine, that are euanished? When you consecrate this God, do you not
cover him within the canopie or tabernacle, and make him fast, to the end that
he may not run away? And is not this Box of the same fashion with that
wherein the poor God Hercaeus Ovid. Fast. 5. Art Syracusa suspensus in aere
clauso Stat globus immensi parua figura poli.
was enclosed? The fire consecrated to the Goddess Ovid. Fast. 6. Ignis
inextinctus templo celatur in illo.
Vesta the Palladium, the little round bucklers, that were thought to have
tumbled down from heaven, were they not shut up, and removed from the sight of
the common people? The Grecians had their Orgia, so termed because unhallowed
Catullus. Pars obscura canis celebrabant Orgia cist is.
persons had no access thereto, and they solemnized them in honor of Ceres
and her travails, which she performed in seeking for her daughter Proserpina.
It is through imitation of those that you shut up in your cabinets that God
whom you worship, yea, and with as much devotion as you do the Diuinities
self. The primitive Church knew nothing of your Cyprian. de Caena Domini.
Clemens epist. 2. Orig. in Leuit. hom. 5 Hieron. in 1. Cor. 12. August. de
Trinit. lib. 3. c. 10. Hesych. in Leuit. lib. 2. ca. 8. Niceph. l. 17. l. 25
Conc. Matiscon. 1. cap. 6. Gabriel Biel. sect 26.
canopie, and I can show throughout the whole antiquity, and from age to age,
that there was no reservation of the sacrament made without any use: and that
it was so far from being approved, that in effect it was rejected. It is a
modern invention, and has proceeded partly from Honorius the third, and was
finished by Vrbane the fourth, which are the authors thereof: and have also
given order Decret. lib. 3. tit. decelib. Missae.
for locks and keys, for the more safe custody of the same.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Confirmation.
WHat shall we say of your confirmation, whereunto you have assigned the second
place among your seven sacraments? Who is able to exaggerate fully those
blasphemies which you utter against Baptism De Consecrat. did. 5. Can
Spiritus sanctus. Conc. Aurel.
that we are not prepared for spiritual combats, that we are not made
perfectly Christians: that confirmation preceedeth Baptism De Consecrat. did.
4.
in dignity, this being indifferently ministered by any Priest, and the former
by Bishops only: that the forehead in the confirmation is a more worthy part
then the cranium. Alas! who will not abhor these Oracles pronounced from the
Popes tripus. Now to return to your conformities, those cleansing days,
whereon the Romans purified their children, the male kind on the ninth day,
and the female on the eighth after their birth, are they not the print and
footsteppes of your confirmation? And in like manner as the Gentiles and
ancient Romans Basilius de Baptis.
when they enfranchised their slaves, gave them a neck-band: so likewise do
you, in sign (as you say) of the spiritual liberty.

CHAP. L. Of Extreme Unction.
IT is in the same school of the Pagans, that you have learned to apply
unction unto those that are extremely diseased, and at the very point of
death, and not in that of the Marc. 6. James 5. Council. Cabil. c. 48
Apostles. For this ceremony is not ordained by God, is not graced with any of
his promises, and it is in vain that you defend your selves, with the holy
Scripture: it is the invention of Felix the fourth Pope of that name Anno
Christi 528.
. And if the Apostles did anoint certain diseased persons, they had withal
the gift of miracles. And show us but one jot, where any commandment is given
to the pastors of the Church to continue this unction on such persons as lie in
the agony of death Iam scrobe, iam lecto, iam pollinctore parato.
? Unction which is not applied but when there is no hope of life? And if
miracles have ceased, is not the visible sign thereof superfluous and
ridiculous? The ancient Idolaters used a kind of washing, which they termed
the Apul. As. lib. 9.
last, washing (I say) wherein they used water mingled with oil, as one of
their Cicero lib. 1. de legib. Tarquinii corpus bona foemina lauit and vnxit.
Virg. Aeneid. 6. Pars calidos latices, et ahena vndantia flammis Expediunt,
corpusque lauant frigentis et vngunt.
Lawyers witnesses. I confess there is some difference; to wit, that which
the Gentiles did to the dead, you do unto such as are dying.

CHAP. LI. Of the Mass.
BEhold we are now come unto the Mass, in the etymology whereof many have
sported and played, some saying after one, some after another manner, so
doubtful is that which they hold to be the Palladium of Christianity. The
origin is taken from the ancient Latin Romans, as diverse of our men have
learnedly remarked, it is folly therefore to make it either Greek or Hebrew. I
will agree willingly that this word may likewise be borrowed of the ancient
Idolaters, and of Mahomets Alcoran. The Arabians through tradition of the Friar
Leo in the description of Afric.
Sergius, have the word Mass in great reverence, and have honored three
towns situate upon the coast of the Ocean, upon the point that makes the
beginning of the hill Atlas, which they have named Messa. And they have
consecrated temples unto this Messa, hoping that out of his lineage shall come
that famous Pontife promised by the seducer Mahomet. Their Temples are named
Messit, their Priests are saluted by this word Messen, as the Masse-mongers
are. Some have drawn the etymology from the sending of presents, or table
services, which we call Messes, and it seems that Lamprid. in vita
Heliogabuli.
Lampridius has iested a little thereat. And those dry Masses that are sung at
women's churching that are risen out of childbed, are they not like unto the
Nephalia, domesticke sacrifices, wherein the use of wine was forbidden? The
Gentiles had their The smophoria, Demeteria Hacest Missa cuius vnius causa tam
multa sunt Corpora missa neci. Ovid. Metam. 7.
of Ceres, the Panathenea of Minerua, the Aphrodisia of Venus: the Pammylia of
Osiris: so likewise have you as many Masses as there are Saints registered in
your Calendar. You term your Masses unbloody sacrifices and without blood,
but how can they be such, since they have bereft so many millions of their
lives? Concerning your private Masses whereinto you have changed the general
communion, the Epigrammatist mocketh Martial. Cur sine te coeno, quum tecu^,
Pontice, coenem: Cur mihi non eadem quae tibi coena datur?
them.

CHAP. LII. Of the Confiteor.
IN vain do you attribute the invention of the Confiteor of the Mass unto
Pontian and Damase Bishops of Rome, and in this we challenge you of falsehood,
seeing this ceremony was invented a thousand years before them. It is theft
to deprive any authors of their inventions, by attributing the same unto others
which are only their imitators. Numa was the first that advanced both the
theorie and practicke thereof: for as we read in good authors, he thought that
the consciences of the sacrificers were well purged, through the confession
Blondus lib. 1. de Romans triumphis. Alex. ab Alexa. lib. 4. cap. 37.
which they made unto the Gods and Goddesses, and that without the Confiteor,
the sacrifice could not be lawfully celebrated. We will not enter into the
deepenesse of Confession which we approve, it being grounded upon the word of
God; I will only demand of you, with what face darre you be so bold in the
Confiteor of your Mass, as to join the creatures with the creator?

CHAP. LIII. Of the nine Kyrie Eleysons.
TO pray to the Lord that he would have mercy on us, should be an ordinary
thing amongst us: but let it be in a language that we understand. And why may
we not use this form at infinite times rather then nine times? And this number
of nine, has it not bin drawn out of the Pythagoricall Cabale? The imitation
and not the invention thereof ought to be imputed to Gregory the first of that
name: seeing many ages before that, Tullus Tit. Liu. lib. 1. Decad. 1. Quoties
prodigium nunciabatur, sacrum noue^diale per nouem dies agebatur.
Hostilius successor to Numa did establish a certain law touching this number,
and ordained a nouendiall sacrifice, for a remedy against monsters and
prodigious sights. And this Ovid. Fast. 5. Cum dicit nouies, manes exite
paterni, Respicit, and pure sacra peracta putat. Stat. Theb. 4. Principio
largos nouies tellure cauata Inclinat Bacchi latices. Ovid. Metam. 10. Perque
nouem noctes venerem tactusque virtles. In vetitis numerant.
nouendiall ceremony is not without some mystery: the use thereof was
frequent among the Idolaters, whether it had been in the Lemurall sacrifices,
or magical enchantments, thinking that the virtue of this number was such;
that ghosts and fearful visions of the night were chased away thereby. Satan
required of his followers an abstinence from that which is lawful in marriage,
and a respite from their marriage bed for nine days space, and namely of such
as were dedicated to the service of Ceres. This is it which we intend to prove,
to wit, the agreement that is between you and the Gentiles.

CHAP. LIIII. Of the odd number of the Collects of the Mass.
SVch as have sung Mass, know that the unity and number of three, five, and
seven are duly observed, and that very seldomly it is extended so far as nine,
in the orations, that are said after the Kyrie eleyson, or gloria in excelsis,
which you term Collects; to the end that the memory of the Masse-monger may
not waver in such along reckoning. And of whom have you learned these manner of
doings but of the Virg. Ecl. 8. Numero Deus impare gaudet.
Gentiles, who were of the opinion that God delighted in this od number? This
law was diligently observed in their sacrifices Plutarch. in symbol. Pyth.
Caelestibus imparia sacrificate, Inferis vero paria.
and it was known by the number, unto what Gods they were offered, unto the
infernal or unto the celestial: for to these last the number was equal, and
to the first inequall. And we will remarke by the way, that according to the
belief of those silly people, the number of three was the Prince of all Iuuen.
Sat. 6. Ter matutino Tyberi mergetur, and ipsis Vorticibus timidum caput
abluet. Virg. Aeneid. 6. Idem ^er socios pur^ circumtulit vnda.
the inequall numbers, as indeed it is most frequent in your Masses, and
chiefly when you go about to sign your Mass bread, whether it be before or
after the consecration. The Poets Virg. in Pharmac. Item Ecl. 8. Tibul. lib. 1.
Eleg. 2.
likewise have remarked, that the sorcerers had the same in great account above
all other numbers: which was observed also in the Ovid. Fast. 2. Et digitis
tria thura tribus sub limine ponit.
sacrifices that were made to the Goddess Muta, where this number of three was
observed. The number of seven also was not Apul. Asin. l. 11
forgotten: and such as were of a most strict conscience reputed themselves to
be very clean, if they had washed them seven times in the sea or salt water,
such as your holy water is at this day: and they did reverence this number
Martian. in Arithmet. Ovid. Fast. 2. Tunc cantata tenet cum fusco licia plumbo:
Et septem nigras versat in ore fabas.
so much, that it was worshipped and inserted in the Catalogue of the
Goddesses, under the name of Tritonia virgo. It was used also in magical
sacrifices, but was not so frequent as the number of three.

CHAP. LV. Of washing of the Hands in the Mass.
Cleanliness is commendable, if it be void of all superstition. And it is
known unto all men how bitter the reproves of Jesus Christ Math. 15. Marc. 7.
were, against the washing and purification of the Pharisees, wherein they
thought that the chief part of godliness consisted, a custom which was thought
by the Idolaters Tibul. lib. 2. Eleg. 1. Cast a placent superis, pura cum vest
venite, Et manibus puris sumite fontis aquam.
to be so religious, that they held it a great offense, to appear before their
Gods, either to do sacrifice, or to pray, unless they had first been cleansed
and washed both in their bodies and garments Virg. Aeneid. 9. -- ad vndam
Processit, su^moque hausit de gurgite lympham Multa Deos orans. Ovid. Fast. 4.
Et manibus puram fluminis hausit aquam. Pollux in Onom. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Purgatu^, expiatum, mundatum, lotum, castum, sub noua stola, in recens lota
vest adire Deos.
. I will submit my self to that which the Poets say, and in every corner of
the fields I hear some tidings thereof: and in the mean season you ought not
to be ignorant, that God has no regard to our bodies if they be well purged,
provided that our consciences be clean in faith, hope, and charity: a
cleanliness that ought not to be sought, and cannot be found else where save
only in the blood of the son of God our mediator. And to return to our
Massing purifications, of whom have you learned to wash your hands three times
Ovid. Fast. 4. Ter caput irrorat, ter tollit ad athera palmas.
, during the action of the Mass, but of the ancient Romans? Your first
purging preceedeth the Mass Durand. ration lib. Hesiodus. Ne vnquam mane Ioni
vinum libaueris ardens, Illotis manibus, neque diuum praeterea vlli.
; The second is used to the end that you may the more worthily touch your God
after the consecration, the last is after the communion of the body and blood,
wherein notwithstanding you wash only the thumb and the finger next thereunto
of both the hands, by which fingers you are chiefly served in handling of your
mysteries.

CHAP. LVI. Of Silence at the Canon.
THe Goddess Muta was worshipped in old times. The promise of silence (says
Tertull. in Apolog.
Tertullian) was duly observed in all their mysteries, and chiefly in the
Samothracian and Eleusinian sacrifices, named Orgia, so termed, because
profane persons and such as were thought to be polluted were forbidden to come
unto them. The Books of the Sibyls were not perused Lactant. lib. 1. Diuinar.
Instit. Liuius lib. 10.
, and that by express commandment, but by the ten or fifteen men ordained
for that purpose: and some have been severely punished for transgressing this
law. Was not Valerius Soranus condemned to suffer extreme punishment, because
he had named with a loud voice the Tutelar God of the city, which could not
be done upon pain of death? Marcus Tullius Duumuir Valerius lib. 1. cap. 2.
having granted liberty unto Petronius Sabinus to copy over a Book, wherein
the secrets of the common wealth were contained, and which he had in his
custody, was condemned to die by the decree of King Tarquin, and being sowed
within a sack, was thrown into the Sea, a manner of death that was not
practiced save only against parricides. The heathenish Doctors Apul. Asin. l.
11 Cicero de legib. l. 2
forget not this silence, and the cause why men were not admitted unto the
sacrifices of the Goddess Bona, was for fear they had, that they might loose
their eyes, which they thought would befall them if they did behold the same.
And is not this the model whereby you have framed or forged the silence of the
Canon. One of your Doctors Clicthoneus in exposit. Canonis.
to the end he may excuse and color this silence, defends himself thus,
that either it might breed some contempt, if the Canon were pronounced so, that
it might be heard; or else some danger might follow after, as it happened unto
certain shepherds, who were destroyed by thunder, because they had pronounced
the Sacramental words over stones, which thereafter were transubstantiated
into flesh. Is not this fable like unto that which is written of Tullus
Hostilius the Roman King, who going about, according to the order prescribed
in the witchcraft of Numa, to bring down Jupiter Hercaeus from heaven, because
he had forgotten certain rites, was stricken with thunder. Therefore you
cannot say of your ceremonies that, which S. Ambrose Ambros. in 1. Cor. cap. 14.
wrote of the simplicity of his time: There is nothing fained, says he,
nothing is done in the dark, as it is among the Gentiles, whose eyes they
cover, for fear that seeing those things which they term hallowed, they might
perceive how they are abused with diverse vanities: for all manner of deceit
(says he) seeks after darkness, and shows false things in stead of true.
And therefore, amongst us nothing is done in secret, nothing under a veil.

CHAP. LVII. Of Consecration.
While I consider with my self the errors and gross abuses that are in your
doctrine of consecration, by the virtue whereof you believe that you make the
son of God descend from his throne, that you may manacle him within your
appearances that are without substance, I cannot marvel enough that you hold
it for an article of Faith, which nevertheless was added to the belief not by
the Apostles, but by Innocent the third, Bishop of Rome. And, what an
absurdity, I beseech you, that this precious body must descend Anno 120.
from heaven, and ascend thither again, a million of times in a day, so often
(I say) as the Priest has breathed on the bread the five words of the
Consecration? That Idolatrous antiquity believed that Jupiter Ovid. Fast. 3.
Jupiter huc veniet summa deductus ab ^rce. Item Hunc tu non poteris per te
deducere caelo. Sed poteris nostra forsitan vsus open.
Elicius, Apollo and Hecate were forced to come down from heaven, by virtue of
some charms and magical verses, made for that purpose: which was very
troublesome to those paltry Gods, of whom some would not obey, but by force and
necessity: howbeit others would freely offer their presence without any
compulsion. And in that consists the privilege which your Priests say they
have above Idolaters, to wit, that the God of the Mass takes pleasure to
remove so often, to be sometimes above, sometimes beneath, yea, and to be
carried solemnly through the streets; though in that same very moment he be
imprisoned in a corner of some cabinet: for through daily practice he is so
accustomed, that he never fails to present himself in proper person, so
soon as the sownde of the last of the five words is finished. The Romans
Plutarc. in problem. Macrob. Saturn. l. 3 c. 9. Plinius l. 28. c. 2.
used these euocations, and chiefly in the besieging of towns, unto whose
Tutelare Gods they promised an honorable place in the Pantheon, or in the
Capitol that was the ordinary abode of the greater Gods. And the fear of
losing their Gods or of their departure, caused the Tyrians Appianus A. lexand.
when they were besieged by Alexander the great, to make fast their images with
chains, that they might not fly away unto the fields. The Lacedaemonians did
in like manne to Mars, that he might not fall into their ennemies hands. This
certain persuasion that you have of the substantial presence of the body of
Christ Jesus in the host; is it unlike unto the Theophanie, so highly renowned
in times past in the temple of Apollo in Herodot. lib. 2.
Delphos? Theophanie, I say, which is as much to say as the apparition or
manifestation of God? Among the Comedies of the ancients, there was one sort
named Magodians Aris^oxenus.
, which were acted to these ends, that they might euocate the Gods and
Goddesses, with whom they were to have any business. And the actors thereof
were clothed in side garments that were white, having cymbols and drums in
their hands. And are not your Priests decked with the like garments, and do
not the little bells keep a tinkling, while you are busied about your
transsubstantiation? The sacramental words (say you) have this virtue to make
the son of God descend from his throne, to chase away the bread, and supply
the room thereof: this is it which 'Numa made his people believe, to wit, that
he caused Egeria descend from heaven that he might Valex. Max. l. 1. c. 3.
Ovid. Fast. 3. Tit. Liu. li. 1. Decad. 1.
consult with her.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the round Host.
IS it not ridiculous that Durand. l. 4. ruber. de 3. par. cano. and rub. de
ob. lat.
Durandus allegorizeth upon your round hosts? That the bread is made round
after the fashion of a penny? For so much as the bread of life was sold for
thirty pence? That the earth, the fullness and roundnesse thereof belong unto
the Lord, and that the round form is a mark of eternity? O God! who would
ever have called to mind these marks so feriall? When Jesus Christ did
celebrate his holy Supper with the Apostles, he gave no order to prepare any
little breads, and round Hosts with impressions, characters or shapes, with
exorcisations of crosses both in equal and odd number: but he used the
breaking of the bread in little morcels, which he distributed unto his
Apostles. From whence then is the beginning of these round Hosts? Numa was the
inuentor thereof more then seven hundredth years before the incarnation of Jesus
Christ. And during the time of that Magician, the Romans Pollux in Ono^. lib.
6. Alexand. ab Alex. l. 4. c. 17.
were not as yet accustomed to do sacrifice with the blood of beasts: but were
commanded to communicate and eat little round breads after the sacrifice was
finished in honor of the Gods, in whose name the sacrifice was celebrated. The
round Hosts were made of meal, that was termed Mola, from whence has
proceeded the word immolo to sacrifice. With these round Hosts wine was
offered. And during the time that the sacrificers and assistants were
communicating, hymns were sung in praise of their Gods, and they caused the
Organes and Cymbales to sound with a great noise. Your round Hosts are made
Ovid. Fast. 4. Facta Dea est fornax: lata furnace coloni: Orant vt vires
te^peret illa suas.
upon the fire between two irons. The Romans had their Ouens likewise to bake
their little breadsc in, from which has proceeded the apotheosis and
canonisation of the Goddess Fornax, whom the country people had in great
account. Do you not acknowledge here the likeness that is between you and the
idolaters?

CHAP. LIX. Of Ite Missa est.
THis license ite Missa est, is it not borrowed of the Grecian and Roman
Idolaters? Those used this form (...), the leave granted unto the people Apul.
Asin. l. 11.
after that the service of the Goddess Isis is finished; These latter,
according to the institution of Numa Pompilius Plutareh in Numa.
in the sacrifices, cried out by the mouth of one of their Sacrificers, the
ceremonies being ended, licet, as your Priests and Deacons do thunder out with
a Stentorian voice Ite Missa est. And like as the Pagans after that they had
kissed the footesteps of their Gods and Goddesses together with the altars,
returned joyfully unto their houses, so also with the like gladness do you
practice that Monkish proverb, de Missa ad mensam. If the Mass be appointed
for the dead, in stead of Ite Missa est, they give leave to the people with the
requiescat in pace. The Gentiles Tibul. lib. 2. Et been, discedens dicit
placideque quiefcant, Atque hoc dat mae. stas munus in exequias.
did in like manner with as great show of sorrow as you do, when they spoke
their last farewell, aeternum salve, aeternum vale: as Virgil Virg de Polyd.
anim^mque sepul. chro, Condimus, and magna supremu^ voce ciemus.
.

Salve aeternum mihi maxim Palla, Aeternumque vale. CHAP. LX. Of Funerals.
WE lament for our dead, we bury them with honor Insepultam sepulturam
Cicero Philip. 1. pro dedecore habet. Nec Turnus Virgilianus (Aeaetd. lib. 10.)
largiens Palla^ti. Qu^squis honos tumuli est, mortui^ honorificum putauit non
humari.
, and this is the last act of our piety toward them. We desire only that the
Apostolic simplicity may be observed here, or else where, and that Gentilisme
may be abolished, wherewith your ceremonies have a very great harmony. The
most ancient that I can find to have brought in these customs among the
Gentiles, was Pluto, whom the Poets have fained to be the God of souls and of
hell. Aeneas Virg. Aeneid. 5. Ovid. Fast. 2. Hunc morem Aeneas pie^atis idoneus
author. Attulit in terras, just Latin, tuas. Ille patris genio solemnia sacra
ferebat. Hinc populiritus e^idicere pios
being fugitive from Troy, and come into Italy brought in these customs with
his Palladium, which Romulus and Numa have imitated, thereafter the Popes have
continued, enlarged, and confirmed these superstitions. It is true indeed,
that the Gentiles did not ordain those ceremonies as hoping thereby to release
souls out of the fire of Purgatory, but only Plato de Re^^o. l. 12.
to make an atonement for such things as the living had omitted in their
Sacrifices: whereas contrary wise, all whatsoever you do practice herein,
tends to nothing else but to deliver souls out of the burning fire of
Purgatory. The Idolaters Alexand. Aphrod. in probl. Homer Iliad. ^. Plato de
legib. l 12. Persius. Hic tuba, candelae, tandemque beatulus alto Compositus
lecto.
hired minstrels, pipers, and fluters, who brought with them candles and
torches, to the end that they might likewise move others to lament and be
sorrowful: and according to the note and accent which the minstrels sounded,
and the motions wherewith they touched their instruments, the parents and
friends smote their breasts and began to lament, a fashion of mourning that is
still observed among some Christian nations, namely the Calabrians, and those
of Bearne and others, whom the holy Fathers Cyprianus. Hieronym. ad Paul. de
dormit. Blesillae.
have so often reproved. At your funerals the corpse is carried before, the
Priests follow after: this was also observed among the Gentiles Terent in And.
at their funerals. At this time bells are in stead of minstrels, trumpets and
flutes, whereof Ovid. Fast. 6. Virg Aeneid. 11. Statius. Quu^ signum luctus
cornu grauo mugit adunco Tibia, cui teneros suetum producere manes Lege Phrygum
maesta.
the use was very frequent, whether it had been in the divine service, or in
the funerals of Gentilisme: and concerning singing, your Priests do practice
it for the comfort of souls, whereas the Pagans did observe it, because they
were of the opinion that the souls being separated from the bodies, did
return unto the spring of the sweetness of Music, that is to say, unto
heaven. The Athenians ordained honors Alexand Aphrod. in probl. Alexand. ab
Alexand. l. 3. c. 7.
and yearly orations in remembrance of those, who had lost their lives in the
battle of Marathon against Xerxes. Pericles ordained Thucid. in bello Pelop.
the same praises, that the memory of those valliant men might not be
forgotten, which had hazarded their lives in the wars of Peloponesus for the
liberty of Grecia. The first that made any funeral oration among the Romans,
was Publicola in honor of his companion Brutus Cic de legib. l. 2. Aulus Gel.
l. 17 Plutarc. in Camillo.
, who gave the chase to Tarquin the proud, for rauishing of Lucrece. Solon in
like manner ordained that such as were endued with rare virtues and graces
should be praised after their decease: and the Matrons of Rome were also made
partakers of this honor, to wit, they were praised by the orators after their
death. The Egyptians Diador. Sic. l 2. Fulgentius lib. 2. cap. 1.
were praysers of their Kings that had lived uprightly. And is it not from them
that you have borrowed your funeral Sermons? For the most part, stuffed with
nothing but hyperbolical praises of the dead, for otherwise, funeral Sermons
are of singular use, Furthermore, the opinion that you have, that the souls
do return back unto those places where they have remained Vir Aeneid. 4. Ovid
Fast. 5.
in times past, or at least that they are still wandering about their bodies,
has it not proceeded from the sacrifices named Lemuria? The banquets also,
which are made under the name of the dead, have taken their pattern through
the imitation of the Argians, Athenians, and viscerations of the Grecians, for
the comfort, not of the dead, but of the living. Behold here the complaint,
which the council Conc. Afric. Can. 27.
of Affricke has made of these feasts: We must, says it, request the
Emperors In tertio Concilis Toletano. ca. 22. interdicta fuerunt quaelibet
ceremoniae in sepulturis, and cantus Psalmorum tantu^ permissus.
that they would interpose their authority, to the end that such feasts as are
made in many places against the commandment of God, and have proceeded of the
error of the Gentiles A Cecrope Atheniense institutum est, vt post terram
obductam amici conueniant ac vicini, epulantes in honorem defuncti. Pontanum ca
15. de magnificentia. Idem de Scythis refert. Alexand. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 7.
may be discharged upon great penalties, and exiled out of all the places that
are within their dominions: the rather because in some cities, they are not
afraid to commit such disorders on the days of the nativity of the holy
Martyrs. And from the same fountain of Gentilisme, have proceeded also the
almesses of beans Fabaru^ vsus erat in his sacris, quod mortuorum animas in
his esse crederent. Vnde Festus: fabam inhibuit, nec tangere nec nominare Diali
flamini licet, quod ea putatur ad mortuos pertinere. Varro etiam flamines ea
non vesci tradit, quodin flore eius literae lugubres reperiantur: quod etiam
Pythagoras asserit.
, which are distributed after that the service for the dead is finished:
because the Pythagoreans Varro de vita Pyth. l. 1. Ovid. Fast. 2. and 5
thought, either that the souls of the dead were in the beans, or that the
letters and tokens of mourning were printed in their flowers. In the temple of
Libitina there was many officers, the dead were their daily bread and riches,
and the greatest gain Horat. Sermon. l. 2 Vt canis a corio nunquam absterrabitur
vncto. Hoc tamen prohibitum est in council. Triburino. c. 16.
that the Pagans had; proceeded from thence. And what would become of your
Masse-mongers if this pray were taken from them? Rests the washing of dead De
Anna Virg. -- date vulnera lymphas Ablua^. Ennius. Tarquinij corpus bonafoemina
lauit and vnxit.
bodies, which is practiced among some monastical orders, as it may be seen
in the old statutes of the chartrous Monks. The Pagans did in like manner, as
it is written in histories.

CHAP. LXI. Of Mourning Garments.
WE read nothing in the Scripture of those strange garments, which are worn
among you, whether it be in the funeral ceremonies, or during the year of
mourning. We find indeed that the Licians Valcr. Maxim lib 2. cap. 1.
were the first inuentors, and that the matrons of Rome Oui l. Fast. 1. Seneca
lib. 1. Plutarc. inquaeft.
were clothed in black, in token of sadness, and this mourning garment was
named Anthracinus Apul. Asin. l. 2.
, from the Greek word, which signifies a Cole. Their kirchiefes were of white
linen, such as the French Queens wear at this time after their husbands
decease. And Licurgus Plutarc. in Licurgo. Alexand. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 7.
in his laws was not so scrupulous as our Lawyers are, having permitted only
eleven days of mourning unto the Lacedaemonians, and on the tweluth, they
behooved to leave it off after they had offered sacrifice unto Ceres: how be it
we in no ways condemn the civil, but only the superstitious use of mourning
garments.

CHAP. LXII. Of the Feasts of the Dead.
THe feasts of the dead are the invention of Pluto, and of Aeneas in honor of
his father Anchises Coelius lect, an tique l. 17, c. 2. Virg, Aenied. 5. Ovid.
Fost. 2.
. Concerning the feasts which were kept in February, to obtain rest for the
dead, we have certain instructions in Plutarch, who in the life of Romulus
Plut. in Romans februariu^ me^sem (...), id est expiatorium neminat.
speaks thus. Touching the feast of the Lupercales, the time when it is kept
being considered, it seems to have been ordained for a purification: for the
same is celebrated on the unfortunate days of the month of February, which
name by interpretation, is as much as purifying, and the day whereon it was
kept was termed in old times Februata. And in the life of Numa Plu. in Numa.
he says, of the months which Numa added, or, which he transposed, that of
February is as much to say as purgative: at least the deriuation of the word
draws very near unto this signification. In this month they offer
sacrifice Ma^tua^, l, Fa. 11. Et paribus studijs vrbes and rura parentant:
Februaque exerce^t: fieut Romana, secundo Me^se, superstitio, Jove tu^c
regna^te folebat. Ovid, Fast, 2. Hanc quia iusta feru^t dixere fera lia luce^:
Vltima placa^dis manibus illa dios.
for the dead, and pass forward to the solemnising of the feast of the
Lupercales, wherein there are many things that agree, and are like unto the
sacrifices used for the purifications. Now the feast of the dead in the month
of February continued eleven days; and at that time those ferall bankets were
made, so called from the word (Far e) to carry, because the dishes which were
prepared thereto were carried, and set upon the monuments and sepulchers. And
the churches of Afric could not keep themselves so well in the purity of
holy religion, but through lapse of time, those heathenish pollutions got
entry among the ceremonies of Christianisme, as we may perceive in diverse
places of Saint. Austin. August. l. 6 Co^ in Psa, 64, Item epistola 64, and
119, et de morib. Eccl, Catholicae c. 34.
The funeral feasts were named Silicernia, either because of the silence that
the dead kept Iuuen, Sat, 5. Ponitur exigua feralis coena patella.
who took their food by licking only, or, because they did but look on them,
not tasting any thing at all of such things as were made ready for them. The
Scythians, Argiues, Athenians and others made feasts for their friends which
had accompanied them at the funerals Contra epulas ad Martiru^ alioru^^
defu^ctorii sepulchra agitatas sic exclamat Cyprianus de duplici Martyrio.
Temula^tia, ait, adeo co^munis est est Africa vestra vt propemodu^ no^ habeant
pro cri^ine. An no^ videmus ad Martiru^me^orias Christianu^, a Christia^o cogi
ad ebrietate^ An hoc leuius crime^ esse ducimus quam Baccho hircu^ immolare?
Vide Amb. in l. de Helia and ieiunio. 17.
and above all others Mercury was called on, because they thought that it
belonged to his charge, to transport the souls unto the place appointed for
their eternal habitation, in whose room at this time Saint Michel, and other
Angels are placed. Baruch Cap, 5.
makes mention of these suppers. And the feast of Saint Peter's chair, was it
not ordained in February, through the example of a day whereon the Gentiles
were accustomed, to offer Juuenall Vade epulu^ possis ce^^u^ dare Pythag^reis
yearly wine and other meats upon the sepulchers of the dead. From one
superstition they have fallen headlong into another: for thinking to suppress
these heathenish ceremonies, they did institute this feast called Saint Peter
of meats. Polydore Virgil De invent. rer. l, 6. c, 9 Ia^pride^ inquit
increbuerat mos hic apud veteres pare^^a^di apud sepulchrum. Quod indicat
Marcus Tullius in Phil. 1. dicens: Vt cuius sepulchru^. nusqua^ extet, vbi
pare^tetur ei public suppli. cetur, and in orat. pro. Flacco, litemus igitur,
inquit, Le^ tulo: parentemus Cethego: sic fieba^t a^nua Parentalia, id est,
sacri ficiu^ quota^nis ad honore^ m^rtuotu^ etc.
after he has discoursed of the yearly sacrifices, which they did celebrate
in honor of the dead: So (adds he) do we observe the same custom for the
weal of the dead. It is certain also, if we do remarke narrowly, that those
services for the dead, were first brought in, by those which had newly left
Gentilisme: and afterward by the Pastors Durae. rat. divine, offic, l. 7. Ru.
de offie, promortuis.
that went about to reform them, were changed from praying into a
commemoration, and from the souls unto the body. De cons. did, ^ Non oportet,
in Glos. sic est annotatu^: Clerici eu^tes ad tumulos mortuorum, portabant
secu^ sacrame^ta corporis and sanguin is excipi, and super tumulos ea distribu
eba^t: and haec co^suetudo facta fuit a gentilibus.
So to return to our feasts: Upon the morrow after Saint Hilaries day, in the
month of January, you have another feast for the same ends above specified,
which continues only the space of a morning, after the custom of the Romans,
who had certain days named intercisi dies, Ovid. Fast. 1.
as who would say, feast cut a sunder. Anchus Martius the fourth King of the
Romans ordained in the month of April the Laurentialia, as yearly sacrifices
unto Laurentia uource to Romulus, Macrobius and Cato referu^t Laure^ita^ annuae
pare^tationis honor dignatam.
which the Romans did also yearly observe, upon the twentieth and third day
of December. The like was done in the month of November for the Gauls and
Grecians, who were buried in the place named forum boarium: like as the fable
of Odilus Petrus Damian, in vita Odili. Anno. 1000.
Abbot of Clugny has given occasion, and has opened the gate, unto the
solemn commemoration of the dead, which is kept yearly upon the second day of
this month. The Grecians Cicero pro Flac co. and l. 2. de legi. Plut. in
Aristi.
in like manner did celebrate the funerals and yearly duties of such as had
died in the battle against the Persians. The Argiues Alex. ab Alex. genesis
dier. l. 3. c. 7.
offered sacrifice unto Apollo, immediately after the decease of their parents,
and after thirty days, unto Mercury, they gave barley unto the Priest of
Apollo, and the feast was not forgotten, which was kept at the Parentalia.
Cicero Phil. 1.
Those silly people had other days also, and that in no small number, which
were dedicated unto their dead, and were called, Necya, Ennata, Enagismata,
Cterismata, Tarchismata, Triacas, Parentationes, Nouendialia, Horat in Epod.
Nouendiales dissipare pulueres. Virg. Aeneid. 5. Praeterea si nona diem
mortalibus almum Aurora. extulerit. Donatus in comment Phormionis.
in place whereof you have substituted the Seventh, Ninth, Tenth, Thirtieth,
and Fortieth day, the Anniuersaries, the Priuerats. And where do you find that
God ordained these Sacrifices? His infinite wisdom would not have have
suffered them to be forgotten if they had been any thing worth, seeing that
he has set down orders concerning things which seem not to be so necessary.
Your religion therefore is no thing else but a continuation of Gentilisme: for
what difference is there between the feast of the dead, which was solemnized
in Rome in the month of February, and that which is now celebrated in November
Rat. divine. off. lib. 7. rubr. de officio mortuoru^ apud Purand.
, upon the morrow after All Saints day, invented by the Abbot of Clugny
Bergomen. supplem chron. l. 12.
, approved by John the sixth, Bishop of Rome, and all the Churches commanded to
observe the same? And touching prayers for the dead, what? This manner of
doctrine was not known among the Jews, until they began to frequent other
nations, according to that which the author of the Apocryphal books of the
Machabees Lib. 2. Match. c. 4.
says: They did not, says he, set by the honor of their Fathers, but liked
the glory of the Gentiles best of all. These be the prayers, whereof Arnobius
one of the most ancient Aduersus Gentes. lib. 29. nu^. 11.
Christian writers makes mention: what do they mean (says he) those
ceremonies of secret arts, wherein you speak unto I know not what powers, to
the end that they may be favorable unto you, and may not let you when you are
about to return to heaven? Item Jdem number. 44.
Their wise men doc warrant unto them, commendatitias preces, certain
recommended prayers, by the which having pacified certain powers, they make
the way to heaven more easy for them. What is to be found there that your
Friars do not practice? And does not S. Austin De ciuit dei. li. 21. cap. 27.
Euique suimemofes alios facere me rendo.
find some comfort for the dead in Virgil, through the prayers of the living?
As for the offriugs for the dead, we have them in Homer Odys. A.
; (...), etc.

And in Virgil.

Hic Inde infernum vinum. Trebatio apud Arnobium Lib. 7. and Festo.
duo rite mero libans carchesia Bacccho
Fundit humi, duo lacte nouo, duo sanguine sacro:
Purpureosque iacit flores, ac talia fatur:
Salve sancte parens, iterum saluete recepti
Nequicquam cineres, animaeque vmbraeq, paternae.
In Tertullian De corn. milit. cap. 3.
we have Oblationes pro defunctis Where Rhenanus notes, that from thence
proceeded the beginning of anniuersaries. But the Index Expurgatorius of the
low countries will have it corrected, antiquity instead of beginning: and the
Spanish one will have it scraped out, although their Parmelius say the same,
Anniuersariorum cum eleemosynis.

Veni etiam Domine Jesus. THE HARMONY AND AGREEMENT of the Romish CHVRCH with
IVDAISME.

The second Conformity.

THE PREFACE, To those of the Romish CHVRCH.
MY Masters, we shall be brief in the description of the harmony, which is
between your Church and Iudaisme. For if we would search narrowly that great
heap of ceremonies, which has been transported from the ceremonial law into
yours, we should never have done, and the reading thereof might perhaps be
tedious, for the prolixitie of the same. And truly if we search well the
fountain of all your ceremonies, whereby the pure service of God has been
made not honorable, but by little and little has been disguised and
transfigured, and in end converted into Idolatry and ungodliness; we should
find them to be as many remnants of Iudaisme, if we add unto them that which
has been taken out of the puddle of Gentilisme, as we have declared in the
conformity preceding. It is after this manner, that so cunningly you have
mingled together with your devotions, rules and ceremonies, not only the
Mythologies of the Pagans, but that also which in old times was appointed for
his people, at this time nevertheless abolished through the coming of our
Savior Christ Jesus, who having fully executed the charge which the heavenly
Father had committed unto him, has done all that was necessary for delivering
of us from the second death, and to purchase unto us life everlasting, as it
was promised unto the Fathers, even when the first sin was committed, and
afterward figured and shadowed by the Ceremonies of the whole outward service
of the Church of Israel. Seeing therefore that he has fully and perfectly
accomplished all whatsoever was promised Rom 1. v. 2. Col. 2. v. 17.
and foretold, as well of his person as of his office, and that he has put an
end to all the shadows of the legal ceremonies, wherefore have you restored
again the greater part of those types which were practiced under the
Leuiticall government? Those ceremonial laws were either personal, or were
appointed for the daily and ordinary service of the Tabernacle, or for the use
of sacrifices, purifications, expiations and such other shadows of this
ancient pedagogie, which God had ordained, as well to separate his chosen
people Deuteronomy. 14. Leuit. 12.
from the Idolatrous nations, to hinder them from forging unto themselves any
new services at their pleasure, and following their own fancies, as to
admonish them to nourish and confirm their faith, in looking for the great
Messiah, who was shadowed by those Ceremonies. All these things have ceased;
And that those Ceremonies are not acceptable unto God at this time, it
appears in this that the Jewish policy is no more, the Arc is lost, the
Vrim and Thumim suppressed, the city of Jerusalem defaced, and the temple
destroyed, so that there is not a stone left upon another,: and what license
soever the Jews obtained to reedifie the same, as under Julian the Apostate, a
mortal foe unto the Christians, who did contribute himself thereto, yet could
they never bring it to pass. But, as the Gentiles themselves of those days
do witness, Ammian Marcel. lib. 23.
fires coming out of the earth, and great thundrings from heaven, consumed the
workmen, and scattered the works which they had begun, with exceeding great
pride and cost. And where now is the fire consuming the holocaustes, the glory
of God among the Cherubins, the manifest inspiration of the holy-Spirit upon
the Prophets, the Arc of the covenant, the Oracles which came out of the
propitiatory, the Vrim and Thumim, the Royal and Priestly anointing: in a
word, all those goodly prerogatives, wherewith God in old times did beautify
and adorn his people? The whole is no more, and it is certain that if it had
pleased God to continue and prolong, as well these things, as the ceremonies of
the Law, he had not suffered the Roman Emperor to overthrow Jerusalem, to
destroy the sanctuary, and abolish the sacrifices throughout the whole earth.
And those utter desolations which have happened unto this people through his
permission, and were foretold in old times by the prophetical Oracles, do
sufficiently show the bill of diuorcement which Dan. 9.
God has sent to those types and shadows, whereof also we did not stand any
more in need: since the truth has been manifested both unto their eyes and
yours. And since it is so, wherefore have you set them up again? You have
loaded your selves with so heavy a burden of diverse ceremonies, that you have
not been contented with the relics of Iudaisme, and to practice the same,
yea, and you have made no difficulty to put forth your profane hands unto the
holy Sanctuary of the miraculous works of Christ Jesus. And what? Know you not
well enough that, that which he has said and done, wherein he would be
imitated of his own, ought to be referred unto the practice of perfect piety
that is due to God, and to the true and perfect charity which he has showed
unto us? But do you not counterfeit Christ Jesus in things, which he never
did, to that end that he might be followed and imitated therein? For howbeit it
be not borrowed from Iudaisme: yet it is an indecent imitation, and void of
all reason.

THE SECOND CONFORMITY.
CHAP. I. Of Lent.
HE fasted forty days and forty nights without eating anything, proving by
this miraculous work, that the preaching of the Gospel, whereinto he entered,
was a doctrine descended from heaven, and not of men; the doctrine of the law
having also been authorized in Moses Exodus 4.
by the like miracle. You will have this institution of Lent to proceed from
that fasting, which Christ Jesus practiced once in all his life, which you
reiterate every year: and God knows with what abstinence! We confess that
some ancient Fathers have made mention thereof, but went otherways to work
then you do, as it is to be seen in the tripartite History Socrates hist.
Eccles. lib. 5. c. 21.
in these words: Concerning fasts which are used before Easter, it is manifest
that in diverse places they have been diversely observed: for in Rome they fast
three weeks before Easter, the Satterday and Sunday being excepted: In
Illyrium, in Grecia, in Alexandria, six weeks, and do call this time Lent.
Others begin the fast, seven weeks before the feast, although they fast but
fifteen days, making certain interualles, and nevertheless call that time
Lent. And I wonder how all these, although they agree not in the number of the
days, yet notwithstanding they agree all in one to name it Lent. Some show a
reason for this name, which is of their own invention. Some are found to
differ, not only in the number of the days, but likewise in the abstinence
from meats; some abstaining from all manner of beasts; others from all other
beasts save fishes, others besides fishes do nourish themselves with those
fowls, which (according to Moses) they say were begotten of the waters;
others abstaining from all manner of fruits that have hard shells, and from
eggs: some others eating nothing but dry bread, and some eating nothing at
all. Some there are, who after that they have fasted till nine of the clock,
use diverse kinds of meats. We have the rather copied this testimony at
length, that we may show how that the historiographer places all these
without the faith, yea and without the Apostolic tradition, leaving them
indifferent to every one. And why then do you make the same a parcel of Gods
service, who threatens the transgressors with no less punishment then
eternal damnation? The doctors of your religion confess openly, that they
have borrowed from the ancient ceremonies of the Law, the pattetne of the
fasts of the four Imber weeks, as it is written in the book of the decrees
Can Ieiunium. did. 76.
: That the custom of the Jews is the welspring and fountain, whereunto the
Church ought to have her refuge, to the end that her good intention may be
well and devoutly protected. And Durandus Durand in rat. divine. offic. lib. 6.
cap. 6. rubr de quartaferia, and ieiunijs quatuor temporum.
the Schoole-man declares most evidently, that it is a thing well known, that
all your fasts are cast in the same molde: because from the fast of the Spring,
until that of the Summer, there are just fourteen weeks, which answer to
the fourteen generations from Abraham unto David: and as in like manner there
are as many from David unto King Iechonias, and from Iechonias unto Christ, so
the Romish Church has suffered fourteen weeks to pass from the Summers fast
unto the fast of Autumn, and as much from the fast of Autumn unto that of
Winter. Are not these mysteries drawn out of a very deep pit? The
speculations of the Thalmudistes have served for a ladder to descend thereunto.
Let us prosequute your imitations.

CHAP. II. Of Spittle.
TO counterfeit the miracle of Jesus Christ wrought on him that was borne
blind, you have added spittle unto Baptism, and Ioa. 9. Marc. 7.
likewise this Syrian word Hephphatah, which our Savior used in healing of the
man that was deaf and stammered in his speech: And to what purpose Hephphatah.
that? Where is the opening that you make Raba. de instit. Clericorum. lib. 1.
cap. 27.
of the eyes and ears of those that neither hear nor see? If it has pleased
the Lord to use these De consecr. did. 4. Can. Postea. can. ante.
outward means, yea although contrary (according to man's judgment) in the
diseases whereof we speak, to declare that there is no fleshly thing in his
work, and that he works in us after an admirable manner, which surpasses
the capacity of men: to what purpose is it to conform yourselues unto him in
that, since the effects prove contrary?

CHAP. III. Of Blowing.
Jesus Christ to bestow some new virtue on his Apostles, that they might
faithfully discharge Ioa. 20.
so weighty affairs as he committed unto them, has given them the earnest
penny of his holy Ghost, by breathing on them, and saying to them, receive the
holy Ghost: using a visible sign, that he might make that the more manifest
which he did, and that he might the better imprint in his Apostles hearts, that
the holy office of preaching was altogether heavenly, and did not proceed from
the inventions of men. And your suffra gants and Bishops, do they not use
blowing at the making of their Priests, through a most impertinent imitation of
Jesus Christ? What a blasphemy I be seech you, to counterfeit that which the
Mediator and Redeemer of the world has done, in so far as he is God
eternal, who ought to be reverenced and worshipped, and not imitated.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Sacrificer and universal Bishop.
Jesus Christ is the sovereign Sacrificer, who through the oblation of
himself once made on the Cross, has reconciled and sanctified us all for
ever unto God his Father, it is he who has ever been the mouth of his
Father, that he might Romans 3.
teach us the doctrine of salvation, having even Heb. 10.
spoken by the Prophets through the inspiration 1. Pet. 1.
of his holy Spirit: and who in end, having declared Joan. 15.
Ephesians. 4.
with his own mouth the will of his Father, Galat. 3.
has since that time sent, and sends yet every 1. Cor. 1.
day his faithful pastors and ministers to build up his spiritual dwelling
place: it is he that was made a curse for us, to the end, that he might become
a blessing unto us, that is to say, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption: it is he that was figured by the sovereign sacrificer of the
Jewish Nation: but who is only after the order of Melchisedech, both
sovereign Sacrificer and the only Sacrifice together. But do you not say
that the Pope is Sacrificer after the same order? Universal Bishop, father of
all Priests and Levites, having the same privileges and prerogatives which the
great Sacrificer of the ancient covenant Mantuan. fast 4 -- Venalia Romae
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae, Ignis, thura, preces, coelum est
venale, Deusque Idem ibidem.
was wont to have? But where shall we find that this oecumenique Pope was
ordained by God? He of the old Testament together with the whole outward
ceremonies of the tabernacle had their warrant out of the word of God: which
seeing it belongs not unto your Bishop pretended universal, -- Romana graui
maculata veneno Curia, quae spargit terras contagia in omnes.
wherefore would you make a show of him, and install him openly as sovereign of
the whole Church? We will confess indeed that he has succeeded Caiphas, with
whom he has great conformity: Postremum est oppressa fides, expost a rapinis
Vndique et in praedam populis proiocta cruentis.
for like as this fellow bought for ready money that so holy and precious
office, which represented the true, universal, and eternal head of the
Church, so also the other sells his spiritual offices: Actius Sannazar.
Vendit Alexander coelos, altaria, Christum. Idem.
and they are come so far, that they have caused the taxes to be printed: and
thereafter according to the example of Caiphas, he has (howbeit in vain)
sought all possible means, whether Sacra sub extrema si forte requiritis hora
Cur Leo non poterat sumere? vendiderat.
it were by violence, or by all kind of snares, to stop the course of the
verity: and like as Caiphas proceeding against Jesus Christ assembled a
council, being accompanied with the Doctors of the Law, and the famous
ancient governors of the people, of whom the great Council of seventy was
composed, which was established by the ordinance of God: so likewise the last
refuge of your universal Bishop, is unto those gallant councels, where he will
needs be both judge and party, as it was seen in this last that was holden in
the town of Trent. Finally, like as Caiphas to the end that he might persuade
those that were present, that the great zeal of Gods glory did move him only,
whether it was in questioning, or condemning of Christ Jesus, labored to
persuade them falsely that he never answered directly to the purpose unless he
had first been forced by some adiuration: so your Bishop of Rome observes the
same method of proceeding in our time, in such criminal actions as are
intended against the children of God.

CHAP. V. Of the Church Representative.
ANd what shall we say of your Church, which you name representative, and of
your whole Ecclesiastical hierarchy? You teach, that like as under the Law,
there was many Leuiticall sacrificers, which had the charge of the ordinary
sacrifices by turns; so also in the church there must be Priests, whose office
is to consecrate the true and natural body of Christ Jesus, and to make his
mystical body perfect: who do all affirm that they are of the generation
and tribe of Leui, as it is to be seen in your decrees. The Deacons (you write
Can. decretis. did. 21. Polyd. Virg. de invent. rer. lib. 4. cap. 5.
) have succeeded unto the Levites: the Subdeacons unto the Nathinneans: the
Porters unto those which had the same charge in Salomons temple: the Readers
unto the Prophets: and concerning the Exorcists and Virgers, you do attribute
the beginning of these unto the Kings, David and Solomon. And what is this else
but to play the Jews? We confess that the Romish Clergy has succeeded unto
false Iudaisme, but with a smaller pretense and far greater corruption,
whether it be in the doctrine, or in the external form of the Church. Go to,
as I find three sort of people in Jerusalem, through whose hands the Redeemer
of the world passed, to wit, the Jews bearing the name of Gods people, in the
mean time open enemies, and exceeding great persecutors Ephesians. 2.
of the son of God; the Romans, poor infidels without God; and finally,
Herod and his followers as middle ones between these two extremities halting
on both sides: so also may the like number be found in your Church of those
that have plotted against Jesus Christ. Your Clergy men which under the name
of the people of God stirred up and kindled the persecution among the members
of Christ Jesus. Next the poor ignorant ones, who with their implicit or
intricate faith, differ not much from those Roman Pagans: finally those of the
midst, who would baptize a marriage between the Gospel and the Mass, as
the Herodians did with Gentilisme and Iudaisme: And like as the false Prophets
and sacrificers among the Jews did brag themselves that they had the Law and
the key of knowledge: so do you say De constit. Can. licet. in 6. Articulos
soluit, Synodumque facit generalem.
that the Pope has all manner of knowledge enclosed within his breast: That it
belongs unto him to give authority to the holy Scripture: That the Decretals
are in the same rank with the Scripture, and that if any person does attempt
against them, his sins shall never be remitted unto him: That d we ought
devoutly to lean and rest upon the constitutions and determinations of
Councels, which are composed of the Doctors and sophists, whom your Bishops
carry at their arses: That the Bishops are not Counselors but Judges of the
Scripture: to be brief, That Extrauag. de vsu pallii ad honorem. Durand. rat.
lib. 1 rub. de Ministris and ordinib. Ecclesiae. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Conc. cap.
18.
Durand. vt sup.
the Pope is Caput (you will know your own babbling) omnium Pontificum, a quo
illi, tanquam a capite membra, descendunt, and de cuius plenitudine omnes
accipiunt. Hic est ille Melchisedech, cuius sacerdotium non est caeter is
comparatum. And when will you leave off doting?

CHAP. VI. Of ceremonies.
YOu brag and boast your selves so much of the reading of the Fathers: and why
do you not call to remembrance that which S. Epistola 11.
Hierome writes; That such as observe the Jewish ceremonies have fallen into
the snare of the Devil. And the greater part of your Popish ceremonies are
they not from the Jews? They are so much reverenced, that it were a mortal
sin to reject the smallest of them: howbeit your own Canons Can. illa. did.
12 Can. omnia talia. did. 12. Can. regulae did. 29. Can Clericus. did. 41.
Can. si quis. did. 30.
teach that ceremonies may be changed; That it must be holden for a thing
indifferent, that is not against the Catholic faith, neither yet against good
manners; That such customs as have been brought in, according to the
diversity of times, of wits, or of places, ought to be cut away whenever
opportunity is offered: the reason being annexed thereunto; which is because
they oppress religion with a servile burden, which the mercy of God will have
to be free in the celebration of a few sacraments, the same being most
perspicuous and evident. Wherefore then do you ouerlode the Church with this
burden so weighty? Wherefore, I say, do you restore again those Jewish
ceremonies already suppressed by the truth of the Euangell? Why do you not
content your selves with the Apostolic simplicity? How well did S. Gregory
Aduersus Julian. oratione secunda.
Nazianzene say, That God ought not to be honored by outward ceremonies, but
by the purity of the soul, by the joy of the Spirit, by heavenly meditations,
which are the lamps that give light unto the whole body of the church. And
what would S. Austin say if he were alive again, and did behold this great
mass of ceremonies, wherewith the poor souls are ouerburdened and
smoothered? Truly he should have cause to renew his complaints, which, while he
was yet alive, he left unto us in his admirable Ad Ianuarepist. 86.
writs. And would to God that S. Bernard. epist. 91.
Bernards wish were in your hearts and mouths, who desired to see a good
Council, wherein ceremonies and traditions might not be stubbornely defended,
nor superstitiously observed. But let us return to your Church representative.

CHAP. VII. Of Cardinals.
AND from whence shall we say that your Cardinals are come? Those Cardinals, I
say, who being picked out of the order of great Lords do exhaust and empty
Kingdoms through their vanities and superfluities? You shall peruse that which
the venerable Cardinal of Cambray Lib. de reformat. Eccles.
, and one of your French men, to wit, Nicolas de Clemang is Lib. de ruina and
reparat. Ecclesiae.
have written, as likewise the Council Sess. 41.
of Constance, which proponed a reformation: I will be content here to produce
only Andreas Barbatius, who in a little Treatise-that he compiled of the
beginning of Cardinals, does attribute the same unto that which is written 1.
Sam. 2.
, Domini enim sunt cardines terrae, and posuit super eos orbem: which was said
before by the Canonist Ostiensis. And what is it to corrupt the Scripture, if
this be not? Behold then your Church replenished with Sacrificers, with
Levites, and other officers: who keep their ranckes in the Chauncels of your
Temples, and sing their course about, one after another (a manner of doing
which they attribute Joseph antiq. Iudaic. lib. 7.
to King David) although the primitive Christians did sing together.

CHAP. VIII. Of Sacrifices and Altars.
WHat do you lack more but sacrifices and altars? We say indeed that our Lord
being Sacrificer after the order of Melchisedech, has left no sacrifice to be
reiterated for the remission of sins, has ordained no Sacrificers after him
to offer him up: but Bishops and Pastors indeed to minister his Word and
Sacraments unto us, the seals of the promises contained in the same, who by a
translation, but not properly may be termed Sacrificers, and their charges and
offices sacrifices, but after the same manner that S. Paul says, That he
sacrifices the Gospel, that the Fathers say that to preach the Gospel is the
work of a Sacrificer. And what say you? As in old times the Church of Israel
had a sacrifice, which was offered up every day: so also you boast your selves,
that every day in your Mass, you offer a propitiatory sacrifice without
blood, for the sins of the quick and the dead. Verily I confess that you
differ from the Jews, in so much as you sing not your Masses at night, unless
it be at Christmasse in the midnight, and in some extraordinary case, and by
the Popes dispensation: But you cannot deny that you have framed your Mass
after the Leuiticall morning and evening sacrifices, and your Sacrificers after
the manner of those that were established in the ancient law: although you
ought not to be ignorant, speaking of Sacrificers as they are taken properly,
that among Christians there is none, because there is no more sacrifices
according to their proper signification. If by sacrifice we understand (...),
every holy work, behold then we agree: But it is certain that the faithful
are such according unto S. Peter 1. Pet. 2.
, by pouring forth their prayers, and consecrating their lives unto GOD through
Christ Jesus. And at what gate then, or rather at what window did the Mass
enter into the Church? You borrow it from the Hebrews, and for so much as you
have red in the holy Scripture Deuteronomy. 16.
, Missah nidbath iadecha asher titten caasher; You think verily that you have
found out some warm and sunnie place of refuge for your Mass, even as if the
Mass could be that homage, which the people by Gods ordinance did offer once
in the year, of the first fruits every one according to his means, and as the
Lord had blessed him. All such Hieronym. Paulus Fagiue in verse. Chaldaica.
Arias Montanus Paguinus in Thesau. Munsterus. Rabbi Abrah. in suis comment.
as are skillful in the Hebrew tongue have understood by this word a voluntary
oblation out of their own hands, such as pleased them best, according to their
faculties and means. To build then upon this place of Moses, that pretended
sacrifice, is no more to the purpose, then if a stage player would prove and
confirm his odd pranks and souple tricks, by the same place of Scripture.
The desire that I have to be brief shall stop my pen, and I shall be content
to show unto you that the Sacrificers of the new covenant are but Stewards of
the word, and of the Lords Sacraments, for as much, says Passim.
Saint Chrysostom and Gregory Nazianzene unto us, as by the sword of the word
of God, they do sacrifice and offer up the people to God: wherefore it
follows from thence that we have no need of material altars. There Minutius
Felix in octauiano. Optatus M. Leuit. lib. 6.
was no altars in the primitive Church, but tables only, appointed partly for
receiving of the offerings, partly for participation of the holy Supper. And
what is the use thereof among you? In the very text of the Can.
Consecrationem.. qualiter ergo. de Consec. did. 1.
Decrees, it is said that the custom of anointing altars, and adorning them
with fine knackes, has proceeded from the Jews. And behold what is written:
That if the Jews who served only dark shadows and types, have done it,
with far more reason ought we to do the same, unto whom the truth is revealed.
And thereupon the gloss adds moreover this observation; remarke how that
there may be good and sufficient arguments grounded upon the example of Jews
and Infidels. And from whence have those goodly vessels, jewels, candlestickes,
and other ornaments belonging to the altars, been borrowed but from Iudaisme?

CHAP. IX. Of Priests Garments.
BEhold in your Religion Sacrificers as they are taken properly: behold altars
also, not by translation, but after the Jewish manner; where are your Priestly
vestures now, to the end that your Priest may not appear before the altar in
your Church with less state and pomp, then did the Leuiticall Sacrificer
before the altar of the Tabernacle? In the primitive Walafrid. Strabo de rebus
Ecclesiae c. 24.
Church the garments were indifferent in the celebration of the mysteries,
afterward they became different but simple: and this simplicity was corrupted
under Gregory, through the imitation of Gentilisme, as we have declared in the
conformity preceding: and of Iudaisme, according to Rabanus Rabanus Maurus
institut. Cleric. lib. 1. c. 14. and sequent.
, who takes the pains to reckon them one by one, which we would set down
here at length, if we were desirous to enlarge our Book. And will you deny
that the greater part of the garments which your Priests use in your Temples,
has been borrowed from the Leuits and Jewish Sacrificers? All the world
perceives that the model of all the institutions, and mysteries that you
Romish Catholics have, is generally framed Vide Joseph. lib. 1. de bello
Iudaico: and Hieronymum in lib. de vest sacerdot. ad Fabiolam.
after the pattern of the ancient Israelites (though some of them, I grant,
may be soberly and moderatly used, so it be without superstition) which have
lent you the needle and thread, wherewith your Church has sowed all those
goodly Dalmatique vestures and ierkins of cloth of gold, of silver and of
silk, very richly imbrodered, as likewise the hoods, rochets, chanons, furs,
miters, and long robes. You Durand. rat. lib. 3. rubr. de indument.
acknowledge that the girdle that your Priest uses, was represented by that
which girded the Ephod about; that was above the garments of the sovereign
Leuiticall Sacrificer: your Amice Innocentius de offic. Missae.
by the miter: your Albe by the tunicle: the cope by that robe that was shorter
then the tunicle which was without sleeves, and was put on by thrusting of the
head out at a hole that was above: that your Crosier staves have succeeded to
the rod of Moses: that the Joseph. lib. 4. antiq.
Nazareans are the authors of your shaven heads. And who does not perceive here
that Iudaisme buddeth out again in your Church?

CHAP. X. Of Temples.
IN the end, like as the false Prophets in old times cried out; The Temple of
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Law shall not depart from the Sacrificer:
so likewise to set your idols to sale, you do nothing but extol the
holiness of the places, whereunto the poor superstitious ones do run in
pilgrimage, witness your preachings and writes, amongst others, touching that
which you name our Lady of Loretto, unto which place you have made the
credulous pilgrims believe, that an image was brought down from heaven, and
that the Angels brought a Chapel through the air from one place to another,
the whole being grounded on a hear say of some superstitious persons. In stead
of Salomons Temple, you have builded a million, following therein the footsteps
of the Samaritanes your predecessors, which on every high place, and hillocke,
and under every high tree builded and set up chapels, altars, and idols. We
are not ignorant what was the use 1. Reg. 8.
of the Jewish Temple erected by Solomon. We abhor the abuse, which having
been declared by Ierem. 26.
Jeremy, he was ready to be condemned to death: and S. Act. 6.
Steven was stoned. In like manner; we detest those superstitions which have
been brought in, whether it be in regard of the dedications of your Temples,
as we shall make mention, or of that which is contained in your oiles, your
holy water, your crosses, your relics, your puppets, and such like trash
being forged and dreamed according to your good intentions. And what is that,
to make a den Math. 21.
of thieves of that, which ought to be addicted Jerem. 30.
unto the true service of the Eternal? So like as when robberies surprised the
place of prayer under the Synagogue, Christ Jesus thought it no scorn to
return into the wilderness and enter into private houses: so likewise are we
pleased to serve God in caves and Churchyards as the primitive Christians did,
rather then to pollute our selves by freque^ting those places so much profaned.

CHAP. XI. Of Relics.
THe Pharisees garnished the sepulchers of the Prophets: so do you, in decking
the shrines and tombs of the Apostles, of Math. 23.
Martyrs and other Saints. And when your Popes builded the Sancta sanctorum at
Rome in the Church of Lateran, did they not restore again the holy place which
God in old times had ordained in his Temple of Jerusalem, called in the Hebrew
language Kodech Kadaschim? Truth it is that the God of hosts, the Holy of Holy
did there show forth his Majesty, to the intent that he might instruct his
people in the knowledge of his will, and did appoint the propitiatory to be
kept therein, which was a type of Christ: and the tables of the Law, which the
Lord commanded Moses to close therein, together with the rod of Moses, and a
glass full of the Manna of the Desert, in token of the favor which he had
shown unto them for Christ Jesus his sake, who is the true propitiatory. In
stead of all these, you have locked within your Sancta sanctorum of Rome (a
place whereinto women are not admitted) the fore-skinne of our Savior, with
his slippers, and his navel, Aarons rod, a glass of Manna, with another arc
of the covenant.

CHAP. XII. Of holy Water.
LEt us come to your holy water. Is it not grounded Number. 5.
upon the imitation of that holy water, which God ordained by Moses, namely, to
judge of the guiltiness or innocence of the woman that was accused of
adultery? But let us hearken unto that which your Durand. rat. diuinor. off.
lib. 4. rubr de aqua benedicta.
Durandus says. This lustrall water according unto the testimony of Pope
Cyprian, has power to sanctify, according to that which is written by the
Ezech. 36.
Prophet: Then will I power clean water upon you, and you shall be clean: yea
from all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you. A new
heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take
away the stony heart out of your body, and I will give you an heart of flesh.
And I will put my spirit within you. And a little after, the water of aspersion
cleanses. And from thence he concludes: it appears therefore that the
aspersion of this water, is a washing unto salvation, and is fit to wipe away
the ordinary sins of men, even as the ashes of the Cow were in the old
Testament. Is not this well concluded? And from whence should Pope Alexander De
consecrat. did. 3. Can. Aquam.
the first of that name have learned this, whom they make the author of the
consecration of this water: but from that which was practiced in old times by
Gods commandment among the people of Israel? He had read that Moses Exodus 15.
had taken away the bitterness of the waters of Mara, and had made them
sweet, by causing wood to be thrown therein: That 2. Reg. 5.
God healed the Leprosy of Naaman the Syrian by the waters of Jordan, at the
prayer of Eliseus the Prophet: That Joan. 5.
he had given to the poole of the sheep at Jerusalem, the property to make
him recover of any diseases whatsoever, that first stepped thereinto, after the
Angel had troubled the water. This silly man thought Thom. part. 4. quast 71.
art. 2. and in Math. 6.
that his enchanted water should have the like force. And although the lustrall
water, wherewith the Levites were purified, was a type of Christ Jesus his
blood: yet notwithstanding, as if this blood were not sufficient for the
purging of the faithful, he has ordained this water with the application of
the same virtue, witness this ryme, Aqua benedicta sit nobis salus and vita.
And let us see how this iollie Pope De consecr. did. 3. Can. Aquam.
does frame his argument: if the ashes of the dead Cow, says he, being
sprinkled among the people, did sanctify and cleanse them: how much more the
coniured water, being mingled with salt, and hallowed by godly prayers, ought
to have this power to purge and sanctify the people? So in stead of the blood
of Christ Jesus they offer coniured water unto the Church. The Jesuit Richeome
In his first discourse of miracles.
says, that you have the custom of holy water from the Apostolic
institution, yet does not cite any one place of Scripture. His fellow Bellarm.
tom. 2. page 12. of the first edition.
Bellarmine is against him in that: for he says, Nil deesse ad aquam
benedictam, nisi diuinam institutionem, quominus sit sacramentum. And in the
table of the same Book at the letter A. Aqua benedicta, says he, non a Deo
instituta est, sed ab Ecclesia, and ideo non est Sacramentum. Seeing therefore
that he does freely acknowledge that this water has not been instituted by
God, it remains to go and search out the first authors, the rather, seeing
that the true Church of God has kept her self well from authorizing so great
a blasphemy. Now they are made manifest unto us by Epiphan. cont. haeres. lib.
1. tom. 1. sect. 9.
Epiphanius Bishop of Salamis, to wit, either the Samaritanes, among whom the
use of lustrall water was very frequent: or the Hemerobaptists, whom he
rancketh Epist. ibidem. sect. 17.
in the fourth sect of the Jews, so termed; because they washed themselves
every day with hallowed water, wherewith notwithstanding you are content to
sprinkle your selves only, abusing immediately thereafter the verse of the
good penitential Psalm Psalm. 51.
, which David made in detestation of his adultery: Purge me with hysope, and I
shall be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter then snow. Wherein he means of
the ceremonies of the Number. 19. Leuit. 14.
Law. And what likeness has that with your aspersions?

CHAP. XIII. Of the Cream and anointing.
Moreover you teach all with one accord, that the glory and luster of your
Chrismes and annointings, wherewith the whole Hierarchy of your Priests is
greased, proceeds Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 6.
from no other origin but from the shaddows and figures of the Jewish Law,
notwithstanding that Christ Jesus had already abolished them through his
coming. I suspect you will allege Denis, called De caelesti Hierar. cap. 4.
part 1. and 2.
Areopagite, who will have the composition of the Chrisme to be peculiar unto
Bishops only: but we say that it was not many ages after, which long after it
was brought in, was common to all Priests. The use of this Chrisme is frequent
in your greatest mysteries, and chiefly in the benediction of your Agnus Deis,
as this brave poesy testifies Lib. 1. Caeremon. Pon. ti. 7.
,

Balsamus, and cera munda, cum Chrismatis vnda;
Conficiunt agnum, quod munus, do tibi magnum.
Front velut natum, per mystica sanctificatum.
Fulgura desursum depellit, omne malignum
Peccatum frangit, vt Christi sanguis, and angit.
CHAP. XIIII. Of washing of the feet.
CHrist Jesus before he did institute the holy Supper, washed his Disciples
feet, willing thereby (according to the custom of the Country, and of those
days in washing the feet of such as they lodged in their houses for nothing,
as it may be seen throughout the whole Scripture) Luke 7.
to declare what the duty of hospitality and charity was, even of the
greatest toward the meanest sort, as the Apostle also makes mention, and 1.
Timoth. 5.
in that sense commanding us, to wash one another feet. But in stead of
imitating him after this manner, behold a stage play as you grossly abuse it
brought into the Church, to wash the feet of twelve poor ones upon Mandy
Thursday, as you term it.

CHAP. XV. Of extreme Unction.
THe Apostles, as it is to be presumed, following their masters commandment,
added sometimes unto the wonderful healing of diseases an anointing with
oil. And behold thereupon a new Sacrament of extreme Unction, continued and
practiced so idly and unprofitably, after that this extraordinary gift of
healing has ceased, having been given unto them for a certain time only,
and till the preaching of the Gospel were furnished with sufficient authority
against the greatest unbelievers.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Dedication of Temples.
ANd in the dedication of your Temples do you not play the Jews? Let us give
ear to the reasons that you use. The Jews, say the Canons De Consecr. dift.
1. Can. Consecrationem.. Qualiter.
had certain places, where they sacrificed, which were hallowed by heavenly
and solemn prayers, and offered their offerings to God no where else. If the
Jews therefore, who served the shadow of the Law observed this ceremony, with
far more reason ought we to do the same, unto whom the truth is revealed,
and grace is given by Christ: namely Durand. rat. lib. 1. rubr de dedicatione
Ecclesiae.
to build Temples, to decore them after the brauest manner, and to dedicate
them through sacred unction, together with altars, vessels, garments, and other
ornaments. Thereafter it is added: We ought not to celebrate but in such places
as are hallowed by Bishops. You shall acknowledge here, if it please you, your
Gratians style. In the mean time we find no fault with your Temples: we
require only the true use thereof, to wit, that God may be called on in the
public Congregation, his word preached and embraced, the holy Sacraments
ministered and received. For this cause has Esa. 56. Math. 21.
the temple been called the house of Prayer, for all manner of people
generally. Origin Orig. hom. 2. in Exodus
also calls the Temples of the Christians, houses of Prayer. Tertullian
Tertul. Apol. cap. 39.
says, that we do assemble our selves in the Temple, first for prayer;
secondly, to hear the lesson or lecture; thirdly for exhortation, etc. That
which we reprehend, is that which has proceeded from Iudaisme, whereunto
Christ Jesus has put such an end, that the Apostle Gal. 5.
, comprehending all those ceremonies under the name of Circumcision, says
expressly; That if one be circumcised, Christ avails him nothing: so that to
gather up all in one word, whatsoever color of devotion can be pretended, and
what antiquity soever can be alleged, all those fopperies, wherethrough by
little and little the true service of God in spirit and verity, has been
transformed into a most hideous foolishness, are not only to be rejected as
frivolous and unprofitable, but also to be abhorred: for having degenered first
into superstition, and finally into a detestable impiety. And I will ask you,
where is there any Churches in the Popedom that are dedicated unto Christ
Jesus? It is to Angels and Saints that they dedicate them, unto whom they
address their prayers, their sweet incense, and such other services belonging
to God alone.

CHAP. XVII. Of Traditions.
AS touching traditions, under the name whereof so many superstitions have
been by little and little brought into the Christian Church, and are so
stoutly defended at this day, that you dare even term them Apostolic, do
you not follow in the introduction thereof, the pattern and model of your
fathers the Jewish Rabbis and Pharisees? As in Math. 23.
that they bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's
shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers:
for so much as they do all their works to be seen of men, for that they
keep the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and they themselves go not in,
neither suffer they them that would enter, to come in: for Mark. 12. Luke 12.
that they proclaim by sound of trumpet their fasts and abstinences: for that
they make their Philacteries broad, and would appear outwardly to be very
worshipful Saints, and are nothing within but whited Sepulchers. And then your
Doctors, whom you call Magistros nostros: have they not borrowed their titles
from the Jewish Rabbines? Of whom our Savior speaks Math. 23.
, that they loved the greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, our
Master. Your ordinary bragging is, that you have no tradition or custom, which
is not of ten or twelve hundredth years standing: and we grant to you a far
longer time, to wit, that you have of two or three thousand years standing and
above, such as are those which you have borrowed from Gentilisme, and retained
of Iudaisme. And ought they to be the more embraced for that respect? By the
contrary, as one of the ancient Fathers says, an old custom is an old
error, and ought so much the rather to be abolished.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Transubstantiation.
LEt us come to Transubstantiation. Although this word with the doctrine
annexed thereto be new (for what Doctor of the primitive Church has written
that the consecration is perfected by the virtue of these words, hoc est enim
corpus meum? Nevertheless to the end that you may set the same to sale the
better unto the people, as good and upright antiquities, you make them proceed
from the Jewish Rabbis, even as if they had ever dreamed thereof. Rabbi Moses
Hadarsan writing upon this verse Galatinu de arcanis Cat^^l. veritatis lit. 10.
cap 6. Gabriel Biel in expositione Canonis lect. 4.
of the 136. Psalm. Lord thou give food unto all flesh, speaks in
express terms these words; This text agrees well, with that which is written
in the thirty fourth Psalm. Taste you and see, how gracious the Lord is: for
the bread and meat which he gives unto every one is his flesh, and by eating
thereof it is changed into flesh. Are not these very goodly consequences? No
otherwise then witches do milk a Bucke, or the haft of an axe. Although this
Jew means that all manner of food is changed into the flesh and blood of the
person that eats it, through the digestive power and faculty, yet you would
have gathered your transubstantiation from thence; as likewise out of this text
of Genes. 49. Galat. lib. 10 c. 16. de arcan. Cathol. verit. Garetius de
praesentia corporis Christi ciass. 9. alleg. 1.
Moses, where Jacob foretelling in the agony of his death, what should happen
unto his children, addressing his speech unto Judah the fourth in order,
speaks these words: He shall bind his ass foale unto the vine, and his asses
colt unto the best vine; he shall wash his garment in wine, and his cloak in
the blood of grapes. His eyes shall be red with wine, etc. And what manner of
conclusion can we draw out of these words, but that they are figured and
hyperbolicall, whereby is signified the great plenty and abundance of wine and
milk that was to be in the land of Judah at the dividing thereof? After this
manner has the whole antiquity understood it, and nevertheless you would
corrupt and pervert the sense thereof, under the authority of Rabbi Cohana,
who by the ass has understood, say you, the Messiah, into whose body and
blood the wine was to be transubstantiated. In conscience; is this to speak
reverently of the holy Sacrament? Ought you not to be ashamed of such
conclusions? But how should you be so, since you have no brow?

CHAP. XIX. Of the elevation of the Host.
IN the old Testament there was some peace offerings which they used to lift up
on high, a ceremony that signified the elevation of Christ on the wood of the
Cross. And may it not be from thence that you have learned to lift up high the
round Host after your consecration? Howsoever it be, your Doctors know not
whereof to take hold, whether in regard of the signification of this elevation
of the Host; or for that of the Chalice, seeing as yet they have not
determined whether it ought to be lifted aloft covered, or uncovered. And let
us see how well they are versed in the Scripture. Some Gerard. Lirich. lib. 3.
do attribute this manner of doing unto David, of whom it is written in these
words, naughtily translated out of the Hebrew, Et ferebatur manibus suis:
whereas the text bears that he behaved himself like a fool among the hands
of those that would have taken him. Durandus Durand. lib. 4. de sexta part
Canonis. Ioa. 12.
will have this ceremony to be grounded on that which is written: And I, if I
were lift up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. Another Lin wo^dus de
celeb. Missae.
that he may the sooner have done, writes that the Pope has so decreed, and
has also granted many indulgences unto those that shall worship the Host,
considering the great miracles that have been wrought, which nevertheless one
Alexand. Hales 4. quaest. 53. in 4. art. 3.
of your schoolmen, being of a better conscience, spares not to say, that
they have been devised by the Priests, that they might terrify the people the
more, and keep them under the yoke of this belief, in stead of teaching them
to worship one only God. S. Paul speaks nothing of this adoration, neither
yet is there any mention made throughout the whole antiquity. And what hold
now might Arrius, Eutiches and others take of you if they were alive again?

CHAP. XX. Of Incensing.
THe perfuming with sweet incense was very frequent in the Church of Israel:
and was likewise an institution of God. But the Leuiticall service being
suppressed, why have you restored it again? Yet if you did use the same
simply, the sin would be the lesser: but when as you crave of God that in
recompense of the Franckincense he, would bestow on us the riches Liturg.
Basil. page 60.
of his mercies and compassions, the gifts of his Liturg. Chrysostom. page 85.
holy Spirit, is not this to attribute the remission of sins to the incense?
Likewise in the liturgy that is attributed unto S. James, you pray to God that
he would receive the same, and be pleased therewith for the same purpose.

CHAP. XXI. Of kissing of the Bishops shoulder.
IT is likewise a custom among you, that the Bishops Mass being finished,
which is sung with greater state then the ordinary ones are, to kiss the
Bishops shoulder. Behold what your Doctors say, the one a Pope Innocent. lib.
5. cap. 13. de offic. Missae.
, and the other a Schoole-man Durand racio^. lib. 4. part. 4.
: to wit that by this kissing of the shoulder, is signified that the Bishop is
that Pontife, unto whom, according unto the figure of the Law Isa. 9.
, the right shoulder of the wholesome peace offerings belonged, and whose
domination is laid upon his shoulder. And who would not laugh at these so
subtle and feriall allegories?

CHAP. XXII. Of Lights.
THe like may be said of lights. God commanded in his law: the Leuit. 6.
fire upon the Altar shall burn thereon, and never be put out. And what did
that signify, but that the fire that consumed the holocauste, was a shadow and
type of the afflictions and torments, whereby the body of Christ was consumed
because of our sins? And the perpetuity of this fire Of the Mystical sense
of lights. see Durand. rat. l 6. rubr. de bened. baptis. and rub. de 7. diebus
post pascha.
what else did it signify, but a perpetual enjoying of the fruits proceeding
of the afflictions and torments above mentioned, which the faithful do
suffer? And how can you gather your lights and torches from thence? To be
brief, we will not insert here that which your Canons Of the Mystical sense
of lights. see Durand. rat. l 6. rubr. de bened. baptis. and rub. de 7. diebus
post pascha.
, and one of your Schoolmen teach, Extrauag. de celeb. Missae cap. finis.
who would set this Merchandise to sale as upright wares,: we shall say only
that the ceremonial Durand. rat. lib. 4. rub. de accessu, etc.
Law, having been a pedagogue unto the Fathers, to lead them unto the
contemplation and taking hold (among those shadows) of the light of the truth,
which Galat. 3. Heb. 10.
is our Savior Christ Jesus, it is folly, yea, impiety to restore them and
bring them in use again, seeing that Christ Jesus has suppressed them.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Celibate.
AS for singleness of life, you are directly commanded the same: concubinate
is also permitted among you: which is so far from being excluded from the
Church, that it is even admitted unto the holy table, witness your decrees
Can. Is qui. did. 34. ex Conc. Tolet. Can. 17. Canon. Christiano. did. 34.
Can. tenere did. 31.
drawn out of some council. But to the end that you be not let for lack
of proofs, one of your Popes has made provision, and has grounded his
chastity upon that which the Lord spoke Leuit. 20.
, Sanctify your selves therefore, and be holy, for I am the Lord your God: as
if holiness did consist only in celibate. We shall add unto the premises,
that celibate proceeded from the Esseans, a very famous sect among the Jews:
and not only celibate, but Monachisme also, whereof the Monachisme.
statutes are altogether conform to the rules of the Esseans, as it may be
seen in Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 8. Euang praeparat.
.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Iubilee.
GOD did institute the Iubilee for the liberty of slaves, for the abolishing
of debts, and for restoring again of those that were put from the possession
of their fathers inheritances. And although that literally this institution
belonged to the policy of Israel, as well for the possessions, as to uphold
and keep the distinction and separation of their of spring, which otherwise
might have been confused: yet so it is, that this ceremony aimed a little
farther, to wit, at Christ, who is the end and scope of the Law, in whose
person there is full liberty and joy promised and given to us, which the
faithful shall inherit after the painful travels of this life. And why do
you profane with your pretended Iubilee, this holy figure already accomplished
by our Messiah? We have spoken thereof in the conformities which are between
you and Gentilisme, here we shall add only that you set up Iudaisme again,
and that you attribute unto the golden hammer, wherewith the Pope beats one
of the gates of S. Peter's temple at Rome, called Holy, at the beginning of the
Iubilee; that which appertains unto the blood of Christ Jesus, and not to any
other, to wit, the remission of sins. And finally, the doctrine of the
Iubilee imports as much, as if the blood of Christ were of smaller worth at
one time then another.

CHAP. XXV. Of the conception of the virgin Mary.
YOu keep holy the feast of the conception of the virgin Mary, and believe
that she was conceived without original sin, an opinion grounded upon the
Thalmud of the Rabbis, and principally of Rabbi Judah, the son of Simon; In
the book called the Exposition of Mysteries.
who says; that the matter whereof the mother of the Messiah was to be
engendered, was created before Adam had sinned, and was thus preserved in a
little box from generation to generation, without any spot or corruption: and
gathers these mysteries out of the words of the Psalm: O Lord Psalm. 80.
look down from heaven, and behold and visit the plant, that thy right hand
has planted. And why have you not learned of S. Bernard that she takes no
delight in those counterfeit honors? Bernard Epist. 174.
Which he speaks of purpose of the feast of the Conception; and of Origene,
That her chief honor is to be saved, justified, and redeemed through the
blood of her son. And your idolatry by the contrary has mounted unto such
blasphemies, as to attribute unto the virgin Mary, and to transfer unto her
in all your Offices, all whatsoever the Prophets and the Psalmist spoke of God,
and of Jesus Christ. O Lord, how long?

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Lymbus.
EVen to the Lymbus the antichamber of hell, have you stretched forth your
arms, that you may draw from thence the tradition of those master Carpenters,
the Cabalists, or the Thalmudists. And such as are versed in the reading of
their books, know, how that they believe Mareione^ etia^ ex part sapit illud
dogma, quo patrum animae in inferis dicuntur fuisse, test Irenaeo. l. 1. c. 29.
, that the Patriarchs and others the first Fathers are still lodging there,
and looking for the coming of their Messiah. And do you know where they have
found the Godmothers of this building? Even at hand in the book of
Ecclesiastes Eccles. c. 7. v. 17.
, which says: That there are some just men who perish in their justice. Is not
this to ground the borders and suburbs of hell upon a place, which neither
far nor near approaches any ways unto this Thalmudicall exposition? We are
not ignorant what your proofs are concerning the Lymbus, and chiefly how you
have caused wrest that place of S. Peter's 1. Pet. 3.
, which is so much chatted among you, toward that side. Howsoever the matter
goes, yet it is wonderful, that you have thus stumbled, and that so long
ago: since it appears manifestly that the Apostle speaks not there of the
old faithful Fathers, but contrariwise of the unfaithful: for example whereof
he brings forth those that perished in the flood, because they would not
hearken unto Christ Jesus, that preached unto them spiritually by the mouth of
Noah.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Law.
YOu have that also common with the Jews, who were evil taught, and think
that the doctrine of the Gospel abolisheth the Law. For to what end tends
the calumny of your Sorbonique Doctors and Jesuits, against the Christian
Church, in accusing her that she has abolished good works, and made way unto
all manner of disorder? Indeed we say after S. Paul Romans 3. v. 27. Galat. 2.
v. 16.
that we are justified by faith in Jesus Christ, and not by the works of the
Law: and concerning the morrall law, as Gal. 3. v. 19.
it kills us in regard of us that are transgressors thereof, for whose
instruction it was given: so Romans 3. v. 30.
also we are justified through the same in Jesus Christ, as in him that has
paid the debt which the law required of us: and having fully accomplished
Galat. 3. v. 13. 2. Cor. 1. 20.
and ratified all the promises thereof in all those that believe. And what is
to be seen there that is not Apostolic? And when you say that you are able
to fulfill Gods law, are you not like him that vaunted himself that he had
fulfilled all the commandments even from his youth head? Is there not a fine
harmony between you and that proud bragging Pharisie? We believe better: to
wit, that the regenerate man cannot fulfill the law of God, the same
notwithstanding being justly required at his hands, because it is just in it
self, and because it was given unto the first man, while he was yet in the
estate of innocence, and fell afterward through his own fault from all
ability to fulfill the same, and we all in him. From thence it is that S.
Austin August retract lib. 1. cap. 19.
says to us: Who is he that is able to accomplish the Law in all points, but
he by whom all the commandments of God are fulfilled, that is to say Christ
Jesus? And a little after Aug. de verb. Apostoli. sermon. 13
: But all the commandments are thought to be fulfilled, when that which is not
fulfilled is pardoned. And so speaks he in more then a hundred places
Augustine. de perfect. instit. ratiocin. 6. in Ioa. tract. 3 cap 9. Despiritu
and literae cap. 9. Ambros. lib. 9. Epist. 71. and 73. Prosp. Aquit. in Seut.
34. in Epigr. 43. in Psalm. 118. Bernard in Cantic. sermon. 50.
And S. Ambrose, Prosper Aquitannus, S. Bernard and all the Fathers. To what
purpose then your Pharisaicall pride and disdain here to disanull the effect
of the Cross?

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Justification.
ANd concerning Justification, like as the Jews being evil advised, did teach,
that man was justified by the works of the Law: so likewise you attribute
justification before God unto the merits of good works. And that which you
acknowledge touching the merits of the death of Christ Jesus, is by you so
restrained and tied to that which precedeth Baptism, that the satisfactions of
men are much esteemed, and valued at an high rate, as all your books do
testify. And if some of you do at any time press to speak of of Christ
Jesus and of his virtue, it is done with so much ignorance and sophistry, that
it is perceived incontinent, that as yet you have not learned to renounce your
false and counterfeit righteousness, to the end that you may destroy that, which
is in Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XXIX. Of opus Operatum.
FVrthermore like as the Jews, who were Jews only in name, were contented
with the letter without the spirit, that is to say, they thought that they had
deserved much, if with their bodies and lips they had drawn near to the
temple, to the sacrifices, the sacraments, without faith or any true
repentance: for which cause they were bitterly checked by the Prophets. In like
manner your Doctors have made the poor superstitious people believe, that to
be present at divine service, to rehearse certain words without understanding
or devotion in the mind, to be present and behold their sacrifices and
sacramental signs, were, as many meritorious works, although they had been
without all devotion and inward feeling, even like to a stone or a logge of
wood. So gross an error and so prejudicial unto spiritual and everlasting
life, as if one should teach such persons, as are diseased of any bodily and
mortal disease, that it should be sufficient for them to trust to the
Physicians skill, and to the Apothecaries boxes, not knowing what they were, or
taking any receipt: or as if one should say to a poor hungry man, that (if he
would be filled) it should be sufficient for him to rely on those that make
good cheer, and never to taste one bit in the mean time. Let us learn
therefore by the contrary, that the true faith of Christians is not an
indefinite and confused imagination, and is not to believe by an Attorney, but
to understand the fundamental heads of Christian Religion.

CHAP. XXX. Of Feasts.
TOuching your feasts, do you not say that they are after the imitation of the
Jews, which observed and kept holy the feast of Judith, and of the Machabees
that did institute one, which Christ Jesus found to be still in request in his
time, and did celebrate the same. But you remarke not that those were
instituted to give thanks unto God, and to put the people in mind of their
delivery from the plots and conspiracies of their enemies, being indifferent
and belonging only to order, and not imposed on them as laws for the
necessity of Gods service. Your feasts are after an other manner, since they
are ordained, commanded, and practiced to bind the conscience, even as if the
necessity of religion did require such things. And why have you taken away the
liberty of the choice of days, that was in the primitive Church? Socrat.
hist. tripart. lib. 9. cap. 38
Moreover, the feasts of the Jews were ordained only in the name of God,
without idolatry and superstition: yours are full thereof, and are hallowed in
the name of Saints, male and female. I could amplify my speech upon that
shameful controversy, that rose among the Esterne and Western Bishops,
concerning the feast of Easter, which had caused a great schism in the Church,
if it had not bin prevented by the learned Ireneus, Bishop of Lion against the
imprudencie of Victor the thirteenth Bishop of Rome: I will be contented only
to admonish you, that it should be better, to eschew such a multitude of feasts
full of superstition, and prejudicial unto the estate of the Common wealth,
and to content your selves with that which that great Ignatius writes, who
recommended earnestly Sunday only unto the Christians, Ignat. epist. ad
Magnesios.
which the Council of Caesarea proved by the holy Scripture, whereinto the
Sabbath was changed: or else if you go about to celebrate any notable history
of our Lord, and that it be thought fit and expedient for edification to do
so, to continue such feasts till Sunday, without relying on the Monday or the
new Moon: which is to bring in a Christianisme both Jewish and lunaticke.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Tithes.
THe Tithes that are so severely exacted by your Ecclesiastickes they are
grounded (I confess) upon Gods law. It is true indeed that the Church of
Israel, the Sacrificers and Levites, who were consecrated unto the service of
God, were nourished therewith as with Gods portion and due, and the poor also
maintained. For this cause did the Prophet Malachie accuse them of sacrilege
that refused to pay the same. From this place you borrow the subject of your
Epiphonemes against those that fail in this duty, and that rightly, if you
did rightly use them. And if your Pastors were lawful, and truly called in
the Church, we should acknowledge that they, in sowing of spiritual things,
ought to reap carnal things: and that as faithful laborers they were
worthy 1. Cor. 9.
of their wages, as the Lord under the Law ordained Leuit. 19.
for Leui: But seeing the calling of your Doctors is unlawful and unclean,
they cannot deny that they are much like unto the Pharifies, to wit, reauers:
and like unto the Jewish Sacrificers, devouring 1. Timoth. 6.
the people like bread: which the Prophets reproached unto them, whereas they
ought to have been contented with their food and apparel. And first avarice,
and them ambition has pushed your Church representative so far, that she
has usurped Marsil. Patau. in defensor. Pacis part. 2. c. 25.
Lordships, Kingdoms and Empires, yea, and after such manner, that she has
forgot the care of souls, and spiritual affairs.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Jurisdictions.
LIke as you have stretched forth your hands, under the pretense of
spirituality, upon Kingdoms and Empires, guarding your selves with the
donations Can. Ego Ludouicus did. 63.
of Constantine and Jews the meek, though false and supposed, as the most
learned through many ages have remarked: so likewise your Ecclesiastickes have
usurped the laymens inrisdiction, and have drawn unto them all sorts of
laymen, even in Profane matters. And what is their reason? It is because the
sovereign sacrificer of the Law, say they, was supreme head over the
jurisdiction not only spiritual, but temporal also. And upon this bruised
reed, have they settled this goodly temporal jurisdiction, which they have
appropriated to themselves, even above all Kings, and Potentates of the earth.
But if they had put on their spectacles right, they should have found in the
Exodus 18. ver. 13. and 21. Number. 15. v. 33. Leuit. 24. v. 11. 2. Chron. 19.
verse. 18.
Scripture, that these two jurisdictions were distinguished, and committed to
several hands: the Judges, Princes and Kings being the heads over the
temporal which they ruled: and the Sacrificers judged of things that were
clean or unclean, and of other matters merely holy and spiritual. And Deuteronomy.
17. v. 8.
if any thing was demanded at the mouth of the Sacrificers and Levites, it was
not in so far as they were Judges, but that they might learn of them the
true use and meaning of the Law in doubtful causes.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Irregularitie.
IT were to enter into a labyrinth to go find out all the ceremonies that are
observed in your degradations. And one of your Churchmen being degraded by the
Bishop, is at that same very instant delivered into the hands of the secular
power, that he may be condemned to die. If I should ask why the criminal is
not judged by the Ecclesiastickes; they will answer me that it is done to shun
irregularitie. But is not this the same that was practiced in the Jews time,
who would not enter into Pilates house, fearing that they might be defiled, and
let from eating of the Passover?

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of Vailes and other furniture of the Church.
WE must return unto that which you use in your Temples. That veil rent
asunder at the death of Christ Jesus, did show unto this wretched people of the
Jews, that at this time there is neither sacrifice nor Sacrificer, neither
altar, nor temple. And by the renting thereof, he would declare that the elect
may search even into the secrets of Gods council touching their salvation. And
you not being contented with the signification of so excellent a miracle, have
set the vailes up again in your Cathedral and Collegiat Churches, chiefly in
time of Lent, as if the Christian people ought to be let from beholding of
the Sanctuary, that is to say, from the knowledge of eternal life through
Christ Jesus. And in this do you not patch together again that veil which in
old times was rent asunder from the top to the bottom? So many Jewish
ceremonies as you have brought into Christianity, are as many vailes sowed and
patched together. And say now that you are not like unto those wretches, which
in the Apostles time would have joined the veil together again, by a
conjunction of the Gospel with the regal ceremonies, and of circumcision with
Baptism. Your holy water, those vessels altogether bias, those Priestly
garments whose number is infinite, those burning lamps and lights, the
Chrisme, your anointing with oil, and other infinite abuses that are to be
found among you, are as many additions of new vailes and sacraments which you
have invented. And whatsoever antiquity you can allege, yet so it is that you
cannot purge your selves of Iudaisme, or deny that you have relied on those
ceremonial Laws, which you ought to have banished every one, as we may
perceive, that this veil is not half rent, neither the third or fourth part
thereof only, but from the top to the bottom.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Purification of Women.
IN the end have you not borrowed also from the Jews the purification of women
that rise Leuit. 12.
out of childbed? Truth it is that this ceremony ordained by God, did lead
them unto the consideration of the greatness of their sin, which defiles
the conception and birth of the child, even as it defiled the first Parents.
This was ordained only for disciplines cause, and this uncleanness was only
simply civil, during which the woman was bound not to come unto public
assemblies, whereinto she was admitted afterward, having satisfied the Law,
which commanded to offer a lamb, or a pair of turtle doves, or doves. You by
the contrary think that the woman is in the power of Satan, so long as she
is in childbed, and that she has need of tapers, which you term hallowed, of
coniurations and other prayers for her delivery. These are your goodly
pretenses: but as for me, I believe that these ceremonies have been invented
and practiced, for the opinion which you have conceived that marriage is an
unclean thing, which in old times your predecessors the Manicheans, the
Adamians, the Hieracites did in like manner, who likewise named themselves
Apostolicks. It is enough my Masters, and we should never have done, seeing
that the abuse of the Jewish ceremonies has grown so far, that the whole
outward service of God is changed into a Leuiticall Religion, after such manner
that it seems that the order of Aaron and his subalternes, has yet still the
administration and rule over the house of God here beneath: an order, I say,
which was abolished by Christ Jesus our sovereign Sacrificer, who having taken
on him the charge of his Fathers house, has really showed unto us the true
meaning of all those shadows and figures of the Law, and through offering up
himself on the Cross once for all, and never to be reiterated again, has
freed us from that bondage, and has made open the passage unto the everlasting
Sanctuary.

Veni etiam Domine Jesus. THE HARMONY AND AGREEMENT of the Romish CHVRCH with
ancient Heresies.

The third Conformity.

THE AVTHORS EPISTLE, TO MASTER VIGNES, COVNSELLER TO THE KING, AND CORRECTOR
IN the Chamber of accounts in MONTPELLIER.
SIR, I would not show my self among the writers that abound at this day,
having contented my self in private with the reading of the Orthodoxes, and
contemned such as for the most part do nothing but vent their melancholies
unto the world. I have hit on this resolution, because I am a lover of a
retired life, and of solitariness among my Books, taking pleasure to talk
with the dead, wherein consists the chief jewel of my life. This age
swarmeth in good Spirits, and as Afric is fertile in Monsters, which it
produces daily, so in like manner we may say that it is a wonder and miracle
in nature, to contemplate this exquisite knowledge in all sciences and tongues
wherewith many are endued, that it appears that we have paragoned that old
antiquity: I say in science, not in conscience. Who then has marred this my
silence? You, Sir: for as we were reasoning concerning heresy (a subject
whereupon the seducers through their false Orations and writs have long ago
been baiting and hammering on the heads and hearts of their confederates,
laboring to persuade them that those of thereformed Religion are defiled
therewith) you thought it expedient, that through contrary demonstrations,
which should be both solid and true, I should declare to the world that this
imputation is wrongfully ascribed unto us. There is no parish Priest (how
raskally soever he be) that has not this word Heretic in his mouth. What will
those great Masters in mateologie do then? If little puppies do keep such a
yelling, what will be the effect of the barking of these great mastifs? It is
the custom of whores to prevent honest matrones, and to lay to their charge
that, wherewith they are tached themselves. Those Jesuits, the buttresses of
the Popish Religion, the cream and very quin tessence of Friars, to speak no
worse, doc in like manner. They are scabbie, and would persuade us to scratch
our selves as they do, although our conscience be not defiled. Those that are
attainted and branded by Justice, desire nothing more then to have many
fellows both in their iniquity, and their punishment. What shall we do here?
Shall we betray our brethren and our souls? Shall we temporise, as if we had
some fellowship with this spiritual brothel-house? This would prove
cowardlinesse in us. Wherefore, following your advise, I have thought fit to
show upon the theater of the world, that so many heresies as we are accused of,
are as many calumnies and lies: and that it is the Romish Church, which is
wonderfully disfigured and polluted, as we shall declare, God willing. The
impatience of modern Readers has abridged my discourse, which I could have
enlarged. And who could ever be able to finish the task of the stable of
Augeus? I offer unto you this my little Essay, as unto him of whom I receive
singular comfort in my peregrination, and in this strange Country. You shall
take it, if it please you, in good part, as proceeding from him who is,

Sir, Your most humble servant FRANCIS DE CROY.

THE PREFACE To those of the Romish CHVRCH.
MY Masters, the chief weapon that the Devil has used against the Church, is
Heresy, which the Apostle Gal. 5.
places among the works of the flesh. It is not to day, that this contagion
of particular choosing of opinions, has corrupted a great number of men. The
Churches, both of Israel and primitive, have tasted of this cruel poison.
Those wits that made too great account of Philosophy, and are borne among
Sophismes, puffed up with pride, pale and deformed through ennie, have hatched
this generation, and brought forth this Hydra of all mischiefs. No age has
been free thereof. The histories do set before our eyes and our ears some
lamentable examples, and namely in these latter days: which being most fertile
in all vices, are likewise fruitful in producing those detestable heresies,
the effects whereof are to draw away men from the way of truth, to make them
become Effects of heresies.
enemies thereof, as did in old times Iamnes, and Mambres the adversaries of
Moses, to corrupt them in their understanding, to join them with Devils, and
at length to debar them from the Kingdom of God. We and you are ordained to
be contraries. You call us Heretics, and we Iuuen. Satyr. 2 Quis tulerit
Gracchos de seditione querentes?
return again this title unto you, like a ball in the Tennis-court. Who will
believe you? Who will believe us? There is no difficulty here: let us examine
the doctrines: let us search diligently for that which is true. That is true
says a certain Father Tertul. aduer. Marcion. lib. 4.
, which is the first, that is first which is from the beginning: and that is
from the beginning which is from the Apostles. We have this true, this first,
this beginning, the doctrine of the Apostles, which is the Anchor of our Faith.
There will nothing remain for you therefore, but the last and false, to wit,
the dregs of heresy. Yet do you not cease to reproach unto us, that we have
renewed, and as it were drawn out of hell many old Heresies, which (as you
exclaim) we have broached in these latter times, and have insinuated them into
the belief of men for Evangelical doctrines. And to the end that none should
think that you had spoken idly and without reason, you set down their
number: and if you might be trusted, there is no scab or sore of the ancient
Heretics, whereon we have not rubbed our selves. It is after this manner that
you tickle your selves to make you laugh, and when you have spent all your
force, whether it be in slight, or eloquence, to rouse Lib. cont. here is.
up the implicit faith of your flocks, you think it is enough, and that we
have nothing to reply thereto. We deplore the heresies, and have the register
thereof in our memory, to the intent that we may beware of the same.
Epiphanius gathers to the number of 80. S. Austin Ad quod vult Deum.
reckons eight more. Philastrius more yet. And before these Ireneus and
Tertullian made some catalogues. In reading of them we have found matter enough
against you, because we have learned (and be not offended) that you are
fellows and favorers, of those who through their Heresies sought to destroy
the Church. How then can it be possible that we are their companions? Thereupon
you pay those of your side, not with reason, or with any likelihood, but with
false calumnies against such as withstand you, and to this end you pick out
certain Heresies at your pleasure, which, you say, have been as it were
renewed, and restored again by those great Heralds, the restorers of true
piety, which have gone before us in the reformation of the Church. This little
Preface shall declare the contrary, and such Christian souls as are mildely
disposed, shall be judges of our right, and of your wrong. Ireneus says of the
Simonians Lib. 1. cap. 20. de haeres.
, that they taught that Simonians.
men were saved through the mercy of Simon, and that works were not necessary
unto salvation: from Eunomius. de haeres. ad quod vult Deum.
whom Eunomius has not gone far, who (witness S. Austing) did hold the
opinion; that men could take no harm by sin, how great soever it were,
provided that their faith had not failed. Bellarmine accuses Luther for
consenting to these follies, being followed by Calvin, Brencius and others: who
verily confessed that good works were the effects of Faith, but denied that
they could merit life everlasting. The learned treatises which have been
compiled by our writers on this subject, should have served for physic unto
your eyesight, and should have taken the moate out of your eyes, that you
might behold the truth against your preiudicate doctrine? We will not do you
so much wrong as to debauch them from your company, that we may draw them to
our side. Then let them remain still there in a good time, we denounce them
accursed. Those infamous persons wallowed themselves in all manner of crimes.
No thing, as they thought, could hurt them, if they had acknowledged Simon
Magus to be the chief way unto salvation. Have you found any thing in our
Churches like unto this? Simon rejected all manner of virtuous and just works
as superfluous, we, acknowledge them as necessary, but not as meritorious: for
grace can get no entry there where merits have taken place already. We abhor
Eumenius likewise. We confess Bernard. sup. cant. sermon. 67.
the Eumenius.
separation of faith from good works, to be more impossible, then to separate
the beams and light from the Sun. And what do you find worthy to be
censured, whiles we teach that sin cannot hurt him that has the act of
Faith? You cover your selves with the ambiguity of this word Faith, whereby you
understand nothing but a simple knowledge of the doctrine, and a naked insight
in Religion, and not this certain perswasiou that the just man lives by his
Faith. Truth it is that the sins, which make us guilty before God, do
astonish us: but we say in like manner that they are not imputed unto us, and
that they are covered through the justice of the son of God and mediator
Christ Jesus. Also you would have us to be fellows withone Florinus Ireneus.
apud Eusebium. liber 5. Histor. cap. 20.
, and to say with him that God is Florinus.
the author of sin: an heresy which Vincent de Lirin did likewise attribute
In suo commonitorio.
unto Simon Magus. For an answer hereunto, Bellarmine is your oracle, it
suffices if he has said so to you. This assertion, says Ireneus, is more
then heresy. Shall we therefore defend the same? Truly all things move under
the providence of God. The wicked and their sins are not exempted from this
celestial power and government. Is God therefore the cause of sin? Fie on
this blasphemy. It is not he that inspireth man with: wickedness: this work
is of the Devil. The Butt that we aim at discerns the actions. The scope
of men's evil actions is nothing but rebellion and contempt of the Creator: and
by the contrary, God aymeth only at the execution of his immovable and
eternal decree. The good and the bad Trees, being nourished both with one
manner of juice, in the same soil, and place, are different, notwithstanding
in their fruits. Who can blame the ground? Let us therefore exeeme God from
the imputation of iniquity, and let us not play the Marcionists. Origin Epiph.
haeres. 63.
thought that Adam through his fall had altogether lost the image of God,
Origene.
whereunto he was created in his original uprightness, and that Hieren.
epist. ad Auitum.
Hell was nothing else but a terror of Conscience. You do enclose Calvin
within the compass of the same errors, and are not ashamed to cite those
places Call lib. 2. Just. cap. 1. Sect. 5. and lib. 3. c. vlt. sect. vlt:
which you understand amiss, and interpret worse, that you may make him be
detested like an Heretic. We abhor both the one and the other reauing of
Origin. Calvin speaks not so grossly: he says indeed that the image of God
is not altogether defaced, that there are many remnants left unto us after this
ship-wracke, the reason, the understanding, and other natural gifts. This we
affirm with Calvin, that those supernatural graces, wherewith God had
honored man, were quenched and lost: as the wisdom, 2 Cor. 3 v. 18.
which made us to know God: the righteousness, Ephesians. 4. v. 24.
which pushed us forward unto a voluntary obedience of his commandments: and
holiness Col. 3. v. 10.
, which are seals and principal marks of this heavenly likeness. Subscribe
to this doctrine, or else we will say to your face, that you are infected with
Pelagianisme. The Jesuits Gratensis in assert diffens.
hold, that Adams sin was small, and not so outrageous as it is made. Let us
say Ambr. de Paradiso. August. in Euchir. c. 45. Prosper. lib. de gratia Dei.
Tertul. lib. contra. Iudaos.
better: that our protoplastes have lost their faith: That it was an Heresy,
asinne of incredulity, an apostasy; a fault that could not be amended by any
other then the Son of God. Like as the Moon after her conjunction with the
Sun, is replenished with a divine power, which she imparteth unto all things:
so also the soul of this little world being ravished through contemplation,
and as it were united with that great intellectual Sun, was inflamed with an
heavenly light, and an inestimable power: and if it should be separated from
thence, what would remain but darkness and infirmity? As touching Hell,
neither Calvin, nor we did ever speak any such thing, neither yet any thing
that comes near unto that which you allege: it is deceit and calumny. --
Let us proceed to the rest of your accusations. We rule not only our
external actions, but also the affections of our heart. The word of God is the
square. Those concupiscences that tickle and sting our souls ought to be
bridled, and for this cause we account them as sins, yea, even in the persons
of the regenerate: but that they live not, that they reign not, that they are
not imputed unto us, through the benefit of faith. This is it which we believe.
What have we to do then with the heretic Epiph. haeres. 64 Messalians.
Proclus? What simpathie is there between us and Proclus.
the Theod. lib. 4. de haeret. fabulis.
Messalians? You know not what concupiscence means, you know not the effects
thereof. And since we are speaking thereof, do you not falsify the Scripture,
whereas of the last commandment of God which forbids concupiscence, you make
two, against Saint Romans 7. v. 7. and 13. v. 9. Pepuzians.
Paul's meaning, who comprehends the forbidding of concupiscence, all under
one commandment? In the end we avouch, that the August. lib. haeres. ca. 27.
Pepuzians admitted women unto the sacred ministry of the Church. Luther is
slaundered Articulo 13. ex iis quos Leo damnauit.
as if he had followed the footsteppes of this false doctrine; To say, that
sins are remitted through Repentance, whether the Priest absolve them of the
same or not, is this to follow the Pepuzians? To say, that a woman, or a child
has as much power to forgive sins as the Pope has, is this to attribute the
Priesthood unto that sex, which the Heavenly Oracle forbids to teach in the
Church? We are better taught then so: and in effect this present discourse
shall declare unto you, that you can never be able to free your selves from
Pepuzianisme. The Nouatians Theod. lib. 3. de haerec. fabulis Cornelius Papa
apud Eusebius. li. 6. hist. cap. 33.
acknowledged no other means to reconcile men to God in the Church then
Baptism, and taught Nouatians.
that such as were baptized ought to be anointed with the Bishops Chrisme.
Acknowledge your brethren here: but let us answer. Nouatus admitted not unto
repentance those that had fallen after Baptism. Do we teach that? It is true
indeed that we deny two things: that penitence is a Sacrament: that the force
of Baptism does not continue unto the end of man's life. S. Hierome Hieronym.
in 15. cap. Ezec.
calls repentance the second table after shipwreck. Let us say, that it is
not the cause of the remission of sins (it is the merey of God purchased unto
the faithful through their only Savior Jesus Christ) but only the sign of
remission, and the remedy whereby those that are baptized do help themselves
among those great confusions and disorders arising from their faults. Moreover,
who has foughten Sabellius.
better then we against Sabellius Epiph. haeres. 57
, who acknowledged but one person in the sacred Trinity? Why then do you match
us with that pest? The books written by our men bear record of our
Orthodoxall faith: and the punishment that Seruet suffered, declares the
practice thereof. Wherefore if it be sufficient to accuse, who shall be found
innocent? Arrius made the Son to be Arrius.
meaner then the Father. The Tritheites taught the Tritheites.
same. You shall be contented (if it please you) that we produce a simple
negative against a bare affirmation: and in like manner, if we send you unto
the learned writes of our men. In the mean season we will by order deny that
we are in any ways acquainted with the Manicheans Hieronym. in praefat.
dialog. contra Pelagia. August. li. de hae res. cap. 49.
, contemners of nature, and deniers Manicheans.
of free will. We acknowledge a free will in evil things, and remove the same
from spiritual graces. Touching sin, we do attribute it to the will of man,
to the Devil, and not to God. And if the same Manicheans August. lib. 22.
contra Faustum.
have accused the Fathers of the old Testament, to wit, Abraham, Jacob,
Sampson, Sara, Rebecca, and others, as wicked and detestable persons: shall it
be said likewise that Calvin has scourged these fathers with the rod of
slander? Those did so, that they might make their memory hateful unto the
posterity: he had no other intent, but to declare how frail our life is, and
that our infirmity ought to minister occasion unto us, to suspect our natural
forces, as in themselves incapable of virtuous actions and heavenly mysteries.
The former, to wit, the Manicheans, have followed Cham: the latter sends us
unto the grace of God, who vpholdeth our right hands, that we may not fall into
this puddle of sin. Shall we be Donatistsg also? They closed the Church
within the bounds of Afric: they Donatistes. August. lib. de unit. Eccles. c.
12.
rejected sinners from the liberty and communion of the visible Church:
proclaimed open wars against the Catholic Bishops. Calvin and we (say you)
do in like manner. You speak only by report or by dreaming. We confess
indeed, that the Catholic Church, which consists of the elect only, is
invisible. The eternal election whereupon Gods covenant is grounded, which is
the essential form of the Church, and makes it to be a Church, cannot be
made known and manifest, but through the holy Ghost, and through the word of
God. The election of the visible elect is invisible. Seeing therefore that to
be in the Church, or of the Church, does not declare the essence of man, but
shows the eternal election, whereunto Gods covenant had a relation, and that
you believe after this manner; why do you slander us, as if we were partakers
with the Donatists? Concerning the limits of the Church, we do not diminish
them, they are extended throughout all the climates of the earth: and it is you
that enclose them within the walls of Rome. And if we have a criminal action
against your Bishops, you must not therefore conclude that we are enemies to
those that with the Bishops sea have the succession of the Apostolic
doctrine. Aerius would not pray for the dead: nor Aerius.
yet we. Are we heretics therefore? Then let S. Hierome Hieronym. in 65. cap.
Isa. Chrysostom. 2. sermon. de Lazaro. August sermon. 66. de temp. Theophil. ad 25.
cap. Math.
, if your consequence be true, Chrysostom, Austin, that most worthy Bishop of
Hippona, and Theophilactus be Aerians and heretics: for they affirm all
after one manner, that after this life, there is neither time nor place to make
satisfaction for our sins in this world: and the same Hom. 7. ad popul.
Antioch.
Chrysostom says that those prayers were used as a thanks giving to God, for
that he had crowned those that were dead. The same Aerius left fasting in the
free power of the faithful: said that the Bishops and Priests differed nothing
in dignity. And what harm I beseech you, either in the first (so that it be
understood of private fasts) or in the last. Concerning fasts, there is no
question: touching the last, Aerius and we agree both with the holy writes, and
with the venerable Cyprian. de simply praelat. and cibatur cap. l^q^i tur
Dominus 24. quaest. 1. Item ad Corn. Hieronym. in Tit. c. 1 et in epistola ad
Euge 11. Episcopum. and citatur can. legimus did. 93 et Can^euidenter. 1.
quaest. 1.
antiquity, which cry out with a loud voice, that all Bishops and Ministers of
the word have alike power, in whatsoever place they be, whether in Naples, or
in the Indies, or among the Tartarians. If Aerius then have taught but these
three points, he is wrongfully accounted among heretics. And Theodoret
Theodor. lib. de fabulis Iudaeorum. Iouinian.
freeth him thereof, opposing only one Eustathius his mortal adversary,
although Epiphanius and S. Austin be not of the same opinion. Iouinian is not
forgotten. They would make us to agree with him in five heresies. The first,
that man after he has received Baptism cannot sin, whereunto Calvin has
subscribed, say you, without showing the place where: who writes that the
faith that is once received into the heart of the faithful, cannot make
shipwreck. We grant the second; and impugn the first, which concerns
Baptism, and experience furnishes us with proofs of the contrary, and
freeth both Calvin and us from these impostures. The second pretended heresy,
imputed to Iouinian, is concerning the difference of meats and merits through
fasting, which he reproved. And thereupon you raise hue and cry after Calvin.
If that which you hold concerning the difference of meats, the fish and flesh
days be true: I know not how you shall be able to resist: and what rampart you
can set before your Canons Can. si quis carnem did. 30. Can. delitiae. Can.
Quisquis. Can. quod dicit. did. 41. Can. si quis presbiter did. 30.
: Canons (I say) which vomit forth powder and bullets to bruise all to pieces.
Moreover, if Iouinian makes marriage equal with chastity, both in dignity
and merit, whiten not your tongues against Calvin in that matter: exclame
against Christ Jesus who has said so, and bear ill will against S. Paul that
has written so. Your Erasmus wished to find in S. Hierome a modesty and
greater mildness against his adversaries: this is your desire likewise. It is
true that in so far as Iouinian withstoode the perpetual virginity of Mary
the mother of Christ Jesus, he deserved a very severe and rigorous punishment,
yea even the fire. And upon this blaspemie S. Hierome had very good reason to
frame his inuectiues against him. The like is not taught in our Churches; and
it is without all reason that these great lights of our age Bucer and Molineus
are blamed. Esaias Esa. 7. v. 14.
shall be a warrant for that which we believe, and likewise that which Ezechiel
Eze. 44. v. 2.
writes, which the ancient writers all with one accord have expounded of the
perpetual virginity of the glorious mother of Christ Jesus, shall overthrow
those desseings, whereby you labor to make us hateful unto all men. Yea, and
we should be very sorry to help our selves with the authority of S. Basil,
who says Tom. 1. sermon. de humana generat. Christi.
, that the belief concerning the perpetual virginity of the holy Virgin,
after the dispensation of the conception and nativity of the Son of God,
cannot profit us any thing to be sought out, and that it is curiosity to take
any notice thereof. The last heresy which S. Hierome and you do attribute
unto Iouinian, is touching the equality of the reward of this life: from which
(as you write) Luther goes not far, seeing he writes Sermon. de natalib.
Mariae. Et in comment. in 1. Pet.
that Christians are under the same parallel of righteousness in the Kingdom of
God with the virgin Mary. We could insist upon Iouinians affirmative: for there
is but one manner of faith amongst all the faithful, then there is but one
manner of reward. But that you may not surprise us, let us say, that concerning
holiness and inherent justice, there is some inequality, which
notwithstanding is removed, in regard of the holiness and justice of Christ
Jesus, which being grounded on the eternal election that he has made of his
own, is equally distributed amongst all the faithful and regenerate. Unto
faith and the excellent effects thereof, which are the gifts of God, and are
crowned by him, we do attribute diverse rewards, according to the greater or
lesser measure: this maxim nevertheless being Vigilantius.
still true, that we are received and avouched by the heavenly Father, through
the only one mean of the obedience of Christ Jesus his only and well-beloued
son. Vigilantius Tamen Vigilantius ab Hieronymo sanctus Presbiter dictus est
epist. 13. ad Paulin.
shall have his part here also, and we shall become Vigilantius or Dormitantius
(choose which of them pleases you best) if we would believe you. If he has
said that the relics of Saints ought not to be worshipped: behold we are on
his side: behold S. Austin Lib. 20. de ciuit. Dei, cap. 10.
is in like manner: we honor, says he, the memory of the Saints, but we do
no service to the dead in their graves. Item: the Martyrs are not Gods, they
are named and inuoqued by the Priest. Vigilantius has in like manner condemned
the invocation of Saints: Calvin has done the same: we have imitated him.
Shall we all be heretics? Then the holy Ghost shall be so also, who by his
Oracle teaches Eccles. 9. v. 5. Esa. 63. v. 16.
us, that the dead know nothing of our affairs, and that they meddle no ways
with them. And put the case that they prayed, will it follow by good Logic
that they must therefore be worshipped? Vigilantius reproved singleness of
life, and granted marriage unto the Ministers of the Church. O what a great
crime? O most damnable fault for that we teach the same. The holy Ghost,
according to your speech, knew not what he indicted to the Apostle, when he
accounted the forbidding of marriage among the Doctrines of Devils. What
farther? Vigilantius found fault with the giving away of their goods, the
mother of the Friars poverty. And what profit redounded hereof? Your men, such
as the Capuchins, and others give all that they have, but to their own
kindred, and not to Christ Jesus: they enter into the Monastery, where they
have greater plenty then under their own roof: and S. Francis his bag is at
least worth a Cardinals revenue. What are we farther? Pelagians you answer.
Wherefore? Pelagians.
Because you deny original sin with them: and thereafter teach that the
children of the faithful are holy, and are saved without Baptism. We
disaduouch them in so far as they said, that children were without all sin:
true indeed, that we attribute holiness unto them, even from their mothers
womb, because of Gods covenant, wherein they are comprehended: if this be not
true, the Apostle 1. Cor. 7. v. 14.
must be a Pelagian. As touching Baptism, condemnation proceeds not of the
want thereof, but of the contempt of that sacrament which was instituted by
Christ Jesus. And how, say you farther, can you purge your selves from
Pelagianisme, seeing that with the author of that sect you make all sins
equal, and for the smallest offense that can be committed, you think that
life everlasting is lost. Truly the righteousness of the faithful (we
answer) does not decay for every transgression. We confess indeed that all
sins are deadly, even the smallest, which the Pelagians would not
acknowledge. We will not therefore place all manner of sins in one degree: we
are not Stoickes: some are more heinous then others. And that inequality set
down by Christ Jesus Mat. 10. et 11.
in the pains of the reprobate, does it not proceed of the inequality of the
offenses? You think it strange, that we call all sins (save that against the
holy Ghost) venial, that is to say pardonable. Betake your selves therefore to
the mercy of God, who desires not the death of a sinner? What farther? A
certain great person, and a servant of God in our age, and one whom God
endueth daily with more and more graces, thought once that there had been two
hypostaticall or personal unions in Christ, the one of the soul with the
body, the other of the divinity with the humanity. Shall it not be lawful
for us to recant, and cancel that which through mistaking we have thought and
written amiss, as S. Austin did very commendably? He yielded to the
admonitions that were given him, and declared his meaning, in his learned
treatise of the hypostaticall Union of the two natures in Christ Jesus. Shall
he therefore be accounted a Nestorian, that established Nestorians.
two persons in Christ? And we shall be far less of the Eutichian sect,
which admitted but one nature as well as one only person in Christ, although
Swenckfeldius, Smidelinus, and others have written so, which we disaduouch. We
should never have done: and this Preface would exceed its bounds, if it
behooved us by little and little to follow the footsteps of Alphonsus a Castro,
of one Prateolus, of Bellarmine, and others of that kind, which have filled up
therewith huge and great paltrie volumes, and set up trophies of their
accusations on this subject. That which we have said shall serve for a proof,
that it may be known to the posterity, that with the like facility we are
able to refute the other heresies, which we have not set down here, to the end
that we might eschew prolixitie; (and whereof you accuse us) wherewith we have
refuted the former. And this little discourse shall declare how vain your
proiects are, by seeking to make us worthy to be detested among men, and that
our innocence shall be a decree of condemnation against you, in so far as
you have showed your selves false accusers and rebels unto the Constantinus
Christianam fidem, Catholicam and sanctissimam hares: appellauit: apud Eusebius.
Eccles. hist. lib. 10. cap. 5.
truth. Those great vants of your huge and large Temples do nothing but make
an Echo of this word heretics, your cheeks are altogether swelled
therewith. You can say no worse, taking it in that sense, wherein it is
commonly spoken. It seems that the Echo of those vast dens of your Temples,
takes pleasure to double and repeat seven times over these injurious words,
that they may the better be distilled Nam haereticorum communione leges diuinae
and humanae pijs interdicunt. 2. Joan v. 10. 24. quaest. 1. ci quae dignior c.
13. extrauag. de haereticis.
into the brains of your flocks. And who would not easily obtain the
victory, when the enemy does not appear? Would God that we had liberty to
answer you by and by, in the same pulpits, from which you threaten us so much;
I believe that within a short time you would become Curats without
Parishioners. For we should have just cause to prescribe against you: because
of your reuolting, for that you are blind leaders, for that you agree not with
the holy words of Christ Jesus, yea, and because you are This is your part
likewise (Sirs) to defend the Arrianisme of Liberius, for which he is
excommunicate by S. Hilary: the Monothelisme of Honorius for which he was
condemned by the 6. and 7. Councels: The opinion of the souls sleeping with
John 23. The opinion that the souls of men die with their bodies, like those of
beasts, and that there is no everlasting life with John 24. condemned for this
cause by the Council of Constance, Session. 11.
heretics. You will judge here that I am inciuill and injurious, yet can I
not term a house otherwise then a house, and every thing by the own name. I
love your persons, I hate your heresies and errors, and it is against them,
and not against you that I prepare this combat, for the safety both of you
and of that poor people whom you have bewitched. This little table shall
represent not in small; for it were impossible, but in great, the harmony and
agreement which is between your Popery and old heresies. And it were as much
as to enter into an Ocean, if we would make a Register of the great heaps of
your errors, since that (the decree of the blessed Trinity being excepted)
there is nothing sound throughout the whole body of the Romish Religion. Many
with good success have labored to discover them, though to your great grief:
and have manifested that which you would, had been hid for ever, in the
thickest of Cimmerian darkness. I bear you no malice, God is my witness, my
only intent is that it may be known evidently to which of us two this
loathsome epithet (heretic) belongs. Two things August. lib. de Trinit. in
Pro^mio.
do support each other in error, the presuming of the truth before it be
known: and the defending of the presumed falsehood, after that the truth has
bin manifested unto us. We have accused you, yea, and have vanquished, both of
the one and the other, of presumption and obstinacy. Heresy proceeds not
from the Scripture, but from that it is not rightly understood: it is a crime
not of the words, but of the sense. You err in both twain: and although it be
against your own consciences, yet so it is that you choose rather to be damned
then vanquished by the truth. God of his infinite mercy open your eyes, and
make you see the beams of his graces in his Church, where being gathered with
us, we may worship together, that Pastor and sovereign Bishop of our souls,
our Lord Jesus Christ, who in the unity of the Father and of the holy Ghost,
lives and reighneth God eternally.

So be it.
THE THIRD CONFORMITY.
CHAP. I. Of God.
YOu are not ignorant (Sirs) that there is but one maker of all, creator of
all. Moses speaking unto the Israelites, exhorts them to give ear unto him,
and says that the Lord their God is the only God. The principality of man
has a certain analogy and correspondence with the divine power. All things
are delighted in this unity: and in truth S. Hierome Ad Rust. Monach.
Manicheans.
brings forth some notable examples. Yet notwithstanding the Manicheans have
made two infinite beginnings, although it be impossible that any other infinite
thing can be together with God, in Thought, Will, Might, Goodness and
Essence. If there were two beginnings, the one might destroy that which the
other had wrought, both twain should possess each other, and by possessing
should also borrow one from the other, as being imperfect. If there be two,
which of the two has made this World? Who has governed it? If the one rules,
what does the other? If the one has made this world, and the other rules it,
how has this ruler entered into the house which is none of his? We will
conclude therefore, that there is but one God, but one beginning only. And
although the heresy that maintains the contrary is not embraced generally
of you all, yet Austin Steuchus famous among your Doctors, has written Insua
Cosmopaeia in principio Geneseos.
that the Empyreall heaven is coeternall with God. If it be so, behold two Gods
in your Church, as well as among the Manicheans. For that which has no
beginning, is God. The consequence follows: seeing that the Empyreal heaven is
eternal, it is God. You will object unto us that all do not agree with
Steuchus. This may be true: but where does the Pope censure this matter? Where
is the scraping out hereof in your Index Expurgatorius? Truly this silence
makes us suspect that in holding your peace, you have all agreed with him
therein. And if any of us had spoken and written so, what tempests, what
thundrings should we have heard over our heads?

CHAP. II. Of the body of Christ Jesus.
ANd how have you spared the body of Jesus Christ? You have deified Idem
sentiebat Valentineanus vt est apnd August. har. 11. and Damasc. de haeres.
the same by making it invisible, altogether spirit, without place, without
dimensions, and to be in all places wheresoever any sacrifice is offered after
your manner. This is to make the body of Christ with the Eutichians Leo epist.
96.
equal with the divinity: for Euticheans.
to be in diverse places at one moment, and to be every where are the marks of
divinity: What? Have not Marcion and the Manicheans Epiph. l. 1. tom. 2.
haeres. 24. Basilides.
taught Marcion. Manicheans.
that the body of Christ was but counterfeit and fantastical? Basilides
followed their footesteps. This is the same that you teach unto your flocks.
And that body hid (according to your doctrine Bellarm de Eucharist. lib. 1. c.
2. and lib. 3. c. 6. and omnium Pontificioruus similis est coniuratio.
) under the accidents of bread and wine in the Eucharist, can not stand, but
through a fantastical doctrine in an imaginary body. And what manner of body,
I beseech you, which is void of all its own qualities, and essential
properties? Every true body is in some place, is furnished with its own
dimensions, otherways it is not a body. It belongs unto you therefore to be
advised, by what means you may escape and purge yourselues from Marcionisme and
Manicheisme. You confess that Christ is in heaven contained within a place,
and that he is likewise in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, but without any
place: is not this as much as if you had said, that this sacramental body is
more glorious, spiritual and heavenly, then the body which is in heaven, and
is glorified by the Father? Herein you agree with the Heretics called
Helcesceans, who maintained that there was Helcesceans.
many Christ's, or at least two; whereof the one Theodor defabulis haeretic. l.
2.
dwelled in heaven, and the other upon earth. Some of your Doctors conforming
themselves to the Abbot Eutiches, have not been ashamed to write, that Christ's
body is neither creator nor Eutiches.
creature, but something between them both: which your Canonists Nec Deus est,
nec homo, sed quiddam est inter etrumque.
hold likewise to be true of the Pope. O monster! If S. Austin were alive, he
would answer you that which he has written In lib. sentent. Prosperi.
; namely, that every substance that is not God, is a creature: and that which
is a creature is not God, as being a thing inferior to God. Mahomet Mohomet.
in hss Alcoran holds, that Christ was never crucified, or (if he was) that
it was without cause. Alanus Alanus lib. 2. de Eucharist. c. 8.
, following that which the Council of Trent ordained, says; that the blood of
Christ Jesus, that was shed before he was crucified in mount Caluarie, is the
ratification and foundation of the eternal and new Testament of the Son of
God, whose body without all shame, he affirms to have been offered up at the
Supper before his passion. Dare you confess it? If you hold the affirmative,
what need had Christ to shed his blood the next day following? If Christ our
Paschall Lamb was offered up in the Supper, it behooved him to have made
satisfaction unto his Father, and that our redemption was accomplished there.
And what need was there (if it be so) that he should suffer the morrow after.
And when you allege Joan 20.
those closed gates, whereof mention is made in the Gospel, where you would
have two bodily substances to concur together, in one only place, is not
this to ground your selves on the same argument which the Manicheans abused, to
the end that they might overthrow Manicheans.
the truth of the humane nature that was in Christ? What large and ample matter
should S. Hierome In Psalm. 119.
find here to speak and say unto you, Cum dicit Manicheus and similis
Manicheorum, Dominus non resurrexit in corporis veritate, and, vt scias non
verum fuisse corpus, clausis ingressus est ianuis. Nos quid dicemus? Domine
libera animam meam de labijs iniquis, and a lingua dolosa. And if this be true,
behold the article of the incarnation abolished, and the truth of the body of
Christ Jesus overthrown, at least since his resurrection. The ascension shall
be nothing but the changing of a visible and limited nature throughout all its
dimensions, into an invisible substance, and which is more spiritual and
Angelical: and his second coming shall not be to return and come back again
realy and substantially, but without any removing from beneath here, having
been invisible ever since his resurrection until his returning, to become
visible like some iugler. But when will you leave reauing? And the arguments
which you draw from posse ad esse, are fitter for the Manicheans and
Euticheans, then for those that say that they profess true Christianity. And
call to remembrance that which Vigilius wrote against the substantial presence
of Christ's body in the Eucharist: Caro Christi quando in terra fuit, non erat
in coelo: and nunc quia est in coelo, non est vtique in terris. The Nestorians
Nestorians.
made a separation between the two natures in Christ: you do in like manner,
when you will not acknowledge him to be mediator both according to the one and
the other nature. The Monothelites Monothelites.
gave unto Christ but one will only, which the Jesuits have confirmed, by
condemning of us that have written the contrary. Alanus has written, that
Christ did never sacrifice after the manner l Alan. lib. 2. de Euch. chap. 9.
of Aaron. It is as much as if he had said, that he never shed his blood.
Truth it is indeed that Jesus Christ is a Priest after the order of
Melchisedec, a dignity which has a relation unto his person: but that does
not hinder his sacrifice to be bloody, as were those of Aaron, otherwise we
should not as yet be reconciled to God.

CHAP. III. Of Christ's Soul.
WE believe that Christ's Soul, being for a certain season separated from the
body, was in Paradise, and not in the Lymbus set up and builded by you in the
fourth mansion of the infernal Palace. S. Austin August ad Dard. Epist. 57.
and Ireneus Iren. lib. 4. aduer. haer.
have in like manner taught the same that we hold and believe in our Church.
Notwithstanding Bellarmine gathers Tom. 1. Conc. 2.
out of Durandus his words, that Christ's soul is yet still in hell. Is not
this all one with that which the Christolites said; to wit, that this glorious
soul of our Christolites.
redeemer remained still in hell.

CHAP. IIII. How men are saved.
THe whole Scripture teaches us, that the being, the life and grace, favor
and goodness, which are poured down by God on us, are poured through Jesus
Christ, as through him in whom the Father from all eternity has been very
well pleased, and whose whole kindred is mentioned both in heaven and earth.
And that we being removed far from God, he after an admirable and
incomprehensible manner Docebat Manes ante aduentum Christi neminem saluatum
fuisse: ide^ fere est, quod Pontificij tene^t, neminem in coelos receptum ante
ascensione^ Christi. vide Epiph. haer. 66. Bellar. de Christo lib. 4. c. 11.
unto the Angels and us, has abased himself even unto our estate, and has
clothed himself with our flesh, that we might be made one with him, and with
God through him, to the end that we might be reconciled and saved, having no
other fountain or spring of life but him. This is it which we believe and
worship. Unto this doctrine Andradius Andrad. lib. 3. Orth. fid.
and Catharinus Catarinus in comment. 1. Timoth.
who were present at the council of Trent, have opposed themselves, wrighting,
that some that are not of the faithful may be saved. What more abominable
maxim can any man hold. This blasphemy is as much, as if one should say, that
some may obtain eternal life without God, and without being partakers of this
fountain that springs forth unto life everlasting, which is Christ. We are
able to prove by the uncontrollable testimony of the holy antiquity, that the
Pelagians taught, that the Gentiles might Pelagians.
know God, and be saved through Philosophy only. Purge your selves here (If
you can) of Pelagianisme.

CHAP. V. Of Original Sin.
Original Sin has proceeded from thence, that Adam turned away from God,
that he chused rather to believe the promises of the Devil, then the
threatenings of the creator, that he pressed to make himself equal with God,
and that he followed his adventure and sought for knowledge without God and his
holy word. It is true indeed that Adam and his wife only transgressed the
commandment, which was given unto them concerning the forbidden fruit: yet
his posterity is not a whit the less inuolued within that malediction. For as
the obedience of Christ is not the less ours through imputation, then Christ's
through his own proper action, because we are begotten of his incorruptible
seed, regenerate by the holy Ghost: so the disobedience of our Protoplastes
being imputed unto us by the means of this natural conception accompanied
with iniquity, with good reason are we made fellows and guilty of the same
sin Against this Orthodoxall belief, the Pelagians Pelagians.
have decreed, that children are free from original sin: and have scraped
away not only the thing it self, but also the name thereof, as being contrary
to the holy Word. Your Pighius Pighius in lib. Contro. Controu. de peccato
origin.
indeed would have the child to be partaker of the punishment of sin, but
not of the sin. What wickedness is this? That the Virgin Mary was free
thereof. What, is she not the daughter of Adam, and conceived by the means of
Matrimonial conjunction? He says that Christ was conceived of the holy
Ghost, not because he was free from original sin, but only that his
nativity might be singular beyond all other means. Your Fathers of the
council of Trent, having set down nothing concerning the nature of original
sin, have fully declared the secret collusion that is between them and
Pighius. Whenever your Doctors make mention of this sin, they know not what
the rebellion means which was committed by our first parents, and how that
through the corruption of our-nature, which of necessity followed thereon, we
have all fallen Romans 5. v. 12. Romans 6. v. 23. Ephesians. 2. v. 1. and 4. v. 8. Col.
2. v. 13.
from life into death, and are so far alienated from the life of God, that
there remains nothing but death in us, You will have it to be a petit
peccadille, as the Jesuit Gretensis says Iuassert. defens.
: the will to contribute but a very little, as Andradius Andr in defen. Conc
Trid.
: to have been a thing particularly voluntary in Adam, but not universally in
the will of his posterity, as Franciscus Maronis Francis. Mar. in lib. sapient.
, the illuminate Doctor: in a word, you extenuate the same, as one Occam Occam
in lib. 2. sentent.
does: and are not aware, poor people, that it is an heresy so near to
infidelity, a sin entangled with so many other sins, that if God had not
given his Son unto us, that through him we might obtain, both the
abolishing of our sin and of death, and to be partakers of life; we had
perished, it being impossible for us to deliver us of our selves. The
Catabaptists are your fellows in this. And Charon Cha. in 2. verit.
who says that Adam did not lose his faith, how will he agree with the holy
antiquity Amb. lib de parad. August. Euch. cap. 45. Prosper de gratia Dei.
Tertul aduer. Iudaeos.
which holds the contrary. And that which the Jesuit Richeome Richeome lib.
3. cap. 41. page 246.
teaches, that the sacrifice of the Cross takes away nothing but original
sin, and that the altar (otherwise called Mass) the actual sins: is not
this an execrable blasphemy? You shall judge thereof. In a word, when you do
thus extenuate original sin, is it not to agree with the Manicheans,
Manicheans.
who said, that God had created the affections in the same corrupted nature
that they were of?

CHAP. VI. Of Free will.
THe Catharians bragged themselves of their merits, and the Pelagians August.
haeres. 88.
of their free will, Catharians. Pelagians.
although the Scripture, the consent of the Fathers, and the most holy councels
do teach us, that the regenerate man cannot fulfill the Law of God, which
nevertheless it demands and requires of us, as well because it is just in
the self, as for that it was given to the first man while he was yet in the
estate of innocence: that the Freewill is lost, and that there remains
nothing in us but a natural inclination to sin. But you dare not deny
B^llar. de great. and libert, 6. c. 15.
that the Romish Church has learned of the Pelagians, that man is endued with
this free will, and that he has power to merit the grace of God by his own
means, notwithstanding that Adam enclosed himself, and his posterity through
his fall, in a privation of all spiritual benefits. Pelagianisme is your
doctrine, the arguments of the Pelagians are yours, and let their axioms be
compared with yours, they are two drops of water, or two eggs that resemble
one another. The Pelagians said that grace fails not, has not failed, nor
ever will decay in those that do all that they are able to do. These be the
same very words which you cry out so loud in your schools and pulpits, which
is as much as if you had said, that man by doing what he may, has nothing to
do with grace, and that he may be saved without the same. Man, says the
Pelagian, through the will of his natural strength may make himself fit for
grace: is not this that natural faculty and power, which the council of
Trent does attribute unto man, that of himself he is able to effectuate
spiritual actions? The Pelagian goes on, saying that through free will alone
one may abstain from sinning a new, may fulfill the commandments of the Law,
and that he may be perfectly just: that if at some times he be called unjust,
it is by a comparison made between him and God, and to this sense he applies
the sentences of the Scripture: That our righteousness is like unto a foul
cloth: And that none is good, not so much as one. The proud Jesuits, who
would make the cross of Christ of no auale, do not believe that man after he
has fallen from the estate of innocence is deprived of the power to fulfill
the Law. And what will they answer to S. Austin Retract. lib. 1. cap. 19.
. Who is he (says he) that can perform the Law in all points, but he through
whom the commandments of God were made, that is to say Christ. The Church
indeed has called them Heretics that denied free will: but that ought to be
understood of that will, wherewith man was adorned by God in his first
creation. That which we do avouch and teach in our Churches touching this
point, is conform to the Scripture, and to that which the holy Fathers have
taught. The Ephesians. 5.
unregenerate are named darkness: and in another place Col. 2.
are called not only weak and diseased, but dead also. And how will that
stand which the council of Trent has determined touching this strength of man
in the motions and actions of heavenly things, with these maxims that follow?
The 1. Cor. 2.
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God. The 1. Cor. 1.
world by wisdom knew not God: we are not sufficient 2. Cor. 3.
of our selves to think any thing as of our selves. Where is this free will
then which you blase abroad so much? I shall be brief, and will content my
self, to send you back to those other places of Scripture, which I have set
down in the margent Math. 11. and 16. Joan. 15. Romans 1. 7. 8. and 11.
. And the Prophets bear witness unto us, not only of the defect in well
doing, but likewise teach us, that unto those natural forces, which we had in
our original justice, have succeeded in our souls, desires and hearts of
vicious habits toward evil, and of such like corruptions in our nature: which
like unto great floods, and raging streams do carry us down headlong after
our filthy desire, not being able of our selves to releuate us again to do
well. It is a hard heart that we have Ezech. 11. Romans 2. Esa. 48. Hierem. 17.
Hierem, 23.
, he has a heart of stone that is unregenerate: he has a head of Iron, a
forehead of brass: a corrupted heart, that cannot change its skin, no more
then an Ethiopian. How then can they be able to accomplish the Law of God?
how can they through their righteousness obtain and deserve life everlasting?
Let the same be said of the regenerate ones, whose salvation depends of the
pure mercy of God, seeing that everlasting life Romans 6.
is a gift of God, and cannot be deserved by men. Verily I do confess, that
there is some difference between you and the Pelagians, which consists, in
so much as you join grace with free will, which was taken away by them, at
least you come both so near together, that you hold, that man after his fall
may do good through the benefit of his will. Iodocus Tiletanus In his book
against the confession of Antvverpe. Chap. 6.
has so taught and written. But he and you together, what answer will you
return to S. Austin August. de gra^. and liber arbit. cap. 17. De corrept. and
gra. ca. 2. De dogmat. Eccles. cap. 32. Debono persevere. De praedestin.
sanctor. 7. In Psat. 31. and 70.
, that has written whole treatises of the free and pure mercy of God through
Jesus Christ: Of justification by Faith: Of the infirmity and final
corruption of man's will: Of the filthiness of our works, and the baseness of
our merits. Truly he is far from that Pharisaicall pride, which makes you
presume so much of your selves. S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 1. in Aduentu.
and S. Hierome Hieronym. in Ierem. cap. 13. and Dial. cont. Pelag.
did not hold any such opinion touching this matter that is taught in your
schools, And concerning God commandments, to wit, that we are excluded from
the power of accomplishing them: we alone believe not so: for we have on our
side S. Ambrose, Amb. l. 9. epist. 71. and 73.
Prosper Aquitannus Prosp. Aquit. in sent. 44.
, S. Bernard Bernard in ca^t. cantic sermon 50.
, and an infinite number of the Fathers. If the Pelagians have confessed that
to this end, the grace of justification was given, that we might the more
easily accomplish through grace, that which we were commanded by the Law: The
council Cap. 8. This Council also in the title, where he speaks against the
Pelagians. chap. 110. 111. 112. and those that follow.
of Affricke, has sent forth a curse against them, and you that are fellows
with them, as if without grace (but with greater difficulty) we were able to
perform the Law; seeing that Jesus Christ says not, Without me you may work
with greater difficulty: but very plainly, without me you are able to do
nothing. The second Council In the decrees from the first to the eleventh, and
from the 20. to the 25.
of Aransike, holden in the time of Leo the first, and of the Emperor
Theodosius the younger, overthrew the doctrine of free will, and of
justification by works, and has determined by the word of God, that all
whatsoever is in us and in our power, depends of the one, only and free
mercy of God. Where then will this nature of man be, which is helped to do
well by the grace of creation, and of the doctrine of the Law? We do not
gainsay this grace, but we will not make the same equal with nature, as a
fellow helper, as you and the Pelagians do: for we must receive all from the
liberality and free gift of the holy Ghost, as it were by begging, without any
power or natural faculty in us to prepare our selves for grace. And what will
you answer to the Mileuitane Council Cap. 4.
, which condemns those that say, that the grace of God through Jesus Christ
is given for this purpose only, that we may receive help and assistance, or
that the true meaning of the commandments may be laid open unto us, that we
may know what we ought to follow and what we should avoid? Truly this grace
has not this scope, by the contrary it was given to us to work unto this
effect that we might desire and be able to do well. You do attribute as much
authority or little less to your Canons Look the Can. Per Baptismum. Can.
firmissime tene. ^aen. placuit vt quicunque; dixerit. de consecr. did. 4.
, as to the holy Euangiles of Christ Jesus, we beseech you to peruse them, and
you shall find as it were in dust, this free will with the appertenances
thereof, and the conclusions of the doctrine of merits and works of
supererogation by whole chests and coffers full. To conclude Bellarm. de amiss.
great. lib. 1. cap. 4.
then, you hold constantly and will acknowledge a francke and free will to be,
not only in the estate of innocence, but likewise in the corrupted estate of
sin: through which man is able of himself and his own motion to do well,
and if he receive any help, that it is only by the grace of congruitie, which
is the same thing with that which the Pelagians affirmed.

CHAP. VII. Of the Commandments of the Law.
THe Anomians were so called, as being without any Law. They taught many things
that were contrary to the Law, and that the obedience which man owes
thereunto, was not necessary. And are you not Anomians? For what is your
Popery, but a contreopposition Anomians.
to the holy ordinances of God, but an abolishing of the Law? A Law that
conuerteth Psalm. 19.
the soul: a Law Deuteronomy. 17.
that threatens the transgressor thereof with cursing: a Law Deuteronomy. 6.
which we ought to grave in our hearts. And what is the Pope, but that
adversary, who exalts 2. These. 2.
himself above all that which is called God, as God? This is Zach. 1.
indeed that shepherd on earth, who will not visit those that be cut off, who
shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claws in pieces. We are
commanded to love God with our whole heart. Syluester Prierias holds, that
this commandment is not of necessity, but of honesty: Which is the very same
opinion of Molanus Molan. de Theol. pract. tract. 3. cap. 16. conclus; nu 11.
: and this is as much as if they had taught that it were not needful to love
God most perfectly, but that it should be sufficient for us to know that he
ought to be loved so. Let us reason briefly upon every one of the
commandments, and let us see the antithesis which is between them and the
Popes. Thou shall have no other God but me: The Pope is called God, not
hyperbolically, but effectually, Dominus Deus noster Papa. Thou shall not make
unto thee any graven image; Contrariwise the Pope commands, that all manner
of images and representations be affixrd and set up in the Temples and Churches
of Christians, that they may be honored, apparelled, lighted, and that we may
bow down our selves before them in all reverence, as it may be seen in your
Canons Can. Perlatu^. C. Venerabiles de Consec. did. 3.
, and the Books of your chiefest Doctors. Thorn. Aqu. 3. part. summae, quaest.
25. art. 4.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, says the Eternal.
The Pope The Pope dispenses with vows and oaths and gives license to break
the oath made either to God, or to the Prince, or to any heretic. Cause. 15.
Can. Alius et Can. Nos sanctoru^ quaest. 6 The Priscillianists (as S. Austin
writes lib. de haeres. 8.) gave free liberty to perjury, teaching each
another thus; swear, forswear, etc.
absolueth subjects from the oath which they have made to their natural
Prince. Honor thy father and thy mother. The Pope dispenses with his Priests
and Friars, yea, and with all those that be on his side. Thou shall not kill.
Our France has made trial The same very words of Peter Chaestels
interrogatorie are set down by Mr Arnaud page 30. and 31.
in the parricide that was practiced on the person of the most Christian King,
Henry the third, what dispensation is granted in this case. Thou shall not
commit adultery: but The Canon dilectissimis, cause. 12. wills that not only
possessions, but wives also be common. And the Canon Christiano did. 34. which
says, That a Christian ought to have but one wise, or a concubine instead of a
wise.
Hildebrand a Friar of the order of the Clumacenses, called Gregory the
seventh forbade marriage: nevertheless it is well known after what manner he
behaved himself with Mehant, Countess of Mantua. And who knows not that the
Pope approves whordome, since he receives tribute from the whores of Rome?
Robberies, and false witnesses are but childrens sport. And touching
concupiscence, you are of the opinion that it is not forbidden, and that it is
no sin, unless the fact be joined therewith. What shall I say farther? In
the Romish Church they take away, change, diminish, and add to the Law what
pleases those best that have the charge thereof. They have taken away the
Deuteronomy. 6.
knowledge of the word of God from the people, reserving the same for great
Doctors. They have forbidden to read the holy Bible, which is against Gods
ordinance. Enniche the mother of Timothy shall rise up in judgment and
condemn them. They have bin so bold as to stretch forth their sacrilegious
hands unto the sanctuary of God, that they might pull away from thence the
second commandment of the first Table. They have changed their Priests into
Sacrificers: the Euangiles into Masses: the preaching into ringing of Bells,
singing, lights, and such like trash. They have changed the breaking of the
bread in the holy Supper, into hosts altogether round. They have diminished,
to wit, the cup, contenting themselves with a part only. They have added,
namely, the commandments which they call of the Church. Christ comwaunded us
to love our enemies, and pray for them. Yet notwithstanding your Molanus
denies that God has commanded us to pray chiefly for our enemies, and that
we ought to salute them lovingly. You vpbraid us with the debates that are
among us. We are at one together, praised be God. But make Torrensis Torren.
lib. de residentia.
agree with Catherin, to whom he reprocheth that he has written, that the law
of Moses, is not the Law of God: and that the commandments of the Apostle S.
Paul, are not the commandments of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VIII. Of Predestination.
THis Doctrine of Predestination is of great importance. S. Austin August. lib.
de praedest sanctorum. Debono perseuerantia. De natura and gratia. De fide et
operib.
has written whole Treatises thereof. Through it we know that without Christ
Act. 4. v. 12. Timoth. 2. v. 19. Romans 8.
, there is no salvation. It is a refuge in time of temptation to persuade us
more and more of the assurance of our salvation, which we believe to be
grounded on the son of God, that we may cast away far from us all manner of
desperation. It is a spur to prick us forward to the study of good works,
which are the effects of our election. It is a bridle to contain our
insolency and bragging within the limits of Christian modesty, that we may
not attribute to our selves that which proceeds of the grace of 1. Cor. 1.
God. All the holy antiquity does send us unto the pure and free mercy of God
through Jesus Christ, unto justification by faith, unto our infirmity and
wretchedness of our works. And nevertheless you are not contented with this
simplicity, contrariwise you do attribute predestination unto good works
that are foreseen, as the Pelagians have done. The common Pelagians.
opinion of the greater part of your Schoolmen is bent that way, as Cathar in
comment. sup. epist. ad Romans cap 8.
Catharin can well reproach unto your Divines his fellows.

CHAP. IX. Of the Scripture.
IS it not true that the thief abhors nothing so much as the Law, nor the
heretic any thing so much as the Scripture? May I not liken you to the
Claudius Espensaeus in epist. ad Tit c. 1. testatur inter Episcopos Pontificios
esse, quiscripturarum lectionem tam periculosam iudicent, vt ab ea prae metu
caueant, ne sic siant haeretici.
Owls, that cannot endure those glistering beams of Gods word? Unto those
betelles, that above all things hate the balm of those celestial decrees? You
say that it is imperfect Look the 3. verity of Charro^. cap. 13 and 4.
Bellarm lib. 4. de verbo Dei. cap. 3. Du Perron in the treatise of traditions,
where he shows that the Scripture is not sufficient to bear witness of the
truth.
, obscure, doubtful, ambiguous, a dead letter that kills, a matter of
debate, and riddles. Your whole refuge is unto homilies, trophonaries,
passions, legends, lectures, antiphonas, graduaries, breuiaries, fermologues,
and Missals. And for the Scriptures, you believe them no more then the fables
of Aesope, unless they be authorized by the Pope. Eusebius says Eusebhistor.
lib. 7. cap. 30. Samosatenus.
that the holy ancient Fathers accused (and that with very good reason)
Samasatenus, because that by departing from the Canonical books, he had been
the author of an heretical Doctrine, in so far as he had not followed the
Apostolic Doctrine. And to whom belongs this censure more then to you?
Ought you to speak not only when the holy Scripture is silent; but also when
you are flatly condemned thereby? Would to God we had not this right to blame
you of that, which S. Austin August. lib. 2. de nuptijs and concup. ca. 33.
said in old times unto those that were like you: That you aim at no other
thing, but that the whole authority of the holy Scripture may turn to
nothing. Bellarmine Bellarm. tem. 1. lib. de verbo Dei non scripto. cap. 4.
has labored much for his part, when of purpose he has made a whole Chapter
of the insufficiency of the Scripture, the Scripture, I say, which is the true
rule of our understanding, and the solid anchor of our salvation. Tertullian
Tertul. de praescript.
in his time fought against your fellows, who denied the Scriptures to be
perfect. And likewise the heretics would never grant them to be the true
rule of faith, notwithstanding that Ireneus Iren. lib 4. cap. 43. and 44.
did send them back unto this doctrine of the Apostles, which S. Chrysostom
and Basil in diverse places of their works, have called the exquisite balance,
the rule of equity, and the canon of verity. Your Eckius Eckius in Enchir.
lo^oru^ communium. Pighius lib. 1. Ecclestast. Hierarch cap. 2.
, your Pighius yield no more authority unto the holy Scripture then that which
your Church is pleased to bestow thereon. And in that conference Holden in anno
1557.
of Worms, your men that were present there, did they not say that the
Scripture was a nose of wax, and a Lesoian square? And if it were so, as you
maintain, that the Church is above the Scripture, it should follow that it
were more expedient to find out the head by the testimony of the members, then
the members by the testimony of the head. It is to the Shepherd that we
address our selves, that he may bear witness of his flock, and not
contrariwise. Turrianus the Jesuit has abased the majesty of the word of God
so far as he was able to do: for writing against Sadeel Lib 1. cont. Sadeel
page 99.
he has not been ashamed to spew out after his babbling manner: Si Scripturam
solam fidei regulam in Ecclesia Christus reliquisset, quid aliud quam Delphicum
gladium haberemus? O blasphemer! That which strengthens the soul, gives
wisdom to simple ones, that which rejoices the hearts, that which is power
from God, in salvation unto all such as believe, that which is the wisdom of
God, ordained before all ages unto our salvation, that which is the covenant of
God, shall it be a Delphian sword? You will not Jndex lib. prohib. edit. a Pie
4. reg. 4.
have the common people to read the Scripture, whereunto notwithstanding all
manner of people are invited of whatsoever sex or age they be: for fear (you
say) that pearls be cast before Swine. For says the Cardinal Hesius in loc
is communibus.
Hosius, this profanation of the Scriptures would make not only Porters,
Bakers, Shoo-makers and others to become Prophets, but women bakers, shoomakers
and such others of that sex to turn Prophets also: Do you not in that follow
the footsteps of the Basilidians and Carpocratians, who (as Iren. lib. 1. cap.
23. Epiph. haeres. 24.
Ireneus and Basilidians. Carpocratians.
Epiphanius write) hid their Doctrines? We are men, said Basilides, all others
are hogs and dogs: cast not therefore pearls before hogs, and things
that are holy before dogs. The epithers which you do attribute unto your
selves, to wit, spiritual persons, Church men; do make the way plain for
you, that you may approach unto the cabinet of those heretics, that there you
may contemplate that which is not permitted to those beggarly seculars and
laymen to behold. And if you should permit the reading of the holy Scriptures
unto all persons indifferently, you would be afraid that all Gods people would
turn Prophets: and therein you are very far wide of the wish of Moses Iren.
lib. 3. cap. 2.
. The heretics Number. 11. v. ^9.
of Ireneus his time, being reproved by the Scriptures, began to accuse them of
darkness and insufficiency, saying that the truth thereof could not be found
by those that were ignorant of traditions, that they had received the truth by
hearing, and by a cabale from the father to the son; for which cause S. Paul
said, we speak wisdom among the perfect. It is the same buckler that you
hold up before you to save your traditions with, but it is so weak that the
strokes have made the light shine through it. And that du Peron, to the end
that he might show his loquence, has set forth his detestable Book of the
insufficiency of the Scripture: a Book spewed out of hell, and whose author
can be no other then Satan. And who were able to make an end, if it behooved us
to set down the hatred and malice which you have conceived against the
Scripture. This example will be a proof, namely, when you hold so manifestly
that it is not necessary, and that the Apostles were not commanded to write,
but only to preach. Have you not in like manner minced some morcels of the
holy Epistles, and Euangiles in the Mass, together with some current prayer,
to the end that you might the more easily purchase authority and favor unto
your Pompilian idolatries? This is the same very practice of Sergius, Mahomets
Doctor, who has infected the holy Sergius.
Law with a gallemafrey of fables and heresies, that he has placed in the
Alchoran. Montanus confessed indeed that he embraced all manner of Montanus.
Scripture, but he invented moreover, that the Paraclet was come to finish that
which was only begun, as Epiphanius Epip. haeres. 48.
writes. So likewise you hold the canon of the Scripture to be imperfect, and
do remit the perfecting thereof to your Paraclet of Rome.

CHAP. X. Of Traditions.
MAking mention of Traditions we will begin at the Council of Trent, whereof
behold here a solemn Session. 4. c. 1. Pari fide and pietatis affectu.
decree: The Council of Trent receives and honors with the like affection
and reverence of piety, all the Books of the old and new Testament (seeing
that one only God is the author of both the one and the other) and the
Traditions themselves, which belong unto faith as well as unto discipline, as
being endited, either by the mouth of Christ, or by the holy Ghost, and have
been preserved by a continual succession in the Catholic Church. This decree
has made me wonder as it were, because of the disposition thereof which is
turned vpside down. It is known how that traditions are the very proppes of
your Religion, and the hinge, whereupon all the inventions that are among you
do move. As touching the holy books which the Council confounds, not
putting difference between the Apocryphal and the Canonical, they are
nothing, according to your judgment, but light armed Harquebusers and lances
on horseback, to guard and defend only those great armies of Traditions. This
was the ordinary buckler of those ancient heretics, Valentin, Valentin.
Ebion. Apelles. Marcion.
Ebion, Apelles, Marcion, and such others, who did boast themselves, that they
had received many doctrines and traditions from the Scripture. And thereupon
(as Iren. cont. Valent. cap. 1.
Ireneus and Tertul. de praescrip. haeret.
Tertullian write) they confessed after a general manner, that in Jesus Christ
consisted all treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and that on him was grounded
all perfection of doctrine; but to the end that they might color or plaster
their dreams, and add more weight and beauty to their inventions, they
maintained with a brazen face, that the Apostles, in so far as they were men,
were ignorant of diverse mysteries that were necessary for man's salvation: or
else that of purpose, they had concealed and kept back certain points, the
knowledge whereof they reserved for the more perfect sort of their posterity,
not willing as yet to reveal them to the world, as being unworthy of the
knowledge of so goodly traditions, and that they were those that they taught.
Eusebius Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. cap 28. Artemon.
writes, that Artemon the heretic bragged that his doctrine was gathered out
of the Apostolic traditions. Clement Alexandrin Clem. Alexand. Strom. lib. 7.
Basilides. Valentin.
says, that Basilides gloried in this that one Glaucus was his teacher, who
had been S. Peter's interpreter: that Valentin did boast in like manner that he
had been S. Paul's auditor, and that the Marcionists bragged that they were the
Disciples Marcionists.
of those which had heard and conuersed with the Apostle S. Mathias, whose
doctrine they allowed, taught, and observed: as the like also is said among
you, concerning your traditions: notwithstanding that you can neither find out
the cause, nor origin thereof; and that not without reason, seeing they are
not grounded on the Scripture. And how should they be so, seeing that for the
most part they were invented more then a thousand years after the death of the
Apostles, such as monastical rules and others of that sort are. Truly you
cannot deny, either that they have been unknown, or else have been kept
back for the knowledge of the posterity, to wit, of you my Masters the
Prelates, that have the keys to draw whole bags full of them out of your
Councels either general or provincial, and out of the determinations of your
Sorbonists or Jesuits. Let us see farther what is the chief foundation of
your traditions, the most beautiful plants and roses of the garden of the
Romish Church. Behold it is here, That the Apostles knew not all things: or if
they have known all things, and none of them has preached otherwise then the
rest did, that they have not taught all things to all persons. Is not this to
accuse those great Stewards of the Church, of ignorance, of cowardlinesse, and
that they have not dealt uprightly in their calling? That they have not been
faithful obseruers of the Covenant or new Testament, whereof the preaching was
committed unto them? The Ambassador has no power to dispense with his Masters
will. It is the duty of a servant to discharge things faithfully in their
fullness; and as he has been commanded to do. In the making of our
contracts or testaments, we would not suffer the notarie and witnesses to keep
back a part thereof, and not to bear full testimony of our will, unless they
would incur the danger of punishment: and can that be tolerated in a matter
of so great moment, to wit, in the Testament which the son of God has
ratified by his death? The Apostles having declared faithfully the whole will
of their master, and having discharged their business very well, it were
sacrilege and an intolerable blasphemy to accuse them, either because they
knew not, or were not able, or would not bear witness of the kingdom of God,
as they were enjoined to do. I could here insert that ample discourse which
Tertullian makes in answering to the arguments of the heretics, as also what
infallible prescription he uses Tert. de praescript. haeret. page 95. ex
aedit. Froben. 1522.
against them: but to be brief, I will send you back to that which himself
has written, and has spoken to you as well as to the heretics of his time.
Ireneus Lib. cont. haeres. Valent. in praefat. and in princip. lib. 1.
that was a disciple of the disciples of the Apostles, writing in express
terms of the true justifying faith, which the Church received from the
Apostles, and has delivered from hand to hand unto their children, is no other
thing then the Gospel that we have received from the Apostles themselves, for
as much as they first preached the same with their mouth, and thereafter penned
it, to the end that it might be the foundation, the pillar and proppe of our
Notwithstanding the Pope will have his Decretall Epistles placed among the
Canonical books, and to be equal with the holy Scripture. did. 19. can. In
Canonicis.
faith. Then without the Gospel we cannot imagine any doctrine of salvation,
what name or title so ever it have. For Christ and the Apostles have left unto
us by writ, all whatsoever is necessary unto true piety, and honest
conversation. Why then do you allege unto us the insufficiency of the
written word? Truly it must needs be that those famous men Hieronym in praesat
in lib. Salom.
Hierome, Cypr. in symb. page 377.
Cyprian, and the Fathers, that were assembled in the Council of Council.
Laodic. cap. 59.
Laodicea, had a beam in their eye, when they could not perceive that, which
you say is more clear to you then the Sun is in the noonday, to wit, that
the holy and canonical Books were not sufficient to prove matters concerning
faith and charity, and that we must have recourse unto traditions, and the
unwritten word. And for this cause, when we go about to convict you by the
proofs of the Scripture, that we may declare what harmony and agreement is
between you and the Marcionists, the Valentinians, the Ebioneans, the
Apellians; by imitating of them you cover your selves with this buchler; to
wit, that the Scripture is obscure, and that the truth cannot be fully
collected from thence, unless we help our selves with the unwritten
traditions, which the Apostles delivered from their own mouth without
Scripture? And what manner of things are they which they would have us to
embrace under this pretense? The forbidding of certain meats on certain
days; the forbidding of a certain order of persons to marry; Lent,
chastity, and such like things, that belong not to faith, but to a simple
custom, which is diverse in diverse places, according to the humor of such as
bear rule in the Church. These are the things of so great weight (as you will
have them to be) which Bellarmine says, that the Apostles did not preach to
the common people, to whom they ministered simply that which was necessary and
profitable unto them; but concerning other things, to wit, those weighty
matters before mentioned, they taught them apart and in private, unto those
that were of greatest understanding, that thereafter they might deliver them
from hand to hand unto those that should be found most capable of them. Are not
these goodly reasons? Reasons that are so pertinent, that it has seemed
expedient unto you to make up huge Tomes thereof, that have bin published,
whereunto notwithstanding our writers have not failed to answer, reasons I say,
that are so unreasonable, that you cannot deny, that by the means thereof you
collude and agree with the ancient heretics. The chief argument of those of
Ireneus Iren. cont. Valent. l. 3. c. 12.
and Tertullians Tert. de praescript.
time, and which was ordinary in their mouths, was grounded on that which our
Savior says Joan. 16.
to his Apostles, That he had yet many things to say unto them, but that they
could not bear them. Of this did S. Austin complain in his time, and chiefly
in two places of his works. In the first he uses these August. in Joan.
tract. 97.
terms: All the madder sort of heretics, who will be called Christians, do
labor to shadow the boldness of their inventions, which the understanding of
man does even abhor, by taking hold of these words of the Gospel, where the
Lord says, I have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them
now. In the second he writes August. in Ioa. tract 96.
thus; And since our Lord has made no mention of them, which of us will say,
they are such or such like things? Or if he were so bold as to say so, how
could he be able to prove it? For who will be so foolish, or so rash, when he
has said all that he lists to whom pleases him best (although it be true)
as to affirm without any divine proof, that he has spoken those things which
our Lord would not reueile at that time? And if S. Austin has written after
this manner against the heretics of his time: If Ireneus and Tertullian could
not endure the Gnostiques and others to abuse the same: why may not Gnostiques.
we do after the same manner with you, to the end that we may exclude all the
fancies of men? We will add further to that which is said before, how that the
ancient heretics did abuse, even as you do, that which the Apostle says 1.
Cor. 2. v. 6.
, And we speak wisdom among them that are perfect. This was the ordinary
defense and argument of the Carpocratians, Carpocratians
witness Ireneus Iren. lib. 2. c. 2. and 3.
Bishop of Lion, although that in this passage he does not place those that
were perfect as opposites unto idiots. This is it which S. Athanase Athan orat.
2. cont. Arrian.
remarketh against the Arians, concerning those bragges of Arrius who blinded
the eyes of his followers with these goodly titles in show, Electis Dei
secundum fidem: peritis Dei: ita didici ego. Montanus August. haeres. 26.
joined with the old and Montanus.
new Testament certain other observations of his pretended paraclete: is not
this the very same that was said of that holy Ghost, that was carried by post
from Rome to Trent in a cloake-bagge?

CHAP. XI. Of the Church.
THe Donatists tied the Church to a certain Donatists.
place: as for you, you tie it to Rome, and to a counterfeit succession of
persons, and say that the general assembly is composed only of such as follow
the Romish Church, as mother and Mistress of all the Churches, and do
acknowledge the Pope to be successor to Peter the Prince of the Apostles, and
vicar of Christ Jesus. Hearken unto S. Hierome Hieron. in Psalm. 133.
: The Church does not consist in walls, but in the sowndnesse of doctrines.
Wheresouer true faith is, there is the Church also. And they do Christ Jesus
great wrong to tie him to the Temple of Rome, he that departed from his temple
that was builded in Jerusalem, because of the wickedness that was committed
among the Sacrificers. Whosoever therefore would know which is the true Church
of Christ, says Chrisostom Chrysostom. hom. 49. in Math.
, let him find out the same by the Scriptures. And S. Austin August. lib. de
past. cap. 4
, We have found Christ in the Scriptures: we must find the Church there also.

CHAP. XII. Of Baptism.
Who has taught you that Baptism takes away only the sins that are past,
and secureth us only from the first shipwreck, but the Marcionists, the
Messalians and Euchites, as Epiphanius writes. Marcionists. Messalians.
Euchites. Epiph. haeres. 22. 60. and 8.
You do attribute with them the virtue of Baptism unto sins that are past:
and to the Sacrament which you term Penitence, the washing and purging of
other offenses, in case we should fall again therein, through weakness
which is in stead of a table, to save us from this shipwreck. The Messalians
taught that man was not made perfect through Baptism. The Jesuits hold, that
this is no sure pledge unto us that our sins are forgiven us. This moved
Marcion to reiterate the same to his followers. And although Baptism be not
renewed in the Romish Church, yet so it is that she uses the Chrisme in her
pretended Sacrament of confirmation, to make those that are anointed, become
more skillful in spiritual combats: that they may become wholly and perfectly
Christians, Qui nunquam erit Christianus, says the Canon Vide de Consecrat.
distinct. 5. Can. Omnes fideles Can. Spiritus Sanctus.
, nisi qui confirmatione Episcopali fuerit chrismatus. Would you hear any
thing more horrible then this, and namely when confirmation is preferred to
Baptism, the institution of men to Christ's? Theodoret Theodor lib. de fab.
haeret.
writes, that the Messalians were the authors of crosses and exorcismes: for
(said they) the child at his birth is accompanied with his Demon, who cannot
be chased away but through coniuration? And what? Know you not very well; that
it is forbidden by the Law of God Leu. 19. and 10. Deuteronomy. 8.
, to use charms, coniurations, and exorcismes De Conse. did. 4 Can. Sieve,
Can. Sal. Can. dehine. Vid Raban. Man. de instit. cleric. l. cap. 27. and 28.
Conc. Brachat. c. 1. Council. Agath. cap. 13.
of any creatures, whereby any virtue or dignity above the course of nature is
attributed unto dumb things? We are not ignorant that this manner of coniuring
was practiced in the Church, in S. Cyprian and S. Austins time: let us rest
notwithstanding on that which Christ Jesus and the Apostles have done, and not
on the Fathers, when they are destitute of Gods word. And what need have
children to be exorcised, seeing they are members of Gods everlasting covenant?
You have a certain coniured oil De Conse. did. 4 Can. Symbolum. Can. Prima.
Iuo. l. 1. de Baptis. Vide Raba^ vt su. De Conse. did. 4. Can. Deinde. can.
Venisti. Can. Postquam. Can. emersesti. Marcus. Marcosius. Valentinus.
, ordained of purpose for baptising of little children. And of whom have you
learned this manner of doing, but of the Heretics Marcus, Marcosius and
Valentine, as Epiphanius witnesses Epiph. l. 2. tom. 3. haeres. 34. Ireu l. 1.
c. 18. Marcionists. Quintilians. Cataphrigians. Montanists. Pepuzians.
Priscillians. Artotirites.
? And to the end that corruption and abuses might take the greater increase, it
has been permitted unto women to baptize, according to the error of the
Marciomists, Quintillians, Cataphrygians, Montanists, Pepuzians, Priscillians,
and Artotyrites Vide Epiph. l. 1. tom. 3. haer. 42. and to^. 1. l. 2. haeres
49. August. haeres. 27
: although the ministration of Baptism belong unto a part of the preaching of
the Gospel, and that all things ought to be done with comeliness and good
order in the Church. Was it ever permitted by the Law of God unto women De
consecr. did. 4 can mulier. Durand. rat. l 6. Rubr. de Baptis.
to minister the Sacraments, or Sacrifices that were ordained in the first
Church of the Israelites? Is there any sign how little soever it be of any
permission in the new Testament of Christ Jesus, by which this female sex is
licenced to do so? It is written in the history of Moses Exodus 4.
, that his wife Sephora being moved with a womanly fury took a sharp knife
or stone, and cut away the foreskin of her son, but that was done without any
commandment, and through a rash usurpation of that which belonged no ways
unto her. And S. Austin August. l. 2. c. 13 cont. epist. Parme^
has expressly forbidden women to do the same, following the council of
Carthage Conc. Carthag. cap. 100.
, where he had been present, which did the very same, You cannot deny
therefore that you insitate those Heretics, and most of all the Pepuzians, who
permitted the Priesthood unto women, seeing that through a supposed necessity
you agree that a part of the Ministry should be discharged by them. You have
gone on further: for this express manner of Baptism that was appointed by
Christ Jesus, in the name of the three persons of the most blessed Trinity, is
changed: and you have taught that Baptism is lawfully minished although it
were used after this form In the book named Manip. sacerd. part. 1. page 20.
Baptiso te in nomine Patris and filij. and Spiritus Sancti, and Beatae
virginis Mariae. The Marcosians in the administration of Baptism, used some
Hebrew and strange words, that the hearers might be astonished thereat (as
Ireneus Iren. l. 1. cap. 8.
writes) and namely this Syrian word Etphethah. You do worse: for not only in
the administration of Baptism, but in your whole service you speak strange
languages, and mingle the same with certain words, that amongst a thousand
Priests, there is not one that can pronounce them well, let be to understand
them. This spittle, this saliue, and holy water Sic Ebionitae aqua lustrali se
purificabant. August. haer 9. Epiph. hares. 30.
are of their inventions, and of your imitations.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Lords Supper.
AS the holy Apostles received it from our Lord, so have they delivered the
same unto us, and so will we keep it. We will not enter in discourse touching
that which may be said and written of the Eucharists, our intention is only to
declare unto you, that you have borrowed from the Heretics, or the Heretics
from you, many things that belong not to the institution of this Sacrament.
Ioh. Scotus In 4. Sentent.
says, that the Priest having an intention to consecrate, saying the five
words, upon all the bread that is in the market, and upon all the wine that is
in the celler, immediately thereafter, all the bread and wine is changed into
the natural body and blood of Christ Jesus. I know none of the Heretics that
believed this transubstantiation of the bread: touching the wine, the Marcites
(as Epiphanius Epiph. hares. 34
reports) did Marcites.
assure themselves, that the grace of God powered the blood of Christ into their
cup: and Marcus their schoolmasters made them believe that he changed the
wine of the Eucharist into blood. You would make the whole world believe, that
there is a transubstantiation of wine into blood made in the Chalice, and that
you may the more easily deceive men, and blind the eyes of the simpler sort,
you bring with you sometimes certain false miracles and illusions. And from
these goodly traditions, some wretched creatures have taken occasion, to
invent this mingling of blood that is drawn from young children, that they may
burn the same with the bread of the Lords holy Supper, as the Cataphrygians,
who (as we read in S. Austin August. l. cont. hares. c. 26. and 64
) did invent a manner of transubstantiation of wine into blood realy and
corporaly. It cannot be unknown to you, that the decree of transubstantiation
was established by two Councels holden at Rome: the one An. 1060.
under Nicolas the second against Berengarius Ego Berengarius did. 2. de
Consecr. Vide glos. in v. Dentibus.
, and the other An. 1070.
under Gregory the seventh: being both provincial, and not general. The most
ancient of them being a thousand years after the Apostles. You would cover the
newness of this doctrine with antiquity, which nevertheless can be but
imaginary. We yield to you antiquity, but such a one as is taken from the
Marcites, and Cataphrygians. The use of leauened or unleavened bread in the
Sacrament was holden a great while to be indifferent in the Church Eusebius. lib.
3. ea. 27. and l. 6. c. 14.
. Wherefore then has Alexander the first of this name, restored the Jewish
ceremony concerning unleavened bread, as if the Sacrament were to be
celebrated after the manner of the Jews? Is not this to follow the doctrine of
the Ebionians, who taught that the ceremonial Law Ebionians.
of Moses was necessary unto salvation? Is not this (I say) to imitate the
same that one Symmachus an Symmachus.
Heretic of Palestina had taught before? The gloss Extrau. de celeb. Miss.
ca. literas in gloss.
of the decretall of Honorius the third, upon the word (fermentato) says that
it is not lawful to use leauened bread, because it is written, Not with old
leaven, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. And in your
gloses Consec. did. 2. Can in sacrament. and ibigloss.
which you have approved and authorized, after the rules whereof the Romish
Church lives and believes, we find that pepper being added to the Sacrament,
marreth not the transubstantiation of the wheat, but contrariwise that leaven
marreth the same. And in this how differ you from the Heretic Sabacius
Sabatius.
Hist. tripart. l. 9. c. 37. and lib. 11. cap. 5.
who used unleavened bread only and no other? Nicephorus Niceph. lib. 18. cap.
53.
speaking of the Heresies of the Armenians that were followers of the
Theopaschites says thus: The same in the Eucharist use unleavened bread, and
not that which is leauened. And Armenians.
in the chapter following; The ancient Law giuers (says he) do wrongfully
boast themselves that the famous Gregory Bishop of Armenia did leave unto them
those ceremonies by tradition: chiefly, the oblation of unleavened bread, and
the cup without water: because that in like manner in that mystical supper of
our Lords, the sacrifice was without leaven, and the wine pure: which things
notwithstanding the Catholic Church does not allow in any ways. Concerning us,
we do not impugn the mixtion of the Chalice, but only the condemning of such
as do not mingle it. For we have always acknowledged that the most ancient
Fathers used wine mingled with water in the Sacrament: and we read not that
the Churches of Armenia were ever excommunicated for that, to wit, for using of
pure wine. Behold what he has said here: Furthermore like as the Messalians
dipped the Messalians.
bread in the wine: so also in the breaking of your Eucharist, which is done
after that the Agnus Dei is sung, you mingle the third part thereof with the
supposed blood of your Chalice. The council Sess. 13.
of Constance has taken away the cup from the communion which you term
Laicall. The Manicheans Manicheans.
also used but one sort in the celebration of their Eucharist, as Leo Leo.
sermon. 4. de Quadrag.
and Gelasius Bishops of Rome do witness, and of this last Gratian, makes
mention in his rapsodies In 3. part de consecr. did. 2. ca. relatum, and ca.
comperimus.
The same Manicheans Vide August. epist. 19. and contra Faustum. lib. 42. cap.
29.
maintained, that all things which appeared outwardly in Christ, were but mere
accidents. May it not be that you have learned from those, that the form,
figure, color and weight of the bread remain still in the Sacrament without
their own substance? There remains nothing fit to finish your picture, but
to mingle cheese with bread, as the Artotirites did

CHAP. XIV. Of Purgatory.
PVrgatorie springs from the heresy of the Catharians, against whom
Epiphanius has Catharians.
learnedly written. And although Purgatory Epiph. tom. 1. l. 2. In eadem
haeresi fuit Manes. Vide August co^t. Fanst. lib. 20. cap. 21.
be the chief patrimony of the Romish Clergy, and the only foundation of
Masses, yet it is unknown to the Church that was under the Law, to the Church
that is under Grace, being without all warrant, without any likelihood, how
little so ever it be.

CHAP. XV. Of Miracles.
THe Donatists would have proved their errors Donatists.
by Miracles: which appears in Saint Austins writes. Justin Martyr and
Athenagoras say that those be Heretics, that work Miracles in their Churches,
and that to do Miracles, is Chrysostom in Mat. cap. 24. hom. 49.
no sign and demonstration of Gods true service. S. Chrysostom says: There
can be no other proof of Christianity then the holy Scriptures, the signs are
now abolished, and will rather be found among false Christians.

CHAP. XVI. Of Praying to Saints.
We do honor and worship the Saints, but it is in imitation. This is S.
Austins August de vera relig. cap. vlt. Item cont. Faust. Manich. lib. 20. cap.
21. Vult sanctos honorari cultu dilectionis and societatis: caritate and non
seruitute, de vera relig. cap. vlt.
maxim, honor andi sunt propter imitationem. We do not call upon them, nor
pray to them that they may become intercessors and advocates for us at Gods
hands, we retain and follow only their good life and doctrine, by holding and
reputing them blessed in heaven. We know that worship belongs to God only,
all manner of creatures being excluded. We will not produce your arguments
here, neither yet our defenses, we should never have done: I will ask you
this only, how can you with an upright conscience deny the harmony that you
have with the Melchisedechians, and Sethians Melchisedechians Sethians.
who worshipped the Saints as you do? And where can you show that this
invocation has been taught in the Primitive Church, or yet many ages after?
Verily in the Primitive Church, all gifts were thought to proceed from Jesus
Christ alone, no mention was made either of Saints or Angels, contrariwise it
was the doctrine of Heretics, of the Basilidians, and of the Ophites, who
Basilidians. Ophites.
called on the Angels in their operations, as if the earth had been divided
among them, and assigned unto them certain names, and sought to appaise them
by certain composed forms, namely this (as Iren l. 1. c. 23.
Ireneus writes) O tu Angele, ab, a, te, or, opere tuo. Who had in like manner
their pretended Saints, Judas, Cain, Esau and such others, unto whom
nevertheless Ireneus does not oppose either Abel, or S. Peter, or Abraham and
the like, but only our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone is received in his Church.
We cannot find therefore any footesteps of this invocation in the venerable
antiquity, or if you have remarked any such, our writers have refuted them,
and have rased the foundation thereof. For the Fathers have maintained, that to
call upon God, we must no ways have recourse unto dead men, neither yet admit
any creatures (how worthy soever they be) to be mediators and intercessors, but
Christ Jesus alone. Which is made manifest by S. Ambrose Amb. lib. de Isaac and
beata vita.
: Jesus Christ (says he) is our mouth, by which we speak to the Father, our
eye, by which we behold the Father: our right hand, by which we offer up our
selves to God: without whose intercession there is no access to God, either
for us, or for any of the Saints. S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 2. de Cananta.
Tell me woman, why have thou been so bold as to address thy self to Christ
Jesus, thou that art a sinner, and a lewd person? I know well what I do said
she. Behold the prudence of this woman. She prays not to James: She
addresseth not her self to Peter: She has no regard of the whole company of
the Apostles: She has sought for no Mediator, but in stead of all these, she
has made repentance her companion, and thus has taken her journey to the
sovereign fountain. For (says she) for that cause Vide Chrysostom. hom. de
promot. Euangel. Item hom. 4. de poenitent. Item hom. 43, in Genesis
has he descended, for that he has taken flesh on him, for that he has
become man, to the end that I also might be bold to speak to him. S. Austin
August. contr. Parm. l. 2. c. 8.
says: The Christians in their prayers do recommend themselus each to another.
But he that prays for all no body praying for him, is the true and only
Mediator. And a little after Vide cundem August. lib. 10. confess c. 42. Item
lib. 4. ad Bonif. cap. 4. Item lib. de moribus Ecclesiae c. 34 Item. epist. 44.
ad Maximum.
If S. Paul were intercessor, the other Apostles should be so likewise, and by
this means, there should be many intercessors. Which could not agree with
that which is said, That there is one Mediator between God and man. And
August. in Joan tract. 84.
upon S. John, he adds, that it is not lawful to worship any Saints, neither
yet to consecrate Altars and Chapels unto them. Cyrillus Cyril. lib. 16. in
Joan. and 7.
, If we would have the Father to grant our requests, we must pray in the name
of the Savior. What shall we say farther? Clement Alexandrin, Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Ireneus and the most ancient speak nothing thereof. And if you
will not believe me, at least you will believe Leo Leo epistola. 82 ad
Palestinos.
, that was Bishop of Rome, who plainly affirms, that neither the death, nor
the merits of Saints, are able to help us a whit to obtain remission of our
sins, but only the merits of Jesus Christ. And those passages of the ancient
Fathers being so clear and manifest, are withal grounded upon the testimonies
of the Scripture Joan. 14. v. 6. 1. Timoth. 2. v. 5. 1. Joan. 2. v. 1. Epiph.
tom. 3. l. 3. haeres. 59.
. Epiphanius reproves the invocation of Saints and Angels as a vilde heresy,
and an abuse of Satan and of the old Dragon, and says, that in no ways we
must perfume their images with sweet incense. The Mileuitane and Africane
Councels Look the first tome of the Councels, page 482. or thereby.
have taught the same, and have wholly overthrown that which you hold
concerning their merits and works of superrogation. We have already spoken of
those that called on the Angels, whom S. Austin August. lib. de haer. ad quod
vult Deum. baer. 93. Angeliques.
for this cause called Angeliques I sid. Orig. lib. 8. cap. 5.
, a title that belongs unto you as well as unto them. For who knows not
after what manner you worship and serve them? You ought to call to mind that
which that holy Father writes August. lib. de vera relig. c. 55. Cainitae,
Angelos affectuum moderatores statuebant. Nicet. lib. cap. 11.
August. lib. 1. cont. Maximum. Arrian. Episcopu^
. We honor the Angels by charity, and not by service: and we build no
temples unto them: for they will receive no such honor at our hands. We will
add moreover to the premises another goodly sentence of this same Doctorq,
but that we may be brief, we will send the Reader to the place that is cited
in the Margent. S. Hierome Hieronym. ad Riparium.
says, that we ought neither to worship Relics, nor Angels, nor any
creature: Which was the same that S. Athanase Athan. sermon. 3. cont. Arrian.
Iren. lib. 2 c. 58. Ethnophrones.
had written before: and S. Ireneus yet before him. The Ethnophrones did
celebrate birth days, like as you do the nativity of your Saints, and the
days of their death, and from these your greater and smaller feasts have taken
their beginning, which we acknowledge to be the marks of Antichrist only,
such as be condemned by S. Paul Col. 2. v. 16.
, and by the Decree De consecr. did. 3. Can. peruenit.
it self under the particularitie of Satterday, thought by some persons to be
a vacation day. And the same Heretics (as Bodin In his Demonomanie.
reports) had their enchantments, as in old times you had the book of
exorcismes upon the canonisation of Saints.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Virgin Mary.
THese are your ordinary reproaches, that we contemn the Virgin Sic occinitur
in Ecelesia Romana: Midiatrix hominum: Tuspes certa miseriru^. Ve^e matter
orphanorum: Tu leuamen oppress rum: Medicamen infirmorum Omnibuses omnia:
Nostra expias scelera.
Marie, notwithstanding that we have often protested that we will not
diminishany thing that belongs to the rights and prerogatives of this holy
Virgin. We acknowledge her to be the mother of God, the instrument of the
reparation of mankind, a Virgin both before and after her delivery, and we
defend her with the holy Fathers against Heluidius and his associates. It is
not against her that we labor, but against your Doctors, which utter most
horrible blasphemies against this Virgin. Gabriel Biel Gabr. Biel. lect. 80.
has been bold to write thus; The heavenly Father has given the half of his
kingdom unto the most blessed Virgin Mary, Queen of the heavens, which was
figured in Esther, unto whom Assuerus promised the one half of his Kingdom.
And for as much as the heavenly Father holds justice and mercy to be the
riches of his kingdom, he has reserved justice for himself, and has
resigned over mercy to the Virgin Look the Psalter of the Virgin Marie,
printed at Paris by Nicolas du Fosse, in S. James street, at the sign of the
golden Vessel, in Anno. 1600. 1601. and reprinted in An. 1602 with approbation
of the Sorbone, and the privilege of the Court.
Marie. Can we imagine any thing more abominable then this? In your
Confiteor, like as in the form of your excommunication, there is nothing
performed without the consent and approbation of the Virgin, and without her
the Lord may not use his mercy and justice in the Church. You have composed a
Psalter for her, that cannot be red without horror: for all that David has
spoken of God, is changed and attributed unto her: and the names (Lord, and
Eternal) are changed into that of (Lady.) The songs of the Prophets, of
Simeon, and those that are attributed to S. Athanase, and to S. Ambrose, have
felt the same Metamorphosis. It is your ordinary prating to call her Queen of
heaven Breuiar. Romans in hymn. ad B. Virg. Vide D. Antonin. hist. part. 3. tit.
23 Theodoricu^ Appian. vitae S. Dominici lib. 2. Surium de probatis sanctorum
historijs tom. 4. August. 5. Martyr. Romans Oct. 7. In canticis, Salve Regina
etc. Et Regina coeli etc.
, Lady of the Angels, Mistress of the world, the gate of heaven, the star of
the sea, the fountain of mercy, the fountain of grace and pardon, our life,
and salvation unto all those that put their confidence in her. And Bernardin In
Marial.
de bustis; We must appeal (says he) from the Court of Gods justice unto the
court of his mothers mercy. And notwithstanding you ought to have learned of S.
Bernard, Bernard. Epist. 174. Chrysostom. hom. 45. in Mat. and 20. in Joan.
pronu^ciauit virginem Mariam peccasse.
that she takes no pleasure in these false honors: That her chief honor is
to be saved through the blood of her Son. Nevertheless you prepare temples
for her, garlands, bankets, sweet cakes, sacrifices, and a thousand other
toys, as if she required such flattery and adoration. You have ordained some
of the principal feasts for her: and have converted this feast that was
ordained by Iustinia^, and was dedicated unto the memory of the receiving of
Christ Jesus by Simeon, into the feast of the purification of the virgin Tamen
Bernardue Mariam, vt Dauidem et alios vniuersos ex Adamo natos, in peccato
co^ceptam tradit. Epist. 174.
Mary. The feast of the annunciation was established the 819. year of the
assumption the 1273. year of the visitation the year 1380. of the conception
the 1439. year, and of the presentation the year 1484. Greg. 13. etiam
instituit Festum solemn Rosarij. B. Virginis.
. And it is most wonderful that the Apostles and those famous men of the
primitive Church did not foresee thus much, to the end that the elect might not
be frustrated of that which you hold to be a part of Gods feruice. Moreover you
have granted to the virgin Mary a certain adoration, which you call
hyperdulia, that is to say, above service. Is not this to renew the heresy of
the Collyridians, which Epiph. lib. 3. tom. 2. haer. 79.
Epiphanius abhorred so much? Is not this to imitate Collyridians.
those women of Arabia, that brought in these vanities, as to sacrifice unto
her a tart or sweet cake, and to assemble themselves in her name? Let us look
on the text I beseech you. Certain women (says he) do prepare a chariot, and
a four square chair, and covering it with a sheet at certain solemn times
of the year, during the space of some days, they present bread, and do offer
it in the name of Mary, every one taking a part of the bread, as I have partly
made mention hereof, in the epistle which I wrote to Arabia. And now I will
speak of this heresy, after that I have called on the name of God, I shall
produce according to my power such reasons as shall be sufficient to refute the
same, to the end that having plucked up by the root this heresy, that is the
cause of images, we may through Gods assistance, ridsome persons of this
madness. Behold what the Doctor has said; and if those women offered biggins,
the Jesuits offer themselves, witness this form of speech that they use, O
Lady I do acknowledge thee to be my mistress: And in their rule, Ego me voueo
tibi in perpetuum seruum. And Thomas of Aquin Thom. Aqu. in 3. part. summae
quast. 27. art. 5.
writes, that Marie had the fullness of all graces, which is as much as to
make her equal with God, and like unto Christ Jesus. Contrariwise Epiphanius
Loco supra citato.
says; Verily, the body of Mary was holy without all contro uersie, but yet
it is not God Iudicet lector number Diua virgo sit loco Dei hoc ca^tico, quod ante
co^cionem occinebat Archiepisc. Patracensis in Council. Later. Sess. 10. an.
Dom. 1515 sub Leone X. Omniu^ splender, decus and perenue Virginu^ lumen,
genitriu superni, Gloria humani generis Maria Vnicae nostri, Sola tu virgo
dominaris astris, sola tu terrae maris atque coeli Lumen, inceptis fau^as
rogamus, Inclyta nostris. Vt. queam sac^os reserare sensue, Qui latent chartu
nimium seueris, Iugredi et celsis, duce te, benigna Moenia terrae. Sequentes
versus leguturin porticu Mariae Magdalenae Romae. Tertius Eugenius Romanus Papa
benignus, Obtulit hoc munus virgo Maria tibi. Quae matter Christi fieri merito
mernisti, Salua perpetua virginitate tibi. ^svia, vita, salus, totiuagloria
mundi, Daveniam culpis virginitatis honos.
Without all doubt she was a Virgin and honored, but she was not given unto
us that we might worship her; yea, she her self adoreth him that was borne of
her according to the flesh, but who descended from heaven out of his Fathers
bosom. Herein the Gospel is our warrant, saying; What have thou to do with
me woman, my hour is not yet come. Now let us consider, adds Epiph anis, for
what cause Christ Jesus speaks so to his mother? He calls her woman, to the
end that none should think her to be super-excellent, prophesying as it were
what things were to fall out on earth concerning sects and heresies; to the end
that some that admired her too much, might not fall into this heresy, and the
fanfies thereof. Afterward he says: God who is the word, bath taken flesh of
the holy Virgin, yet not to the end that she might be gilded Tamen Pontificij
ad Mariam accommodant quod diuinae tantum sapientiae competit, ipsi scilicet
Christo; Dominus possedit me in initio viarum suarum, antequam quicquid faceret
a principio; ab aeterno ordinata sum etc. Pro. 8. v. 22.
with gold, and that he might make her a Goddess, but to the intent that we
might not offer in her name. And in the end: that the Father, the Son, the
holy Ghost might be worshipped, end ^one might worship Marie, neither man nor
woman whatsoever, and that none might say, we honor the Queen of Heaven. We
might copy out here a great many more goodly sentences, which this Father
Epiph. lib. 3. haeres. Hereticos nomine Collyridianes panem (sine dubia
sacramentalem) in medium producere et cir^ esse refertin honorem B. virginis
Mariae.
has declaimed against those persons: but to eschew prolixitie, we shall note
that the maine scope of all is this, that he calls those images that were
appointed for the Virgin, the fortress of the Devil, the service of the dead,
and that he abhors them in the same terms that the Prophets did the Idols
of Baal, giving to them the name of adultery, and applies all that properly
against the adoration of the holy virgin: he gives the name of heresy to this
abuse, he denies that the Scriptures have made mention thereof. He brings
his argument from the quick to the dead: that if we ought not to worship Elias
while he is yet alive, how much less then when he is dead. Thereafter he
concludes, If God will not have us to adore the Angels, how much less the
Virgin? One Petrus Cnapheus a most pernicious heretic, brought in the
invocation of the holy virgin Petrus Cnapheus.
in the service, and (as Niceph. Ecclesiast. histor. lib. 15 cap. 26. 28.
Nicephorus witnesses) said that in enery prayer the Virgin Mary ought to be
called on, and her divine power worshipped. He lived under the Emperor Zeno,
about the year 470. and was condemned in the fifth general Council, which
condemns you likewise after the same manner.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Images.
IT were to enter into a labyrinth if we should write all that we know
concerning Images Sic Conc. Eliber. Placuit picturas in Ecclesiae esse non
debere, ne quod coliter in parietibus pingatur.
; Images, I say, which you honor so much, which you adore so much. And that
institution of Pius Vide comment. Pij 2. lib. 8.
the second, Pope of Rome shall be my warrant, by which he will have the
Veronique to be Vide libru^ orat. inscriptum Antidotarius animae, vbi ad
Veronica^ oration sic incipit, Salve sancta facies nostri redemptoris etc. Hanc
deuote dicentib. concessa numerantur december millia dieru^ indulgentiarum.
shown in pomp, at Rome upon Easter day, and the people to call out loud with
tears and weeping, for mercy at her hands. And who would not abhor the
consecration of the Image of the holy Virgin, which is practiced to these ends,
and in these terms: That, whosoever shall in this image worship the mother of
mercy, shall obtain pardon for all his sins, both of commission or omission,
shall merit present grace, and salvation to come? Blasphemies that were
unknown to the antiquity, that were invented in the most obscure ages of the
Church. And how should the Fathers avouch the adoration of Images Synod. Ephesians.
epist. ad Theodos. et Vale^t. Imper. c. 67. Et act 7. Nic. synod. epist. ad
Constant. et Iren. dicit se fidenter anathematisare Nestorij idolatriam in
homine.
, when they approve not the adoration of Christ in his humanity, as it is
simply considered in its self. They make war against the Arrians. The
Nestorians, who did separate the two natures, are called Anthropolatres. Those
holy inuectiues are to be seen in S. Athanas cont. Arria. orat. 1. col. 114.
Athanase, Gregory of Greg. Nyss. in orat. in laud Basilij. Synod. Ephesians. 1. in
epist. ad Theod. et Valent. cap. 67 page 119.
Nysse, and in the first synod of Ephesus. Now we ought to remarke that the
origin of these great abuses must be sought from a farther beginning. And
those your progenitors lived many ages ago, yea, in the time of the Apostles,
as it may be seen in that great magician Simonians. August de haeres.
Simon, who made his followers worship his image, and that of his whore Silene.
The Franciscanes Ederus in Babil. page 5.
adore the image of S. Frauncis of Asisa, and the Dominicks Iren. lib. 1. c.
20. Epiph. haeres. 20. Marcelina.
that of Dominicus the Spanyard. In like manner a woman named Marcelina, of
whom S. Austin August de haeres. haeres. 7. Basilidions.
makes mention, adored the images of Jesus, and of S. Paul, and offered sweet
incense to them. The Basilidians, besides the adoration of images, added
farther certain inuo cations and enchantments, as Ireneus Iren lib. 1. c. 23
writes. You do after the same manner, by attributing to images certain hid
virtues, and by offering candels unto them. The Gnostickes and Gnostickes.
Carpocratians esteemed very much certain pictures Carpocratians.
of Christ: and with his images and S. Paul's, had also those of Pythagoras,
which they perfumed with incense and worshipped, as Iren. lib. cap. 3. and 24.
Epiph haeres. 27. August. ad quod ^^lt Deum haeres. 7. tit. 6. Damascen in fine
lib. de haeres. Vide Niceph. lib. 18. cap. 53.
Ireneus, Epiphanius, and Austin do write. And like as they believed that
Pilate had caused to make the image of Christ, while he was yet on earth: which
the Simonians kept very carefully: so do you believe that S. Luke made the
pourtraiture of our Lord Jesus Christ, not once, but often, not of one fashion,
but of diverse. Those which you have at Rome in diverse Temples, in Loretto, in
Montferrat, and other places, unto which you attribute greater virtue then to
others, which you make with a stern countenance, and worship in your temples,
declare that you are Carpocratians, of whom Charles Carolus Magnus li 4. de
imaginib. cap. 25. page 636.
the great, King of France spares not to say, that S. Austin reckoned among
their heresies, not only the worshipping of Pythagoras and Homers images, but
even those of Christ Jesus, and of S. Paul. Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 18.
witnesses that he saw those images which the Carpocratians kept and
worshipped in their closets. And it shall not be amiss, to set down here
formally that which Epiphamus Epiph haeres. 27
writes against them. They have (says he) certain images set forth with
colors, yea, and some of gold, of silver, or of some other matter, which they
say are of Jesus made by Pilate. Now they keep these images in secret, and
have withal those of certain Philosophers, as of Plato, Aristotle, and
others, with which they fellow those of Jesus: and having rancked them thus,
they adore them with the like mystery that the Gentiles observe in their
services. They have (says Ireneus Iren. l. 1. c. 24.
speaking to the Gnostickes) certain images, whereof some are painted, the
rest are made of some other fashion, etc. You ought to call to remembrance that
Epiphanius in the Epistle written to John, Bishop of Jerusalem, casts out of
the Church or Oratory the image of Christ, or of a Saint, by tearing asunder
the veil wherein it was drawn: and thereupon writes, that by no means we
ought to suffer such blasphemies and sacrileges in the Church. The Council of
Ments holden in An. 813. condemns your images, and before it Rubr in Epist.
ad Romans cap. 1. August. epist. 49. and in epist. 113. Lactant. lib. 2. de
Instit. Det. cap. 2. Origin. li. 4. cont. Celsum. Clemens in Protreptico. Oros.
cont. gentes. Imaginem suam fieri simpliciter vetat Deus, Deu. 4. v. 12. 15.
16. Vide Clement. Alex. Strom. lib. 1. and 5. Originem cont. Celsum lib. 7.
Eusebius. Euangel. praeparat lib. 3. Athanasiu^ orat. cont. gregales Sabellij.
Hieronym. in Isaiam. c. 40. August de fide and symb. c. 7. Theodoret. in Deuteronomy.
quaest. 1. Damascen. orthod. fidei l. 4. cap. 17. Constant Synod 2. act. 6.
tom. 4. Nicetum lib. de imagine. Niceph. hist. cecles. l. 18. c. 53. In Bib.
vulg. edit. Sixti v. et Clem. 8 edit. 1. in folio Romae ex Apostolica Typogra.
phia Vaticana.
Serenus, Bishop of Marseille. S. Ambrose, S. Austin, Lactantius, Origin,
Clement Alexandrin, and Orosius write all with one consent, that God will not
be worshipped by any representation of a painted or graven image. And what then
will become of your pictures of the Trinity, sometimes with three heads, and
three faces: sometimes with a triple Crown, and set up like a Pope, holding a
crucifix in his bosom, with a Pigeon flittering above: sometimes in likeness
of a God of mercy, having both his hands and feet tied fast together? The
Romish Missals and Breuiaries are commonly adorned with the Picture of the
Trinity in the first page, as the edition of the Bible is, which was set forth
by Sixtus the fifth, and Clement the eight, which does solemnise the same at the
very entry. The Fathers teach no such thing, but contrariwise, as S. Basil
Basil. in Hexam. hom. 10.
, who says, that God cannot be represented: that we ought not to imagine any
likeness: that he has no other image but his only Son, who is the light of
his glory. And S. Austin Aug. epist. 222.
, we must (says he) separate the Trinity from all bodies and corporal
shapes. Item: That if the Trinity be invisible after such sort, that we cannot
see it, not so much as in spirit: we ought far less to be of any such opinion,
as to think that it resembles bodily things, or the images of bodily things.
Then he concludes: when thou think on these things, although thou call to
mind the bodily shape, chase it away, for sake it, fly from it. Nicephorus
Niceph. lib. 18. cap. 53. Armenians.
speaking of the heresy of the Armenians, They make (says he) images of the
Father, and of the holy Ghost: which is a most absurd thing. For images are of
bodies that may be seen and comprehended, and not of invisible things, and
such as cannot be comprehended, not so much as in our understanding. Now this
invention of picturing God, has not proceeded from the Armenians only, but
also from the Anthropomorphites, who were likewise called Hi absque tropo
acceperunt quae, de oculis, sacie manibusque Dei per tropum scripta sunt.
August. lib. de haeres. 50.
Vadians, Anthropomorphites. Vadians.
and had also this custom to picture God the Father, in the likeness of an
old man with a gray beard, as S. Austin writes, and as it may be seen in the
annotations of Beatus Rhenanus upon Tertullians Book against the Valentinians,
about the end. In the mean season the excuses of the ancient idolaters are
yours, there is no difference. Those denied Lactant. de Instit Dei l. 2. c. 3.
Clemens rec^gn. lib. 1. Chrysostom. orat. 12. de primae Dei notitia ait Ethnicos
asseuerasse summu^, primum et maximu^ Deum a se in simulachris ex auro and
argento and cbore factis coli.
that they worshipped images, but said that they did contemplate the likeness
of that which they worshipped. We adore (said they) visible images in honor of
the invisible God. Clement in refuting of them, says, that these are the words
of a Serpent, that speaks by their mouth. Why then, says he, do you not
honor God, rather by doing good to the poor, that are his image, then to
run after wood, stones, and things that have no life. But from whence has
this evil come into Christianity? It is because the ignorant Pastors found
it more easy to feed their flocks with husks then with bread: with pictures
then with Scriptures. And images being thus once received into the Churches,
who would think it any thing strange, that the people being newly come out of
Paganism, did transport their superstitions with them, and helped both with
tooth and nail to advance the business? But yet some good Bishops were found,
which did oppose themselves against those broils, yea some even with the zeal
of Ezechias, by bruising of them to pieces. As touching those sloathfull
Pastors, they did then even as they do yet still at this day, following the
Manicheans, of whom Manicheans.
S. Austin August. contra Adimantum cap. 13. tom. 6.
writes: They will have men to believe that they are favorers of images, that
so they may purchase the favor of the Gentiles unto their foolish and unhappy
sect. In a word, we find in your images the Hellenisme, the doctrine of Simon
Magus, of the Carpocratians, of the Basilidians, the Christianocategorians, and
others your forefathers.

CHAP. XIX. Of Relics.
THe invention of relics is not from God. In S. Ambroses time only men began
to seek after Relics, to transport them from place to place, and to
recommend them to people. The testimony which Ruffinus Ruffinus lib. 1. cap.
35.
and Socrates Socrates lib. 3. cap. 18.
, Ecclesiastical writers, render of the body of Babilas, martyr (as we have
written in the conformities of Gentilisme) makes us believe that Satan is the
author of Relics. And indeed, the Fathers that were assembled in Council at
Constantinople, in the time of Leo the third, concluded, that the adoration of
Relics was mere Idolatry. Yet notwithstanding you make ostentation of your
Relics with great pomp, and are not ashamed to place among them, shoes,
hair, combs, shirts, nails, and other jewels, whereof our writers have set
down whole Catalogues in their Print books. Is not this to imitate the
Sampseans, Sampseans.
who kept the spittle, and dust of two women's feet, whom they adored, thinking
that these were fit to cure diseases? Thus has Epiphanius Eplph. haeres. 53
written. And like as the Heliotropites honored Heliotropites.
such herbs, as turned about with the Sun: so do you embrace every thing,
yea, even to the tail of the ass, that carried Christ Jesus to Jerusalem, and
is kept at Genua, and the myse that eat your host, which (if like good Cats
you do once catch) you make relics thereof. S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 2
de Machab. Item hom. 43. in Mat.
reproves and condemns those Relics: I will send you to those passages
which I have noted in the Margent.

CHAP. XX. Of the Cross.
WHen we speak of the cross, we mean not of the cross of wood, and of the
sign of the cross Imagines crueis latria coli debere asserit. Tho. Aqu. part
3. quaesi. 25. art. 3. and 4. Quam energeiam huic signo tribuant vide Rabanu^
Maurum de Instit Cleric. lib. 1. cap. 27. De consecr. did. 4 Can. Postea. De
consecr. did. 5 Can, Nunquam.
. For when our Lord says, that we ought to take up our cross and follow him,
we must not understand this sign that is in wood, as if we were to carry it on
our shoulders, but rather that we may crucify our affections under the
commandment of Christ Jesus, as also that we may undergo all manner of
crosses and afflictions for his names sake. By the cross therefore, we
understand the death and passion of our Lord, and not this cross whereupon
Christ Jesus suffered death. For the Ecclesiastical history assures us, that
Helena divided the same in two parts, whereof the greater she left in
Jerusalem, enclosed within a silver case, and sent the other to the Emperor
her son, who placed the same in his statue that was set upon a pillar of
Porphyre in the midst of the market place of Constantinople. The Pagans
Minutius Felixi^. Octau. page 18.
mocked this adoration: and Caecilius reproved the Christians for so much as
they worshipped the doleful wood of the cross, and honored that which they
had deserved, and ought to have suffered. But what does Octauius answer unto
them? Behold what Arnobius Arnob. lib. 8. cont. gentes.
says, We adore not the cross, neither yet desire the same. S. Ambr. in.
Ocat. suneb. Theodosii.
Ambrose says, Helena the Empress found out the title, and adored the King
and not the wood, because it is an heathenish error, and an ungodly vanity.
And the history of Epiph in epist. ad Dan. Episcopum Hier^sol.
Epiphanius, that broke and bruised the image of the crucifix that was placed
in the entry of the temple, is manifest. You adore the cross Siclignum cru^is
i^uocantes clament Papistae, salua caterua^ in tuis laudibus ^o^gregatam. Bre^.
i. R. man. in Fast invent. et exalt. S Crucis.
plainly. These be your words, O crux, aue, spes vnica. There is a verse in
your breuiaries, Crucem tuam adoramus, Domine. And in that are you not
Armenians, who adored Armenians Niceph. hist. l. 18 cap 53. En. been i^^ in
Panoplia.
the cross of our Lord, and for that cause were called Staurolaters?
Tertullian and S. Basil say indeed that this manner of making the sign of the
cross In altero duorum celcherrimorum templorum vrtis Turonensis, inter
reliquias c^ux erat au^o bducta, acatem habensilligatum, cui. artificiosissime
insculpta spectabatur Venucum Marie and Cupidine. Ista c^ux ob addactu rubri
ligni finstulum, quod de vera Chrsti cruce essedicebant, augustissimis festis
adorabatur a populo deuote imagines osculante.
in the air has proceeded from an Apostolic tradition. But from what
tradition I beseech you? From the Euangell of Nicodemus, where we read those
pleasant fables, that Charinus and Lentius being risen again, make the sign
of the cross on their tongues: That Christ being in the Lymbus made the same
sign upon Abraham and the rest: and that he made this sign on the hands of
the good thief, that he might show the same to the Porter of Paradise, in case
he would not suffer him to enter.

CHAP. XXI. Of Marriage, and Celibate.
I Will begin at Mantuan. li. 1. fast. Coelebs Gracam habet originem, (...)
est carens concubitu. Joseph. Scalig. Castigationib. in Pestum.
Mantuans verses.

Tutius esse volunt qua lex diuina sinebat
Isse via, veterumque sequi vestigia Patrum,
Quoru^ vita fuit melior, cum coniuge, quam nunc
Nostra sit, exclusis thalamis, and coniugis vsu.
What ample matter I could find here to convince you (Sirs) that forbid that
order and vocation of persons to marry, which is in the first degree of
holiness and religion among you. Behold your prating here: That it is an
unseemly thing that those which ought to be the temple of our Lord, should be
the slaves of beds and uncleanness. You guard your selves, with the Councels
of Ancyra, of Neocaesarea, of Arles, of Elibera, and which are prouincials,
which nevertheless were ruled by the first general Council of Nyce. I
abhor these blasphemies that your Canons spew out against marriage: That Can.
decernimus did. 28.
it is nothing else but the filth of carnal copulation, a reproachful
uncleanness: When Can. quia aliquanti did. 82.
marriage is called obscaenae cupiditates: When Can. Proposuisti. ead did.
married Bishops are termed contaminati, carnali concupiscentia: When Can.
plurimos sacerdotes. did. ead.
again they are called Sectatores libidinum, and praeceptores vitiorum. The
Popes, Syricius and Innocent 33 Quaest. 4. can. Vir.
call marriage pollution. Gregory surnamed the great, would not suffer such
married persons to enter into the Church, as had lain together the night before,
unless they had first bin purged and washed: and grounded himself upon an
ancient custom that had been used in Rome, and it may be that it is that,
whereof the heathenish Poet makes mention.

Haec Persius Sat. 2.
sancte vt poscas tyberino in gurgite mergis
Mane caput bis terque, and noctem flumine purgas.
And what manner of songs be these but of owls and scratchowles, fowls that
are ominous? And what shall become of so many great and worthy persons, that
have deserved so well of the Church, who were married? S. Hilarie Bishop Mant.
fast. lib. 1. de Hilario: Non nocuit tibi progenies, non obfuit vxor, Legitimo
coniuncta thoro, etc.
of Poictiers was married, Oceanus Numidicus, Seuerus, Restitutus, Chaeremon,
Philogonius, Apollinaris, Synesius, being all renowmned married Bishops and
Pastors. Gregory Nazianzene Greg. Nazianz. defunere patris orat. 28.
was a Bishops son. Item, Gregory of Nysse, brother to S. Basile was
married, as Nicephorus Niceph. lib. 11. cap. 19.
writes, and among the modernes, Baptista Mantuanus Mant. in fast. lib. 1.
Praesule patre satus, nam tunc id iura sincbant, Pastorale pedum gessi post
funera patris. Saturnillus.
. And when you thus detest marriage, is it not to raise Saturnillus from death
again, who abhorred the same as a villainous fact, and said, that matrimony
proceeded of Epiph. tom. 2. lib. 1. haeres. 23. and 25. August haeres. 1.
Satan, and not of God? And that accusation is notable, which Epiph. haer. 63.
Origenists.
Epiphanius frames against the Origenists grandfathers to the Friars and
Nuns of our time: They banish marriage Costerus Ench. cap. 15. prop. 9. ait in
sacerdotibus tolerabilius esse adulteriu^, matrimonis. Idemdocet Mare^millanus
tract. Gallico de commodis and incommodis matrimonij.
, says he, and not lechery, they pollute their souls and bodies with
filthiness. Some live solitary like Friars, some women also live in desert
places, in the habit of those that lead a solitary life. They are polluted,
accomplishing in themselves their concupiscences, yea, and practicing the
infamous act of Onan, the son of Judah. The chastity, whereof they make
profession, is fained, and bears only the name. Their butt and aim is this,
that women may not conceive and bring forth children, fearing that they might
be diffamed among men: and through the means of this fained chastity, they
would purchase fame and praise unto themselves. Behold, what has caused in the
church this so slanderous and execrable introduction of chastity, afterward
confirmed with so many curses by Gregory the seventh. The Gnosians forbad
their Gnosians.
Priests to marie, as Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 23. Scuerus.
writes. Scuerus, witness Epiphanius Epiph. har. 45. Eustathius.
, calls the woman the workmanship of the Devil, and by consequent that such
as are joined in matrimony, do perform the work of the Devil. Eustathius,
Bishop of Sebaste, of whom the Eustathians Socrates lib. 2. cap. 3. Nicetas
lib. 5. c. 14. sumana Council. in act. Conc. Gangr.
have proceeded, commanded to eschew as an abomination the blessing and
communion of the Priest that had a wife, whom he had taken to be his lawful
spouse when he was a layman. Marcion has borrowed the Marcion.
foundation and ground of his opinion from the Philosophers and Poets, of whom
the greater part thought very hardly of marriage, by calling the conjunction of
sexes in marriage sin: and (as Tertullian Tertul. cont. Marcion.
writes) would not receive any to be baptized that had not forsaken marriage,
and embraced chastity. The Manicheans permitted not marriage unto their elect
and perfect ones Aug. epist. 74. and haeres. 46.
, no more Manicheans.
then you do to your Priests and Friars, whom you hold to be in the estate of
perfection. And like as their elect were forbidden, so they permitted the same
unto those whom they named auditors, whom we may call the laytie. The
Montanists about Montanists.
the year 200. were pleased in outward show to condemn second marriages: but
by such reasons, as did overthrow the first also, from whence we suppone that
your railing accusations have proceeded. Thereafter the Nouatians August.
haeres. 26. Sacrat. hist. lib. 5. cap. 21. Nicet. lib. 4. c. 27.
, which under Nouatians.
a pretense that they would be more pure then others, having caused a great
schism in the Church that they might authorize it the better, did admit none
into their Clergy, that had been twice married: in that therefore being more
reasonable then you are, that forbid 31. q. 1. ca. de his, et c. hac ratione.
the first expreslie. Your answer is, that you debar not all manner of
persons from marriage, and that the Romish Church cannot be blamed in that
respect: which is as much as if you would excuse a murderer, and pronounce him
not guilty, because he had not murdered all the world, but a part only.
Moreover, that you may shun the sentence of the Apostle 1. Timoth. 4.
, who affirms plainly, that the forbidding of marriage is the doctrine of
Satan, you agree in one with the Encratites and Tatianites Epiph. haeres. 46.
and 47.
, who went Encratites. Tatianites.
too plainly to work, saying, that marriage differed nothing from fornication,
and that it proceeded of the Devil. But it is easy to be decided, whether it
be pronounced against the heretic or the heresy; against the person, or
against the thing: and in the end, if such as hold the marriage of a Priest to
be incest, be not condemned by the Apostle. Those of Phrygia Socrat. l. 5. c.
21 Hieracites.
forbad the laytie to Phrygians.
mary, as being more rigorous then others: The Hieracites Epip. haeres. 47.
Dositheans. Adamians.
forbad the same in all manner of persons: the Dositheans praised nothing but
chastity: the Adamians did in like manner, from whom the best common places of
your Jesuits, concerning celibate have proceeded. Consider here then, if Pope
Syricius had more reason for him, then those heretics had, among whom
although there was some that condemned only second marriages, yet so is it that
he has spoken as much in general of the first, and of the second, saying,
that those that are in the flesh cannot please God (so terming married persons.
Out of all this that has been mentioned we may gather that you have imitated
the heretics, and being unwilling in this show of holiness (that is so much
applauded of the common people) to give place to them in any ways, you have
thought it more convenient that married persons should not touch those things,
which you name holy. I cited certain Canons a little before, that forbid, and
exclaim vildly against marriage, and approve chastity. It shall not be
impertinent if we discharge here some others Can. si quis docuerit. did. 28.
Can. si quis discernit. did. ead. Can. si quis propter Deum. did. 30 Can.
Nicena Synod. did. 31. Sozomen. lib. 1. c. 22. Vide tom. 1 Conc. page 263.
against them, which hold and command the contrary. And how will you be able
to accord these flutes? Moreover, why do you not answer directly to the first
Council of Nice, and to the Council of Paphnucius, which was written in the
records? And the Council of Gangra Conc. Gang. cap. 1. 4. 9. 10.
has condemned and excommunicated all those that under the color of
Monastical vows, of Religion or Priesthood, do abandon their wives.
Whereunto agrees the sixth Council of Constantinople, assembled in Trullo. The
proofs going before, do sufficiently declare that you are enemies to
marriage, seeing that which does not hinder piety, is by you termed pollution,
the work of the flesh, adultery, whoredom, and filthiness, which is the
cause why you have degraded those Ecclesiastical persons, that are joined in
matrimony according to Gods institution, and contrariwise such as have
Concubines are not excluded from your communion: witness that which the
Council of Can. is qui. did. 34. Ex Council. Tolet. Can. 17.
Toledo has set down in plain terms. He that has no wife, and in stead of
a wife has a Concubine, ought not to be excluded from the communion: yet after
such manner, that he content himself with one only, whether she be wife or
Concubine. Unto this Canon we will add another Can. Christiano did. ead.
that says: It is not lawful for a Christian to have more or two wives
together, but one only, or otherwise in place of a wife, if he has none, a
Concubine. Which we understand not particularly in regard of Priests, but of
all persons indifferently.

CHAP. XXII. Of Friars.
COncerning Friars, although that supposed Denis Areopagite make mention of
their consecration through tonsure, yet we have learned of S. Hierome Hieronym.
in vita Hilarion. Eremit.
, that Antony the Hermit was the first Friar that dwelt in the Desert, and
Hilarion his disciple the first that gathered them into Monasteries. And this
Antony died in the year 361. Their institution therefore is not so ancient as
it is noysed among you, for concerning that place in Philo Philo de vita
contemplatina. Celibate.
, which you abuse, it has been answered to you that he speaks of the
Esseans, who were Jewish Heretics, and not of the Friars of the Romish Church.
Now to weary you no longer, we shall declare only, how that the Marcion.
Ebionians. Apostolicks. Aerians Encratites. Hieracites. Manicheans. Vide Epiph.
lib. 2. Haeres. 22. and 42. 43. and 67. August. ad quod vult Deum haeres 25.
46. 47. and 53 Item hares. 17. Abeliani licet coniugati and cu^vxor bus
habitarent, ijs tamen non vtebantur. August. haeres. 87
statutes, decrees, rules and devotions that are practiced in the Monasteries
of both sexes were made after no other model, then that of the Heretics, that
lived even in the Primitive Church. We have made mention before of Celibate,
whereunto they bound themselves by a solemn vow: wherefore we shall only
remarke by the way, how that Marcion the great Arch-Hereticke, the Ebionians,
the Apostolicks, the Aerians, the Encratites or Tatians, the Hieracites, the
Manicheansc and others, recommended chastity above all things, would admit
none into their company that were married and lived not chastely, whether it
had been men or women. And from whence then should Celibate have proceeded but
from these good Masters? In what Idea have they received their form, those
vows of chastity that are observed by the Friars, Jesuits and Priests, but in
the school of these good men. It is true that Matrimony, which the Manicheans
had kept back from their elect, was permitted unto those that were auditors
only. And let us search what Epiphanius, Philastrius, Austin and others have
written as well of those ancient Heretics, as of others that have been since,
such as be the Gnostics, the Adamians, Gnostics. Adamians. Priscillianists.
Saturnalians.
the Priscillianists, the Saturnalians, which Nicet l. 1. c. 35. and l. 4. c.
24.
in the mean time wallowed themselves in abominable vilanies, even as your
Friars at this day are both known to do and convinced thereof, we shall find
that they have all with one accord banished and chased holy Matrimony out of
their conuents, although the forbidding thereof be a mark of Antichrist, as
the Prophet Dan. 11. v. 37.
teaches us. Your Canons Cause. 32. qu. 1. can. Integritas.
should have taught you so far, that chastity may be councelled and
recommended only, and not commanded. Remember, I beseech you, that worthy
sentence of S. Bernard Bernard sermon. 66. in Cant.
: Take away Matrimony out of the Church, and you shall fill it with whoredoms,
with incests, and with Sodomitrie. And that great Baldus L. si is qui filiu^
and l. si paterfam.. in arrogationibus. D. de Adopt.
writes, that the Pope did once give license to the Friars to marry for a
certain space, until such time that they had gotten some offspring,
conditionally that immediately thereafter they should take on their hoods
again. Truly in this restraint you oppose your selves to the holy Ghost, to
the commandments of the Gospel, to the example of the Apostles, to the whole
antiquity, to the most approved Fathers and to the best Councels. And it is
pleasant that the Canon Caensors non est cause. 26. quaest. 2
says: Before the Gospel was spredde abroad through the world, many things
were tolerated, which after that a more perfect doctrine has taken place, are
utterly abolished: as for example, Howbe it Priests were not forbidden to
marry, neither by the Law, nor by the Gospel, yea, not by the doctrine of the
Apostles, nevertheless the holy mother the Church has forbidden it
altogether. Concerning that, to have nothing in property, from whence have you
Apostolicks. Apotacticks.
the invention thereof, but from the Apostolicks and Apotacticks August. de
haeres. haeres. 40. Epiph. haeres. 61. Nicet. l. 4. haer. 36 Idem attribuit
Philaster Aerij sectatoribus. Anabaptists.
? The only way to become wealthy, is to possess nothing in property, for
nothing can be given away. And it is mere mockery this counterfeit Monkish
poverty, which hydeth inestimable and princely treasures. And verily we may
say that the Apostolicks were the inuentors of those societies, which we see
renewed in our age, and of those new fashions of living. Those then are the
Fathers of your Fratrie, and the authors of this voluntary poverty, which
consists only in possessing nothing in property, which is as much as to
have all things, to possess all things. And the Anabaptists of our time do
verily conform themselves unto your Friars, who carry nothing about them, and
have all things common among them. The garments Quidem ex veteribus use sunt
Adderethsebar, id est toga sieve Abolla maiore, eaque villosa atque impexa and
rudi, plurimum coloris natiui: qnoniam his vestibus nullo studio aut ratione
opus est: neglectae sunt, and neglectum prae se ferunt nec Dominum suumin curae
purgandi aut eluendi occupant.
of the first Friars, as likewise those of the order of S. Benedict, were
either black, or rather, without any regard to the color, course and mean
according to the custom of the country. At this time their clothing is the
latus clauus of the Romans, which is the broad band that is to be found among
the garments of the most ancient orders. The Eustathians Eustathians.
taught their disciples to apparel themselves in certain garments of cloth,
and that such garments were able to cleanse and sanctify them. The Capuchins
and such others, being worser then the Eustathians Balsamon in can 12. Conc.
Ganger. Epiph. haeres. 31. In forma absoluti nis monasticae l^gitur Rigor
religionis and meritum ordinis, cedant tibi in remissionem peccatorum and
praemium vita aterna. Bernardin. de busto in Rasario.
, make the people believe, that to take on their habit is a second Baptism:
and to die therein, is to go straight to Paradise: to be buried therein is to
go free of that burning fire of Purgatory. Bernardine teaches in his
Rosarie: That he that takes on the habit of Religion, receives the same Grace
from above, that he that is Baptized: That to put on a Friars habit Cuculata
saga agricolis imper^t Columella, and cucullionem viatorium Capitolinus in Vero
nominat, and Festus cuculli. unculum ad propulsandam iniuriamcoeli.
, and to lurk under his hoode, gives free remission both of the fault and
punishment of all their sins. That he that dies in the habit of S. Francis,
cannot be damned. And what blasphemies are these, to attribute unto a garment,
invented by some fanaticke and melancholic persons, that which belongs to
the only blood of Jesus Christ? And Thomas Thom in 4. sent did. 4.
himself, who is yet more strange by reason of his exquisite doctrine, We
read (says he) in the lives of the Fathers, that a certain person saw the
like grace descend from heaven upon him that was clothed in the habit of
Religion, that he had seen descend upon him that had received Baptism: which
is to make the filthy hood of a durty Friar, equal with Gods ordinances.
Moreover those goodly Abbeyes, Monasteries, and sumptuous Conuents, are they
not the inventions Buildings.
of the Euphemites or Messalians? Epiphanius Euphemites.
Epiph l. 3. com. 2. haeres. 80.
writes of them, that they builded for themselus great lodgings, large walks,
and termed all those places of prayer. The Jesuits in this sort of Oeconomie
go beyond all their companions of the Fratrie, in so much as they build
nothing, and do alwais take hold of such palaces as they find already Shauing
of the beard. Messalians. Euchites.
perfected and finished. The same Messalians and Euchites have taught your
Friars the holy mysteries that are in shauing Rasio capitis est temporalium
omnium deposilio vt aiunt. Odepositio!
of the beard, and in the barbers operation, that you may play gaudeamus in
coenaculo charitatis, that you may dally and put off time in idleness, in
singing and buzing by measure and compass. For my part, I hold this shauing of
the beard to be a most pleasant and delectable thing, since Suetonius Sueton in
Othone.
says that the Emperor Otho used the same often, that so he might increase
the beauty of his visage. And how will your Friars agree together touching long
and short beards. The diverse readings that are found in the copies of the
council of Carthage Conc. Carth. ca. 44.
have nourished their contentions. In some Sic in codice Gemblacensi.
they read, comam nec nutriant nec barbam: in others Sic in Gandensi S.
Bauonis. Euchites.
, nec barba^ tondeant. I refer my self to the decision of some council. The
Messalians were called of the Grecians (...), or (...), Epiph. haeres. 68. and
80.
, by reason of this fained and as it were continual labor in singing,
praying, prating and babbling both day and night prayers, psalms and other
meditations, whereof they have composed their offices, accompanying them with
lights, tapers, and burning candles, yea, even Lights.
in the noonday. And this exercise being continued both day and night made
the common people astonished. In like manner they used spittle Spitle.
in their Sacraments, as a thing that had a certain force and virtue to chase
away the Devil. The same Euchites and Psallians (as S. Austin August. haer. 57
writes) thought it not lawful to labor with their hands Noworking.
that they might earne their living. And against these pests Amphilochius and
Flauianus most worthy Bishops have written most sharply and mostgrauely, of
whom Theodoret Theodor. lib. 4. cap. 11.
makes honorable mention and if they were alive now, they would wash your
Friars heads soundly, with no smaller reason then they opposed themselves to
the Messalians. For this they hold with them, that to play the Friar well,
there must be no working Interim non laborando omnia in sacrum (...) and inex.
plebilem congerunt, ex quo farciantur Monachorum botuli. Vide. August. de
operib. Manach. cap. 20.
, that handy works are unworthy of the white and delicate hands of Monachisme,
and that sloth is the nourishing mother of the Gospel. And what answer will
they return to the author of the History tripartite Hist. tripart. l. 8. cap.
1.
, who says that a Friar that works not with his hands ought to be accounted
as a thief? And to the Apostle 2. These. 3.
, that he shall not eat? The Primitive Friars placed no part of their
salvation in their abstinences. Yea (as S. Austin De moribus Ecclesiae
Catholicae 31. and 33.
says) they admonished after a brotherly manner, those that through too much
fasting, had become rather weak then holy. Ifidore says, that the Nouatians,
Heretics gloried in the merit of their works. And at this time who vaunt
themselves more then Merit of works
those of the Romish Church, cheefely the Friars, and among them the Capuchins
most? The Isid etymol. lib. 8. cap. de haeres. Christ.
Nouatians Nouatians.
said that they were pure and separated from the rest of the world: and who is
liker unto them, then those that are of another world, who say that they live
like Angels, although they draw the glory and pride of this age after them, yea
and Ignorant Friars Gnosimaches.
into their draughts, which are become redoubtable not only unto the common
people, but unto the Popes also? After such manner, that one of them said, that
he would choose rather to offend a Monarch, then the least Harpie of the
Minorite Friars. The sect of the ignorant Friars, whom the Italians call Frati
ignoranti, is it not like unto that of the Gnosimaches, of whom Damascene
speaks Damasc. lib. de haeresibus.
, and who gloried in this, that they knew nothing? Some of your Doctors Nicet.
lib. 44. c. 39. Coster. Ench. cap. 11. Bozius de signis Eccl. lib. 9. cap. 12.
have maintained August. de moribus. Manich. l. 2. c. 13. and 15. A. carnibus
abstinebant per ieiunia tamen peregriuas and exquisitas fruges multis ferculis
variatas sumpserunt. Encratites. Tatians. Manicheans.
that ignorance is the cause and mother of all piety and obedience, and we may
perceive the print of this maxim in the Faith, which you term implicit or
intricate. But what will they answer to the Council of Toledo Con. Tolet. 4.
can. 24. Aug. in Psalm. 33. Abstinence from flesh.
, whereof one Canon says that, matter omnium errorum est ignorantia: and to S.
Austini, that the kingdom of ignorance is the kingdom of error? The
abstinence from flesh, which chiefly the charterous Monks and some others
observe very strictly in their rules, as being willing to die rather then to
enjoy the use of flesh: next, the abstinence from eggs; white meat and such
others, has proceeded from no where else but from the Diabolical shop of
the Encratites, Tatians and Manicheans Epiph. haeres. 46 Damas. de haer.
Philast.
as Epiphanius Can. delicias. Can. quisquis. can quod dicit. did. 41. Can. si
quis carnem. Can si quis presbiter. did. 30.
, Austin and Philastrius writ: for they have the like marks on their visage.
Those vows touching meats of fish days, whitmeate days, cheese days and
flesh days are against the Canons Conc, Gangr. cap. 2.
which we have noted in the margent. The Gangrene Cont. Aneyr. c. 14. Conc
Brach. c. 14.
Council and that of Ancyra Abstemijs illis potest dici quod ^lim Nouato
Acesio, dicebat Co^siantin. Erigite scalam, Acesi, tibi, and in coelum solus
ascendito. Silence. Pattalormichites.
which were holden almost at the same very time with the first council of
Nice, have ordained, that one should not and ought not to chastise or condemn
those that eat flesh on Friday, or in LentP, yea, and that in matters which
concern Matrimony and meats our consciences ought not to be burdened with new
commandments. The Chartrous Monks have learned their silence in the School
of the Heretics, whom S. Austin August. ad quod rult Deum haer. 63.
calls Pattalornichites, which had this custom; to put their finger to their
mouth, that they might hold their peace. And if you enter into the Monasteries
of the Charterous Friars, and meet any of them, all the salutation that you
shall have of them, willbe only a very humble inclinabo. Now it may be that
those silent Friars, will have the profession of their silence to come rather
from the Echimithie of the Pythagorians then from those Heretics. I give them
liberty to choose, for it is all one to me. And the Jesuits are they not
descended from the Carpocratians Jesuits. Carpocratians.
ancient Heretics, of whom Ireneus writes, that they bragged themselves to
be fellows Hoc est insanabile Iesuitarum cocoethes. Barefooted.
with Jesus, and to bear rule over the Princes of the earth? Jesuits (I say)
the most pestiferous Grasshoppers that ever came out of the pit of hell? The
Capuchins go bare footed poor men, truly they are worthy of compassion,
those poor snakes, Philastrius Bishop of Brixe, in the catalogue of Heretics,
has made a whole chapter of purpose, wherein he speaks de excalceatisf, and
S. Austint likewise makes mention in the book of Heresies ad quod vult Deum,
and he adds that they grounded themselves on this, that the Lord had said
unto Moses, put off thy shoes from thy feet, which perhaps is the same place,
whereupon the Capuchins and obseruantins have grounded this custom, to go
barefooted. We shall join with Monachisme the foolishness of the Ass of
Gignac a town in the lower Languedoc, The Ass of Gignack.
which has proceeded of none but the Gnostics, of whom Epiphaniusu writes,
that they Gnostics.
taught, that he that appeared to Zachary the Father Epiph. l. 1. tom. 2.
haer. 2 F.
of John Baptist had the shape of an Ass: August. haeres. 68.
Benedictus Theol. Parisien. Concord. Bibl. in verbo (Asina) affirmat; Asinam
in historia Balaami significare Ecclesiam.
which Zachary being about to reveal, to the end that he might divert the
heople from burning of incense in the Temple, had his mouth stopped, and was
not able to speak by the means of this Ass. So much have we thought good to
speak concerning the harmony of your Friars, Iuuenal. Sat. 6. Obseruant. vbi
festa mere pede Sabbatha Reges
and of their ceremonies with ancient Heretics. We avouch Quod de Monachis a
Pontificijs scribitur, idem contestari potest de Mithriacis Persaru^, Isiacis
Aegyptiorum, Drasid is seue Druidibus Gallorum.
the antiquity of the custom of Monasteries, and that some chused this manner
of life, that they might the better employ their time in the study of the holy
Scriptures, and that they might be the better prepared to bear the Lords
cross under the sea uritie of discipline; nevertheless without making of any
vows or bonds which might concern Monastical rules. But the whole being
degenerate, and this vow that was only temporal (if there was any at all)
having taken sure hold and perpetual possession of the poor consciences of
the modern Friars, with good reason we abhor such monkerie, such as we see it
now, to the great hurt of Christendom. And we may speak of this goodly
Monacall Celibate, that which Ovid spoke in old times of poor Calisto:

Quae fuerat virgo, credita matter erat. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Popish Lent.
IT is a commandment of the Romish Church to observe Lent, and not amiss, if
you had not made a part of Gods service of it, as it is to be seen in the
preface of your Lent Masses Vide Fuchsium Instit. Medic. lib. 2. sect. 2. c. 9.
, wherein you sing, Qui corporaliieiunio vitia comprimis, mentem eleuas,
virtutem largiris and praemia. And by these words do you not bring it into the
place of the blood of Jesus Christ? S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 47. in Math.
says, that our Lord Jesus did not command us to imitate his fast of forty
days, but only learn of me to be meek as I am. S. Austin Aug. epist. 86.
writes, that he could never find that the Apostles, or the Lord himself, had
left any ordinances touching days, wherein we behooved to fast, or not fast:
whereunto Socrates Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 21.
the Historiographer agrees and declares what great variety was in the use
of Lent in his time. Out of what storehouse then have you taken this
observation that is so necessary unto salvation, according to your doctrine?
They attribute the same unto Telesphorus, the ninth Pope in order, but without
discipline, and without any penalty set down for the breakers thereof.
Wherefore we must attribute it to Hildebrand, called Gregory the seventh, who
in the year 1075. established the rigorous laws of this fast, threatening them
with great punishment that should happen to break the same. And of whom did he
learn it but of the Montanists, which (as Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 17. et
18. Epiph. haer. 42. Ebionians.
writes) Montanists.
in the year 144. invented the same. The Ebionians commanded abstinence from
flesh, as we see at length in Epiph. haer. 10. and 30.
Epiphanius. I hear that your Capuchins make four Lents in the year. I will
submit my self unto that which is truth. In the mean while we shall allege
against them that which S. Hierome Hieronym. in Agg. cap. 1.
says; Their fasts and diverse rules, and their lying hard, who fasting three
Lents in the year, and humbling their souls (...) and (...), by eating
nothing but dry things, and such other superstitions which have proceeded from
the root of Tatianus, upon such pains Tatianus.
as they lay on themselves, must only give ear unto this: Why have you taken
so much pains without any cause? Or, have Tanta passi estis sine causa?
you suffered so much in vain?

CHAP. XXIIII. Of abstinence from meats.
THe Councels and Canons which we alleged in the title of Friars, shall make
us abridge that which we were minded to speak here, concerning abstinence from
meats. The Manicheans in their fasts observed strictly this Manicheans.
difference of meats, as it is now practiced, and in like manner abstained
from flesh, in place whereof (as S. Austin August. lib. 2. de morib. Eccles. et
Manich. c. 31.
writes) they used other most delicate meats, and fishes that were found with
much difficulty, and were so daintilie prepared with costly sauces, that
Apitius would have enough ado to make ready the like. The Ebionians, the
Ebionians. Tatians. Encratites.
Tatians, the Encratites Epip. lib. 3. tom. 1. hares. 10. et 30. Eusebius. lib. 4.
c. 28 Iren. lib. 1. c. 24. Marcion.
have also authorized and taught their disciples this abstinence from flesh.
But above all others Marcion agrees best with you: seeing that he reputed the
eating of fishes to be more holy, then the eating of the flesh of other
creatures: whereunto Aerius the heretic has set his hand in like manner, who
also abstained from Aerius.
eating of flesh. The Council of Conc. Brac.
Brachara holden the year 630. condemned abstinence from flesh, if the same
were observed for religion, and not for sobrieties sake.

CHAP. XXV. Of unknown Language.
YOu dare not deny that which the Apostle says, That every thing ought to be
read in the Church in a language that is understood. I should never have done,
if I should here unfold the authority of the Fathers. The councels of Laodicea
Council. Laodic. can. 59.
and Carthage Conc. Carth. 3. can. 47.
ordain, that nothing shall be read to the people in the Church but Canonical
Scriptures. And if they were not understood, what would the reading thereof
profit us? The Law of God was read unto the ancient people in a language, that
the whole multitude understood, as we may see in Nehemias Nehem. cap. 8.
Justinian. nouella 123.
. The Emperor Justinian will have the whole divine service to be celebrated in
a known language. You are of a contrary mind, and it were to enter into a
labyrinth to refute your opinion. We will say only, that Mark the sorcerer
has borrowed it of you, Mark.
or you of him, who (as we read in Epiphanius Epiph. haeres. 14 et 34.
and Theodoret Theodoret, de fabulis haereticorum.
) took delight in strange and unknown words. And how? Your whole service,
your Missall, your Breuiarie, are they not thus disfigured? These be your
cunning slights, to the end that by such vain thundering you may terrify
simple idiots, after the example of the Marcionists. Iren. l. 1. c. 18.
Marcionists.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Simonie.
SImonie consists in selling of all manner of holy things. I will have no
other witness then the whole world, that there is none amongst all your
Bishops and Priests, that is not defiled therewith. Blame your own decrees and
Canons Can. Si quis. 1. Quaest. 3. did. 19. Can. nullus. Can. quicquid. Can
placuit. Can. baptisandis cause 1. quaest. 1. Can. qui Episcopus. did. 23. Can.
quum long. Can. sacrorum. did. 63.
, which declare you all to be excommunicated, and witness your vocation to be
unlawful. The Jesuits teach their scholars daily for nothing, to the end that
they may reward them again with almesses of thousands, yea, and of millions of
crowns. In these days, Bishoprics and other Benefices are bestowed, the
Sacraments are ministered, and that for nothing. True indeed, that if they take
any thing, alas it is but little, and only by way of contract, which the
Lawyers term do vt des! And from whence has all this trading proceeded, but
from Simon Simon Magus.
Magus the father of all heretics, that would have given money, to the intent
that he might have the power to bestow the holy Ghost on such as would reward
him therefore?

CHAP. XXVII. Of Processions.
THose Processions are of your own breeding: the holy antiquity knew them
not. We have spoken thereof in the conformities of Gentilisme, and declared
that you abuse these words, procedere and processio, which the Tertul. de
praescrips. c. 43. August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 21. cap. 8.
Fathers used, but after a diverse sense, and it is without all reason that you
will have them to be those Processions that are used among you. And that which
is spoken of the wise men of the Orient, reuersi sunt per aliam viam, is the
cause why you make some Processions after a preposterous manner. The Arrians
Arrians.
were the authors of these circuites, and made them with great solemnity,
marching along the streets, singing Sozomen. lib. 8. cap. 8. Socrat. lib. 6.
cap. 8.
certain lauds which were penned in praise of their sect. Thereafter S.
Chrysostom by an unfit imitation, whereupon followed a most dangerous sedition
in the Church, commanded his clergy and congregation to do the like, as well
to give contentment to his flock, as to the end that they should not follow
that band of the Arrian sect. And the Historiographere concludes, that the
Catholics having for this cause begun to sing after the foresaid manner, have
continued the same unto this day.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of extreme Unction.
ARe you ignorant that the unction, which you call the last, was a miracle of
the primitive Church? And of a miracle why do you make a sacrament? We have
protested before that we would not enter into the deepnesse of controuerted
matters, seeing that our butt is only to join you in alliance and matrimony
with heretics. In this title I find that you are companions with the
Heracleonites Heracleonites Epip. haer. 36. August. haer. 16. Damasc. de haeres.
. The difference that is between you and them consists only in this, that
they anoint the dead, and you anoint such as are a dying.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Death.
FRom extreme unction we shall pass unto death: and truly it is the forerunner
and the trumpet. The greatest displeasure that you can do to the wives of
sick persons, is to bring unto them this manner of wares, which is as much as
a commission or packet, that is delivered to their husbands to carry into
another world. Behold death that arriueth, whom the faithful do acknowledge
to be the mean to change all these miseries into felicity. It is the hand of
God, that pulls us back from these calamities: it is the opening of the
prison, our delivery from captivity, the issue of our miseries, and the
arriving at the port. And although death does afford so many commodities unto
us, yet it is the reward of sin. And what do the Pelagians Pelagians.
speak thereof, with whom you have more then ten heresies common? That Adam
had died, although he had not transgressed Gods commandments. This heresy is
not general among you. But having perused your Index expurgatorius, which
spared not to censure the old Fathers, and having perceived that there was no
order taken for scraping out of that, which Austin Steuchus August. Steuchus
cap. 2. genesis
has written, to wit, that death is a thing natural, and that sin is not
the cause thereof, seeing that Infants die (says he) which are free from
sin: and that Adam notwithstanding his transgression had been a pray to
death, I have good reason to accuse you of Pelagianisme.

CHAP. XXX. Of the dead.
THe Heracleonites Heracleonites August. lib. de haer. haer. 16.
(as S. Austin writes) thought that they were able to redeem those that were
dead through inuocations and prayers, which they uttered in Hebrew words and
strange languages. The Romish Church will not give ear unto the Doctors
Hieronym. in ^sa. ca. 65. Chrysostom. hom. 2. et 11 cap. Hebr. hom. 2. de Lazaro.
August. epist. 54. ad Macedo. and sermon. 66. de temp. and in lrypognost. lib. 5.
Theoph. in 25. cap. Mat.
, who maintain, that after this life there is neither place nor time, to make
any satisfaction for the sins that have bin committed in this world. And
indeed that were to bereave them of the fattest of their daily bread.
Concerning the feast of the dead, we confess that Boniface the fourth was the
author thereof. And whereon groundeth he his reasons? Upon the dreams of
certain melancholic persons.

Veni etiam Domine Jesus. FINIS.

