A TRACT AGAINST VSVRIE.

Presented to the High Court of Parliament.

HEB DDIEV HEB DDIM
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by W. I. for Walter Burre, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane. 1621.

TO leave the proofs of the unlawfulness of Usury to Divines, wherein a
number, as well Protestants as Papists have learnedly written; here is only
set down some arguments to show how great the hurt is it does to this kingdom
which has no gold nor silver mines, but plenty of commodities, and many and
great advantages of trade to which the high rate of Usury is a great prejudice
and decay.

For proof, how much the high rate of Usury decays trade; we see that
generally all Merchants when they have gotten any great wealth, leave trading
and fall to Usury, the gain thereof being so easy, certain, and great:
whereas in other Countries, where Usury is at a lower rate, and thereby lands
deerer to purchase, they continue Merchants from generation to generation to
enrich themselves and the State.

Neither are they rich tradesmen only that give over trading, but a number of
beginners are undone or discouraged by the high rate of Usury, their industry
serving but to enrich others, and beggar themselves.

We also see many trades themselves much decayed, because they will not afford
so great a gain as ten in the hundred; whereas if the rate of Usury were not
higher here then in other Countries, they had still subsisted and flourished,
and perhaps with as much advantage to the public, as those that do bring
more to the private adventurers.

Yet are not those the greatest hindrances the high rate of money brings to
trade; our greatest disadvantage is, that other Nations, especially our
industrious neighbors the Dutch, are therein wiser then we: for with them, and
so in most Countries with whom we hold commerce, there is not any use for money
tolerated, above the rate of six in the hundred: Whereby it must of necessity
come to pass, though they have no other advantages of industry and frugality
that they must out-trade us; for if they make return of ten per centum, they
almost double the Use allowed, and so make a very gainefull trade. But with us,
where ten in the hundred is so current, it is otherwise; for if we make not
above ten, we are losers, and consequently the same trade being with them and
us equally good for the public, is to the private adventurers losse-full with
us, with them very gainefull. And where the good of the public and private
men's go not together, the public is seldom greatly advanced.

And as they out-trade, so they may afford to vnder-sell us in the fruits of
the earth, which are equally natural to our and their Lands, as to our great
shame we see our neighbors the Dutch do, even in our own Country: for in
most commodities the earth brings forth, the stock employed in planting and
managing of them, makes a great (in many the greatest) part of their price; and
consequently, their stock with them being rated at six in the hundred, they
may with great gain vnder-sell us, our stock with us being rated at ten.

And as they may out-trade us and vnder-sell us, so are all contributions to
the War, works of Piety, and glory of the State, cheaper to them then to
us: for the Use for money going with us near double the rate it does in other
Countries, the giving the same sum must needs be double the charge to us, it is
to them. Amongst other things which the King with so much wisdom delivered to
the House of Parliament, he committed to their consideration the ballancing of
Trade and Commerce, wherein there is nothing of greater consequence, then the
rate of Usury, which holds no proportion with us and other Nations, to our
disadvantage, as by experience we see and feel.

Neither is the high rate of usury less hurtful to Commerce within the land,
the gain by Usury being so easy, certain, and extreme great, as they are
not only Merchants and Tradesmen, but Landed-men, Farmers, and men of
profession that grow lazy in their professions, and become Usurers; for the
rate of Usury is the measure by which all men trade, purchase, build, plant, or
any other ways bargain.

It has been the wisdom and care of former Parliaments to provide for the
preservation of Wood and Timber; for which there is nothing more available
then the calling down of the high rate of Usury; for as the rate of money now
goes, no man can let his timber stand, nor his wood grow to such years growth
as is best for the Commonwealth, but it will be very lost-full to him: The
stock of the woods after they are worth forty or fifty shillings the Acre,
growing faster at ten in the hundred then the woods themselves do. And for
shipping, which is the strength and safety of this land; I have heard diverse
Merchants of good credit say, that if they would build a ship, and let it to
any other to employ, they cannot make of their money that way, counting all
charges, tear and wear, above ten or twelve in the hundred, which can be no
gainefull trade, money it self going at ten in the hundred. But in the
Low Countries, where money goes at six, the building of ships, and hiring
them to others in a gainefull Trade; and so the stock of rich men and the
industry of beginners, are well joined for the public.

And yet that which is above all the rest, the greatest sin against the Land
is, that it makes the Land it self of small value, nearer the rate of
newfound Lands, than of any other Country* where Laws, government, and
peace, have so long flourished; For the high rate of Usury makes Land sell so
cheap; and the cheap sale of Land is the cause men seek no more by industry
and cost to improve them: and this is plain both by example, and
demonstration; for we see in other Countries, where the use of money is of a
low rate, Lands are generally sold for 30. 40. in some for 50. years purchase:
And we know by the rule of bargaining, that if the rate of Use were not
greater here, then in other Countries; Lands were then as good a penniworth, at
twenty years purchase, as they are now at sixeteene: For Lands being the best
assurance and securest inheritance, will still bear a rate above money: Now if
Lands were at thirty years purchase, or near it, there were no so cheap
purchase as the amendment of our own Lands; for it would be much cheaper to
make one acre of Land, now worth five shillings by the year, to be worth ten
shillings, or being worth ten to be worth twenty shillings: and so in
proportion, then to purchase an other acre worth five or ten shillings. And in
every acre thus purchased to the owner, by the amendment of his own, there
were another purchased to the commonwealth. And it is the blessing of God to
this Land, that there are few places of it to which he has not given means by
reasonable cost and industry, greatly to amend it, in many to double the value,
so as in time, if for their own good, men's industry were compelled that way,
the riches and commodities of this Land would near be doubled: Then would all
the wet lands in this Kingdom soon be drained, the barren Lands mended by
Marle, Sleech, Lime, Chalk, Sea-sand, and other means, which for their
profit, men's industry would find out. We see with how great industry and
charge our neighbors, the Dutch, do draine and maintain their Lands against
the sea which flows higher above them, then it does above the lowest parts of
our drowned lands. I will admit a great deal to their industry, but I should
very unwillingly grant, that they are so much more ingenuous and industrious
then we, as that all the odds were therein: Certainly, the maine cause of it
is, that with us money is dear, and land cheap, with them lands dear, and
money cheap; and consequently the improuement of their Lands at so great a
charge with them, is gainefull to the owners, which with us would be loss-full;
for Usury going at ten in the hundred, if a man borrow five pounds, and bestow
it on an Acre of ground, the amendment stands him in ten shillings the year;
and being amended, the land is not worth above fifteen years purchase: But if
the use of money went at no more with us, then in other places, then five pound
bestowed upon an Acre of ground, would stand a man but in five or six
shillings a year, and the Acre of Land so amended, would be worth, as has
been showed, six and twenty or thirty years purchase. Whereby it appears
that as the rate of Use now goes, no man (but where the Land lies
extraordinarily happily for it) can amend his Land, but to his own loss;
whereas if money were let as it is in other Countries, he might bestow more
then double so much as now he may, and yet be a great gainer thereby; and
consequently, as was before remembered, should to his own benefit purchase Land
to the commonwealth.

Neither would such purchase of land to the commonwealth, be the benefit to
the landed men only, the benefit would be as much to the poor laborers of
the land; For now when Come and other fruits of the land which grow by labor,
are cheap, the plowe and mattocke are cast into the hedge, there is little
work for poor men, and that at a low rate, whereas if the mendment of their
own Lands were the cheapest purchase to the owner; if there were many more
people then there are, they should readily set a work, at better rates then
they now are, and none that had their health and lims could be poor, but by
their extremest laziness.

And as the high rate of Usury does imbase Land, so it is as great a hindrance
to discoueries, plantations, and all good vnder-takings, making it near double
as chargeable to the Adventurers, (money being at ten in the hundred) as it is
in other Countries, where the Use of money is so much lower.

Now let us see by the contrary, and conceive if Usury were tolerated at
fifteen or twenty in the hundred (and I fear many borrowers, all things
considered, pay above ten) what the condition of things would then be, and if
it appear how desperate the hurt would be which that would bring; it may (at
least upon good reason) persuade us how great the good would be of calling it
down. Certainly, it must of necessity come to pass, that all Trades would in
a short time decay; For few or none (and reckon the hazard at nothing, yield
so great again, as twenty in the hundred) and all other Nations might with so
great gain out-trade and vnder-sel us that more then the earth would of her
self bring forth, we should scarce raise any thing from it, even for our own
use within the Land; and Land would be so much imbased, as men might afford,
without loss to themselves, to carry the composte out of their closes, upon
their next adjoining lands to mend them: so far should we be from marling,
liming, draining, planting, and any other works of cost or industry, by which,
Lands are purchased to the Commonwealth. So far from Building, making of
Havens, Discoueries, new Plantations, or any other actions of virtue and glory
to the State; for private gain is the compass men generally sail by: And
since we cannot without extraordinary diligence Plant, Build, Draine, or any
other way amend our Lands but it will be deerer to us, then the purchase of
others, money being at ten in the hundred; if money then should go at twenty in
the 100. the charge of mending our Land would be doubled, and the Land abased
to seven or eight years purchase; and consequently all works of industry and
charge, for improuing of Lands would be quite neglected and given over: we
should only care upon one another with Usury, have our commodities from other
Nations, let the Land grow barren and unmanured, and the whole State in short
time, come to beggary.

Against this (perhaps) may be objected, that before the 37. of H 8. there was
no limitation of Usury, and how did we then? To this, may be answered, that in
those times there was a stricter band in that point upon men's consciences; So
far forth as Usurers were in the same case as excommunicate persons, they could
make no wills, nor were allowed Christian burial. Therefore let us for our
forefathers sake, hope, that the rye upon their consciences then, was a greater
restraint of Usury then the Statute of ten in the hundred is now; I fear
fornication is too frequent among us, yet thanks be to God not so much used as
where there is allowance of Curtizans and Stews.

The objections likely to be made against the calling down of money, are
first, that general objection of ignorance against all changes, be they never
so necessary and apparently good, that it has been so a long time, and been
well enough; what will become of the alteration, we cannot tell, why then
should we make any change?

Secondly, that as in bodies natural, so in politic, great and sudden
changes are most commonly dangerous.

Thirdly, that money will be suddenly called in, and so all borrowers greatly
prejudiced.

Fourthly, that money will be harder to come by, and thereby commerce greatly
hindered.

Lastly, that much money of forreiners, by reason of the high rate of Usury, is
brought over here to be managed at interest, which would be carried away
again, if the rate of Usury should be called down.

To the first, that money has long gone at ten, and things bin well enough.

It is answered, that it is not long that the practice of Usury has been so
generally used, without any sense or scruple of the unlawfulness of it: for
men's consciences were hardened to it, with example and custom, by degrees, and
not upon the sudden. And as the beginning of many dangerous diseases in
healthful bodies, so the beginning of many inco^ueniences in a State, are not
presently felt. With us, after that with long civil wars the Land was half
unpeopled, so as till of late years, it came not to his full stock of people
again, there being the same quantity of Land to half the number of people,
the surplusage of our in land commodities must needs be so great, that though
trade were not equally balanced with Us and other Nations, we could not but
grow rich: Beside, France and the Low Countries were for many years half laid
waste with wars, and so did trade but little, nor manage their own Lands to
their best advantage, whereby they did not only not take the trade and market
from us, which now they do, but they themselves were fed and clothed by us,
and took our commodities from us at great high rates: Whereas now we see the
Dutch do every where out-trade us, and the French feed us with their corn,
even in plentiful years; So as now our Land being full stocked with people,
our neighbors industrious and subtle in trade, if we do not more equally
balance trade and bring to pass, that we may afford the fruits of our land as
cheap as other Countries afford the same of the same kind; we must (though
we leave a number of our superfluities) as (God forbid but we should) in a
short time grow poor and beggarly. And in this condition ten in the hundred
in a little more time will as well serve to do it, as if money were at twenty:
For (as was before remembered) in most of the commodities the earth brings
forth, the stock employed in planting and managing of them, makes a great part
of their price, and consequently they make with great gain to themselves,
vnder-sell us, our stock with us going at double the rate that theirs goes
with them.

And this we see and feel too well by experience at this present; for having
a great surplisage of corn, we can find no vent for it; the French with their
own, the Dutch with the corn of Poland, every where supplying the markets at
cheaper rates then we can afford it: and even our Clothes which have hitherto
been the golden Mine in England, I have heard many Merchants say, that (except
it be in some few of the finest sort of them, which is a riches peculiar to
this Nation) other Countries begin to make them of their own wool, and by
affording them cheaper then we may, so to take our markets from us.

And this I hope may in part serve for answer to the next objection; that all
great and sudden changes are commonly dangerous; for that rule holds true,
where the body natural or politic is in perfect state of health, but where
there is a declining (as I have some cause to fear there is or may soon be
with us) there to make no alteration is a certain way to ruin.

To the third: That money will be suddenly ^alled in, and so all borrowers
greatly prejudiced; for that there may be a clause in the end of the Statute
whenever it shall be made: That it shall be lawful for all that have lent
money at ten in the hundred, which is now forborne, and owing, to take for such
money so lent and owing, during two years after this Session of Parliament,
such Use as they might have done if this Act had not been made: Whereby
borrowers shall be in less danger of sudden calling in of their money then now
they are; for where the lenders upon continuance of their old security, may
take ten in the hundred; upon new security they must be content with less,
so the calling in of their money will be to their own prejudice.

And if there be any borrower to whom this gives not sufficient satisfaction,
if such borrower have Lands of value to pay his debt, the worst condition he
can fear, is to have at the least twenty years purchase for his land,
wherewith to clear his debts; for as I said before, land being the best
security, and securest inheritance, will still bear a rate above money. And
so there being no Use allowed for money above the rate tolerated in other
Countries, Land will as readily sell at twenty years purchase, as it does now
at twelve. And I think there is no borrower that has Land of value to pay his
debts, does doubt if he will now sell his Land at ten years purchase, he might
soon be out of debt.

To the fourth Objection, that money will be hard to be borrowed, and so
commerce hindered: I answer, that it were true, if the high rate of Usury did
increase money within this Land; but the high rate of Usury does enrich only
the Usurer, and impouerish the Kingdom, as has been showed; and it is the
plenty of money within the Land that makes money easy to be borrowed, as we
see by the examples of other Countries, where money is easier to be borrowed
then it is with us, and yet the rate tolerated; for Use is little more then
half so much. It is the high rate of Use that undoes so many of the Gentry of
the Land, which makes the number of borrowers so great, and the number of
borrowers must of necessity make money the harder to be borrowed, whereas if
Use for money were at a lower rate, Land as has been showed, would be much
quicker to be sold, and at deerer rates, and so the Nobility and Gentry would
soon be out of debt, and consequently the fewer borrowers, and so to
Tradesmen and Merchants money easy to be had.

Further, let us consider if money were called down, what Usurers would do
with their money; they would not I suppose long be sullen, and keep it a dead
stock by them; for that were not so much as the safest way of keeping it: they
must then either employ it in trade, purchase land, or lend for Use at such
rate as the Law will tolerate, if it quicken trade, that is the thing to be
desired; for that will enrich the Kingdom, and so make money plentiful. And
yet need not any borrower fear that money will so be employed in trade, as
that there will not be sufficient of money to purchase Land, where the
purchaser may have as much, or near so much rent by the purchase of Land, as
he can by putting his money to Use: For a great number of Gentlemen and other
in the Country, know not how to employ any stock in Trade, but with great
uncertainty, and less satisfaction to themselves, then the letting of their
money at a lower rate, or purchasing Land at twenty years purchase or upwards.
No doubt for the present there would be great buying and selling of Land, till
men had cleared themselves, and paid their debts: But in short time Land, as
it is showed before, would sell at so dear a rate, as money let at a lower
rate of Use, would bring in proportion as great a rate above the rent that
would be made then by the purchase of Land, as the rate of money now is above
the rent of Land, purchased at fourteen or fifteen years purchase, and so by
consequence money would then as easily be borrowed as it is now, and so much
easier, as it would be more plentiful, and fewer borrowers.

To the last and weakest of Objections; That there is now much money of
Forreiners in the Land to be managed at ten in the hundred, which if money
should be called down, would be carried out of the Land; there is no doubt it
is true: But I desire to know, whether any man think it better for the State,
that they should now carry out one hundred pounds, or seven years hence, two;
or fourteen years hence, four* or one and twenty years hence eight: for so
in effect upon the multiplying of interest, they do.

It will seem incredible to such as have not considered it, but to any that
will but cast it up, it is plainly manifest; that a hundred pounds managed at
ten in the hundred, in seauenty years multiplies it self to a hundred
thousand pounds. So if there should be an hundred thousand pounds of
forreiners money now managed here at ten in the hundred, (and that does seem
no great matter) that an hundred thousand pound in threescore and ten years,
which is but the age of a man, would carry out ten millions, which I believe is
more then all the coin at this present in the Land. I know we cannot conceive
how any such sum should be managed at interest, yet this is sufficient to
make us little to joy in Forreiners money.

Besides, we must not conceive that the money of Forreiners, which is here
managed at Usury, is brought into the Land in ready coin or Bullion: the
course is, that Merchants send over Bills of exchange to their Factors, for
which they receive our money here; and this is the money they manage at
interest, and so they eat us out with our own moneys. The old comparison,
which compares Usury to the Butlers Box, deserves to be remembered; Whilst men
are at play, they feel not what they give to the Box, but at the end of
Christmas it makes all or near all Gamesters loosers: and I fear the
comparison holds thus much farther, that there is as few escape, that continue
in Usury, as that continue Gamesters, a man may play once or twice and leave a
winner, but the Use of it is seldom without ruin.

Now because I know men's private interests does many times blind their
judgments, and least any may be tempted for their own, against the public
good, I will desire them to remember, that if they have Lands as well as money,
that what they loose in their money they shall get it in their Land; for Land
and money are ever in balance one against the other, and where money is dear,
Land is cheap; and where money is cheap, Land is dear.

And if there be any yet so hearty a wellwisher to ten in the hundred, as that
he still think it fit to be continued, my wish is; that he and his
posterity may have the privilege to borrow, but not to lend at that rate.

In the beginning of this Treatise, I did disclaim the proofs of the
unlawfulness of Usury, leaving them to Divines, this one only (rising from
the premises) which may serve for all, I think fit to set down. It is agreed
by all the Divines that ever were, without exception of any, yea and by the
Usurers themselves, that biting Usury is unlawful: Now since it has been
proved that ten in the hundred does bite the Landed men, does bite the
Poor, does bite Trade, does bite the King in his Customs, does bite the
Fruits of the Land, and most of all, the Land it self; does bite all works
of Piety, of Virtue, and glory to the State; no man can deny but ten in the
hundred is absolutely unlawful, howsoever happily a lesser rate may be
otherwise.

To the King increase of his Customs.

To the Kingdom increase of Land, by enriching of this.

To the Nobility and Gentry deliverance from bondage and debt.

To Merchants continuance and flourishing in their Trades.

To young beginners in Trade and Commerse, the fruits of their own labors.

To Laborers quick employment.

To Usurers Land for their Money.

FINIS.

