VERTVES Commonwealth: OR THE HIGHWAY TO HONOR. Wherein is discovered, that
although by the disguised craft of this age, vice and hypocrisy may be
concealed: yet by Time (the trial of truth) it is most plainly revealed.
Necessary for age to move diligence, profitable for youth to shun wantonness:
and bringing to both at last desired happiness.

Haud curo inuidiam.

By Henry Cross.



LONDON Printed for John Newbery, dwelling in Paul's Church yard, at the Sign
of the Ball. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Robert Lee, Lord Mayor of the honorable City of
London: And to the Right worshipful the Aldermen his brethren.
I Am not ignorant (Right Honorable and right worshipful Senators) of the
custom of this age, which is, that such as write books do use to dedicate
the^ to some worthy person or other, under whose protection they might pass
with more safety from the biting of the envious: so that many times a light
discourse is graced with a judicial censor: I was therefore imboldned to
observe the same Method, and that chiefly because I know true Virtue loves
whatsoever is like it self be it never so little, and accepts what is
zealously offered, though not always deseruingly excellent, when base dejected
minds want wisdom and experience to direct the purity of judgment. And
although I have scattered here and there some iarring notes and harsh
consonants, untunable to a modest ear: yet the vglines of vice made me strive
to paint out her lanus-face to the eye of the world. Alexander refused not a
cup of cold water at the hands of a silly beggar, the poor widows myte was
more accepted then the abundance of the Scribes and Pharisees, for she offered
all that she had, they of their superfluity: so a noble mind does always
patronize a poor gift as willingly, as it is devoutly dedicated. If in like
sort your bounties will deign to give free admittance to this homely work, I
shall be provoked not to end with this my rude beginning, but strive to show
some greater monument of my love hereafter. And thus leaving to trouble your
wisedoms with tedious circumstance, I rather abreuiate of that I would say,
then by speaking too much to breed suspision of my simple well meaning. And so
I humbly commit your affairs to the good guidance of the Almighty, and my
self to your favorable censures.

Your Honors and worships most dutiful to command. Henry Cross.

To the courteous Reader.
WHen I had brought this poor labor of a ^ewe idle hours to a full period
(gentle Reader) I was purposed to have sent it to the world like an Orphane,
without a father (being so untimely borne) yet considering it was not
altogether unprofitable for this last age, wherein iniquity does so much
abound; and so much the rather, being so instantly urged thereunto by such as
have an absolute intrest in me and my labors, I was content to send it to the
Press, and cast my self upon the general censure. I must confess it is very
vnscholler-like handled, being hudled up in haste without the rule of order,
wanting time Decies castigari ^dvnguem, to correct again and again: and
therefore I was almost dissuaded from this desperate attempt; and that chiefly
because reproof is grown so headstrong, as she will buckle with Virtue: yet
in this hope I rested, that although Momus and the whole brood of Sycophants,
byte and s^arle with their venomous and spiteful tongues, though it be not in
my power to stop their mouths, yet it is in my own hands to stop my own
ears, and let them bark at the Moon, with the Wolves of Assiria: yet if thou will distinctly read, and not rashly judge, thou shall find matter worth the
noting. Here is Virtue leading the way to honor* Vice and Ignorance exaulted
with vaine*glory: Learning and good littrature wrapped in with poverty:
Machauile, writing books against honesty: Idleness, drunkenness, and the
gross errors of these days, earnestly reprehended. But if thou do^st
patiently bear ^ith my rudeness, it will animate a gross conceit to set upon
some thing that may show a further testimony of my grateful mind toward thee
hereafter. In the ^eane time let this my first labor be one little step,
whereby I may ascend into thy good opinion, and that that is weak and in
authenticke, correct with thy pen, or gently pass it over, so shall thou
recompense my travel, and bind me to requite thy favor. But if thou art so
auspicious, as with narrow critticke eyes to look a squi^t at every thing,
thou will dismay a young begin^er* and turn my Alpha, into Omaega.

Henry Cross.

VERTVES Commonwealth: or the highway to honor.
THe fame eternized T^lly, in his book of duties sets down, that the
teaching of any doctrine, which is to be taken in hand in due form, the
exordium must begin with a definition, that the life of the subject whereof the
discourse does run, may the better be understood. Virtue, is an elected habit,
or a settled quality, consisting in a mean, and that mean stands in the
midst Virtue, desined.
of two extremes, the more, and the less, and this that some laudable action,
which by no other name can be termed but by the only title of Virtue. Vice is
opposite to Virtue, a habit of the mind annexed to nature, not striving with
reason, an inconstant desire in the whole life: rebelling against honesty:
which two affections, grow Vice de^ined.
up to a habit by degrees, through use and exercise, chosen by the rational
parts, and when by custom the will is settled in the course of either, the
whole disposion is carried to good or bad.

Ex viro, dicitur virtus.
The Stoikes, call Vice and Virtue, Animalia, living creatures, because by them
a man is discerned, for in respect of Virtue, a man is said to be a man, which
is the Etymology of the word, and in respect of Vice, to be a beast, because
he wants those faculties, and demensions, (...) proper to a virtuous and good
man.

Virtue is divided into two parts, the Intellectiue, and the the Mortal, the
former is begotten and nourished by good tutors, reading good Books, and
exercise, from this flows wisdom, science, prudence, memory. The latter
comes by custom and use, for these two are so forcible, as by it a man may
get him a second nature, Actus.
and this works this thing called Actus, in the extreme parts, and is the
mother of Liberality, Fortitude, and of all good manners.

The divine essence of the soul, beholds nothing with contentment, but the
perfect Idea of Virtue* being so pure and excellent, as she only aymeth at
perfect happiness* if the corruption and disobedience of the body, did not
contaminate and defile her. And therefore the Philosophers say, when she is in
the company of good men she possesses joy, but among evil, is evermore in
heaviness: for the soul is occupied in heavenly contemplation, and delighted
to know her Creator, his omnipotent majesty and power, the works of nature:
but being imprisoned follows the bodies inclination, The Christian Virtue.
and by that means is kept back from the haven whereunto it would most
willingly arrive. But according to a Christian exposition, the very faculties
of the soul, are so essentially defiled with Adams transgressions, that it
has no power to think one good thought, or beget an acceptable motion, before
it be regenerated and borne anew; for Christian Virtue stands in Faith, Hope,
and Charity, not fashioned according to Philosophy; but to have him the
Author, which is both truth and righteousness.

We must not rest then upon the morrall virtue, and make that the chief good,
which are but steps to clyme up thereunto, as the wise Heathen taught: for
all their doctrine, was but to fashion the outward man to civil obedience,
making that the end which are but motives to the end. For it is not all one, to
be a morrall wise man, and a good Christian, a great proficient in humane
Sciences, and a great Clarke in divine mysteries, here is a maine difference,
let no man repose himself, upon such a sandy and shallow foundation, if he
will stand sure: but build on Christ the Rock, the bright star of the
immortal majesty, on him to cast Anchor, purify the inward parts, and dig
up that dunghill of filthiness, derived from original corruption. Man's
happiness stands not in pleasures, honor, nor in the goods of Fortune: but
only in those holy Virtues which proceed from a pure heart. This is the plain
pathway to sanctity, and immortallitie, Vice sincking down to hell, the one,
with Eagle-winges mounts up to heaven* the other, clogges the soul with leade^
thoughts, benumming her dexterity, for so high a flight.

But to prosecute my intent, which is to handle the morrall Virtues, and lay
open the parts of humanity, it will not be amiss to touch by the way, the
four chief and principal Virtues, called cardinal Virtues, as Prudence,
justice, Fortitude, and Temperance, which are distinguished one from the other
by their several properties, all conioyne in one, and make a union: For though
Virtue be subsisting in one single being, yet because of diverse works, she is
deuidable, and albeit many sprigges grow out of these four branches, yet is
she called Virtue in the singular number.

Prudence.
Prudence, is a certain brightness shining in the mind, by which the light
of truth is descried, foreseeing what is fit to be done, a true affection,
laboring by reason to find out the quallitie, and to judge what is just, fit,
honest, profitable, equal, and good, not only advisedly looking to the first
motive cause: but also to the consequent and final ends, by this the present
felicity, and infelicitie of this life, is sweetly tempered, and all things
ordered in comeliness.

Whosoever rashly sets upon his business without her, rusheth upon the
rocks of error* and by his own headie opinion comes soon to ruin:
because it is impossible to effect any thing well, unless he be guided by her
light, neither can he be able to discern good from evil, things profitable,
from things prejudicial: but as a blind man does venterously travail
without a guide, and at every step ready to stumble: so he that is ignorant
in plotting his affairs, wadeth in darkness, wherein every storm of trial
does ouerturne his policy.

A prudent man, is so cautelous and vigilant, as well in the consideration of
fore-passed dangers, as in preiudicating perils to come, that he meets with
every mischief, and is not overtaken, with non putaui, had I wist, for having
set his rest on a firm ground, does not doubt but expect, not repent in the
end, but rejoice in the whole action: so that she regards things past,
present, and to come, and bends her force to that part that is needful, to
defend the weakness of reason, and when she has drawn out the plot, which
honesty does require, commits it to Sapience, whch as a hand-maide, is
ready to execute that in the outward work, which before was determined. The
main difference between these two, is, the former is a general comprehending
and knowledge of things; the other an experience of that in action. For as by
reasoning, reading, and conuersing with wise men, a man may understand much:
yet without practice all is nothing. Before a Physician does minister to his
Patient, he searches into the nature of the disease, and acquaints himself
with the state of the body, which having once found out, it is to no end if he
apply not himself in outward means, to benefit the sick person with his
potion: So if there be but a defused Scire tuum nibil est: nisi te scire, ho^
sciat alter.
knowledge of things, and as it were such a collection, as by it the
understanding is bettered, and no outward demonstration, it is as treasure hid
in the earth and serves for no use: for there be marks to know a prudent man
by, if he be unjustly vexed, troubled, Ennius.
or in poverty, sickness, and tossed too and fro in Notes of a wise man.
misery, if he rejoice in these afflictions, and patiently bear the cross,
the same is a prudent man, and his suffering makes it a mean to him: but when
a man is chastised either in body or goods, and will not suffer without grief
and muttering, the same is a vicious and imprudent man. To be brief, she is
the right disposer of all things, an enemy to ignorance, the key of knowledge,
which opens the rich treasure of divine and humane things; doing nothing but
that which is right, just, and praiseworthy.

Justice.
Justice, is a virtue that gives to eueryman his own, the first and
principal part whereof is, and ever was, to do God that honor which is due
to his divine majesty, consisting in fear, love, and reverence, for as
Justice will equally render to every man his own, and bring discording things
to an equality, by considering the difference between them: so much more and
most of all, it is most just, to love God, of whom we have all that we have,
and being perished by original corruption, were eftsoons recovered, by the
sufferings of his son: this part of Justice, ought to be embraced with other
affection than the Heathen, who wandering in the darkness of ignorance, know not
God as he is. A just man coueteth not that that is an others, but rather
neglects his own for the good of the Commonwealth, nor with a greedy
humor, does incroach upon his neighbors possession. Without Justice, no estate
can subsist, for all virtues are comprehended under the name of Justice, of
which a man is said to be a good man, for all the other virtues cannot make a
man good, if Justice be absent. Tully calls her the Lady and Queen of all
other virtues; by her is the society of man preserved, the most excellent
blessing that ever God gave to man was, to be governed by Justice, which
bridleth the hot fury of the wicked, comfort the innocent, and equally
decideth between Meum, and Tua^. And he that is exercised herein, his mind is
lifted up to the apprehension of greater wisdom. For howsoever the world is
troubled with hurly burly, yet the quietness of his mind is no whit
distracted, but resting in security, smileth at the worlds turbulent state.
Finally it is a blood in the vain, giving life to the whole body, the head of
all virtues: for of her self she may do many things, but without her the rest
can do nothing rightly.

^ortitude.
Fortitude is a greatness of mind, which without furious or rash resolution,
fears not to hazard it self in the greatest perils, and with eager pursuit
to hunt after honorable actions, thirsting after glory, not respecting the
tedious difficulty of the passages thereunto, to encounter wiih dangers, wade
through the mystic clouds of darkness, and willingly endure all bitterness of
fortune, for the safeguard of the country, such were Scipiones, Fabij,
Alcibiades, Hannibal, etc. who by their valor and great prowes, reached to the
top of honor. Neither is true Fortitude measured by the compass of a great
body, nor by doing great enterprises, in respect of the huge stature, but by a
fierce and courageous spirit, stri^ing The cause makes a Martyr.
in a good cause, the cause is all, it is not the torment that makes a Martyr,
but the cause for which he suffers. So that to speak properly, Fortitude is
that which is granted upon good cause, and possible to be achieved, such true
valor was in David, who could not abide to hear the name of God blasphemed by
such a monster as Goliath, and therefore knowing God would aid his enterprise,
he relied not upon his own strength, but cast off all vain glory, for when
matters are rightly attempted, many strange adventures proceed, even as it
were by miracle: a just and honest cause makes a man bold, hardy, and
venterous, to strive against one of greater force; as King Alexander, being of
small body, sought hand to hand with Porrus, which was a more mighty man: it
is not then any great person or huge Collosse, that can triumph over a good
cause.

The Roman Scipio was wo^t to say, no man ought to levy war, or fight with
his enemy without just cause offered: but if he were provoked by an iniust
intrusion, it booteth not to tarry til they come, but intercept the^ in
coming, for such cause gives encouragement to set upon them freely.

As when our common enemies in 88. with their Spanish The Spanish brauadoes.
braues meant to have invaded our Territories, and came armed with instruments
of tirannie to insult over our nation, and to bring our necks into a Spanish
yoke, it pleased God to abate their pride, and turn their cruelties into
their own bosoms. Here was cause to make a coward valiant, and the fearful
forward to fight, because he was compelled to take up weapons for his own
safety; and he that will not defend himself, is not worthy to live in peace,
especially when his wife, children, father, mother, brothers, sisters, yea the
whole Country is in danger ^o be torn and rent in pieces by savage and
merciless tyrants. When it is for a common defense, is not he a wretch that
will sit still and see his mothers throat cut? What if he dye in the conflict?
were he not better to dye honorably like a Martyr and soldier of Christ, then
live to see the ruin and desolation of his whole Country? wherefore no man
ought to stagger or saint at a good cause, but be the more imboldened, because
it gives good encouragement. We may call to mind, and we cannot remember it
too often, the overthrow they then had, not simply in respect of our own
prowess, but by the assistance of a higher power, we being but a poor
handful to their great multitude; they came like Briarius, threatening the
heavens, and casting mountains at Jupiter; yet their glorious title of
invincible was confounded, to their God g^ue the victori^.
shame, and our glory: this we may think upon with reverence, but ascribe the
honor of the victory to him by whose means it was wrought. If war be
levied without cause, or if one man shall be so foole-hardie to attempt things
impossible, and presume on his strength to assail a greatmany, beyond hope to
vanquish, it is no marvel, if the success fall out against his desire, for
Ne Herculus contra duos. For Hercules himself held it odds to deal with two:
but when for the common good of the Country (as I said before) any man shall
undertake some hard adventure to free it of some imminent peril (if sent by
imperial command) though he loose his life in the action, yet for that he is
endued with true Fortitude, does win immortality: as the three Romans called
Decij, who for the safeguard of their Country auowed to dye, and with resolute
and undaunted courages, pierced the host of their enemies, and though they lost
their lives, yet by their stout example gave such audacitie and courage to the
rest of the Romans by provoking them forward, as they easily obtained the
victory, which was thought to be unconquerable. I might speak the like of
Codrus, Marcarius, Curtius, Marcus, and Regulus, which dyed most willingly for
their Country. I might recite here also a Catalogue of those valorous English
Knights, that have honorably yielded up their lives in the field of Mars, for
their Prince and Country: but that I intend not now to make an Apology of
this Virtue, but refer it to a Treatise of Justice, which I suppose shall
succeed this work, especially upon the improuement of this, God giving me
time and quietness of mind to perform that.

This manliness is a Virtue that fights in defense of equity and just
dealing: but we never find that any man got true praise and honor by rash
fury, for nothing is honest that is void of Justice. He that is hasty to
surprise a man, and soon moved to impatiencie without just cause cause does
rather merit the name of leaud boldness, then manly courage, because this
Virtue stands in honest deeds, and not in vain glory, and being truly
carried, serves as a hammer to beat down those Vices, that oppose themselves
to the beauty of Virtue, which chiefly does appear, when preferment does lift
a man alo^t, by embracing humility, and ouercomming pride, which soon creepes
upon the advanced: or if tossed in adversity he be vigorous, and bear an
invincible courage, to combat against the passion of the mind, which is ready
basely to decline: for whatsoever falls out crookedly, is turned to the
better part, she inableth to undergo damage, to bear injury, to be patient,
and not to st^rre, but for a common good, or his private defense, when a
violent intrusion is made unto his person.

Many hide themselves under the wings of this Virtue, that never seek to
apprehend her aright, and would True valor stands not in vain qua^elling.
seem valorous and magnanimous, when they are but white liuerd cowards and
miscreants: as many of these brawlers and swashbucklers, whose hot blood once
stirred, cannot be cooled without revenge and field-meetings, which for every
light cause they undertake, and so violently swaid with fury, that they rush
forward into all desperation, without reverence of the laws of God, the law of
nature, love, charity, and which is above all, care of their own salvation,
do arrogant to themselves glory, by defacing and spoiling the Image of their
Creator. The sons of Cain thus maistred with wrathful fu^ie, murder and
dismember their brethren, and as catiues and slaves, bend the will to such
inhumane cruelty, and so become branded to everlasting destruction. Now if all
Virtue does consist in obeying God, keeping his laws, maistring wicked anger,
and holding concord, how can that be praised which is against such a blessed
assembly of virtues? or how think they, that that offense can be remitted,
which is abhorred, detested, and so expressly prohibited in the sixth
Commandment? men ought to live in Christian amity, and leave all revenge to
him, who says, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it. The poor Cinick, when
one had hit him on the ear, I thought (quoth he) I had left The patience of ^
Heathens memorable.
one place uncovered.

Socrates being told one spoke many railing and evil words of him, was no whit
moved thereat: and being asked why he would bear so great indignity,
answered; if he spoke truth, I have no cause to be grieved, being justly
blamed; if false, I have less cause to be angry, because that which he spoke
pertained not to me. O that men would learn patience ^ and not so often fight
and murder one an other, for verbal and idle quarells: for now if one amongst
a hundred be patient, quiet, will carry coals, and meekely suffer rebuke, he
is noted of cowardice, and deuoyd of manly parts.

Now lastly follows Temperance, as a sad and sober Matron, a provident guide
and wise Nurse, awaiting Temperanc^*
that voluptuousness have no pre-eminence in the soul of man, the most
glorious Virtue in any kind of estate, she orders the affections with
continency, an enemy to lust, and a mediocritic in the pleasures of the body,
whose office is to count nothing that may be repented of afterward, nor to
exceed the bounds of modesty, but to keep desire under the yoke of reason.
Of the lyneaments of her perfection, the whole world does subsist and abide,
even from the lowest to the highest, without whom our lusts would overthrow
our understanding, and the body rebel against all good order, and the habit of
reason wholly suppressed: for she tempereth and keeps in frame This little
m^cr^co^mi^ is vph^ld by Temperance.
the whole body of man, without whose aid many enemies would creep in, and
infect our best parts, and utterly ruinate and cast down the bulwark of
reason, and walls of understanding: but he that does sacrifice his endeavors
to so divine an essence, swimmeth safe between two Rivers deuoyd of danger.
Extremes are ever hurtful; for if a man eat too much or too little, does it
not hurt the body? so is it of too immoderate labor, or too much idleness, of
too much boldness, and too much cowardnesse: these extremities are vicious and
evil, but the mean does temper them both.

No man is wise, happy, or any thing worth, if Temperance square not out the
course of his life. And herein the benefit of old age is to be honored, for
that it has this pre-eminence over youth, time has weakened their affections,
abated their courage, and stayed the intemperate blastes of unbridled
liberty, and by long experience have gotten a more large portion then they,
whose affections being strong, and discretion weak, set themselves against
this Virtue, eclipse her brightness with the fogges of ignorance. And for this
cause have wise men so joyfully embraced old age, which Tully so highly
applaudes in his book De Senectute.

This is guided by Prudence, which does govern the life of man with such
reason, as she is ever careful for the welfare of the body, by curbing those
passions of the mind, which are vehement and unruly: by her the mind is made
capable of honest actions, and beautiful demeanours, and like a provident
gouernesse, rules over concupiscence and floods of lusts, which would else
surround the purity of the mind. A potion to purge the soul, an Antidote
against pride, and a valiant tryumpher over flaming desires, not like Aetna,
too hot, or Caucassus too cold: but is content between both, and rejoices
in it.

If the body be not dieted with moderation, it will prove a stubborn servant
to the soul, unfruitful, fit for nothing but thorny cogitations, the greatest
enemies to the spiritual powers that can be, for the flesh pampered in
delicates, or kept short of her natural needments, is effeminated, corrupted,
and weakened, and many diseases be gotten, which are all staid by a mean and
temperate diet and the boiling lusts of the body assuaged.

Thus far of these Virtues: more might be added, if I meant to entreat of
them at large: but this brief recapitulation, may serve as an introduction, to
our following discourse. Omnis virtus, vna virtus absoluta, All Virtues, are
but one simple Virtue, being chained and Plato.
linked so near together, as one cannot be sundred from the other, without
disparagement of the whole. Fortitude is a noble Virtue, but if destitute of
Justice, she is hurtful to the good; if Temporance keep not her under she
will turn into rage; and if Prudence be absent, they all fall into error.
There is a mutual league, a proximitie, and near acquaintance, which does
conglutinate and join them all in one, one must have relation to an other, and
follow by degrees; Piety, Truth, and Temperance, must march before Fortitude;
In a word, Virtue is no other but Vitium fugere: hating Vice, and loathing
evil, and we better know her by her contrary, then by her self, which does
make the imagination guess at Virtue a far off: so that knowing Vice, is a
good ground of Virtue, whereby the inward powers are held in, with unspotted
simplicity, far more better then such as cunningly seek to know what
Virtue is, then willingly betake themselves to follow it in their life, so that
knowledge is not enough alone, unless it be practiced by outward action: for
it is better to do wisely, then wisely to devise.

So that in general, Virtue rightly carried, comprehends whatsoever, is
conducing and leading to a good and holy life, and he that once has tasted
the sweetness of one, is drawn with much desire to an other; one good thing
begets an other, and taking once a deep impression, his estate is thereby
preserved incorruptible without change: whereas if a man takes hold on
external goods, and lean to the mutabilitie of Fortune, does often stumble
upon many dangerous Rocks, and fall into wretchedness, when Virtue will
firmly uphold a man in the midst of all calamity.

Horatius.
Villius argentum est auro, virtutibus ^^r^m.
Silver is cheaper then Gold, and Gold of less price then Virtue. She is of
great moment and most inestimable value, although a carnal and gross mind,
cannot equally deem the price of so rare a Jewel, for where ignorance does
cover the mind, she is rejected and held of base esteem: as a simple peasant
trampleth many wholesome herbs underfoot, which a skillful herbalist would
carefully gather up, and extract some rare quintessence out of their hidden
secrets. Will thou build thy safety upon a sure foundation? then here is the
rock that no tempest can shake; here is a shelter to defend thee from perils,
a safeguard to preserve the purity of the soul, from being polluted by the
concupiscence of the body, and though never so many storms of adversity and
shewers of persecution, beat upon thee (being in this world as in a
wilderness of woes) yet shrowding thy self under the Cannapie of Virtue, thou
ioyest in the midst of all sorrow, and though the whole world be of an
uproar, yet what is that to thee? thou art no whit moved thereat, for Animo
calestia tangis, thy affections are mounted up to heaven, and thy mind advanced
above all earthly weakness.

It is not only hard, but very difficill to find out, which of the Virtues
are most predominant, that the victory may be imputed to her, because they are
all knit in one single union, for the good of the soul. For as one link of a
chain draws an other, and an other after, til it come to the last, the
Antecedent the Relative: so one Virtue is an Adamant that draws an other
Virtue unto it.

And though she take up her lodging in a crooked and deformed body (as she is
ever ready to dwell where she finds the heart yeeldable to honesty) yet
penetrating with inward desire, and bringing the straggling powers of the mind
to a uniformity, does make up the want of nature, with a supply of grace,
causing him shine like Crystal, for when the life is laudably lead, there
appears so great a glory, that it is not only admirable to the eyes of man,
by reason of formal carriage in humanity: but also high pleasing to God, by
the intellectual goodness, Virtue, is the spur of Honor. It is not the
abundance of wealth and great dignity, that makes a man truly noble: but the
possession of Virtue, which is true honor and ancient riches, and is not
gotten by loytering Idleness; but with industry and much labor, for Ardua
virtutis via est, It Is labors force that carries a man to Virtue, a hard
entrance, a continual perseverance, because he must encounter against his
passions, and stop the floods of intemperance: for such high and admirable
things cannot be had without effectual endeavor, and by how much the more
straighter the passage is thereunto; by so much the more careful must he be,
least it slip away through arrogance or vain glory: for in Virtue, pride
begins to swell, or some Vice or other to creep in, which if not beaten back at
the first, will hazard the whole frame of Virtue; or being maistred by some
ouer-weening thought, or singularly carried away with self-love, a passion of
the mind disquieting reason, does wholly estraunge himself from her
Beatitude* loosing those complements which formerly he was possessed of.

Mayor nobilitas.
The reward of Virtue, is true generositie, and where it is joined with great
possessions, and has long continued in the house of a Gentleman, without
corruption of blood, that nobility is most to be honored, forasmuch as long
continuance has given it the badge of glory. Plato, divides Nobility ^oure
ways, the first says he, are those that rise from good and just parents; the
second those whose parents were Princes, or great men; the third famouzed for
martial exployts; the Quadri faria nobilitas.
fourth which excel in any kind of learning, and for Virtues sake only are
seated in the place of honor; these latter are vere nobiles, truly noble, made
noble by Vera nobilitas.
Virtue. Yet if one shall stand upon his riches, parentage, office, place,
dignity, and by these only suppose to win the place of true honor, he
climeth a rotten ladder: for what is all this worlds pomp, or titulary
preferments, if not achieved by Virtue? or what does great birth avail if he
debase it by his ill life? or a virtuous memory of his ancestors, if he
follow not their example? are they not like smoke and vapors, which vanish
with the Sun? can a man without offense brag of the Virtues of his ancients,
if his own life be vicious? For has he not broken off the succession of
Virtue by wilful detraction? wherefore what worldly glory soever is otherwise
had, is filched, and her chastity at no hand will be defiled with such
bastardly plants. Praises and commendations wait ever on Virtue. And therefore
Tully in his Tuscul: questions, defines honor to be a union of praises of
good men, which judge of Virtue without partiality, and not by the opinion of
the multitude, which look more to a velvet Iacket, the outward bravery, then
to the mind how it is qualified: so that the nobleness of man is his virtue,
and they ought to be called noble and honorable, which are most honest and
virtuous.

If I should enter into the wonderful account which the Heathen made of Virtue,
I might show how Num^ Pompilius, was taken from the plough, and chosen the
second King of the Romans, what was the cause think ye? but his Virtue and
wisdom, for which they thought him worthy of so high a calling; this they
reckened true nobility: likewise Quintius, a poor Husbandman, was made
Dictator, which was a great office, and for three months had a Regal power,
and when he had ended his office, went again to his old labor without
indignity to his person, or derogating ought from his worthiness, of this
high estimation was Virtue among them.

He that is nobly borne, and descended of an ancient house, should bear in
his mind the remembrance of his birth, and frame himself to imitate his
parents in Virtue, as well as he looks to possess their inheritance, and
joining these two in one, is truly noble: for if his auntients were more noble
then he, whose dignity he enjoys, his praise is diminished, and becomes a
bye-word and a reproach, among them that have heard of the former Virtue; or if
they were vicious and of evil life, then to avoid the scandal in himself, to
abhor the like, and covet to live in Virtue: so shall he purchase true honor
to his riches, and worthily be deemed to enjoy the inheritance. And there is
great reason to induce him thereunto: for of such a one there is a general
expectation of some notable Virtue; the eyes of all men are bent upon him as on
a Commet or blazing star, prying narrowly into him how he lives, what he
does, to what science he be^deth his mind, and what good he does in the
Commonwealth, for which he is borne, and as if his private actions should be
openly done, no one word or deed of his can escape the common censure. It is
the more behouefull, then to apply the mind to laudable actions, and to do good
in the place where he is, for so much as he may appropriate to himself a good
report for well doing, and by that means participate the hearty prayers, and
many good wishes of the common people; gain their love, and induce the^ with
more facility, by his good example, to trace in the wholesome path that leads
to the house of honor.

Likewise the unknown, the issue of a base stock, obscurely brought up, if he
will be advanced to the type of honor, must addict himself to Virtue, which
will be so much the more glorious at the last, by how much more obuious his
estate was at first. And this I suppose, should be a spur or goade to push
them forward, because they shall not only be admired by the praises of the
good, which are the badges and simballes of Virtue, but also acquire perpetual
fame and renown, as the surname thereof. What should I say? Virtue is a The
commod^ie of Virtues is unspeakable.
pearelesse and precious Jewel, so rare and excellent, that it can neither be
sufficiently commended, nor worthily esteemed: all humane things do faint,
fail, sink down, and decay, when that only will abide for ever, an honor
for youth, a crown to age, a comfort in prosperity, a succor in adversity,
delightful at home, not burdensome abroad, and a pleasant walking-mate to
accompany a man wheresoever he goes. What a divine glory is here? that
strikes the beholder in admiration, dazeleth his sight, and forces the very
abject to reverence him in whom it does appear, for she is so beautiful a
Lady, as she makes many gaze at her a far off, that have no power to come
nigh her, but strikes into wonderment at her incomparable majesty, are
metamorphosed, as it were by Medusa.

And howsoever it is that many are so blockish and senseless, that they wander
up and down like vagabounds and base peasants, and make no account of Virtue
and honesty: yet are they forced, will they, nill they, to fly to her for
succor in time of want, and hide their misdeeds under her golden wings. And
verily, no pretense or vain show can prevail against her, but that she will
have the just victory and triumph over those that have despised her; and when
they are on the top of their hateful envy, they shall wish her company, and
desire to embrace her, though it be but with dull affection, which the Poet
well notes, Ho^^b. 1.
Virtutem incolumen odimus: sublatam ex occulis querimus inuidi. When Virtue
does offer her self, we deny her, but afterward seek her greedily.

If thou therefore, whatsoever thou art, do neglect to follow her in time,
thou shall be taught by experience, when it is too late, what it is to cast
off thy proffered happiness, a faithful teacher, but a severe and sharp
corrector: seek her then while she may be found, and be as ready to
entertain her into service, as she is willing to serve; possess thy self of
her, and she will Register thy ^ame in her golden Book, of never dying honor.

Worldly honor is no true happiness.
It is not the riches of Cressus, the tryumphes of Caesar, the conquests of
Alexander the great, or any worldly pomp, can make a man truly happy, or
crown him with true honor, but only Virtue. For if we value men by outward
prosperity, we deceive our judgment, and swerve from equity.

Touching wealth, it is like poison in a golden ^uppe, and commonly where it
abounds most, there Virtue is set by least, a laborinth wherein many are
lost, not only subject to chance, and infract fortune, but also to
misgouernment, pride, ambition, and many other vices; for good manners
oftentimes is corrupted by ouer-regarding riches, and moderate dispositions
turned into greedy desires; grant it lifts up a man's estate, to make his
delight subject to his will, indeed he is somewhat the wealthier, but no whit
the honester, unless as gotten by Justice, so used in Temperance, and
distributed in charity, and if the rich man be also a good man, let him take
heed least they be a sting to his conscience, and draw him to sinful
pleasures.

So that the verdict, must pass upon honesty, and the quality of Virtue,
more precious then the quantity of money; for as a rich man covetous, gripple,
and earthly minded, is not to be respected, so a poor man simple honest, and
well qualified, is to be regarded, since the one is as a craggie flint stone,
the other a precious and princely Diamond, and this was the cause a Prince of
Troy chose rather to marry his daughter to a poor man honest, then a rich man
vicious: For it is better (quoth he) to have a man without money, then money
without a man, for Virtue is great riches, when Vice is like a sheep with a
golden fleece; and as the wise school master Isocrates, counseled his Pupil
Demon* to make more account of a poor good man, than of a rich man not so
honest.

H^ra* ad iccium.
Pauper enim non non est, cui rerum suppetit vsus. He is rich enough that is
content with his state. We must not measure men, by those things as are subject
to the tottering wheel of Fortune, which as Meteors in the air vanish as soon
as they seem: but for Virtue abides to eternity.
that which is permanent, durable, constant, and firm, which is Virtue, only
Virtue, and nothing but Virtue; and therefore least worldly regard should
strive against reason, the immoderate care of this life, must be sprinkled with
the water of provident respect, in considering those inconveniences that rise
out of the root of abundance: Man's felicity, is not in riches, they are
gotten with pain, and lost with grief; pleasures end in sorrow,
vainglory, vanishes; if we think it is in wit, that is perfect folly;
for a wise man, ever esteems an other wiser then himself; Quoad Deum,
touching God, and in this stands the greatest point of wisdom, when a man
does neither exalt himself, above a stronger judgment, nor insult over those
that be weak, but ready to submit his opinion, to a better information: and
has such a slender care of his own^ worthiness, that if he hap to possess
some worldly honor, does blushingly receive it, as a thing not deserved: so
that we cannot find the perfect good we look for, but only and altogether, in
the exercise of Virtue.

A foolish opinion.
Yet now men hunt after Riches, as though there were no true honor without it,
and that to be only rich, were to be only happy, and so set their felicity
on a slipperie foundation: but how false this opinion is, does appear
already. For be it that honor, be not given as our ancients did, only to
the virtuous and good, yet shall the virtuous man be praised, be he never so
poor, even of his most utter enemy, as Metellus Macid^nicus, praised Scipi^,
for his Virtues, and wept for his death, though he were his mortal foe, for no
man be he never so envious, can take that from him which Virtue has merited:
but must, and will, maugre his head, applaud and commend him for an honest man,
even behind his back, and be forced to admire those good parts that are in
him, when an other man being rich, and nothing within, but all without, shall
be clawde and flattered before his face, but cursed and band behind his
back, and this pre-eminence it has, maugre the worlds malignitie, that where
this Christian verity does shine, she forces the gazer to break out into
wonderment, and spread that glorious report which it justly meriteth: yet there
be some so sottish and mad, that though they know themselves but flattered,
suppose they be by and by praised, when he neither speaks it with his heart,
but for some carnal reason, and they themselves know it to be false which he
speaks. Believe no man therefore of your own goodness, better then your
self, if there be ought in you worthy of it, if you deserve it not, think
assuredly they do but mock and deceive you, and with their tongues seem to be
with you, when their hearts be against you. This is a sure token, for a man to
see into his own Virtue, first he sueth not for honor, but honor follows
him; and secondly is not grieved, though he be unregarded, nor bears
indignation at others happiness, and this same thing is it that we call honor:
now seeing this worldly honor is of so small price, A true vertuou^ ma.
it is the part of a base and vile mind, to believe glozing and fair words,
and gross ignorance it is indeed, to build honor upon the brainsicke and rude
opinion.

Now what are all the goods of this world? but a troublesome carriage and
greeuance, because they bring no assured comfort, but do rather with their
weight, pluck down those minds, that be flying toward heaven, and hinder a
man in the passage to glory.

Nevertheless, this might somewhat dismay the weakness of man to strive for
Virtue, because commonly it has no reward in this world, but wandreth up and
down naked, and forsaken: but this is no disparagement to a good man, for
look what he possesses, be it more or less, is so moderatly expended, that
it is competent and sufficient, and this is the very fountain, whence all
contentment proceeds, for being well composed within, regards nothing
without, but a just applause for well doing: only covetous, to carry away a
good report of his Virtues, which as Trophies are hung over his Tomb, for
eternal monuments. Virtuti^merces, ^adem and labor, illa and trophium est.

Touching such as are laden with this worlds dross, and moistened with golden
showers, living in voluptuous and vain pleasures, and defile those blessings
with their lusts, what should we think of this? but that the great and rich
God, is content to throw and scatter about his goods, among a sort of pedegrant
peasants, and insaciable horse-leaches, which greedily scrape it up to fill
their Cofers, and feed their lusts: not thinking one day they must reckon of
the well employment.

Riches puff up men in pride.
Riches, not rightly ordered, provoke many hurtful and wicked desires, the
mother of pride, contempt, disdain, self-love, and the very fire that burns
up all good motions, if not quenched with moderation, for they puff up a man
in opinion to be some body, when he is no body, and to think himself truly
honorable, because he is honored of the vain world: supposing that to be
rich in costly suits, is the only glory. This makes them spurn at all good
aduertisements, and despise Christian admonitions; for how comes it to pass,
that so many great, rich, and mighty men of the world, are some Athists,
Papists, Neuters, N^lla fidians* Vain hono^r.
etc. and so cold in charity? but only this, impatiencie of good counsel,
being hard to find a faithful man, that will boldly speak without
partiallitie: but elther is blinded with greatness, or driven to silence for
outward respects, to keep in favor with smooth words, especially when his
state dependes upon great men, there is then a Filme grows over the
eyesight, and such a dimnesse, as he cannot see, no not the Sun at noone
days, be it never so clear or splendidious, but be rather as clouds to hide
their shame, or instruments to incite them to more lewdness. For if such a
one fall into a gross error, and by his life be a scandal to the good,
living openly in some vile crime, he shall not want trencher-flies, clawbackes,
and Sycophants, that will cry peace, peace, when he is at war with his own
conscience, and feed his humor with flattery, be his life never so sinful;
such may be fitly called seruingmen, for they never serve God, but soothe them
up to serve their own turn, they pretend much love and great service, when
it is nothing but superficial flattery, if these see but a small moate amiss, a
wrinkle awry, how tentible they be to mend it! but though the mind be never so
spotted with vice, the eye cannot pierce it, be it ner so visible, and indeed
if the humor of their master, take it in ill part, they may chance for their
intelligence to be turnde out of all preferment; O how they will storm if
controwlde in their course! and take The m^lici-A^h^st never want slanders.
it exceedingly ill, as though they had a dispensation to do what they list
without reproof, because they are great. If Preachers cry out against vice in
general, then is it specially applied, he meant me, he spites me, and so goes
about to stop their mouths, by accusing them of ^^yling, sedition, or
slaundring: or if privately admonished, then are they busy, factious, and
stray from their text: yet for all this, a good man will not be abashed to
whisper into their ears privately, or inueigh against vice publicly, come what
will come. Solon compares (not unfitly) laws to copwebs, for that great flies
can break through at ease, when the lesser are entangled: in like manner great
men can soon rush through the walls of law, and break down Iron Gates;
when the weak must abide the extremity, and have no other defense but their
own innocence. Thus does might deceive them: but A^risacra fames quid non?
what cannot gold bring to pass? it can dim the clearest sight, and raise up an
humble mind to a haughty courage: is it not strange that a base pedanticall
parasite, in hope of a lease, or some small favor, should clappe his hands at
wickedness? and that a man endued with reason, and has the use of his five
wits, should beled by flattery, and made blind with plausible words, not to
see his own faults, though they be as thick as the darkness of Egypt, to be
felt with the hand and not seen with the eye? for be it he is so obdurate,
that he cannot, or will not see them: yet must he needs be noted, pointed at,
live defamed, as a may game to the worst, and a lamentable spectacle to the
best.

A memorable example of a Heathen ^ing
I remember I read once of Alexander, if happily I can now repeat it, who on a
time vehemently blamed his Steward, for that having served him so long, and
been so conversant in his affairs, so familiar with his private doings, and
lay as it were in his bosom, as if he had been his second self, that in all
the time of his service could not spy ought amiss, to dim his glory: For
it is impossile (quoth he) in so many years, and so much opportunity, that I
should never offend and blemish my virtue, with some dishonorable action:
deserving either prewarning in the beginning, or reproof in the end, and so
expelled him his service.

Here is a mirror of true honor, this noble Prince, cast off his Steward,
because he concealde his faults Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit.
amongst Christians, that should be inspired with higher wisdom; the contrary
is daily practiced, the ^eruant shall be dismissed for telling truth, and honest
minds purchase shrewde rebukes; this headstrong opinion is the downe-fall of
all good order: for when men-pleasers, and claw-backes, do lead captivity
cap^iue in the fetters of vanity, a multitude of honest minds are in danger
to be seduced, to imitate their course of life. Sycophants are dangerous
enemies to Virtue.
For as the Mariners in a ship, have their eyes earnestly bent upon the
Master, that sits at the helm, and ready at his beck to do his will; so
such men as stand up in the Commonwealth, and hold the Rudder of direction in
their hands, are duly watched, and attentively ouerseene, and according to
their aim, the common sort bend their course.

O how riches mock men with certainty, when nothing is more mutable and
slippery, with perfect happine^^e, when nothing is more wretched, the nurs^ of
pride, the school of abuse, and the guide that leads into many temptations,
it is much better rather to shine in Virtue, then in riches. And therefore our
Savior Christ in the Gospel, comp^reth the felicity of a rich man, to an
impossibility: ^aying, that it is as hard for him to climb to heau^n, being
laden with dross, as for a Cammell to creep through the eye of a Needl^: and
this made the Philosophers in their humane wisdom, so much despise worldly
honor, and undergo ^^amples of con^emn^rs o^ money.
poverty with so great patience. A^nacreon* having a huge mass of money sent
him by Policrates, could never rest till he was rid of it again, his mind
troubled, his sleep broken, returned it again to him that sent it: saying he
never lived in so great fear and dread all his life long, as he had done
those two days while the money was in his house. Pho^^^n, in like manner, when
the king had sent him a great benevolence, he asked him that brought it* what
moved his master to send him so much money, seeing the king did not know him*
answered, it was in respect of the great fame he heard of his virtues: If that
be the cause (quoth he) carry it back to him again, and let him leave me as I
am, and ^ot by increase of wealth to diminish my virtues. Diogines refused all,
and craved nothing, but the common benef^^ of the Sun, which Alexander had
taken from him, by standing between him and it.

Plutarch reports, that when Alexander upon a time came into a poor barren
Country, thinking to have made some great conquest, found the inhabitants
gathering roots and grass to ^ate, neither using force to repel and keep him
back, nor any means to dissuade him from his warlike attempt, but as poor
snakes, were altogether busied for their bell^es. The King considering their
poverty, and unfruitfulness of their country, had pity and compassion on
their misery, and bad them ask what they would, and it should incontinently
be granted. Quoth they (with one consent) give us everlasting life. Why how
can I give that (quoth he) that am but a mortal man? Then why seek you to win
the whole world, as though you were immortal, and should never dye? Zenon,
Crates, infinite were the examples of those that were ravished with the
formossitie and excellent hue of Virtue, that they contemned money, riches*
pomp, choosing poverty for the pure life of perfection, bearing the
bitterness of fortune with an unconquerable courage. The ancient victorious
Romans ^ought after Virtue, and by their noble deeds and heroical spirits,
got the palm of true honor, not sparing body or goods to advance the
Commonwealth; The shadow of virtue was more esteemed among the Heathen, then
the true body is now among the Christians.
in so much as many of them had not wherewith to endowe their daughters, nor
which was less, to defraye Funeral charges, but what they had out of the
common store, which by their conquests they had so greatly enriched, as S^ipio,
Sylla, and the great Pomp^y: for then Virtue was their chiefest riches. An
example we find of a noble captain, who being offered a great reward by his
General for his knighthood and valor done in service, with this gratulation
thou shall be paid in riches for thy valor, and not in honor for Virtue;
he refused the one, and took the other, counting riches not worthy to be
matched wi^h the dignity of V^rtue.

The Martyrs in all ages are much to be admired, that being endued with true
fortitude, did most willingly embrace their deaths, and suffer their bodies to
be rent, torn, and cruelly burned, by the persecutors, for the profession of
a good conscience, and by their meek sufferings, gained perpetual honor.

And although it falls out as for the most part it does, that men endued with
rare and singular virtues, are utterly forgotten, and scarce noted while they
live; yet being dead, their fame mounts up to heaven, and is divulged and
spread in the earth; for the want of a good thing, is then most precious when
it is removed farthest off. Cato was scarce known while he lived, but after
his death, was of great price; and all those famous Philosophers, Orators,
schoolmen, that lived in darkness, and were so basely esteemed, yet we see
by the memory of their goodly virtues, they now live again by being
recommended from one age to an other. And herehence sprung the multiplicitie of
Heathen gods, I mean from the notable virtues of singular men: for the
foolish antiquity, honored men as gods after their Cicerods not* d^or.
deaths, which either were of high dignity while they lived, of great birth,
or had done some notable benefit for their Country: for honor and reverence
is rehibited for some certain cause, rising of external things, framed by
Virtue, for honor is compounded of honesty. Honor ex virtute ^ritur.
H^rmes, or Mercurius, was of such fame among the Aegiptians, as he was
deified and made a god, calling him the Messenger of Jupiter. Mars, a great
warrior. Bacch^^, the inuenter of wine. Esculapius, a Physician. Pyth^* was so
reverently thought of amongst the Barbarians, for that by his singular wisdom
he had withdrawn the inhabitants from their vices, that they made of his
Cottage a Temple, giving him divine honor. What contumelies and strife was
about the body of Homer, when seven Cities were at variance to possess his
corpse when he was dead.

Septem vrbes certant, de stirpe insignis Homeri: Aulus bell.

Smyrna, Rhodes, Colophon, Salami^, Ios, Argos, Athenae.
Diogenes lived beggarly, in contempt, but after his death was honorably
interred in a monument of fame: so that the memory of these sprung from the
root of Virtue, and from some notable exployt, which got the peoples love, who
thought the applause of this world was no sufficient recompense for their
virtues.

The flourishing state of the Romans, Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and other
dominions, were all vpheld Virtues hold up a commonwealth.
by Virtue; for where Virtue is established, there Vice is detested: for as
light and darkness, fire and water, cannot be put together but one will
confound the others nature: so these two contraries, cannot jointly hold
possession, but one will utterly extinct the other; and where Virtue is wanting
in a general government, that Commonwealth is wholly overthrown.

Oderunt peccare boni, virtutis amore, Hora.

Oderunt peccare mali, formidine pane.
The good hate to sin because of Virtue, the bad for law, but he is only
good, that of his own will, and honest mind, eschueth evil more for conscience
sake, the^ for dread of man's punishment: the evil and vicious contrariwise,
are withheld by the rigor of Justice, and for fear of penalty, the
rebellion within is kept from outwardly working: so that nothing but the sword
of the magistrate does stay the hot rage of his fury, when the conscience lies
vast and open to all wicked desires, he is not to be numbered amongst virtuous
and good men. To conclude, where the Commonwealth is guided by godly laws of
Princes, the lamp of Virtue shining in the hearts of subjects, laudable
sciences embraced, Justice without partiality administered, the good protected,
the bad punished, and peace maintained; there is a happpie and blessed
government, a sweet harmony of nature, and an earthly Paradize: for he that
shall go about to counite and couple Vice and Virtue in one, puts a man and
a beast together: honesty admits no such knot, for the end of good, which
ought to be after one sort, must not be mingled with any thing disagreeable in
an other sort; for Virtue is no longer Virtue, if mixed with contrary
qualities: we may then safely conclude, that there is no goodlyer possession
then Virtue, and that it is perfect folly, to covet to be rich, mighty, and
creep up to worldly honor, and make so small reckening to be stored with
Virtue, which is so certain, the title so glorious and permanent, whereupon
one calls it Dimidium animae meae, which is not improperly spoken, for take
away virtue from a man, which is the plain path to sanctimony, he must be
numbered among those creatures that have only essence, and want understanding,
since he aymeth not at the purpose of his creation.

The audacitie and stout courage of the Heathen was such, that for morrall
virtues would ca^^ themselves into dangers, many times deadly, abandon riches,
endure poverty, abide tortures, desiring rather a poor quiet life to follow
Virtue, then by a prosperous state to draw the mind into a troublesome stir:
for poverty, performs that indeed, that all Philosophy goes about to
persuade.

But this does much shake the feeble conscience when we behold diverse good
men endued with rare virtues, and stored with good parts, notwithstanding
Virtue dis^^yed by poverty.
oppressed, discarred, and as it were made the scorn and May Game of the
world, finding no place of safety to rest upon, and the bad and vicious to sit
in Fortunes lap. Now when we mark these unproportionable accidents, only with
the eye of common reason, o^ how it distracteth the mind! accusing through
ignorance the just and divine providence, because he permits the good to be
punished with misery, and the bad to swim in prosperity: but if we bend our
wits to find out a deeper reason, we shall see that the good are not afflicted
for their hurt, but fatherly chastised for their better trial, the wicked not
favored, but severely punished* for God works al things for the good of those
that are his: yet who can deny, but that the burden of poverty is
importable, hunger, imprisonment, exile, intolerable persecution, and death
insufferable? all which is enough to drive a man to despair of his own
happiness, supposing God had utterly forsaken him: but the weight hereof is
lightened and made easy to them that steadfastly believe Gods promises, and
cast their care on him, as Peter wills: Cast thy care on him, for he has
care on thee. Moreover, though a man be poor, sick, diseased, An honest man
is not poor, for in adversity Virtue shows her chiefest operation.
and wayed down with a clogge of misery: yet can he not say, he is so bare
and naked, as utterly unable to help himself or an other: for admit he has no
tempo^all goods to help that way, yet can he harbor and show the rights of
hospitality: if he has neither of both, yet can he visit the sick, and
cheer up his mind with good counsel: if he be poor, sick, lame,
harborlesse, and comfor^lesse himself, yet can he help with his prayers, and
communicate his love by his orysons and devout supplications: so that every one
has a rich fountain within, which upon every occasion may be powered out, and
therefore no man can plead disabilitie, and want of means to relieve.

And what though a man have some casual deformity in his body, or be
unhappily fallen into a wretched estate* yet so long as his virtue and honesty
may be justified, he need not be ashamed of brusing the flesh, or feeling
penury, but rather boast and glory in them, for it cannot be any shame or
dishonor, to carry about him the visible tokens of such scarres, neither
does it any whit impair his credit with the wise and virtuous, nor make him
of less esteem with good men, much less with God, who puts no difference
between a king and a beggar, but only in obedience to his will: but here is
the ignominy, to be branded with the hot iron of wicked The simbolls of
vanity.
conversation; as when a man shall have his ears cut from his head, or marked
in the hand for some villainie, and the spots of vice so pregnant on his body,
or going under a hard censure, for a bad opinion justly conceived, in this case
he has small cause to glory or boast, but rather blush, be ashamed, and exile
himself from common society, and strive with humility to reform those
rebellious passions, that have so strongly lead him into such dishonestie.

But where Virtue does rule, the affairs and actions of this life are managed
with wisdom, and those swelling thoughts kept back, which as a raging flood
carry away all that is not ground*fast, that any outward grief is quietly
suffered, and patiently endured: for what adverse fortune soever happens, is
borne with contentment; in so much as neither poverty, sickness, crosses,
afflictions, or what calamity soever come, cannot move or distemper a stayed
mind: for being inflamed with a constant resolution, does fit himself to
bear the troubles of this life, with a valiant and immutable courage.

Stilp^ a Greek Philosopher, when the city where he dwelt was burnt to
sinders, his wife and children consumed in the flame, and all that he had
turned to ashes, himself hardly escaping with his life, was asked what he lost
in the fire (quoth he) I lost nothing, for Omnia Omnia mea mecu^ perto.
mea mecum porto, all that is mine I carry about me; meaning his virtues, the
only proper goods of a wise man, which no force of fire can consume, nor the
fury of no enemy take away. In like manner an other being told his own son was
dead, was no whit moved at y^ message; and being told again and again he was
dead, why quoth he, what of that? I knew I begat a mortal creature, and being
mortal, he must needs die: who could bear such great cause of grief without
some show of sorrow? but such small reckning did the wise Heathen make of
worldly losses: for it is the nature of man to relent, deplore, and be subject
to lamentations, yet their wisdom kept it under the yoke of reason: or who
in these days would Riche^ rightly used, are great blessing^.
refuse such preferment as Di^genes? o^ his load of gold, as Fabritius? or
cast his treasure into the sea, as Antippus* I verily suppose few or none
would be of that mind, neither is it so needfully required, Christian sorrow
for worldly losses is sufferable: riches and wealth to a good man are
comfortable, by reason he has greate^ means to do good, for the danger lies
in the abuse, and not simply in the use: for to a bad man they are indeed the
cause of more evil, because they minister more matter to his wicked and
sinful desire.

A man may warm him by a fire, though he burn not himself in it: so a rich
man may mod^rately use his riches, though with them he stop not up the gappe
to happiness: but the deadly hatred they bore to external things, showed
their love to Virtue, and the desire they had to diue into the depth of
wisdom; o how they strove about the contemplative and active life! some
choosing one, some the other, struggling who should come nearest under the wings
of Virtue, and yet for all this they labored but in darkness and blind
ignorance, and never attained to that true joy, by which the heart is exalted
to immortality: for the true and absolute Virtue is the true knowledge of GOD,
the way to worship him aright, and true comfort in adversity, for nothing can
be good without the sovereign good: if m^n be ignorant of that, all is
false, and their intentions go awrie, but the Philosophical summum bonum
rested in this; namely, in the quiet apprehending of reason, and fashioning the
outward man to civil obedience, and could never possess themselves of that
heavenly felicity, under which all Virtue is comprehended.

Poverty ought not to disqui^t^ the mind.
Poverty ought not to move the mind with restless passions, but to allaie
the heat with contentation, and pacific the unstaid affections, which will
more easily be done, if a man considerately call to mind, how many persons in
the world are in as wretched, or more woeful estate then he himself is, yet
the dear children of God too: but in adversity many lose themselves in
coffeehouse, not patiently waiting, but greedily snatching, not content with
that they have be it never so much, but adding goods to goods, and multiplying
more to enough with never satisfied desire, tormenting the mind with unquiet
motions, and by that means make the freedom of life a sharp and bitter
bondage: for if their life were six times so long, as it may be by the
inuitable course of nature, yet the tenth part of that they have, were
sufficient to maintain them well and honestly, and declare whereto they were
borne, and enrich their posterity after; why should they then be so greedy and
earthly minded to consume their days in such unreasonable cares? whereby they
are never at rest, but in continual slavery, so greatly do they fear least
they should be poor: and so in the midst of plenty live in want, and thus
become incaple of reason, and most miserable of all men: for no external thing
can in themselves make a man unhappy, if immoderate desire creep not in to
breed rebellion, so that still our former assertion must hold: In medio
concis^^t virtus, Virtue stands between two extremes, in cooling the heat of
desire with Temperance, not in feeding the belly so much as it will hold,
clothing the back so far as the purse will stretch, and giving scope to
pleasure, as though much wealth gave much liberty, for that is prodigality,
nor in pinching and hoording it up from necessary duties, for that is
illiberalitie, and ouerturneth the whole fellowship of mankind: neither must a
man neglect his private state, but labor in his calling to supply his wants;
the mean therefore is the safest path to walk in, in which whosoever goes,
is safe from stumbling upon extremities: If Y cor as had held his medium
t^tiss^mum, he had not so untimely In medi^ concistit virt^s.
fallen: or Phaeton, observed the good counsel of his father, he had not bin
stricken with thunder; but presumption and arrogance, casts men healong into
woe and misery. So that if Temperance do not order the life, and dispose our
humane affairs, we fall into an insatiable desire of having, or into an utter
neglect of our own wants, spending too much and that vainly, or sparing too
much, and that too nigardly: But as the higher we clime, the less appearance
those things seem to have that are under us, our sight being removed from the
object and species of things: so the nearer we approach to God, and frame our
obedience unto him, the less we value these base and transitory things. Now,
if by this compendious course, our minds are abstracted and drawn backward,
immediately our cogitations ascend up to heaven, as unto the country to which we
are traveling, we must not the incumber our minds with so heavy a load, as
the cares of this life, least they hinder us in the pursuit to perfect
blessedness. O what a burden of torments does the covetous desire bring with
it! a disease like the Dropsy, the more it has, the more it would; thirsty as
the serpent Di^sas, never satisfied till it burst, wanting that it has, and
has that it wants; because the good use of those things present, are ever
absent* o whither would the greedine^^e of man run if Mydas golden Wish were to
be had? the covetous Lawier would have the devil and all; the secular Priest,
be sick of the golden dropsy; the Artificer, Alcumize his Instruments into
gold; the plow*man weary of his labor: so that here would be Aurea atas, a
golden world. Thus would extreme covetousness bring a misery upon the owners,
and though with Mydas, they might turn any thing into gold with a touch; yet
should they be starued with hunger, famish the body, and rob the soul of
all true comfort. For these weight always on a covetous man, Impiety,
perjury, thefts, rapines, treasons, fraud, deceits, and all kind of
unconscionable and merciless dealings.

Let a man then be content with his portion, and not seek to aspire unto
terrestiall honor, by tearing out the bowelles of his brethren, with usury,
extortion, and unconscionable brokerie. For it is better to be contentedly
poor, then miserably rich, and to surpass in rare Virtues, then in earthly
treasure; for albeit a man be down in misery, yet if honest and virtuous, he
is raised up to immortal glory: for the excellency of Virtue, makes him shine
with such a grace, as h^ may soon be elevated to the top of true honor, and
cannot go unrewarded for his honorable service; for having valiantly Post
f^^^r^ virt^^.
fought under the banner of so noble a matron, his pay is fame in despite of
death, and eternal felicity in the world to come* for Virtue inableth a man
to enjoy the fruition of perfect happiness, and eternal life.

Then let a poor man rejoice in affliction, and patiently bear adversity*
and comfort him self with the hope of a better life, which assuredly he
shall The comfortable hope of a poor man.
enjoy if so be he hold out to the end in a holy and virtuous course, and for
sorrow here, have joy there; and for a hellish life now, a heavenly life then;
when those that have their heaven here, and wallow in solace, joy, and carnal
pleasures in this world, must with Dives be tormented in endless flames in the
world to come.

To what end then should a man be grieved at misery, and murmur, as though he
were an abject, an ou^ cast, and forlorn: when there shall be a supply of his
wants, in abundant measure, and be crowned a king of that heavenly Jerusalem.

Upon a time Solon found a poor man sitting by the sea side, bewayling his
misery in great despair, whom he comforted in this manner: Brother why weep
you, what have you lost, is it want and pennury that nippeth you? Alas for that
you have small cause; for say you were in the midst of yonder great sea,
laden with treasure, in danger of drowning, would you not willingly lose your
goods to save your life? Why think then you were once in like peril, and have
escaped, and lost but your only goods, then now pacific your self, be content
with your state. Thus we see what danger a rich man is in, by the opinion of
this wise Heathen.

Vice and Virtue two ways.
Two ways are proposed and laid open to all, the one inuiting to Virtue, the
other alluring to vice; the first is combersome, intricate, vntraded,
ouergrowne, and many obstacles to dism^y a passenger; the other, plain, even
beaten, ouershadowed with boughs, tapistred with flowers* and many objects to
feed the eye; now a man that looks but only to the outward show, will easily
tread the broadest p^the, but if he^ perceive that this smooth and even way,
leads to a neast of Scorpions: or a litter of Bears, he will rather take the
other though it be rugged and unpleasant, then hazard himself in so great a
danger.

The highway that leads to pleasure is very spacious, it lies open like the
sea, many tempting motions to inuoke the mind, Lamea sitting by the way
gorgiously decked, the Sirens with sweet melody, to intrappe the passenger, if
with Ulysses he bind not himself to the mast of provident respect; and many
Lyo^s, Bears and Wolves lie in wait for their pray. But the pathe leading to
Virtue, though it be toylesome, laborious, difficult, a way uneasy to be
trackt, hard to find, craggie, stony, thorny, and a sweating turmoyle, as the
Poet describes:

Nam via virtutis, dextrum petit ardua callem,
Dificilem que additum, primum spectantibus offert,
Sed requiem praebet fessis in vertice summo.
For Virtues rugged pathe requires,
a stout and painful mind:
And dangers new are multiplied,
to such as will her find.
But in the end great joy she brings, etc.
Yet seeing he goes straight to his iournies end, shall arrive at the house
of Fame, be crowned with honor, who will not undergo a poor labor, to gain
so rich a Jewel? for though the roots of Virtue be bitter, yet the fruits be
sweet.

Dulcia non mer^it.
Again, if in things dangerous and full of perilles, a man will not stick to
hazard his life, ^run through fire and water, abide hunger, cold, and
willingly bear a thousaud miseries, incident to long and tedious iournies, to
diue into the bowelles of the earth for gold, traffic to Orinoque, the
Indians, and far remote places to feed the long desire of this short life,
as the Poet says: Impiger extremos currit marcator ad Indos,
Per mare pauperiem sugiens, per saxa, per igneis:


How ought they the^ to hunt after Virtue, the bright son of prosperity,
which can raise them up, tamquam e puluere and lut^, out of dust and claie, to
the high pitch of everlasting honor.

Many ways leading to l^ame.
But as many ways cross the Queens high*way, so Virtue is wanted and
thwarted, with many smoothe paths, if by exact care they be not avoided, and
though there be a spacious opposition an Antithesis, yet no such difference at
the first seems, for long pacing breeds content, by reason the mine is
nummed and brought a sleep, with such variety of objects, as dazzle the
senses, and fix the opinion so firm in an ill course, that he finds
himself enexorable to turn head, and set footing in the way of Virtue.

Nevertheless, though Virtue is so noble, glorious, honorable, immortal,
etc. (that neither my dull wit, rudeness of speech, or this little volume is
able to express her infinite praises: but had rather need of prompt eloquence,
and cunning most excellent, and much leisure thereunto) yet Vice is painted out
with such goodly colors, and so gorgiously set out with pomp, that iumping
with the natural impediment, a man is soon lulde a sleep in pleasures, and
deluded by phantasma, a dream, a shadow: as it was with Calippus, that dreamd
he was a King, and whe^awooke he was a beggar: or the fool of Syrac^sa, who
being oppressed with melancholy, thought all the ships that arrived in the haven,
were laden with his marchandiz e; so does it mock the imagination, with
flattering allurements, and draw a man by little and little to his own
destruction. O it is an amiable devil, a sweet sin, a lycorous poison, a
smiling cutthroate, a weeping Crokidile: so that by this the mind is drawn
from all celestial contemplation, and from that heavenly regard which the
singularity of that divine sweetness does require, and by that means become
careless and negligent, in the pursuit of Virtue, and have no desire to be
partaker of her utility and profit, but are wholly circumuented and carried
away by Injustice, luxury, pride, covetousness, selfe*loue, and such like;
for this fleeting joy, is a sweet delight; but as the Poets feign, that
drinking the water Lethae, breeds forgetfulness: so vice and pleasure, makes
the mind obtuse and careless of all holy virtues, whereby the whole man is
transported into all licentiousness. And for this cause are pleasures ^ompared
to the Syrins, that appear lovely in sight with golden locks, chirry lips,
rosy cheeks, etc. and all that part above the water goodly, beautiful, and
pleasant to behold: but the tail hid below is sharp, crooked, venomous,
that she no sooner draws a man unto her by a wanto^ countenance, but
presently stings him to death; for pain and pleasure are two twins, for he no
sooner lets his mind slip to one, but the other is ready to cast him into
miserable estate. And therefore to shun pleasures, it is good to behold her
behind and not before, to consider what trouble, torments, dishonor, and
ignominy, waits upon her, for after her ghests are surfeited with dainties,
she makes the end as fatal and ominous as the Centaurs feasts, a subtle
Sy^on, that tells a pleasing tale to breed security, dropping honey from her
lips, but has the poison of Aspes under her tongue, a standing ponde, clear
above: but all filth and mudde below: and therefore the wise schoolemaister,
warns his scholar to shun pleasures, for I^o. ad De^on.
fear of smart; sour things follow sweet, and joy heaviness. Volupt as esca
malorum, says he, Pleasure is the bait of evil: and hor. ad lollium.

Sperne volupt at is no^et empta dolor volupt as.
F^olish wisdom.
Yet many repute themselves wise and excellently seen, though they are nothing
daunted at such a hidious monster: and so are wise only in opinion, and with
this sottish cogitation enterprise matters infamous, yea oftentimes to the
utter ruin and overthrow of themselves, and by this means run headlong into
all manner vice, not suspecting the mo^ster-like danger over their heads.

He that follows pleasure, is as the spider that labors all day to entangle
a fly, or like a wa^^on boy that blows up feathers into the air, and spends
the time in running up and down after them; for what is pleasure but a puff?
and what is all painful and ponderous labors but a copweb? If we shoot not
at this mark, to cast anchor in the harbor of Virtue, for if we covet to be
honored, otherwise then by Virtue, we climb a rotten ladder sure to fall; for
vainglory is a blaze which soon vanishes, glistering for a while in some
outward pomp, in the darkness of this world, carrying with it some show of
Gentri^, when it is but the scumme of Vice, Pride, and swelling Ambition: for
what gain is it for a man to win the whole world, and loose his own soul? to
dance in pleasure for a while, and live in woe for ever? What great matter was
in Darius and Alexander, Tamberlaine and Baiazeth, Caesar and Pompey, that
strove for the monarchiall government, and to be sole Potentates of the world?
but that the after times might sing with Melib.

Haec memini and victum, frustra contendere Thyrsin. Eclog ^.

Ex illo Coridon, Coridon est tempore nobis.
What was their happiness, but unquiet and perturbations? and never attained to
that their ambition sought after, but snatching at uncertainty, like Esops
dog, lost that they were sure of before: so that all this worldly strife was
but to satisfy the hungry desire of a few days, to purchase such honor as
sinkes into oblivion, leaving no happy memory behind of any notable virtue.

The best warre*fare.
But the only warre-fare is striving for Virtue, by resisting the passions of
the mind: this is both a valiant and an honorable expedition, a true
Martialist he is indeed, that by strong hand labors to suppress his
rebellious lusts, and is ambitious of nothing but only Virtue, as
Themistocles, that said, the monuments, Trophies, glory, and great fame of
Miltiades, would not suffer him to take his rest, for that exceeding desire he
had to imitate him in Virtue, that so he might rise up to like honor. Former
presidents are spurs to quicken the Pl^tarch.
mind, to embrace that Virtue portraied out by our auntients, and a means to
make us vigilent and watchful, least by sloth we become blind, ignorant, and
grope in the dark with Polephemus: and this is most evident, that so long as
we live in pleasure, the mind is never illuminated with divine moisture: for
while the time is spent in voluptuousness, a blast of vanity, a bubble of
water, the excellent faculties of the soul are depressed and weyed down with
base and servile designements.

But having thus rudely run over the profitable study of Virtue, in this
homely manner, as the dullness of my wit, and shortness of time would suffer,
it now remains to blaze out her enemy Vice, and more lively to paint out
those capital evils which oppose themselves A diometrical opposition betwixt
Vice and Virtue.
against honesty. And in this the method of the ancient Philosophers is to be
observed, who were not content to explain the moral virtues, with a bare and
simple demonstration, but also set to every one her contrary and repugnantvice,
that by due considering both, we might embrace the good and shun the evil; and
that by the glory of one, the other might be more ugly and loathsome: for when
Virtue is visibly painted out, environed with Vice, we have her in greater
admiration, and her excellencies in higher regard, and therefore Fortitude has
audacitie on the one side, and timiditie on the other side, science, ignorance,
and sinister persuasion, and so every one, the more and the less, whereby we
see not only the Image and reflection, but the very abstract and essence of
them both, and although one would think that Temperance, a heavenly Virtue,
were enough to move to sobriety, yet if the many enormities that come of the
contrary be omitted, a man is hardly dissuaded. Therefore Diogenes being
demanded how one should keep himself sober, by beholding (quoth he) the
beastliness of drunkards; for it is manifest, that when a crabbed visage and a
misshapen body, shall stand by an amiable and lovely personage, the deformity
of the one does much illustrate and beautify the other. Venus was ever fairest
when she stood by Vulca^: so that viewing this Antithisis, honor and shame,
perfect bliss and never dying sorrow, and looking to the final ends, and the
reward that they both yield at last, we may be stirred up with an ardent zeal,
to destroy Vice, and master that combersome servant passion.

Now the chief motive hereunto, is diligent education and training up youth in
discipline, whereby a universal Good education is the happiness of a kingdom.
good is attained; for this is the maine pillar that holds up and underprops
the government, without which no Commo^-wealth could stand and peaceably
continue. And therefore it is in the power of parents, to make or mar the
world, for if children be not well nurtured, how shall they bequeath that to
posterity which they never der^ued from their ancestors? or if superiors and
magistrates, give not good example in their places, how should they induce
other to piety? for as Atlas is feigned to support the heavens with his
shoulders, so must the world be held up by discipline, and those vices cut off
with the sword of reformation, that fight against honesty; for her valor and
courage will soon weaken by impunitie and evil example; but as the cutting
off the head of a serpent kills the body, so the immoderate passions of ye
mind rooted out in the beginning, the whole body of this hidious mo^ster
voluptuousnes is destroyed, and the tranquillity of the mind possessed with
greater joy; for being once taught to loath Vice, and traded in well doing, from
the cradle, is thereby so well qualified, as it does not easily change any
good course it undertakes, but upon well grounded reasons. For having some
knowledge of it own inward good, finds nothing without of so equal rate,
for which it should alter and turn, but being firmly settled in an honest
course, keeps a sweet concord between the intellectiue and the morrall, and
yields it self suitable, to the virtuous disposition of the mind, the
excellencies whereof, is manifested with such rare demonstrations, that it
never subiecteth it self to base inconstancy and feeble hazards, expelling
Vice, as an enemy to all good endeavor.

To proceed, Virtue cannot be gotten without Hypo^rkes and dece^uer^ creep
under Ver^ue.
employment of the mind and body in commendable arts. Security and ease
draws to Vice, if a man then will build upon a perfect assurance, and make
his estate durable, he must bend his whole endeavors to honest labor, and not
only do well, but continue therein to the end. But if a man suppose to be
richly virtuous for one good deed; as in paying duties, impositions, tallages
to the poor Church, or Commo^-wealth; if taxed according to his ability, and
forcibly exacted from him, it is but the superficies and blaze of Virtue: for
Intentio animi non actus perfecit actum: the willingness does approve the act:
or if a man do a good deed by accident and haphazard, to blind the opinion,
and by a counterfeit show seek to insinuate into a good report, when
otherwise the whole scope of his life be vicious and evil, what lawde can he
justly merit? but where entirely the mind is bent thereunto, and inflamed
with her pulchritude, so that he persist and hold out therein. As for example,
as he is not to be termed a Tailor, that only mendeth his garment, or he a
shoemaker that only patcheth his shoe, unless he make it his whole art, and
expose himself thereunto, as to his trade and occupation: so in like manner,
he that stumbleth upon one good action by chance, is not by and by to be
deemed a perfect man; but he only that does well, and persisteth in so doing,
and as his trade, be wholly occupied therein. For as the mind of the
husbandman is ever upon cattle, tillage, and such things as belong to his
calling, Saylors upon their ships, and soldiers on the wars, and scholars
on learning, so must the whole disposition and carriage be occupied in Virtue,
as on the day star that guides to the haven of rest.

It is not therefore one or two good deeds, or such things as are done by
chaunce-medley, or peradventure without a settled mind, that Virtue honoreth,
for every man goes so far in common honesty: but when the integrity of the
heart is stirred up by devotion to stream out a continual store of good
works, with a mind willingly disposed thereunto.

Nevertheless, if our eye*sight and understanding could pierce inward, or that
we had the eyes of Linx, to penetrate the secrets of the mind, we might see
many ravening wolves, covered with a sheep skin, and the nature of a cruel
and savage Tiger lurking in some, that outwardly carry a semblance of Virtue,
a civil course, and an hypocrite clad with the mantle of honesty: for she
carries a general good liking of all men, and (as Plato says) if she could
be visibly painted out to the eye, every one would be wonderfully ravished
with her perfections, and therefore the evil seek to hide their vices under
her shadow, and draw the curtain of policy in the portraiture of piety:
for stand he never so obstinate in a desperate state, and be really possessed
with wickedness, yet in no case will he willingly seem to be that in show
which he Hypocrisy is double impie^ie*
is indeed, but labor to hide it what he may, and cover the shame of evil
with a simple shadow, if it be but with figge-leaues, and deaurate and guild
over his spots and sores with the tincture, and dye of holiness. For the
purity of Virtue makes men detest their own evil, and though Vice break
out, and be never so pregnant, yet will they cunningly blind the opinion, and
fly to her for succor: and albeit their eyes be dazeled with the splendor
of Virtue, and cannot choose but admire her beauty, yet have they no power to
follow her, but pine away, and give her no Hor.
entertainment, which the Poet well notes, Virtus laudatur and alget.

Virtue (says he) is praised of many, but she may s^arue for cold before
they will take her in, and warm herby their fire.

These are right counterfeites, that have nothing but a cloud or skin of
Virtue, which as a slender painting is washed off with cu^ry dash, a gloss, an
Image, that they keep so long as they have pleasure or profit thereby: they
may well be compared to vaineglorious women, who because they want beauty,
color their faces with painting, to get that by art, that nature has denied
them.

Yea there be some that seem the very Images of sanctity, lowely, courteous,
modest, humble, their eyes fixed on their graves, their hair shorter then
their eyebrowes, as though they were myrrours of religion Dec^it^ul do^^ble
dealers.
and piety, and by robbing Virtue of her best apparel, deck themselves with
the habit of honesty, and yet have nothing within but artificial knauerie,
fraud, deceit, and hypocricie: for if outwardly stretched to show their inward
good, they then appear as they are, and lay themselves open to their own
shame: the touchstone of trial can soon distinguish them aright; o how such
smoothe fronted hypocrites can dally with the time, and cut out their manners
to the best fashions, only to please those who measure others good by their
own integrity, and as long as the Sun shines, go by the shadow of others,
but their light failing, soon leave their earnest following, and is so hotly
bent in his cold zeal, that he is never without a boult in his mouth to
shoot through his simple neighbor.

But because I will not be too Cinicall, to anatomize particular imperfections,
I will be sparing: I could nevertheless paint out some, that as long as gain
hung on their profession, were not slack to overtake There be too many such
cold Christians
the best men: but the world slyding, their means failing, and the gain they
reaped by such their profession decaying, their hot love to piety melts away
like snow before the Sun, and as dogs, turn back to their own vomit. So
that here is the depth of policy, in sifting the carryage to the humor of
good men, that tracing the path of counterfeit holiness, might gain both
favor and advancement. For as I said before, if Vice should come in her own
shape, few or none would give her entertainment, and though in wardly embraced
of some, yet outwardly detested of all.

These are like blades that have painted sheathes, but canker-fret and rustie
within. And as the Cameleon has all colors save white, so have they all parts
save honesty.

The fish Polipus (as some write) has this property, that it can turn
itself into the likeness of a stone, or seem to be that which is next it,
and so under color of not seeming as it is, does raven upon other fishes. So
in like manner do cold Christians prey upon the simplicity of honest minds,
and fit themselves to all companies. If among good and virtuous men, then is he
like them, setting himself in his best properties, and seem to have that
which every honest man ought to have, and so by that means hide great vices
under a thin color of Virtue, that by so fitting his habit to the time and
place, is for the humor of every person, and thus by crafty and disguised
dissimulation, live in outward happiness, by praying upon the good opinion of
other men.

But as Socrates said to an humble hypocrite, his pride might be seen through
the rents of his cloak: so this false and double dealing cannot so long be
hid, but it will break out at one rent or other, and detect his pilferie,
according to the change of times.

And albeit ^he purity of truth is not hereby any whit impeached, being ever
one and the same: yet by this we may see the nakedness of old Adam, that will at
no hand appear as he is.

But this idle show and false appearance, o how dangerous it is to the truth!
being possessed with naught but treachery and cosonage, a capital plague, it
is for the wicked to make show of goodness, and may fitly be sorted to the
Apothicaries painted boxes, that have nothing within but poison, or some deadly
compound: for which the Pharisees were sharply reprehended by our Savior in
the Gospel, and as the Lord complains by the Prophet, They honor me with
their lips: but their hearts are far from me. And therefore he is no Virtue
is not in vain words: but in conscionable works.
good man that can reason of Virtue in words, but he that has a true
possession in deed, whereby the conscience is lead to deal justly, in a
continued course of well doing: for it is no pain to give milkie words, sweet
terms, and make a vain flourish of honesty, to choke the hard opinion,
which otherwise might justly be imputed: for this is but vainglory, which is
ever gaping with open mouth for popular applause, for doing some thing that
has a show of Virtue, to get praise of the rude multitude.

And though by prosperity a man be dignified with glorious titles, yet if it
spring not from Virtues root, it is but a bastard plant, a rotten carcass
with a painted skin. And howsoever they mock the world for a while with the
badge of honesty, yet the all-seeing eye of heaven, God searche^h into the
heart.
to whom darkness is light, perspicuously observes all their deeds, and will
bring them forth even as they are naked and uncovered: But as such fallacies,
and dillusions, are incident to a base and servile condition: so are they
evermore abhorred of an honest man.

Lying is become ^n occupation amongst many men.
Nevertheless many there be that bind themselves apprentise to unjust
collusion and fraudulent dealing: in so much that lying and falsehood is become
an occupation, fair and smoothe words carry away all their gains, increased
by oppression, and by deluding the simple, make bad wares vendible, and that
which is corrupt, unwholesome and naught, (with many protestations) utter for
good and excellent, and that at unreasonable rate too. It is lawful for every
man to maintain his charge, and by his calling in which he is set, which to
omit is worser then an Infidel: but with this caution, evermore profit, must
go with honesty, and not immeasurably carried with greedy affection, to
multiply gain by unjust means; that that is co^scionablygotte^ is profitable;
and nothing profitable, that is dishonest: but to pull away either by usury,
extortion, briberie, or fraudelent dealing, is repugnant to honesty: or to
increase a commodity by an other man's discommoditie, ryueth asunder the common
fellowship of mankind. Tully handling Lib. 3.
this argument in his offices to his son Mark, says; If two run in a
race, each one ought to strive so much as he can to win the prize: but in no
case he must not trip his fellow, keep him back with his hand, or cast blocks
to stumble on, for that is not equal: so in like sort (says he) while we run a
race in this world, it is good to get that may serve the turn, in an equal and
just course: but it is neither right, nor honest, to rack, extort, and
purloyne from other, and by setting the conscience on the tainter-hookes, to
rise up by his fall.

It was ordained by the Athenian Law, that the seller, should lay open the
faults of the ware to the buyer, and seeing he sells, to sell with the best
advantage Lib. 3. offic.
to him that buyeth, with this or the like promulgation.

Aduexi, exposui, vendo meum non plur is quam ^^terie fortasse etiam minoris,
cum mayor est copia, c^ifit iniuria?

Here is my ware, I offer it to sell, I sell mine for no more then other men,
perhaps also for less, seeing I have more store, to whom is the wrong done?
but he that should observe this in our days, would either be thought a mad
man or a fool; so far is this griping covetousness rooted in the hearts of
many, that they make no conscience to get gain; Fas, aut nephas, by hook or
crook so they may come by it* in so much that this greedy desire has eaten up
all remorse of conscience, that labor all day with deceit, and rise up early to
wealth, by the spoil and undoing of other. O how pleasant and sweet is the
savor of gain to the carnal man, be it never so injuriously gotten!
Vespasian the Emperor, delighted so in powling and pilling his subjects, that
nothing was exempted from his tallage: not so much as the very vrin made in
every house, but he had tribute for a certain quantity, for which being
maligned and ill spoken of, his son dissuaded him from it, as a thing base
and dishonorable: but putting some of the pissing money in a Unlawful gain is
sweet to a stinking mind.
perfumed napkin, held it to his sons nose, asking him how it smelt; meaning
thereby, that though it was had of a filthy excrement, yet the money sauoured
well enough; Suauis odor lucriex qualibet, and that gain is sweet of
whatsoever it comes.

All lying, in making bargains is utterly forbidden, false waits and measures
abominable, and wealth gotten this way clogs the soul: for it is never
profitable to do evil, because it is evermore hateful: and because it is
always honest to deal justly, it is evermore profitable. No man by the
ignorance of an other, ought to increase his own gain: and no greater injury
can be used amongst godly Christians, then falsely to mock the understanding.
Nothing couetously, unjustly, wrongfully, or waueringly, is fit to be done.

He that is therefore set up in a trade, and has to deal with men in
bargaining, must be wary least he be carried into unconscionable getting, and
be content with a reasonable gain without exaction, for the ignorance of the
buyer, cannot excuse the deceit of the seller.

Nevertheless, many shopkeepers, keep small conscience in uttering their
ware, their shops, shops of deceit, for now almost all men cry out, that there
is nothing but cosonage in buying and selling, and not without cause: for let a
simple man come to buy a piece of cloth, or what other thing he needs in
some of their shops (I will not say all, for no doubt some deal honestly) if
he be ignorant and unskillful in that he buyeth, is sure to pay double the
value, or at leastwise much more then it is worth: and yet will they swear and
protest, Many ^^ue upon the simplicity of the poor.
and heap up a many oaths, that were it not to him he could not have it so,
and that it is far better then the money he paieth; the buyer thus deceived,
yet thinks himself greatly friended: but if he books that he sells, and that
the buyer comes upon trust, then shall he pay well for Ink and paper, that in
the end he must buy his commodity twice. Yea, craft is crept into the bosom
of some, with such Foxe-like subtlety, that they lay open their ware as
nets, to catch young Gentlemen, who having good friends and assured
possibility, shall have what he will upon trust: provided his lands be bound
for payment; and so long feed his humor with coin and commodities, that they
creep at last into his whole possessions.

A man must not only use a lawful trade, but also use it lawfully, without
deceit; and though it be never so base, yet if followed with diligence, will
maintain his estate honestly, so be it that he always keep within the
essenciall properties thereof: yet there be some that have such wandering wits
and shittle heads, that never rest til they have assaied all means, leave the
limits of their calling, and run into by courses, and either fall into a
loytering life, or attempt that wherein they have no skill, whereby their
follies many times are made manifest to the world; for none can judge of an
Art, but he that is an Artizan, hereby hindering his neighbor, who has fitted
himself to it by experience, deluding the commonwealth, and offending the
law. Appelles rule is quite forgot; Ne suitor, vltra crepidam. The shomaker The
p^inter spoke this so long since, that it is now forgotten.
must not go beyond his latchet, the plowman meddle in matters of Art, nor
scholars teach Coridon to hold the plough, but every man to keep within the
compass of his own skill, and not like wild coultes to break into other
men's ^astures: But many busy fellows that have short arms, yet will claspe
many things, supposing that to enterprise is sufficient to execute, and that to
begin is only enough, though they never make an end, and thrust into many
trades, and heap one thing upon an other, in so much that it often falls
out, that being Solicitus circa multa, busied in many things, prove unfit for
any thing: let the vnum One thing is necessar^e.
then be preferred that tyeth a man in compass of good ability. For as a
swift current running in one kill, is very forcible, but if divided into small
angles is less powerful: so in like case so long as a man holds out in that
he was brought up in, it is effectual, but if he once straggle and scatter
into other Arts, does utterly weaken and disable himself, and is unfit for any
notable enterprise, and by leaving his peculiar trade, is possessed with such a
greedy discontent, as he repineth at the prosperity of his neighbor, which
is the fruit of envy.

Others there be so luskish and idle, that though they have both means,
strength and ability, yet will follow none at all, but be better content with
hunger and ease, then labor and profit, or else by unlawful shifts come to a
shameful end: but as the gripplenesse of the one is to be avoided, so the
security of the other is to be hated. It is meet that every man follow his
own vocation, and being ordained for one thing, not to fall into an other: If
fit for one, to hold that, and So said old ^^ther Latimer.
seek no other: if apt for pollici^, to leave the Ministry: if fit for the
plough, to leave the Pulpit, and use that for which he is most pregnant: for
one of these require a whole man, and not the least part of a man.

Three things uphold a Mo^^^chie in peace and tranquillity, Scil: tu supplex,
ora, tu protege, tuque labora, Pray thou, defend thou, and labor thou: these 3.
employ the Three things intended in policy.
happiness of every state; the first the Ecclesiastical discipline: the
second, the politic state: and the third, the state subiugate: so that by
these, and in these, a peaceable government is maintained: and these are the
employments of the particulars members of a politic body, within the limits
of which, every one must keep and contain himself.

But if any man fall into extrauagant courses, he slippeth into those evils
that flow from the complexion of nature. We see how many are rapt up with
greedy desire of getting, and never satisfied with that they have, or can come
too, either by violent extortio^, brabling suites, and unjust vexations, that
they had rather spend ten pound in law to feed the malice of the mind abroad,
then by loosing ten pence, to have it quietly ended at home.

I and now a days some are so mad and brain-sicke, that they fall together
by the ears for the value of a straw, and make hard shift though they be
never so poor, but they will be Termers, and trot to Westminster three or
four times a year, though their wives and children beg in the mean while:
and what get they in the end after their long suites, save a flap with a
Foxetaile (as the saying is) and come home by Need*ham cross, and fools acre,
then cry they out, might ouercomes right, would I had known thus much before,
a vengeance take the lawiers, I am undone: they weep, the lawiers laugh, and
the devils sings. The commonwealth If it were not for some honorable well
quallified, and conscionable Lawier^, the generation of Fogge, would eat out
the bowelles of the commonwealth.
is as a den of controversies, a man cannot brook a petty wrong, but by and
by he runs to some makebate some petty fogger, who no doubt is forward enough
to put fire to towe, and the bellows to blow the coals of contentions:
filling the head with quirkes and quiddits, who being hot before, is now of a
light fire, till he be in law, the world shall not dissuade him. Lawiers swarm
as thick in England, as frogs in Egypt; they norish strifes, beat down
charity, and purchase to themselves great inheritance by the discords of
brabling clyents.

Again, some for a private gain, will murmur at a common good, and rather
wish a dearth to benefit some few, then a plenty, that may bring profit all:
if they have store of corn, they had rather keep it still in their barnes,
till it be mustie and naught, or suffer vermin to spoil it, in hope of an
excessive price, then by bringing it out in due time, to have a reasonable
gain* and this is a true experiment, that such moathes are so auaricious and
covetous, that they had rather keep their grain till it be corrupt and
foistie at home, or send it to our enemies abroad, to starve and weaken our
own state, then to relieve their brethren with the crop of their increase.
Certainly though they would seem Christians, and men of good spirits, yet are
they not equal, no nor any whit comparable to the Heathen, since they thought
nothing too dear for their country, neither life, goods, nor any thing else,
and these think all too much, be it never so little. And to what end serves
this greedy desire of gain, but to make logger-head the son, march before
the cormorant his father in some worldly pomp, and to cover his fine daughter
Si^, with Copweb-lawne to catch butterflyes: this is not the highway to honor.

We see that plain Corydon, that has no more wit Every misers son must be a
gentleman.
then to know the price of Satin and Velvet, and toies to make him
soole-fine, cannot be content to hold the plough, and be one of those Aratores
optimos ciues Reip: good commonwealths men, keep hospitality, and spend his
revenues moderately, and do good in the place where he dwells: but being
crept up to wealth by the death of his miserable old father, must instantly be
dubd a gentleman of the first head, and purchase arms, though it be at a dear
rate, and be a smoakie gallant in youth, though he beg his bread in age, and
lash out that riotously, that his father got miserly; and as one well says,
tedding that with a forke in one year, that was not gathered together with a
rake in twenty. And this iumpeth with that which is affirmed before, that the
goods of a wretched miser holds not long together, but as it has been badly
gotten, so it is as leaudly spent. He is now of no esteem unless he be cut of
the fashion, and can swagger and brave it out, swear himself into smoke with
pure refined oaths, and fustion protestations, take Tobacco with a whiffe, and
be odly humorous. And in no case it must not be forgotten he is a Gentleman,
and therefore to shun the stab, you must provide a sacke-full of worshipful
titles to cool his blood, when (God wot) his grandfather would have been glad
of a crust of brown bread: but what should he be touched with base birth or bad
life? is he not now a Gentleman, and has wherewithal to hold it up? but such
generositie is like a copper Ring new guilt over, that wareth off with the
least persecution.

Fortunafa^et fat^os.
Now these cannot truly say that the honor of their house did first rise in
them, or that true gentilitie is derived out of their loins to succession,
because they are neither possessed with any notable Virtue, nor created noble by
accident, but have only a little pelf, which with swallow-wings, is flying
away as fast as their riotous course can lay it on.

Yet will their insolence arrogate to themselves honor, as though it stood
only in riches and worldly glory, and many vain titles will they pluck by
violence Honored ig^^ranc^*
from the rude world: for simple ignorance gives humble reverence to wealth
and a gay coat: but though by the courtesy of wise men, and simplicity of
fools, they have many fair titles, yet let them not think they are any whit
the more honorable, unless they have the temperance of the mind and body
before remembered.

We have here in common use to buy and sell, diverse pieces of silver and gold,
which passes from man to man as good payment, so long as the metal be
current, and the Princes stamp upon it: but if we find a piece counterfeit,
and the true stamp set upon base metal, we presently nail it to a post, and
wish the coiner hanged, so that all the estimation is in the metal, and not
in the print: so in like manner, though a man be never so Counterfeit
gentilitie.
rich, and never so highly advanced, yet if Virtue has not framed him fit for
those places, wise, affable, temperate, but foolish, malicious, and
vainglorious, he is no otherwise, but as the print of honor, set upon base
bullion, and so commits horrible treason against the majesty of Virtue.

There be some that hunt after honor, and some that be hunted after by
honor: touching the first, they are such as by bribes or double diligence
creep into a place or office of preferment, and never rest night not day, till
by money and friendship they have got it a hungry eye to spy out, and an
impudent face to thrust in, and being warmely seated, strout up and down with
swelling terms, as if they had risen by some degree of Virtue. The other sort
are sought after by honor, and they be such that Virtue frames fit for that
purpose, that first grow excellent in some high desert, for these beg no
place, nor foist into office, but if it come, they unwillingly hold it, and be
no whit the more puffed up in opinion, but justly exercise the same, not so much
for their own private gain, as for the general good.

Liberality ^s the artires, veins, and sinews of le^rning, and the worlds
Paragon.
Liberality is a mediocritie in giving benefits, the blood and strength of
sciences, a Virtue divine; and to speak briefly of her properties, first and
chiefly a liberal man is ready to reward honesty, his friends alliance, and
such are near him, to succor orphans, widows, bestow poor maidens in
marriage, and raise up foundations, and mend decayed structures, for the good
of posterity, and is still occupied in such memorable works: and he is only a
frank man, that distributeth his substance measurably, and where it is fit,
and must consider to whom he should give, that is, to the needy; how much?
according to his own ability, and the others necessity: and when? in season
and in due time, for liberality res^eth not only in the quantity of the
thing given, but in the natural disposition of the giver. And this is one of
the chief species of Justice, to follow the worthiness of the person in
considering his good parts: for if gifts follow not Virtue, it is a great
disparagement A liberallman i^ a general good man.
to her followers: nothing is liberal but that which is just, which is the
ground of all; for Justice is every Virtue, if her shoulders be bowed down
with want, to be raised up again with gifts: for there is no Virtue, but too
much misery destroys: in so much that if a man be as prudent as Cato, as
iustas Manlyus, as magnanimious as S^ipio, and as temperate as Curious, yet
nevertheless, if these virtues be not eftsoons cherished by benevolence,
they will soon faint, grow feeble, and be daunted. Tollegloriae cupiditatem,
and omne Os^r* ^ib. 1.
studium virtutis extingues, says one. Take away the desire of glory, and all
study of Virtue is utterly extinct: for true it is, that no man either for his
private good, or common profit, will apply the mind to any Virtue, unless he
be held up and comforted in adversity, or ravished with an immortal hope,
because the faculties of the mind are wholly studious to hold up his poor
dying life. Again, who would bend himself to Art, Science, Faculty, or any
kind of learning, if there were not some glory? for what moves the Lawier to
beat his wits on Littletons Maxims? or to be so earnest to find out the
differences of causes, to bring them to a head, but glory? the Divine to study
the mysteries of Gods wonders? or the Physician to Hon^s alit art^s.
diue into the secrets of nature, if they aimed not at preferment? To conclude,
honor nourishes Art, and for the regard of dignity, do learned men strive to
exceed in faculty; so that advancement is the mother of Virtues
Commonwealth; yet nevertheless is it not so tied within the limits of a
circle, to keep there and go no further, I mean in respecting simply the
virtues of the Donee, as to reward Virtue, and nothing but Virtue; for the
vicious being in want, must be likewise cherished, though not for his own
sake (having nothing in him of worth, yet because he is a Christian brother)
and therefore the Apostle wills us to do good to all, but especially to the
virtuous.

So that a frank mind does as well march before and lead the way to Virtue,
as nourish her in whom Entisign^tio^s of Virtue to be cherished.
she is first set. The substance of a rich man is not so to be shut ^p that
liberality cannot open it, nor so unlocked to lie abroad for every body, but a
measure to be kept, which must be referred to ability: for as it is not the
part of a liberal man to be too pinching and niggardly, as to withold from
good duty, so is he prodigal that spends his faculties upon flagitious and
vile persons, or upon bad and leaud courses, but only where there is a sign
of Virtue present, or an introduction to a future honesty: for the employment
of money is not honest, unless it be to some good end* neither is he a wise
man that is so foole-large in distributing his goods, to waste his patrimony,
especially upon such vain things whereof a short memory or none at all does
remain, necessity not provoking, nor show of honesty inducing: such
vnaduaned mispence brings naught but ignominy and shame: for what credit is
it for a man to lash out his money in feasts, plays, huntings, hawkings, and
such vain sports that soon vanish? It is the greatest folly that may be,
that the thing that a man does which is honest, to endeavor it may no longer be
done: for as a wise man omitteth not to do good at all times, so he uses the
matter with such moderation, that he keeps a store by him to help with when
occasion is offered.

How infamous among writers is Comodus, Ner^, Caligula, Heliogabalus, and other
like monsters, which exhausted and devoured infinite treasures in banquets,
Prodigalitle i^ a r^ging fir^.
brothel*houses, and such abominations, was this liberality? shall they not
suffer reproach to the worlds end? and shall not all prodigal spend-thrifts,
that wastfully consume their wealth, be partakers of the like shame? Surely
yes, when they are not transferred with the rule of measure, to do that which
they may continue to do, and since they have means to do good, to raise up a
happy memory by dedicating their benevolence to posterity: and this was the
cause our auntients set forth the picture of a Gentleman with his hands open,
to signify that liberality was the honor of a Gentleman, and that to give
was always heroical.

Now what advantage then has a rich man, that by rewards may purchase
immortality, and outstrip the fury of Vice with good works? if so be he
abandon vain glory, and do that he does with sincerity.

From a good man, gifts pass with a free donation, not looking back for
requital, nor blowing the trump when he gives alms: yet can we not say, but
gratitude as a hand-maide, is ever attendant; for though a poor man cannot
acquit again in measure, yet is he forced, will he, nill he, to confess a
debt beyond measure; for a good mind does always remunerate a good turn.

E^nius*
Benefacta male locata, malefacta arbitr^. Good deeds misplaced, become evil
deeds. So that it is a great decay of Virtue, when the merits of the virtuous
are carelessly ouer-passed, for when men are led by passion, not by reason,
many worthy spirits run out their lives unprofitably, consume their days in
condolement, and repent the time spent in science, when they might have gotten
some adulterous trade. Now I say when Virtue does knock at the door of
liberality, and can have no entrance, no marvel though she be frozen with
cold, and go a begging from door to door: but the iniquity of the time
hatcheth many evils in advancing where Virtue does not merit, in raising up
such as are void of all good parts. Now when notable imploymens are unworthily
bestowed, and given by corruption, the power of Virtue must needs be weakened
and grow cold, and be feeble as the Orator says; Male enim se res habet, cum
qu^d virtute effici debet, id Offic. lib. 2.
tentat ur pecunia. The matter (says he) cannot go well, when the same that
should be wrought by Virtue, is accomplished by money: this ouerturneth all,
for no man will willingly embrace her, if she bring no advancement: so that in
this there lies a two*folde mischief, one in the discouraging of learning,
the other in the corruption; for he that buyeth an office must needs sell it
again, and by extortion wring the conscience with injustice: and therefore
Cato would that no old officer should be removed till he dye, or for some
notable Officers sought for wi^h greedin^sle.
crime. For (^aith he) new officers are as hungry flies, that never leave
sucking till their bellies be full, whereas the old ones being full before,
suck more faintly, so that the oftener they are changed, the more do they
gnawe and sting the Commonwealth: and yet what is more common then buying and
selling of offices? for there is almost now a days, no office, but is bought,
sold, and offered to him that will give most, as a bankerout selles his goods:
for if he can but nickhornnize his name in some ordinary fa^ simile, he may
step up to dignity: Na^genus Hor. ad nun.
and forma^ Regina pecunia donat, though he want all good properties and
intelligible parts. If a hungry fly, a smatte^er, either for envy of the
party that is already possessed of Hungry flies bloudsuckers.
some office, or to satisfy his desire of private gain, (for by this it
shall be best known) do seek unjustly to aspire by crowding and wresting the
other out, and therein lalabour, Omnibus neruis, by direct and indirect means,
it may well be thought he has opened the gate of his conscience, to corrupt and
false dealing. And therefore if a man be not lawfully called, it is a point of
wisdom to stay and have an unworthy opinion of himself, and be pacified with
his present state, until the vacancie of a place shall importune him to make
suit.

But it often otherwise comes to pass, that money and countenance can
promote men of no desert to preferment: for instance, one whose brain is all
mudde, that never put his asse-head into the Accademie, little wit, and less
honesty, may notwithstanding climb up to office, and be highly seated, so
that he sing Egl^. 3.
sweetly with Menalc^^: Aur^a mala december misi cras altera mittam.

And a base stigmaticall Thraso, Fex populi, the scum and dregs of the
people, that has no commendable quality, as means to insinuate into favor,
but garrulous prattling, unworthy chaste cares: yet shall he want no
countenance, if so be he can but Ars adulandi, to feed the flambe of
wickedness, with the fuel of sinful fopperie.

Vi^e rides on horseback, when Virtue i^ feign to trot on footbacke.
And thus shall Vice be animated and borne out, be it never so brutish and
uncivil, and be hugd in the bosom of charity, when a man honest, if poor,
shall be scarce known of his neighbors, much less have any measurable
allowance. O pitiful case when Vice shall be exalted, wickedness loved, and
godliness hated! Hence it is so many dangers arise, when the meede of Virtue
is ingratitude, and so many good wits injured in the justice of their merit,
guld by sycophants and flatterers, are not only hereby distracted in their
studies, and dismayed to proceed, but which is worse, so great coffeehouse
breed, that they often prove disloyal, revolt from obedience, and either fall
into dishonest shifts at home, or bad atchieuements abroad: thrusting their
weapons into the bowels of their mothers, either by open practices, or secret
conspiracies. When with bribery and collatorall practices, men of no gifts
leap up to preferment; and though they be never so weak and simple in
judgment, yet will dare (being thus lifted up) to censure every man, as they
were not meanly sighted in the deepest things, and by a malicious rage are
ready The ignoran^ is selfe-wis^.
to controwle others doings, when to back their carping tongues, put on a
superficial habit of learning, whereas if they be nearly touched, they appear
nothing else but empty bags, stuffed with vainglory, Nomine gramatice re
Barbari, and seek what they can to bar the virtuous of their just reward,
and darken their good names with scandalles, that the memory of their labors
may die. Thus when good deserts are neglected, liberality forgotten, and the
bad countenanced, the common state is in great hazard: but this is that iron
age Ovid speaks Fe^ea ^t^^.
of, wherein Virtue should find cold comfort, and pass from door to door
unregarded: which prescience of the Poet was never more verified the^ in these
last times: for never was this sweet harmony of nature, the eye of world, the
mistress of reason, of less price amongst men then now, for some are puffed up
with pride and violence, that they had rather burye their coin with E^clio in
Plautus, then impart a myte for the encouragement of laudable Sciences: in so
much as this cold devotion, causes many to leave trading for so excellent a
Jewel.

And not only Covetousness is an obstacle and let thereunto: but Pride, Pride,
devilish Pride, is crept into all states, every man is fallen in love with
himself, either of his person or apparel, his quallities are so excellent in
his own eye, a poor man's wife will be as trim as a gentlewoman, and every one
studious to deck themselves in bravery, when their manners are out of all good
order: like the Musition that is very careful to set his strings in tune, and
let his manners be still out of order, the mind is set upon fashions, fangles,
and gawish clothes, now one, and then an other, never content long with modest
and sober attire, it is too mean, too base, too beggarly: for now he or she
that can put themselves into a monstrous fashion, a singular habit, and be
straungely dressed up, are in their own opinion very gallant, but in the
judgment of wise men they are Pride as brief in England, as ever it was in
Sodom.
but a blown bladder, painted over with many colors, stuffed full of pride and
envy: the bravery without, shows the arrogancy within; for as there is no
fire without smoke, nor no visible grief, but an inward festering, so in whom
so ever such badges of vanity appears, it is a sure token there is a stinking
puddle of vain glory within. Some iuggle their lands into gay apparel, and
clap it up in a small room, that contained a great circuit, and hold it a
point of policy, to put their lands into two or three truncks of new
clothes, that wearing their lands on their backs, they may see that no strip
nor wast be done by their tenants: but when they would Iuggle backward their
clothes into lands again, alas and weladay they are so thredbare and out at
th'elbows, that they will not match the former value, and so is dubd Sir John
Hadland; a knight of pennylesse bench. Thus to make Idols of their carcasses
for a while, beggar themselves for ever. And many such base pesants that have
witless wealth, or wealth without wit, are puffed up with such presuming
thoughts, as they ambitiously aim to trick up themselves in costly suites,
and covet to match, nay to exceed men of good worth and place: but this is
destined to such high minds, that when they are crept up to the top of such
bravery, they often fall to great shame, being the first step to the
downe-fall of beggerie: but howsoever they incroach into vainglorious tytles,
yet wise men measure all estates by their virtues, not by pomp and outward
bravery, and despise not him whom birth, time, place, or office, makes
worthy of such costly ornaments, but hold it lawful and commendable to fit
their degrees in apparel, answerable to their callings: but if we should
enter into the intolerable abuse of Pride, we might paint out some that are
dying their faces with painting, to be more lovely and amiable, and stretch
their wits above Ela to be the original of some new toye: but who is so
foolish to count them the fairer for that? but rather the fowler: for that face
that is slubbred and starched with so many ointments and dregs, is more liker a
sore and scurffe, then a natural face: God has given the face, and thou
Painted faces abominable.
defilest it with mire and dirt; would thou be fair, to be more amiable?
why, silence, sobriety, chastity, are beautiful ornaments, and richer then
any orient pearl, and with wise men more inestimable: but indeed if thou
would entice the eyes of them that behold thee, nourish lust in young men,
and draw them after thee, then this is the way: but in my opinion, it is
impossible for thee to get a good and virtuous husband with who^ thou may
live quietly and well, by smering thy visage: for when he sees that thy face
was but florisht over, he shall find thee a deceitful crocodile, and so
loathe and hate thee more afterward, then ever he loved thee before.

Now what are these thus patcht up by their own workmanship, but the least
part of themselves: they cannot be content to be as God made them, but as
though they were hudled up in haste, and sent into the world not fully
finished: and to this end serve their drugs, balmes, The devil the inuenter of
f^arch, poking sticks, etc.
ointments, paintings, Lac virginis, and certere quid non? to mend the least
mote amiss: sye upon these frownsing Irons, poking sticks, perriwigs,
embroided fore-tops, etc. which are all an evident token of that filthy kennell
of mudde wherewith they are possessed: for what is all this but to impeach the
Creator, and disable the all omnipotent workmanship of nature? for when they
have done what they can, they paint but a muddy wall, and set a gloss upon a
counterfeit: for though they should bathe themselves in milk every day, as
Cleopatra, yet will they cry out with Ovid, I am meos v^ltus Ruga semilis erat.

And overtaken with time, the visage will be wrinckled, rugged, and
hard-fauoured, and the whole body crooked, infirm, weak, and bent downward,
and force them, mauger their heads, to behold their graves, where under a clod,
they and their gay cloutes must be buried; the remembrance whereof should make
them veil their plumes, and turn pride to humility: but the abundance they
wallow in, like Epicures, drown the mind in sensuality, choke up the
understanding, and keeps it back from the contemplation Cold charity now a
days.
of future happiness. And notwithstanding they are so rich and sumptuously
arrayed, and carry so much gold about their necks, and so hung with costly
Jewels, yet will deny to give a halfe-penny to them that have need: o stony
heart! that can suffer the poor to be in want, yea dye for hunger, and thou
stuffed full of delicates, clothed in silks and fine garments, and let them lie
naked in the streets: or if the extreme necessity of some poor Lazarus move
compunction, to give an alms, it must be done in the eye of the world, and set
down in capital Letters, and commended to posterity, as a work of eternal
memory. In like manner if we descend lower, we shall see Pride ruffle in base
Rustickes, Every base Tapster or Oastler, will be as fine as a Gentleman.
for every one will be in the fashion, howsoever they come by it; the servant
cannot be known from the Master, the maid from the Mistress, nor scarce any
man's estate distinguished by his apparel; but every slouenly seruingman, and
greasy scrape-trencher will exceed the bounds of his calling, and creep
into acquaintance with velvet, satin, and such costly stuff, too high I wisse
for their low estate, and lay all they can rap and rend on their backs, in
swaggering and vain apparel, to seem a clout of lousy gentilitie, that
proving bankerouts in youth, are feign to wear rags in age. And every
Countrey-wench that has but four nobles a year and shifts, must be trimly
trickt up like maid Marryan in a Morris dance, and her ruffes set above the
common size, and be in the fashion, though she get it with shifts; but the
shifts that makes her laugh, sendes her often home by weeping cross.

But it is undoubtedly true, that such as are so curious, to dight up
themselves in quaint attire, forget to adorn the mind with humility,
modesty, shamefastness, and such feminine virtues as becomes their sex,
and utterly omit to deck the soul with the sparkeling Icmmes of
sober-beseeming qualities. Consider what you are, and whereto you must, a
painted post does but deceive the eye, and a painted body the soul. Is there
a new fashion come out? be thou then the first to put it down, follow not the
guise of the world, but seek for those virgin virtues that will make you live
admired, as a wise and sober matron; for the vanity of apparel shows the
lightness of the heart, and the A fair whore i^ a sweet poison, and her lou^
like a false fire soon out.
very badge of inconstancy, when many female serpents lie in wait to deceive
young wits with trains of love, and set out their gay bodies to sight, as
pleasing objects to entrap the soul, that tender youth may make annatomie of
misery by their own woes.

A beautiful strumpet is an Adamant that draws, a Panther that allures, and
of the nature of quicke-siluer: for as this metal does mingle it self with
gold wheresoever they meet: so they respect nothing in a man but money, and on
that set their love, and prize wealth before any internal Virtue. For as they
are a painted continent of flattery, the Image of inconstancy, and the
cabanet of evil: so the habitation of such scorpions, is likened to hell,
Noctes atque dies patet atri Ianua ditis, night and day the gates stand open to
receive all comers, and by their sweet words and loose manners, draw souls
to Gehenna. These iette with heads aloft, hung with rich abilliments, costly
Jewels, and brave attire, when fetters for their feet, and manacles for their
hands, were more seemlier for such shameless Curtizans.

These are as baits to take men, as hooks do fishes, and as Hiena, flattereth
when she means to kill, and the Crocodile weep when she pretends murder: so
do they embrace their lover with a dagger in his bosom, and feed him with
sweet words, wanton toys, till they bring him into fools paradize: but when
the storms of adversity begin to flow, their love does ebb: and when my young
nouise his purse is dried up, the great show of love does abate: And therefore
these mermaids may be fitly compared to glorious flowers, that have stinking
smells, puffed up with pomp and lightness, and co^taine nothing within but
deceit and treachery: in sight louel^ and sauerous: but in taste most deadly and
venomous.

Ovaine mind! that buildst thy rest upon sinful sport, and make shipwreck of
chastity for gain, as though there were no God, or at least that he were idle
and did not regard the action of men: shall they not one day they know not how
soon, be conuented before his seat, and give account for every idle word? much
more for pride, covetousness, whoredom, and such like abominable deeds: and
being convicted by their own conscience, will they not be danted at the woeful
sentence, Go ye cursed? etc. no doubt yes, their courage will quail, and
their pride abate: filthy sports and sweet sins are short and soon vade:
but the guiltiness tarrieth still behind, and clogs the soul to eternal
destruction.

Again, by riches is corrupted the Judgment with partiallitie; for does not
the vain world value a man by money, by the outside not the inside, and judge
him rich if possessed with some worldly honor? For let a poor man be never so
honest, wise, temperate, and his mind never so beautiful, yet if his back be
poor, in want, need, and out of fashion, and has neither mo^ey nor friends,
he shall have Tom Drums entertainment: Sinihil attuleris, ibis Home for as, Why
money is the sinews, the blood, and soul of man, without which all is nothing
be it never so excellent: for unless the purse be well lynde with crowns,
neither Science, cunning, Art, honesty, or any Virtue, is available to
advance to dignity (without some mechanical endeavor) for gold makes a way
to every thing, yea and opens the gates of hell as the Poet says:

Omnis enim res,
Virtus, fama, decus, di^ina, humanaque pulchris
Diuitijs parent: qua^ qui construxerit, ille
Hor. in sermon, li* 2.
Clarus erit, fortis, sapiens, etiam and Rex:
Et quicquid volet, hoc vel^ti virtute parat^m
Sperauit magnae laudi fore.
So that a man has all these properties in the vain opinion of the world, if
so be he be rich, but if poor, notwithstanding he be stored with good virtues,
yet is he not reputed as he is: has he money? yea: is he rich, and has he
great possessions? yea: why the^ let him be honored, and deemed virtuous,
gracious, and what he will, though in truth and verity he be nor so nor so.
Again, is he beggarly, has he no money nor means? why then let him pack and
walk along, no penny, no Pater noster: for he is as one dead, among the
living; though indeed properly this peremptory sentence ought not to be so
applied; but rather to Virtue, and littrature, without which the body is dead,
although it live.

What cannot this humpish eleme^t bring to pass? can it not cover a mass of
ill humors? and cause the son to A true speech of a Cannibal.
betray his own Father? as a leaud fellow said once, If my Father were a
hangman, my mother a harlot, and my self no better: yet if I have money, I am
liked well enough, and never touched with their misdeeds: so that there is no
vice that wealth does not smother: a rich man as proud as Tarquine, as cruel
as Nero, as doggish as Tymon, as covetous as Dives, and as foolish as
Lobellinus, yet all these vices are hid with greatness, and though counterfeit
metal, yet with a true stamp may currantly pass: but a poor man, in whom
is great wisdom, and many good parts, Si res angusta domi, if coin be
wanting, he is despised, rejected, and never used in exployting weighty
matters: so that a man is never thought wise, learned, unless he be rich, and
swim in the stream of wealth: and though he speak well, and to the purpose,
yet is he never gracious, as the Poet says, Rara tenui facundia panno. A poor
man's speech is Sa^yr. 7.
seldom pleasant, and wisdom under a ragged coat seldom canonical: which
the Philosopher well found, Learning thrust out by head and shoulders.
when offering to press into the presence with his simple weeds, was shut out
by a grim Cerberus, but shifting his clothes, was admitted without repulse:
wherefore coming before the king, he turned all his obeisance upon his own
clothes, saying: I must honor them that honor me, for my cloutes brought
that to pass which all my Philosophy could never accomplish. And thus is the
rich beauty of the mind, measured by a beggars weed, and gay apparel
preferred before a mind well qualified: so the rude opinion looks at nothing
but the outward picture, and magnify an ignorant Ass, so he have a gay coat,
and set him on a high seat, where by silence he may seem wise: for the
wisdom of a man says Solomon, is known by his speech. But as by knocking on
a vessel, the crack (if any be) will soon be seen, so if touched with an
argument, his cracked understanding will soon be manifest.

Great places are possessed with men of weak judgment, Simple men cl^mbe to
high places.
that have no iotte of worthiness, but wealth and worldly fame, and can serve
for no other use but for a Nomenclator to tell the clock, call a spade, a
spade, and reckon up the proper names of things: yet if trimly spunged up in
some formality (though he have little wit, and small honesty) it is enough to
raise him up to some dignity: but when such an one is exalted into the
imparatiue mood, how moodie his maistership is, so toadeswolne with pride and
ambition, that he is ready to burst in sunder, and so rapt up in conceit of his
high place, that he utterly forgets his first creation. Oh it is a world of
sport to hear how some such clouting beetles roll in their loblogicke, and
intrinsicate into the mayor of the matter, with such hide*bound reasons, that
he makes a pitiful learned face, one spreads his arms, cleares his throat,
as who should say, attend, attend, for now he speaks, whose conclusions are
unanswerable, but finding the proposition too deep for his shallow wit,
suddenly starts back, and briefly huddles up his headless matter. An other
shakes his empty head, and dives into the bottom of his bottomless brains,
to find some intricate and tedious circumstance, into which when he is entered
he cannot find a period and full rest, so many Tautokogies and itterations
come into the way, that unless some Ariadne lend a thread to pull him out of
Dedalus laborinth, he must needs be lost; or at leastwise when he is gotten
out, is so myred with his own slyme, that he becomes a scorn to wise men,
in laying open his own weakness: yet who more talkatiue, and ready to stop
the mouths of men able to speak, then such insencible tatlers? for drunken
fortune has this opinion of it self, that look whatsoever it speaks is
authentical, and droppeth from the mouth like the Oracles of Appollo. There is
nothing therefore so holy, so pure, so honest, so chaste, but money will
corrupt, violate, and batter down: so that these empty bottles, apish
gestures, and anticke faces, if wealthy, rich, and well monied, all gross
imperfections are ouershadowed. So that when men are sotted in the allureme^ts
of this life, and dedicate their whole labors to so wicked a saint, they soon
loose the use of their goods, and become partially affected: if passion rule,
and not reason, all goes to wrack; for if either prodigallitie rule the purse,
whereby the mind is strongly carried into temporary joy, or so gripple and
covetous as to do nothing but scrape in the dunghill of this world, why these
extremes do so urge the opinion, that they headlong run at random into all
licentious and loose living, in so much as they do not perceive to what end
they are advanced above other men, and made so rich among a company of beggars.

Many there be (the more is the pity) that although God has abundantly
multiplied his blessings upon them, that they cannot justly say they want any
worldly thing, yet be they so near to hold fast that which Hard-hearted
Christians.
they have, that they do as it were, single themselves from all common duties,
and lay aside that regard of the public good, which their conscience and
private ability does instantly tie them unto; let us note them a little, who
will sooner shift and wrangle off honest duties then they? will they not
brabble and sophisticate for very small payments? and will they not wrest and
wind laws to their own sense, if they may save but a penny? and bear the
repulse of superior rebukes, the^ to part with ought shall contradict their
froward nature: is this the duty of good subjects? do these seek the peace of
the state? does not the Heathen man say: Non solum nobis natisumus: we are not
borne for our selves alone, but for our country also: shall Christians be
worser then Pagans? Let this great duty therefore be considered, seeing thou
have store, withold nothing that is due: is not he a caytiffe that will see
his mother dye for hunger, and he has bread to relieve her if he would? why,
the Commonwealth is thy mother, every poor Christian is thy brother, will thou see them famisht before thy face and not succor them, having enough? Thou
have thy wealth to that end, if thou could see it, and use it aright.
Nevertheless, we see how men of good place and reckening, will hide themselves
in corners, live privately, only to keep their purses, that they The City is
extremely postered with Inmates and Idle families, when ye Country lies waste
and unpeopled.
may be liable to no imposition, and crowde into Cities, Boroughs, and
privilege places, or like nonresidents, roll up and down from one lodging to
an other, to the intent that being uncertain where to be had, their states may
be unknown, and by this means both overthrow hospitality, defraude the
Queen and Commonwealth of necessary duties, and depopulate the country. Is
it not a token of a couctous mind, that men of good possessions and fair
livings, should break up house, and soiourne only with one or two servants,
that they may hoorde up their rents, when they are sufficientlye able to keep
a good house themselves? surely it is a sign of a base condition.

Furthermore, many wealthy Yeomen, and rich Farmers that are risen up to goods
enough, do tread the same path. For whereas erst when they dwelt upon their
own, they kept good houses, and were no small stay to the places where they
lived, are either covetous of some vainglorious title of gentilitie, or
otherwise so miserly greedy of wealth, (for one of the two I know not which)
thrust themselves in like manner, into Cities, Corporations, and Liberties, and
yet hold their Farms still in their own occupying: for they have such long
arms, that they claspe many great livings. And also lying upon the advantage,
take Farms over their neighbors heads, ten years before their Leases be
expired: And what do they with these plurified livings? but place shepherds,
herds, underlings, and such thred*bare tenants in their stocks, and that at
such unreasonable rents too, that the poor snakes that dwell under them are
driven to weak shifts, to fare hardly, live barely, moyle and toil the whole
year to scrape up their rent, not saving at the years end for all their
pains, scarce the price of an old Frise Ierkin: for their Lord knows better
then they what profit will arise, and how every thing will fall out: and if he
thrive under him, then does he stretch and rack it to the uttermost, till at
last he bring the whole gain into his own bag; and so by this means can
hardly bear ordinary charges, much less do works of superrerogation, being
kept down so cruelly by their greedy Land*lords.

Now these have not only their means brought in unto them by the sweat of
poor men's brows, and sleep in peace and security when others watch and
labor (a great blessing, if rightly weighed) but will closely and cunningly
seek to shift off all duties by withdrawing them into odd corners. Oh that
men of such ability should have such Iron rustie hearts, to hide their heads,
shut their hands, and whip devotion from their doors! do they not seek to
subvert and weaken the state as much as they can, by withholding that part of
duty required by the law of nature? but the greediness of gain causes
unrelenting hearts, for one would possess all alone.

O how are men deceived in their own estate, that being rich, are yet ever
poor, because opinion is never satisfied: whereas if we only respect nature,
no man can be poor, Natar a enim vt ait Philoso. paucis minimisque contenta
nature, is content with necessity. But to bring all this to a head, though
some be carried with the stream of pride, some with the floods of desire,
some prodigal, some pinching; and though the covetous man gape for more, more,
and like hell mouth, never satisfied, yet will they hide their plough-sores
under the carpet of liberality, as now and then to give an alms against a
good time (as they call it) to beat down a hard opinion, intimating thereby
to be good free-hearted men, when all the year beside, they scrape and clawe
it from other by the excessive prices of their badde commodities, and by
pinching them with many uncharitable gripes, and yet will they hide their want
of love under Virtue and Religion: and why so* because it carries a general
good liking of all men: for although many have no religion at all, nor one
spark of a virtuous man, yet for all this will they seem to love and embrace
it entirely, because of the unspotted simplicity they see in the true
professors thereof: and that chiesly, because this outward show is some means
to assuage the heat of sharp reprehensions; and that under color of this,
they may live in some good report of the common sort: for if they should not
hide the malice within, with a show of holiness without, but permit the
rebellion to rush forth, they would be hateful to others, and disquiet their
own peace: to hold friendship therefore with the world, it is expedient for
them to be hypocrites and deceivers, and therefore will they perform many
Christian duties, and communicate with the Saints, yea and crowde to the Church
door of true devotion, and both pray and use good exercises in their families,
frequent Sermons, yea and ride and go six or seven miles to hear a good
Preacher: are not these good things, Cunning deceluers.
and the very properties of a true Christian* yes verily: but all this is but
done in policy to mock the world: how know you that* why look into their
course of life; if any vain opportunity be offered, will theynot follow it? if
the wicked call to go, will they not run* will they not dice, card, swear,
swagger, and be drunk? are they not usurers, extortioners, proud persons, and
so cold in charity, that no Christian duty can heat their love? so it is an
casie thing to see their hypocrisy, if a man but cast his sight upon their
conversation.

And in like manner, many at the end of the year (as a charitable work) will
keep open house, and set open their gates, for all the rake-hels and loose
vagabounds in a country, and fill idle bellies with their fleshpots, when the
poor, blind, lame, and sick, are feign to lie in the depth of misery,
without comfort, help, or succor: and to what end is this great
superfluity? forsoothe, to rejoice for the blessed feast of Christmas: The
false use of^ue joy.
Indeed this feast does bring great cause of joy, for that being all lost
in Adam, and heirs of damnation, are nevertheless by the coming of the
Messiah, the son of God, who took on him our flesh at this time of the
year, to undergo the wrath of his father due to us, redeemed us from hell,
and made us inheritors of heaven: here is cause of joy, what a happy memory
is this? how ought this feast to be celebrated in magnifying the Almighty, and
lauding his name for so great a benefit? but what a commemoration is here?
when they turn true joy into carnal iollitie: does this true joy stand in
eating, drinking, rioting, feasting, mumming, masking, dancing, dicing,
carding, and such like, that taste wholly of Heathens superstition* is God
honored by this* nay rather is he not more dishonored at that time of the
year, then all the year beside* So that a counterfeit joy is set up in stead
thereof, meditation and merciful works are pulled down, and Epicurisme set
up, which does usurp and imperiously bear rule over all holy desires: for in
this is their devotion, in unlawful and sinful pleasures, to gurmandize and
waste in excess the good blessings of GOD; and these men will not stick to
lash out a whole mass of money, in dedicating feasts to devil Bacchus, and
maintain Plays in their houses, as silthy as the Lupercalia in Rome, spend
whole nights and days in reuelling, and toaste themselves by Virg.
their great fires, and as the Poet says, Regific^ luxn paratae epulae, have
their Tables furnished at exceeding and princely charges, to stuff the guts
and feed the belley, and wish with Polmixe, that they had throats as long as
Cranes, so that they might taste their sweets with more leisure: In so much
that by this unreasonable excess and gluttony, in a few days wast out that
riotously, that would relieve many poor people if measurably bestowed. Thus I
say like Epicures they consecrate the memory of this blessed feast, with such
a joy, as savors altogether of the dross and slime of the earth: and this is
liberality forsooth, charity, and Christian love, when it is but
prodigallitie, vainglory, and hypocrisy.

Moreover, although they be too too slack in honest duties, yet will they
scotch at no charge may bring pleasure, or hold up some vainglorious
memory, as in building great houses, to be christened by their names, when many
of them are but as Absolons pillar, a monument of folly, a spectacle of
vanity, and a prey of time, many chimnies, little smoke: large rooms,
wherein a man may walk and chawe his melancholy for want of other repast, and
never be put to the charges to buy a tooth-picker. And to what end is this
great building and cunning Architect? but to stand in the gaze of the world,
and make the passenger cry out with admiration,

O domus antiqua hen quam dispari dominari Domino! Ennius.
O gallant house, full well do I see,
How unlike a Lord has lordship on thee.
Indeed here is the two-folde benefit it yields, not only in setting many poor
laboring men a work, but also a Princely edifise and stately building, is a
great honor to a kingdom. But such are worthy blame that overthrow their
state by building, not being able to use one room well of those many they
build: for if a man of reasonable wealth fall into this humor of building gay
houses, if he did small good before, is now utterly unable to do any at al, his
new foundation has eaten up all his old means: this is the simple policy
of some men that love to beggar themselves to please the eye. Again, how
provident men are to graft their children into great stocks, that may not
easily be stricken with the thunderclaps of adversity, and though the stock
be never so rotten, infected, and blasted with Vice, yet if rich and mighty,
it is enough: and surely this Ethicall policy were highly to be advanced, if
so be that our continui^g City were here: but seeing all things are frail,
momentaine, short and transitory, that we cannot certainly number to morrow
among the days of our life, what a mere madness is this, to be so in love
with the flattering smiles of this life? and so myred in the dunghill of
pleasures, as to doat so much upon it: for verily men seek their own danger,
when they make the thing that is indifferent, to be unlawful: do they not with
Orpheus catch the air? seek the shadow, and loose the substance? win earth,
and loose heaven.

Yet these aboriginies, carth*bred worms, with high looks, and insolent
bragges, will stand upon terms of gentilitie, and derive their pedigree even
from Cadwallader, the last king of the Britons, when in sadness they are not so
much as sprinkled with one true drop of gentle blood, neither one property of
a Gentleman, unless it should only stand in wealth and great possessions,
which is contrary to our former assertion: for if true gentry be a mind
excellently decked with rare virtues, not only by propagation of nature, but by
integrity of qualities; not in beauty, but in Virtue; not in riches, but in
honor; not in pride, but in comeliness; not in costly and curious diet, but
feeding the hungry, and clothing the naked; not in sumptuous building, joining
house to land, kin to kin (with respective marriages) but only in the true
possession of Virtue: then albei^a man wallow in wealth, live in pleasure, fare
dainty, go princely, hung with pearl, sweetly perfumed, hawks, horses,
hounds, and in a word, have whatsoever pomp and glory his heart can wish, or
the world afford: yet if he be not noble in Virtues, but ignoble in vices, and
have not those good parts that carry a union of good men's praises, he is but
pirat and latro, a thief and a robber; and all his rich paintings and goodly
buildings, are but monuments of shame and baseness. Is not Virtue then more
honorable then Virtue more honorable then riches.
riches? does it not raise a man to immortality? and does not riches overthrow
his happiness, if not duly ouerwatcht with Temperance? and if so be a rich man
look narrowly into his state, and cast up his accounts well, he shall find
himself a very bankerout, and to owe more then he is worth: for why has he
more plenty of bastardly riches then other men, but that he is a bayliffe,
steward, and Feoffer in trust, to dispose and lay out in alms and charitable
works? Now then if he apply them to his own use, what reckning can he make,
or how will he answer it at the great assizes, when it shall be objected by the
king of glory, When I was naked, you clothed me not: when I was hungry you
fed me not? etc. Go into everlasting fire, etc. And therefore these great rich
men of the world, have objects before their eyes, and are hemde in with poor
on every side: here is one crying for bread, there an other for clothes, the
sick to be visited, the lame and infirm to be comforted, the stranger to be
lodged, so that they cannot turn their eyes no way, but they have motions to
stir up charity, and woeful clamors sounding into their ears of want: and
yet had diverse of them rather do any thing then relieve their necessities, to
give ten pound for a Hawke, then ten pence to cloathe the naked. The Raven
forsakes her young ones as soon as they are hatched, because seeing them of an
other hew, thinks them of an other kind: so in like manner some rich men look
aloft, snuff and fume at their poor brethren, and cast off all deuosion and
brotherly love, because seeing them humbled and brought low in the world,
judge them utterly unhappy, when verily they are not only of one selfsame
issue and parent, but also more acceptable to God in their base estate, the^
they in all their royalty.

Is it not lamentable, to see a number of poor winterstarued people lie pining
in misery, which might Cold charltie in these days, among many mysers.
be relieved, if it were but with the surplusage of their vain expenses, and
comforted with that, which they wastfully consume? For do but view these kind
of men, and you shall see they will spare for no cost to build fair houses (as
I said before) though they impouerish themselves for ever: galleries,
bowling-allies, walks, and whatsoever may bring delight; to ride with great
retinew to show their pomp, and maintain their* quarrels, to feed idle
bellies with their flesh*pots, that are no sooner up but run to vain sports:
but if a poor man be fallen into want, or an honest cause crave some relief,
a penny is as hardly gotten from them, as fire out of a flint*stone, or if it
does at last come, it is many times more for fashion to shun reproach, then
for charity to the cause. But some perhaps will say, it is my own, and may I
not do with mine own what I will? but it is neither so, nor so: for it is not
thine, thou art put in trust to lay it out, to help and succor thy poor
needy brother. Perhaps thou will say again, I brought him not to beggary: did
I lame him? did I vnparell him? or did I vnhouse him? wherefore then should I
recompense him whom I never wronged? Are Bees bound to gather honey for
droanes? and must I keep life in rattes and myce, and such vermin as are bred
by the infection of a plentious year? Indeed they are made poor, but it is
because thou art rich; that thereby thou might exercise thy love, for there
shall be poor always to set charity a work: yet some are so far from
love, as they fall into barbarous cruelty, that they had rather cut their
throats, then cherish them with benevolence: as it is recorded of a B. B. of
Constance, that under color of giving alms, assembled all the poor in the
country together, shut them up in a barn, set fire to it, and burnt them up
together, counting it a work meritorious: and no doubt for so doing, he was
cannonized a saint by the impiety of Antichrist.

If one of these Bacchanalls, deliver to his steward a great sum of money to
lay out in domesticke affairs, and he lavish it out in ryoting, drunkenness,
and leaud company, will not his master pull his coat over his ears? brand
him for a knave, and turn him out at his gates? no doubt he would be as
rigorous as so leaude a prancke should deserve: why then how do they think to
escape? being bailiffes and stewards, to the Lord of Lords, who has
committed his treasure to them, with a charge to lay it out in such merciful
works as he has appointed, and they run with it to the market A note for
belly-gods.
of vanities, and expend it in prodigal uses. Surely it will be a mad
reckening when they shall come in with Item in Pheasants, Patriges, Woodcockes,
sawses, sops, and delicates for the body, so much. Item in strange fashions,
and new fangles for my back, so much: upon dogs so much: in vain building
so much, and such like. I suppose this bill of Items will be scarce pleasing
to their master that has put them in so great trust.

Then seeing God has made thee rich, and thy brother poor, be never the more
pust up with pride and disdain, but studi^ how thou may discharge so great
a reckning as thou have to make: think this with thy self, he that made me
rich, could have made me poor; it is in his bounty, not my deserving; I do
but possess that of which an other is owner, who can disinherit me when he
will: why then should I brag as if it were mine own? and though my brother
be poor, yet peradventure he is richer to God then I; I see no difference
between us, we are both of one moulde, ^aue that I have more chafe and
rubbish then he, which is scattered with every gust of wind: so that if he
well consider his state, and expostulate with himself in this manner, that
load of riches that is now so heavy, will be more easily borne.

The Poets feign, that Plutus the god of money is lame when he comes, but
has wings swiftly to depart: signifying that as riches are long in getting, so
they are suddealy lost: and therefore a man should be rich in charity and
poor in desire, and impart the benefit to the needments and necessity of
other.

For as there is a divine coherence between the members of the body, though
they have all a distinct and peculiar office, yet they all minister to the
common society: so in like manner we being members of that body, whereof
Christ is the head, ought to bend our actiuitie for the health and welfare of
the same, and to bear such a mutual conjunction and simpathie, as feeling
members, to open the bowels of compassion on such as are in want: and this
only is Virtues Common*wealth.

Nevertheless there be some well disposed and very forward to all good duties
in saying, till it come to doing: but then they winch like a gald horse, o they
cannot away with charge: If my ability says one would answer my
willingness, I would do this and that, or if I had so much wealth, I would
relieve the poor better, they should not go empty handed; or if I had so
much wit, and such means, I would countenance good causes with the beauty of
honor: and so do they vaunt of that they would do, and yet do not that they
should do. I demand what good do thou with that little thou have? thou art
wise and politic, or at least thou think so, how do thou use it* if
thou art unfaithful in a little, no doubt thou would be so in a great deal:
for as he is inconfident to whom money is delivered upon trust to pale to an
other, and does either keep it back all, or deliver but half: so he that has
much or little and does not dispose it as he oght, is not worthy to be trusted
with more. Perhaps thou will say, such a man is of great wealth and he does
little good or none at all, why then should I that am of lesser value do any
thing* this is no excuse for thee, nor cause of suspense, for thou art to look
to thy own duty, and not weaken thy own charity, by the negligence of other
men.

An other will boast of that little he does, and be the trumpe of his own
praise: saying, I give thus much weekly to the poor, and do this and that
good: but he is to examine himself if it be according to his wealth and place
or no, for otherwise an other man does as much that is far behind in
substance, and with whom he would brag without measure, in comparatiue
terms: but some think if they do a little good, though it be nothing in liew
of their state, or if they do not a great deal of hurt by pilling, powling,
strife, factions, and such like troubles, they have done so much good, that God
is bound to pay them somewhat back again. But according to the Poet, Est
quodam prodirete^^s: sinon datur vltra.


Hor.
Here could I enter in a field of matter
more then much:
But guess that all is out of frame,
and long it has been such.
Although it were better to be occupied in practicing those books already
written, then to write more, (this last age being so full, that it does exceed
all other): yet the necessity of times, by reason of controversies, do provoke
the learned to spend their labors that way: and not only so, but in
explaining the scriptures, and No end of making ma^y books.
discoursing of Sciences, which work is not only necessary, but commendable;
whereby a general good is brought in: this godly use of writing cannot be
disliked of any virtuous man.

But forasmuch, as some are diversely affected, they observe not this decorum
before noted, but fall into vain iangling, and so conceited of their own
wits, and have so many crotchets in their heads, that they publish great
volumes of nice and curious questions, ambiguities, and doubts, as many of the
Asse-stronomers, that are very inquisitiue to know if the world were created
Curious star gazets.
in the Spring or Autumn, the night before the day, and how Moses could write
credibly of the worlds creation, living so many years after; as thoug^ God
could not as well tell him what was passed, as he did the Prophets what was to
come, and such deep secrets, as though God had called them to counsel. In like
manner some are busied in Natiuities, Destinies, Dreams, Palmestrie, and
Phisiognamie: in a word, who is able to express the foolish curiosity of some
men, that are never satisfied in these vain and idle studies, but spend whole
years in searching after doubts and fallacies, and in the mean time ouerpasse
those things which he has vouchsafed to reveal unto us, sufficient for us to
know: Noli altum sapere, it is no time well spent to soar so high in things
shut up from common understanding and reason, and chiefly seeing they are no
ground of faith, nor means to edification.

But by this, the Roman merchant has fetched in his greatest gain, I mean
by false reu^lations, and The Pope loses nothing by this*
fond opinions, as Purgatory, the Econimicall government of the heavenly
powers, the mansions and chambers in heaven, the degrees of Angels, and
Archangels, Cherubins and Seraphins, and a thousand other fond imaginations,
foysted in among them by their school dunces, which they falsely derive from
Dionisius Ariopagita, one of the seventy Disciples: so that by these intricate
fallacies, and subtle silogis^^es, wherewith they are maintained, many poor
souls are ensnared, and cast headlong into a laborinth of blind superstition.
This curiosity therefore is a dangerous disease, and a sore that must be
healed, least it fester and run over the whole body.

Others there be that have such a leaprosie of wit, that they to disquiet and
trouble the estate, seek for innovation, and displant all good order
established, not only thereby amazing the weak Christians, but also alinating
the hearts of many from their due obedience. Touching these that carpe at the
present discipline, I will say little, only this much by the way: that
although many things may be misliked in a pollitique state, and not seem so
precisely good to them that look a far off with slight imagination: yet may
be well permitted and tolerated in policy, to keep peace and quietness: so
be it the fundamental properties stand fast, which otherwise could not but
bring much confusion and disorder: and therefore it is no sure opinion (as the
learned suppose) to go about to change laws, and break down discipline,
which is already established, least all comeliness and good order be
therewith overthrown.

Some do naught else but scrape the puddle of contentions, to find matter to
wrangle, though they have no cause to carpe.

Epist. 18* li. 1.
Alter rixatur de lana s^pe caprina:
propugnat nugis armatus.
And these are so ambitious of their sophistical vain of wrangling, that they
put their brabbles in print, to the view of the world, and out of the rancour
and malice of their hearts, spew and belch outscandals, slanders, Busy
controwlers.
rumors and false reports: by that means kindle flambes of contentions in a
peaceable state, and distemper the quietness of men's affections, and this is
chiefly bent against good men: for the quality of grudging envy is, to be
sick with sorrow and virulent hate, at the prosperity of other: for he that
is exhorted by the desert of Virtue, is subject to scandalls, and the
backbiting of the uious.

But the haven I intend to harbourin, is to speak somewhat of those vain,
idle, wanton Pamphlets and lascivious loue-bookes, which as firebrarnds,
inflame the concupiscence of youth: for in my opinion nothing does more corrupt
and wither green and tender wits, then such unsavory and vituperable books,
as hurtful to youth, as- Machauile to age, a plaugh dangerous, and as common as
dangerous.

The lazy Monks, and fat-headed Friars, in whom was naught but sloth and
idleness, bred this contagion; for lining in pleasure and ease, and not
interrupted with cares, they had time enough to vomit out their doltish and
rediculous Vain books the spoil of many young wits.
fables, and this was the subtlety of Satan the^, to occupy Christian wits in
Heathens foolery* but now this age is more finer, men's wits are clarified, the
dullness of that time is thrust out, an other method is brought in, fine
phrases, Inkchorn-termes, swelling words, bumbasted out with the flocks of
sundry languages, with much pollished and new-made eloquence* with these
dainty cates they furnish and set out their filthy and vicious books; now
what do they, but tie youth in ^ setters of lust, and keep them in the
thoughts of love? for do they not with glosing words tickle and stir up the
affections to be conceited of some fond passion, to be more ungraciously
subtle? and do they not labor in vain cunning to infect and poison delicate
youth^? are not there idle Poems of carnal love, lust, and ^nchaste arguments?
the very nurses of abuse, by which the mind is drawn to many pestilent
wishes. For when as young folks have licked in the sweet juice of these
stinking books, their conversation and manners are so tainted and spotted with
Vice, that they can never be so clean washed, but some filthy dregs will
remain behind. I may liken them to fawning curres, that never bark till they
bite: or a gaye painted coffer, full of toades and venomous beasts: So in like
manner many of these books have glorious outsides, and goodly titles: as if
when a man took them in hand, he were about to read some angelical discourse:
but within, full of strong venom, tempered with sweet honey: now while the
mind is occupied in reading such toys, the common enemy of man is not idle,
but does secretly ensnare the soul in security. And some of good parts, and
Good wits vain writers.
beautified with no common gifts, both of art and nature, not being led by
the sunshine of Virtue, infect the purity of wit with profane invention, in
some loose subject; as patrons of Vice, and nurses of impiety, and spend the
blessedness of time in unnecessary babbling.

Other base and servile wits run rashly into any sinful argument, and crowde
to the prease with might and maine, not so much regarding the general hurt, as
some sixe*penny allowance: nay, every triuiall mate and cashired Clarke, will
bewray his folly in print, and with a tumultuous confusion of words, lay out a
deal of amorous prattle, though he be as tedious to his reader, as a muddie
way to a weary traveler. Now what is to be found in these books? but
filthiness and gross ignorance; as for learning, there is none to be found in
them, which never came near the shadow of learning themselves, and as little
wit, but a few fine words of lust, which are chiefly meant to bend the mind to
wantonness: yet are they led with this vain suppositio^, that if they have
bin luld a sleep but one night on the Muses lap, are able to publish any thing
with well deserved commendations: and I must needs say, that I my self have
read in them, and taken great delight in their foolish lies; but surely I could
never find either goodness or wit, unless Vice be Virtue, or to tell a bawdie tale
be wit.

Nevertheless, I would not have any man think, that I inueigh against, or
discommend Poetry; for in all ages it has bin thought necessary: but only
against those abusers of Poesy, who under the name and title of Poets, foist
Modest Poetry commendable.
in their wanton and lascivious verses. The true use of Poetry stands in two
parts; the one in teaching the way to Virtue; the other to move with delight
thereunto: for honest delight stirs up men to take that goodness in hand,
which otherwise would be loathsome and unpleasant: so that when it is bent to
a good end, and every thing laid out in his due annalligie, with some joy the
affections are thereby inuoked to a serious consideration, to imitate that
goodness whereunto it is moved. Those books that both delight and persuade
with learned discretion, and out of which some wholesome document may be
extracted, though it be simple, yet is it praiseable. Disdain not (says the
wise Heathen) the simple labor of an other, though thou be never so great;
especially if he speak good words. Again, considering the diversity of men's
minds, and how diversely they are disposed, all honest delight is not to be
disproued, because every man may find both pleasure and profit: for as I say,
by a pleasant discourse the mind is more chearefully carried, both to read and
meditate, to muse and study, and the memory more willing to hold that it has
conceived: So that Poetry is no other thing, but a lively presentatio^ of
things ingeniously disposed, whereby Virtue is painted out with such fresh
colors, that the mind is inflamed with her excellent properties.

Now whosoever shall descent from this true use, is no Poet, but a vain
babbler: for what are all these scurrillous tales, and bawdie verses? do these
move to Virtue with honest delight? nay do they not rather stir up bawdrie
and beastliness? for are they not full of Paganism and ribald speeches, to
stir up the mind to shady idleness? is this Poetry? verily they are as
unworthy the name of Poets, as Chirrillus, who had nothing to grace his verses
by, but only the name of Allex.

But if a man superficially and slitely glideth over these pye-bald Pamphlets,
they are like a pleasing dream, that mockes the mind with silken thoughts: but
if seen into with a sober judgment, he shall find in that fair beaten
path, many Adders and Snakes lie in wait to byte him by the heel.

A Legend of lies.
For if a view be had of these editions, the Court of Venus, the Palace of
Pleasure, Guy of Warwick, Libbius and Arthur, Beuis of Hampton, the wise men
of Goatam, Scoggins Ieasts, Fortunatus, and those new delights that have
succeeded these, and are now extant, too tedious to reckon up: what may we
think? but that the floudgates of all impiety are drawn up, to bring a
universal deluge over all holy and godly conversation: for there can be no
greater means to affright the mind from honesty, then these pedling books,
which have filled such great volumes, and blotted so much paper, their sweet
songs and wanton tales do ravish and set on fire the young untempered
affections, to practice that whereof they do entreat: who by reason of their
infancy and imbicillitie of wit, are soon seduced, and with wine-puft
eloquence, do so artificially lim out the life of vanity, as they easily take
the impression of that which is portrayed out unto them: and on this rock
stands the ensign of their glory, if smoothly and pithily they can trick up a
tale of some beastly prapus, of lawless lust, and rip up the genealogy of the
Heathen gods, to carry the mind into wonderment: o how they will diue into
the bottom of their brain! for fluant terms, and imbossed words, to varnish
their lies and fables to make them glib, and as we use to say, to go down
without chewing, which as poison does by little and little, disperse it self
into every part of the body.

From hence rises so much foolish idle prattle, the Seruing-man, the Image of
sloth, the bagge-pipe of vanity, like a windy Instrument, sounds nothing
but profaneness, and some are so charmed, as they spend their whole life in
vain reading, because they see in the^ as in a glass, their own conditions:
now such vain fragments as fit their humors, they suck in, and ^queese out
again in every assembly.

It is too true, that one such wanton toye does more breed Vice, then twenty
godly treatises can induce to Virtue: nor twenty Sermons preached by the best
Divine in England, does not so much good to move to true doctrine, as one of
these books do harm to entice to ill living: they corrupt good learning, and
subvert all sanctimony, and by a tedious prattling ouer-sway the memory from
that good purpose whereunto it ought to be employed, not informing the judgment
in matters worthy to be learned.

From whence then creeps in this pestilence, but out of these vain books;
for every mischief by little and little crawleth upon the good manners of men,
which under some show of goodness is suddenly received, which by a voluntary
admittance at the first becomes habitual, especially when the spiritual
faculties are defiled with much conversation: in so much that many that hold
places in sacred assemblies, become affected to their phrases, Metaphors,
Allegories, and such figurative and suparlatiue terms, and so much vain
eloquence, as they yield no fruit at all to their auditors, but drive them
into amazement with a multitude of Inkehorne-termes scummed from the Latin, and
defused phrases, as they fly above the common reach, when the most profitable
and best affected speech is that that is most congruable and fitly applied to
the intendment and understanding of the hearers by familiar and ordinary
terms, not sophistical, dark, and obscure, nor too base and barbarous: but
such as are animated by their present abillitie to speak more then other men,
and be addicted to affectation, have commonly a dearth of judgment, sildome
edify, but gallop over profane writers to show their vain reading.

Demosthenes being called to declaime against the rude multitude that had
assembled themselves in the Forum of Athens, answered he was not yet ready, if
he that had Facacia ingenij, the very soul of wit durst not speak in a serious
matter without preparing himself before, how ca^ such that come far short of
him in promptnes of natural wisdom, presume to handle holy things so rashly
with humane learning, for it is an impudent boldness for a man to take upon
him to teach others that which he before has not been taught: but I may speak
as Tully spoke of the Orators of Rome, Sed tamen videmus quibus extinctus
Oratoribus quam in paucis spes quanto in pa^cioribus facult as quam in multis
sit audacia. We see (says he) what noble Orators are put out of the way, and
how in few a hope remains, in fewer a skill, but in many a boldness, that
dare set upon any thing.

To return, do not these idle pernicious books poison the well disposed
manners of youth, and macerate and kill the seeds of Virtue that begin to
bloome? for do they not use more vain eloquence then confidence in matters of
wisdom? So that all that which they do, is but to make a mutiny. Men need
not sow for weeds, for they grow fast enough: so we are polluted enough by
kind, though we be not more defiled by custom: thus do they proceed like
cankers to eat off the tender buddes.

Neither do they want some Mecenas to Patronize their witless works, and to
have some applause, bend Vain worke^ well reward^d.
the scope of their argument to fit their dispositions; yea, and many times
thrust their dedications upon men of grave and sober carriage, who will not
stick to recompense their idle labors.

Now if the principal scope of all our actions and counsels, ought to be to
some good end, and that it must needs pass as a Maxim, that nothing can be
good but that which moves to Virtue, the^ it must co^seque^tly follow, that
all profane and lascivious Poems, are as an infectious air that brings a
general plague, because they strive against honesty.

And if Plato, saw so great cause to shut them out of his commonwealth, as
noisome to the peace and tranquillity thereof, what ought our Platonists to
do? since they more abound here then ever they did there: or if we had but the
zealous affections of the Ephesians, we would loathe the price of so great
iniquity, and sacrifice them at a stake, though they were of never so great
value. But happily it will be demanded how Ladies, Gentlewomen, etc. should
spend the time, and busy their heads, as though idleness were not a vice
badde enough of it self, without fire to be added, and as though there were not
a Bible, and many good books wherein they might be virtuously exercised.

Of good wits well employed what good would ensue, by setting out the praises
of the immortal majesty, that gives hands to write, and wits to invent,
what matter might they not find: both honest and necessary, in which they
might first want words to utter, then matter worthy to be uttered: especially
those that are not only by their outward felicity freed from troubles and
perturbation of mind, embracing content in the bosom of peace, the nurse of
Sciences, but are also enabled, and sufficiently gifted to publish any thing of
worth, o how willing is Virtue to crown them with honor*

But this contagion, ought seriously to be considered by men of riper
judgment, and by such as have authority to suppress the abuses; for is it
not lamentable? that a Pamphlet discoursing naught but Paganism, should be so
vendible, and virtuous books want sale, the one bought up thick and three
fold, the other lie dead, for there comes forth no sooner a foolish toye, a
leaud and bawdy ballad, but if sung in the market, by the devils quirristers,
they flock to it as crows to a dead carcass* buying them up as Jewels of
price, be they never so ribauld, filthy, or dorbellicall* but books of
Christianity, of modest argument, that ten^ to rectify the judgment, lies
still in the Stationers hand as waste paper, not so much as looked after: so
that by this we may plainly see, what a froward generation we are fallen into,
where in such books as are most hurtful and dangerous, are most devoutly
coueted.

Pythagoras rule.
But if they would observe the Philosophers rule, to abstain from speaking five
year, I doubt not but in that time, they would be fitted and fully
established, to write with sober judgment, as men of understanding and reason:
or if the Apostles rule were followed, Be swift to hear, and slow to speak,
they would be more considerate, and not run out the course of their lives in
such unprofitable study.

But touching the defense some make, to approve this vain writing, it is too
ridiculous, and not worth an answer, that they do by this means polish and
refine our English tongue, and draw it from barbarism, into a more finer
Cadence of words: but those books that polish the tongue, and deprave the life,
are dangerous, and in the sentence of wise men, in no case to be allowed: for
it were better for a man to be dumb, then by speaking to approve a wrong, and
accuse the innocent: and better it were indeed that they had not only no
learning at all; but also that they had no eyes to see, nor ears to hear: for
as it is in the Gospel, it were much better for a man to go blind into
heaven, then with two eyes to be cast into hell. Neither can I see but that
they draw our language from the ancient tenor, by mixing it with so many
strange countries, that it seems rather more artificial, then natural: and
more baser then the common law, which is compounded of French, English and
Latin, etc.

The harsh tooting of Pans pipe, was more pleasing to Mydas care, then the
sweet harmony of Apolloes harp, Vain men* judge vainly.
but this fault was in the Judge, whose simplicity could not distinguish them
aright: in like manner, many are better content with vicious books, bawdie
songs, foolish and wanton ditties, then in the well sea^oned writings of holy
men, and this is for want of judgment, being as blind as he was foolish. It
may be said of such, as Pythagoras said to a leaude fellow that soothed
himself in conuersing with badde company, I had rather quoth he be acquainted
with bawdes, then wise Philosophers. L. Max.
No marvel quoth he very sadly, swine delight more in dirt, then in pure and
clean water.

Of such books as move to good life, and bring a benefit to posterity, we
have but too few, and can never have too many: but of such as follow their
own fancies in spewing out their wandering imaginations, we have but too many,
and it were to be wished we had none at all. Good men are not only otherwise
employed, but also greatly discouraged, for if they set forth any notable book
of divinity, humanity, or such like, they are in no request, but to stop
musterd-pots, and what is the reason but this, every Stationers shop, stal, and
almost every post, gives knowledge of a new toy, which many times Good books
lie dead.
intercepts the virtuous disposition of a willing buyer: so that having time,
and encouragement, labor what they can, to deface good men's works, with the
multitude of their sinful fopperies.

He that can but bombast out a blancke verse, and make both the ends iumpe
together in a ryme, is forthwith a poet laureat, challe^ging the garland of
baies, and in one slauering discourse or other, hang out the badge Many Poets
shallow wit^.
of his folly. O how weak and shallow much of their poetry is, for having no
sooner laid the subject and ground of their matter, and in the Exordium moved
attention, but over a verse or two run upon rocks and shelues, carrying
their readers into a maze, now up, the^ down, one verse shorter then an other
by a foot, like an unskillful Pilot, never comes nigh the intended harbor: in
so much that oftentimes they stick so fast in mudde, they loose their wits
ere they can get out, either like Chirrillus, writing verse not worth the
reading, or Battillus, arrogating to themselves, the well deserving labors of
other ingenious spirits. Far from the decorum of Chauser, Gowers, Lidgate,
etc. or our honorable modern Poets, who are no whit to be touched with this,
but reverently esteemed, and liberally rewarded.

Then seeing this naughty kind of writing does pluck up the seeds of Virtue
by the roots, and quench that little fire as soon as it begins to kindle,
they ought to be shunned as Serpents and Snakes, and youth chiefly to be kept
from reading them.

The Libeller is punished according to the quality A fit comparison.
of his Libell, either by pillorie, whipping, loss of ears, fine,
imprisonment, and such like: the thief hanged, the traitor drawn, and every
one punished in that kind he does offend in: are not these filthy books
libells? do they not defame, discredit, and reproach Virtue and honesty, by
expounding Vice with large comments? do they not steal away all holy devotion,
poison good wits, and corrupt young people? shall he be pardoned by course o^
law, that offends in the highest degree* and shall he be counted a master of
wisdom, that teaches naught but foolishness to the people* wherefore then
should this so great mischief go unreproved*

To conclude, he that can read, shall find books worthy to be read, wherein
is both wisdom and learning, pleasant and witty, sober and chaste, that both
profit The profit of reading good books.
the life, and joy the mind: but before all other, to read those divine books,
that both lift the heart to God, and direct unto Christian duties: for such is
Fomentum fidei, nourishing faith, Lexio alit ingenium, so the books be wise,
virtuous, chaste, and honest: touching the former, they are but stinking
infectious writings, which as mudde and dyrt defile the body, so do they
pollute the soul.

By reading good books, the mind is stored with wisdom, the life bettered
and settled in quietness: so that still all reading be referred to the Bible,
from whence all Virtue is derived. For this cause S. Paul admonishes Timothy
to give attendance to reading: for albeit he was trained up in the scriptures
from a child, and had all Ephesus under his charge, yet he stirs him to
reading; for by reading more knowledge is not only gotten, but also the
decays and breaches of the memory is again renewed; and unless there be both
a pouring in of more, and a continual restoring of that which is lost, all
will drop away, and leave a man empty: for the memory is like a ruinous
house, ready to fall down, which if not eft^oones repaired, will soon become
inhabitable.

The ground^d opinion of wise and godly men against Plays, must be authentic.
Touching Enterludes and Plays, I will omit to speak how the best judgments
conceive of them, their reasons being strong and manifold, to thrust them out
as things indifferent, and make them simply unlawful.

For although they are not simply forbidden in express words, yet if it once
appear the true use be lost, and cleave to a bad report, it is the part of
every man, to shun and avoid the same, and rather draw other to reformation,
then violently suffer himself to be swayed with the like affection.

I. Cor. 8.
And this agrees with that of Paul, If indifferent things give offense to the
weak, they ought to be remoo^ed: for the freedom of those things gives
courage to the defect of grace, to be more ungracious.

Nothing is lawful but that which tends to the glory of God, and profit of
man in comelin^sse: so that the end of all joy and mirth, must be to glorify
the Creator.

Those pleasures of the body and mind which are of good report, are indifferent
if modestly used: honest exercise does much relieve the debilitie of nature,
and quicken the dull spirits, which would else be depressed and ouerladen with
moderate labor. Idleness is to be condemned as the bel-dame of all evil: but
idleness is not only in doing nothing, but also in doing things unprofitable.
Eschew evil, and do good: it is not enough to abstain from evil, but we must
do good also.

Some Plays, as they are now in use, are scandalous Lust^ull Comedies
hurt^ull* Brief Chronicles honorable, if circustances, etc.
and scurrillous, detract from Virtue, and add to Vice, and the very May-games
of all sin and wickedness: for, for the most part, they have nothing in them
but scurrillitie, or some gross show of doltishnesse, to make the sinful
mouth of laughter to gape, and often sporting at that which should rather move
pity and compunction: Stages of desolutenesse, and baits to entice people to
lightness. For is not Vice set to sale on open Theaters? is there not a Sodom
of filthiness painted out and tales of carnal love, adultery, ribaldrie,
leacherie, murder, rape, interlarded with a thousand unclean speeches, even
common schools of bawdrie? is not this the way to make men ripe in all kind
of villainy, and corrupt the manners of the whole world? And there wants no
Art, neither to make these bawdie dishes delightful in taste. For are not
their Dialogues puffed up with swelling words? are not their arguments pleasing
and rauishing? and made more forcible by gesture and outward action? surely
this must needs attract the mind to imitate such vices as are portrayed out,
whereby the soul is tainted with impiety: for it cannot be, but that the
internal powers must be moved at such visible and lively objects. And
principally, youth are made pliant to wantonness and idleness, and the tender
buddes of good manners utterly rooted out. And many times (which is most
sinful) intermixe A sinful mixture.
the sacred words of God, that never ought to be handled without fear and
trembling, with their filthy and scurrillous Paganism: is not this abominable
profanation? is not that humble reverence of the oracles of God, hereby
blasphemed, and basely scorned? is this fit to be suffered where Christ is
professed* must the holy Prophets and Patriarchs be set upon a Stage, to be
derided, hist, and laughed at? or is it fit that the infirmities of holy men
should be acted on a Stage, whereby others may be inharted to rush carelessly
forward into unbridled liberty? doubtless the judgment of God is not far
off from such abusers of divine mysteries: as we have an example in E^sebi^^,
lib. 8. to this effect, of a certain Poet, who mixing the word of God in a
Heathinish Play, was suddenly smitten blind for his profaneness.

Furthermore, there is no passion wherewith the king, the sovereign maie^tie of
the Realm was possessed, but is amplified, and openly sported with, and made a
Maygame The State many times is ^gregiou^ly wronged, and the vulgar ^ort
d^rided.
to all the beholders, abusing the state royal, mocking the ancient Fathers
and Pastors of the Church; and albeit the holy Ghost vouchsafes them many
fair tytles, and honorable Epethites, yet notwithstanding they are so
impudent, as to traduce them on the Stage, and employ them in base offices: for
look what part is more scornful then other, is imputed unto them. Must not
this breed contempt to them and their places, and impeach so holy a function?
no doubt yes. For when the faults and scandalls of great men, as Magistrates,
Ministers, and such as hold public places, shall be openly acted and objected
to the senses, or feigned to be replenished with vice and passion, it must
needs breed disobedience, and slight regard of their authority, whereof
ensues breach of law, and contempt of superiors: there need not be a
quickening, or calling back again of the scapes of such men, to make them
odious and contemptible, for every fault they commit, be it as small as a
pibble, yet is it so big as a mil-stone, because they stand in the gaze of the
world, and soon spyed if they offend never so little.

Vetus comaedia.
This Vetus comaedia was invented to good purpose, the subject, matter of
moral documents, the assembly, the Senators and chief Citizens: and as Tully
calls them, Humanae vitae speculum, a glass of man's life: for when they
represent the acts of virtuous men, time, Ancient Comedi^s, abstacles of
Virtue.
place, and persons considered, they are (deemed by some to be) sufferable, and
that for this cause, when as the comely deeds of good men are feelingly
brought to remembrance, it cannot but move other to imitate the like goodness:
or on the other side, when the spots and errors of our life, shall be acted to
our own shame, it is impossible that we should be content to be such, and not
loath our own evil, as when a bragging Thraso, a strutting
Philopolimarchides, a double dealing Parasite, or such mad humors as reign in
common disorder, dsplayed according to decorum, no spectator but is driven to
prye into himself if he have the like faults or no: for I think verily that
no man will allow such abominable actions in himself, when they are so
visibly painted out in other.

And albeit some benefit might come if circumstances were observed, yet now is
it far otherwise, for these modern Plays, wherewith the world is now so
pestred, are altogether made upon lascivious arguments, and serve as the very
Organs and Instruments to vanity * the honor due to God, and reverence to
man, is laid aside, Virtue disroabed, and Vice exalted; and in stead of
morallitie, fictions, lies, and scurrillous matter is foysted in, and is
cunningly conveyed into the hearts of the assistants, whereby they are
transformed into that they see acted before them: for the rusticke and common
sort, are as Apes, that will imitate in themselves, that which they see done by
other. Or if they stuff their Scene with some one good precept, or well-worded
instruction, what power has that to move to Virtue? when it is immediately
profaned with their exorbitant foolerie, as pure water in a foul and muddie
cesterne.

The indicorum of Poets, and greediness of Historians, iumping in one
simpathy, have changed the inte^dment of the former ages.

Hor. in art^ poetica.
For as Menander in Greece, which is thought to be the first inuenter of
Comedies, Aeschilus, or Thespis, the deviser of Tragedies, aimed at Virtue in
blazing out the deeds of honesty, with grave and sober terms, which indeed
were rude and imperfect, by reason of the infancy of the time, until they were
afterward adorned with the Quintill* lib. 10.
choice flowers of Sophocles and Euripides, of whom it is doubted whether is
the better Poet.

These did labor by modest delight, to draw men by example to goodness:
neither can I imagine, but that they observed many particulars, as well in the
choice of their Auditorie, as of good matter, without greedy desire to
multiply excessive gain, and no doubt were played privately in their
Accademies, at some set times, at which were present the chief Burgomaisters,
Senators, and grave Fathers of the city.

But if we oppose our quotidian Enterludes to them of former time, and consider
the multitude of ours, with the paucitie and fewness of theirs, we shall see
a great diversity as well in the method of writing, as in the time, place, and
company: for now nothing is made so vulgar and common, as beastly and palpable
folly: lust, under color of love, abstract rules artificially composed, to
carry the mind into sinful thoughts, with unclean locution, and unchaste
behavior, as groping, colling, kissing, amorous prattle, and signs of
Venerie, whereby the maidenly disposition is polluted with lust, and moved to
impiety.

Again, if a man will learn to be proud, fantastic, humorous, to make love,
swear, swagger, and in a The documents of Plays.
word closely do any villainy, for a two-penny alms he may be thoroughly
taught and made a perfect good scholar: so that public Sermons are made of
all kind of naughtiness, and the bridle of wicked liberty laid on every man's
neck: and herein stands their glory, if by pleasing the vulgar opinion, they
gain a plaudite, at which they streake their plumes, and spread their pride.

Wisdom does ever mistrusti^ self.
When Phosion had made an eloquent oration before the people, and seeing them
clap their hands for joy, questioned such as were next him, if he had uttered
any foolish and unseemly thing: teaching us by this, that we ought always to
suspect the rude multitude, for that their weak judgments can hardly discern
between Vice and Virtue, and their affections so dull, that they commonly
embrace the cuill in stead of good.

In like manner Hippomachus hearing one of his scholars praised for his
fidling, bad him cease playing, for he was sure there was some great error in
the fingering, that he was so applauded of the ignorant: what true glory then
can they justly merit, that are praised by the witless and braine-sicke
multitude? And as these copper-lace gentlemen grow rich, purchase lands by
adulterous Plays, and not few of them usurers and extortioners, which they
exhaust out of the purses of their haunters, so are they puffed up in such pride
and self-love, as they envy their equalles, and scorn their inferiors.

The common spectators and Play-gadders.
Now the common haunters are for the most part, the l^audest persons in the
land, apt for pilferie, perjury, forgerie, or any rogorie, the very scum,
rascallitie, and baggage of the people, thieves, cut-purses, shifters,
cousoners; briefly, an unclean generation, and spaune of vipers: must not here
be good rule, where is such a brood of hell-bred creatures? for a Play is like
a sincke in a Town, whereunto all the filth does run: or a byle in the body,
that draws all the ill humors unto it.

For what more fitter occasion to summon all the discontented people together,
then Plays? to attempt some execrable actio^, commotions, mutinies,
rebellio^s, as it happened at Windha^ in Norff. in the time of Ed. the 6. where
at a Stage Play (according to a drunken custom there used) the horrible
rebellion of Ket and his accomplices, by a watchword given, brake out, to the
trouble of the whole kingdom: and does it not daily fall out in common
experience, that there is either fighting, whereof ensues murder? robbing and
theeuering, whereof comes hanging? or spotting the soul with wickedness,
that he becomes the very son of Beliall? and are they not grown odious to
good men, and ill reported of? are these indifferent to be used? nay verily,
if a man love his own safety, he ought to withdraw himself from such vain
spectacles.

Plays in the night, very hurtful.
But especially these nocturnall and night Plays, at unseasonable and undue
times, more greater evils must necessarily proceed of them, beeause they do not
only hide and cover the thief, but also entice servants out of their masters
houses, whereby opportunity is offered to loose fellows, to effect many wicked
stratagems. In a word (as they are now used) they corrupt good manners, and set
abroach the vessel of all uncleanness; the ear is tickled with immodest
speeches, the mind imprinted with wanton gesture, and the whole affections
ravished with sinful pleasure: in so much as many leave their honest callings,
live idly, and gadde to those places where the devil displayeth his banner,
living so long upon the spoil of other men, till at last they are eaten up by
Tyborne. Nay many poor pincht, needy creatures, that live of alms, and that
have scarce neither cloth to their back, nor food for the belley, yet will
make hard shift but they will see a Play, let wife and children beg, languish
in penury, and all they can rappe and rend, is little in ough to lay upon such
vanity. Nevertheless some will object they are necessary, and fit to be
allowed in policy: and why so? because they are means to occupy idle
people, and keep the worser sort from worser exercises: for if Plays were not
(say they) some would to drunkenness, some a whoring, others to dice, cards,
riotting, and such vile practices, which by Plays is all prevented. This
proves them as lawful in London, as the common Stews in Rome, or Venis: for
is this a sencible reason, that of necessity one sin cannot be pulled down,
but an other as bad or worse, must be erected in stead of it? it is no sound
argument, to dispense with one to eschew the other, and so by shunning
Carribdis, fall upon Scilla: but how shall we spend the time? as though there
were no exercise to be used, but that that leads to mischief. Time flies
away apace, and therefore we are commanded to redeem the time, seeing we have
but too much, when we wilfully loose and abuse it. Idleness is a sin great
enough of it self, though it have no nourishment by sinful games and sports:
but doubtless if the cause were removed, the effect would soon cease, and the
time be spent in more honest endeavors, and by little and little (the law
observed) the men would be wained from such intolerable abuses.

Others will belch out this blasphemy, that a man may edify as much at some
Play, as at a Sermon: this I easily grant, if so be when he goes to Church,
he leaves his heart at home; or at least it is so ^lintie, that no good thing
will penetrate, the devil sitting at the elbowe, and either rocks him a
sleeepe, or amazeth the mind with wandering thoughts: so that filling a place
as a Cipher in augrime, hears a buzzing sound in his ears, but is never
truly touched in his heart. Beside, the affections are not alike: for at a Play
the whole faculty of the mind is altogether bent on delight, the eye
earnestly fixed upon the object, every sense busied for the time, the ear
narrowly waits to catch that that is uttered, sending it to wit: wit to
reason: reason to memory, which locketh it up in a clozet, least it slip out
again: the devil in the mean time like a quiet fellow, does not trouble the
affections with strange delusions; and why so? because they are occupied in his
work. Furthermore, a man is not wearied be it never so tedious, because they
do not only (as I say) feed the ear with sweet words, equally balanced,
the eye with variable delight, but also with great allacritie does swiftly
run over in two hours space, the doings of many years, galloping from one
country to an other, whereby the mind is drawn into expectation of the
sequel, and carried from one thing to an other with changeable motions, that
although he were unacquainted with the matter before, yet the cunning Art he
sees in the conueyance, makes him patiently attend the Catastrophae: when as
at a Lecture and holy exercise, all the senses are mortified and possessed with
drowsinesse: so that by this then we may see our corrupt nature, and the sore
that runs over the whole body; for the mind is nothing so tentible at a
good instruction, nor the ear so audible, as at a vain and sportiue foolerie:
o how dull is the affections to the one, and how prompt to the other! how the
tongue will itterate and repeat the one with great joy, and smoulder up the
other in drowsy melancholye.

Many well governed Commonwealths, did not only note them to be infamous
persons that acted them, excluding them from offices, and giving testimony in
causes crimminall, but also supplanted and beat down Theaters and common
Play Houses, least any things should be imprinted in the peoples hearts against
honesty.

Licurgus banished all Players, Pypers, Sophisters, etc.

Ovid for his wanton Ars amandi, was exiled by Augustus.

Iuuinall, as an instrument of obscenitie and bawdery, was driven out of his
country, because by their wanton Elegies, they made the minds obsequies to
loose living.

A good old father being demanded what he thought of Plays and idle Poetry:
answered, they were very good to infect young wits with vanity and needless
fopperie.

Foul idollatrie in ye Heathen.
The grossness of the Heathen was such, that they dedicated Plays, games,
mummeries, maskes, etc. to their Idols, to pacify their (supposed)
displeasure. And although there is none but abhors such foul Idollatrie,
yet the devil has such a Heccatombe of sacrifices out of obscene and filthy
Plays. To be short, men ought to recreate themselves comely and decently, and
use* exercises of better report, and less hurt: for what says Saint
Chrysostom to the faithful of his time? In no case (says he) frequent
Theaters, least you be branded with infamy. It is no small offense (says
Ciprian) for a man to disguise himself in the garments of a woman, unless in
cases of great necessity, to save the life, etc.

And therefore it were to be wished, that all loue-bookes, Sonnets, and vile
pamphles, were burned, and no more susfered to be printed, nor filthy Plays
rehearsed, which are the bellows to blow the coals of lust, soften the
mind, and make it flexible to cuil inclinations: unless first seen and
allowed, by some of approved and discreet judgment.

To conclude, it were further to be wished, that those admired wits of this
age, Tragaedians, and Comaedians, that garnish Theaters with their inventions,
would spend their wits in more profitable studies, and leave off to maintain
those Anticks, and Puppets, that speak out of their mouths: for it is pity
such noble gifts, should be so basely employed, as to prostitute their
ingenious labors to enrich such buckorome gentlemen. And much better it were
indeed they had nor wit, nor learning at all, then to spend it in such vanity,
to the dishonor of God, and corrupting the Commonwealth: but he that
depends on such weak stays, shall be sure of shame and beggerie in the
end: for it has sildome beneseene, that any of that profession have
prospered, or come to an assured estate.

Have thou wit, learning, and a vain to write wickedness? add wisdom to
thy wit, and covet to write goodness: so shall thou in stead of cursing, be
blessed, and immortally praised of the good and honest. The flood of witty
foolishnes, has a long time overflowed the banks of modesty, the world is
full of idle books, and frivolous toys, never in any age was the like: turn
thy pen, write not with a goose quill any longer, cleanse thy wit of gross
folly, and publish things profitable and necessary, new, and good, to the
building up of Virtue and godliness.

Again, is the mind and body wearied with unreasonable care and labor? rest,
ease, and inoffensiue pastimes, are then most fittest and in season: for we are
not created to follow sports and pleasures, and sent into the world to play:
but for grave and weighty studies, and to use honest mirth, when the body is
tired and no longer able to endure travail unless it be again refreshed with
some actiuitie, and not otherwise: so that such as spend the time in vain
trifles, gadding after Plays, and idly run up and down, break that
straight iniunction made by God to Adam* In the sweat of thy brows shall thou
eat thy bread. What whoredoms, drunkenness, swearing, and abominable
Sodomie is daily practiced? does it not inuit and call upon Magistrates to
draw the sword of reformation? do they not cry for vengeance to heaven? surely
there was never more filthiness committed then now, the word contemned,
Preachers despised, and a direct opposition against all honesty, that were it
not for some few that stand in the gap, fire and brimstone would fall from
heaven and consume the wicked like Sodom and Gomorrah. For doubtless the sins
of Sodom, are as rife here as ever they were there, pride, gluttony,
cutthroat-enuy, self-loue, vnmercisulnesse to the poor, and such like, and
those not private: but vnuersall in all places, and amongst most men.

Idenesse the root of all cuill.
The next enemy to Virtue is Idleness, a burden of impediment, a vice so
deeply rooted in some, that it casts them headlong into infernal bondage:
the toade out of which issues naught but drunkenness, whoredoms, pride,
ignorance, error, blindness, beggerie, and a thousand more miseries. Time is
like so many lighted lamps, that with care and diligence ought to be kept with
oil: which with dampish idleness are soon put out, and by negligence let
fall: for man's life of it self is not so short by nature, but it is more
shortened by sin, and the length of time hastened on by iniquity. The soul
is of too fine a metal and so pure a temper as to love to do nothing, but will
be employed in labor; yet because she is imprisoned in the walls of flesh,
follows her sluggish inclination: the body by too much ease is like a
pampered Jade unserviceable, and her dexterity and faculties being made blunt
and dull with sloth, becomes wholly unfit for honest labor: for if he remit
and give his mind to idleness, ill corrupting motions creep into the soul,
which polluting the purer parts, do by little and little carry him to all
impiety, until the whole man become nothing but the son of Belial: by it a
wide gap is opened, for adultery to enter in at, and therefore Diogenes was
wont to say, by doing nothing we learn to do evil: and lust (quoth he) is the
trade and occupation of loyterers: and as that grandmaister of wantonness
Ovid, in his book Deremedio amors says; Osia sit^llas, periere Cupidinis
arcus. And it being asked how the Emperor Aegistus became an adulterer, it is
answered: Ovid.
In prompt^ causa est desidi^sus erat.


It is a plain case he was idle. For if the body be not set on work, the
mind goes astray, whereby this little world is soon overthrown by the
invasion made against it by concupiscence: as when a man does fast long The
cause of the plague or pe^^^lence.
and abstain from bodily food, the emptiness of the stomach and passages,
draws into the body windy humors and infectious vapors, because according
to Philosophy, there is no vacuum, but a present supply of air: so that often
either by the disposition of the elements, or by reason of some accidental
cause, the air is so infected and poisoned, as it pierces into the vital
powers, and either brings a universal mortality, or some lingering disease
and sickness: so in like manner when the body is kept from corporal labor,
and the mind from studious exercise, a fit mansion for don Satan is prepared,
every room emptied, and the whole poores and faculties of soul and body
really possessed with wicked impiety, wherein this grand-traitor to man's
happiness, as in a workehouse forge, or common shop, does stamp and coin
a multitude of evils, and suggest abominable vices into the heart: for verily
none are such fit instruments for him to work by, then such as live idly and
do nothing: for where there is no defense to keep him back, there does he
rule so strongly over the affections, that there is no other fruits but a
sinful life, and a shameful end: for such as occupy themselves in no
commendable exercise, but mispend the time, no marvel though the mind be
upon unhallowed actions.

Idleness is a capital plague, a sore vexing the body with extreme torment,
and loading the bones till they crack with weakness, poverty, impotencie,
and in the end leaves old age naked and unprovided for. In a word, nothing
is more unseemly in a Christian, nor more contrary to the law of God, which
commands every one to get his living with the sweat of his brows,
prejudicial to humane society, and injurious to nature: and therefore
Themistocles terms idleness the grave and tomb of such men as An idle man
is a dead carcass.
are alive, for that there is no difference between an idle man, and one that
is dead, for that neither one nor the other does any good.

Every one is commanded to be industrious in that calling wherein he is set,
and earnestly seek to apply himself thereunto, for he that works not, is
not worthy to eat: but he that follows his trade with diligence be it
never so base or mechanical, is always sure of competencie and saturitie,
when as the luskish and idle notwithstanding their great abundance, are in
short time consumed and come to nothing, as the wise Pron. 14. 30.
man says: I passed by the field of the slothful, and lo it was ouergrowne
with briars, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall was
broken down, etc. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little fowlding the
hands together, so thy poverty comes upon thee like an armed man: and as
it is in an other place, he that puts his hand into his bosom, is like to
fall into poverty.

Some lur-daines that have wealth left by their ancestors, hold it a point of
wisdom to rest their idle limbs and spare their bodies, and live in the hyue
upon the hunney of others labor, and as vultures kill nothing themselves, but
preye upon that which is killed by other, so like Catter-pillers do they live
by the fruits of other men's labors and sore travail.

This kind of life was so much hated among the Aethenians, that who so was
seen idle was severely punished. And for this use, was there Sophronistes and
grave Fathers, that had the oversight and surueighing of the Commonwealth, and
most chiefly looked to the manners of youth. Tully reports that none durst
walk the streets of Rome without bearing about him some sign of his
profession, least he should be impeacht of idleness: and in his oration Pro
Archita poeta, he says of himself: What time other men spent in sports,
plays, bankets, dice, cards, tennice, etc. that says he, I bestowed in
poring on my book: which is undoubtedly true, for surely had he been idle and
given to pastime, as many students are in these days, he could never have
been that notable and excellent summus Orator.

There is nothing so precious as time, which being wilfully or willingly
ouerslipt, is impossible to be recalled, The picture of time.
for that she is deaf and cannot hear, and therefore she is painted with
locks before, but bauld behind, because hold may be taken in the coming, but
her back once past, is irrecouerable, and the louder she is called, Mora tra^it
periculum.
the faster she flies.

It were a world to note the idleness of many in these times, and what
multitudes live with doing nothing; or at leastwise in doing things
unprofitable and dishonest: yea, what numbers there be both in City and Town,
that live like Drones and idle Grasshoppers, as a right wise and honorable
Counselor reported in the Star Chamber, that in the city as he verily was
persuaded, there were at least a thousand families that could give no honest
reckening of their life. Some like Aesops labber, sit beating their heels
against a stall, some friske from house to house, as busybodies: others in
curious observations and fault-finding with the gate, apparel, speech, and
defects of other, and fat themselves with busy apprehensions.

This peevish nature is derived from that old Witch L^mea has many children.
Lamea, who as the Poets feign, had broad prospectiue eyes to pull out and in
at pleasure, and at her going abroad, would put on and be very curious and
circumspect in peering and poring about to see what was amiss in her
neighbors house; but at her return home, would lock them up in a cap-case,
and satte down to spinning as blind as a beetle, and never saw what was
amiss in her own house: so in like manner, many both sons and daughters she
has, that cram the forepart of the wallet with small defects, when the weight
of their own behind, is ready to pull them backward into all contempt: and
many female sinners frequent great assemblies for nothing else but to spy out
new fashions, of which they make large coments at their return, never rest
night nor day, till they be trickt up with like trumperie, and if they spy a
hole in their neighbors coat, a moate amiss, a wrinckle awry, then there is
to do and to do, and turning it over again and again, as men ted hay, with
wot you what neighbor, such a man is too familiar with his maid, he is a
bankerout, an hypocrite, a busie-body; she is a muddie queen, a filthy beast,
a lump of kitchinstuffe, and such like: is not here good ware which they offer
to sell, to every ones disgrace? and thus they pass away the time in vain and
idle observations, and utterly forget to look into their own bosom, and
prune and correct their own deformities, which no doubt they should find
laboursome enough to reform.

Every day offers a new occasion to do good, and therefore no one hour
ought to slip away without some profitable thing done: but as Caesar in his
Commentaries sets down his dicirnall affairs, every Caesar Com*
days business: so a man must exercise himself daily in such things as
belong to his calling, and to live so that his company may be desired, and by
his life to yield benefit to the place where he lives, and not so to live, as
if he were borne only for himself; but as Plato Plato.
says, for our friends, parents, country, and such common duties, which are
the final ends of every man's labor: but he that regards neither of these,
his company cloyeth the stomach, and therefore to be spewed out as an
unprofitable waster. Callings are distinguished into sundry professions,
according to the necessity of the time, because every man may not only have
wherein to employ himself, and to benefit others by his travel, but also to
have help by the faculty of his neighbor: yet all come into these two,
either in mind or in body, the Magistrate, Minister, and such as hold
public and sacred places, do labor in mind with good counsel, in government
and doctrine, which is the more excellent calling: others are manuell or
mechanical, which is the more wearisome and toilsome: without these no
commonwealth can stand; for as it is a great policy in maintaining
discipline, so is it not a little cherished by other callings. The Husbandmen
which Tully calls the best citizens, in tillage, pasturage, and storing the
Realm with grain. It is not equal nor agreeable to nature, for a man to live
prowling and shifting by the labors of other men, and prey upon their
earnings, but to labor himself in some calling, that his company may be
enjoyed.

The Philosopher did measure out their rest, and invent means to break their
sleeps, and shaking off the drowsinesse of nature, were content only to
refresh the spirits, that the poores might be more pliant to perform duty.

Cato repented him of nothing he had done in all his life so much as of two
things; one in going by water when he might have gone by land: the other in
passing over one day idly, and doing nothing.

Quint. Cur.
Alexander hated it so much, that least it should abate the courage of his
soldiers, and raise tumults, kept them occupied in appointing Judges to try
out such as had showed themselves most valiant in the wars, to whom he gave
rewards due to their deseruings. Himself delighted in the works of Homer, in
so much as he would lay it under his head when he slept, to read in when he
awaked.

Domitian would spend the time in catching flies. Lucullus in building.
Diogenes in rolling his Tubbe up and down. Marcarius in carrying heaps of
stones from place to place. And if we consider the works, labors, and large
volumes of the Fathers, Philosophers, Orators, Historiographers, Poets, and
Schoolmen, we may see they made precious use of time, and by taking hold of
opportunity, left a memory thereof to posterity.

When Titus had misspent one day, and it was gone before he was aware, cried
out, Amice diem perdidi. O my friend I have lost a day. Appelles would not
loose a day without shadowing a phisnomie.

It is remembered of the Emperor Octauian, thatinstructed his son in martial
affairs, and his daughter in making cloth, as well to get their own living,
if adversity happened, as to keep them from idleness.

Every one therefore ought to apply himself to some honest business, and
stir up his body and mind to some commendable science: for by labor and
exercise, Virtue is purchased, when by dastardly idleness the poores become
soft and delicate, through which they fall into sports, plays, and immoderate
pleasures: and being empty of all good motions, the devil soon takes up his
lodging, and keeps open house for all vices: the very rotte and spoil of
youth, the summons to beggerie, which like a beadle does scourge in the end
with the whip of repentance.

Haniball after all his great victories, by idleness was was wrapped in
delights, and lost his honor.

Alexander at Babylon overthrew his glory and his further hopes by dalliance,
and quenched that fortitude and valor with which he was so really endued.

Sardinapalus was exiled his kingdom through idleness and careless
government.

Time flies away with wings, and therefore a wise man will lay hold of her
forelockes while it is to day, to enrich the mind with the experiments of
those things that bring perfect blessedness. For it may be supposed that God
would never have put a soul into that body which has hands and feet,
instruments of doing, but that it was intended the mind should set them on
work, and employ them in action, and not to hold so divine an essence in the
dungeon of idleness.

We are borne to labor, as well as the birds to fly. Solomon sends us to
the Emet to learn wisdom, to consider her industry, who like a good
Econimist, prouides in Summer for Winter, whereof Esope affoordeth a pleasant
conceited fable: The Ant and the Grassehopper (says he) walking together on a
sunnie bank, the one piping and carelessly skipping, looked after nothing; the
other circumspect in prying about what provision was scattered in the way,
carefully gathered it up and carried it to her cabin, whom the Grassehopper
seeing, scorned this needless thrift with many bitter taunts: now it fell out,
that in short time these two parted, the one to her fair sweetes which the
season did yield, the other to her labor; the one respected the time present,
thinking the Spring would last all the year; the other time to come, providing
against the sharp storms of frost and snow. Anon cold winter grew on, and
took from the Grasshopper her wonted moisture, bereft him of his piping, and
with his shackle hammes weakly skips too and fro, and being pincht with
hunger, and drencht with shewers, went for succor to the Ant, her old
acquaintance, and entreated some teliefe, but the little worm demanded what
she had done all the Summer time, she could not provide for Winter? The
Grasshopper answered with a hollow voice, she sung to delight the passenger:
then now you may dance quoth she, to ease your hunger. With this the
Grasshopper yielding to the weathers extremities, foodelesse, comfortless, and
succourlesse, died without remedy: alluding by the alligorie to such idle and
laizie meacocks, who spend the Summer of youth in wantonness, that when the
winter of old age comes, are forced to want and feel the storms of
penury, and languish by inferred poverty. And therefore while time does offer
it self, and the body able to endure, it is good to seek for those things
that may bring joy and comfort to old age. Nevertheless youth does suppose
that God keeps a court of faculties for them to take up a dispensation, to
run madding after every vanity, having as they think, so much time as they
know not how to spend it: but as the Miller who having too much water, opens
his floud-gates and sluices to let it pass: so they think they have time
plusquam satis, more then needs, and therefore use means to spend it by
breaking up the floud-gates of their vain affections: and least they should be
pent up with too much time, let it unprofitably run out, and gather nothing
by their own labor, but spoil house, land, and whatsoever is left, in
banqueting, dicing, hunting, hawking, and carding, which like a bauin gives a
goodly blaze for a while, but is soon out, and in the end glad to warm their
nails with their own breath, and when frostie age comes on, the joints
feeble, the blood dead, the body cold, and a quiuering paulsey ouer-spread the
limbs: oh how feign would he be thriftie, and how nearely does his want pinch
him! he is forced with the laizie Grasshopper to bewail his state, and repent
the loss of time. Oh what goods and possessions did my friends leave me, which
are prodigally wasted? how often did they seek to reclaim me with good
counsel if I had been gracious? and those vices that mustered about my young
years, how soon might I have suppressed them? but then being young and foolish,
am now old and beggarly: to whom shall I communicate my grief, that will
yield succor? all my laments are bootlesse, relentlesse, and pitiless: what
a heavy reckening have I to make, wasting so many idle hours in eating,
drinking, ryoting in sports, games, and pastimes, and all my flourishing youth
in idleness, not spending one hour in his service to whom all is due, and now
I should find most comfort in that I have got so near my end, a hell of
unquiet torments lie on my conscience ready to sink me down to hell. Let
youth therefore be warned, and lay hold on the wings of Time while it is to
day, least by slipping the tide of opportunity they fall into a sorrowful
lamentation when it is too late.

And therefore such old men as are sorry their youth is gone, it is a sure
token they were never wise nor gracious, for he is no wise man that repineth
at the most profitable things, for age takes away the delight of the flesh,
the root of all evil: for there can be no greater plague to man's happiness
then the will of the body, which by the privilege of youth is subject to so
many indirect courses, destroying the judgment, and putting out the eye of
reason, no community with Virtue, but a lively brotherhood with vice and
vanity: yet some take great glory to crake of their youthful acts, and tell
many stories of their prankes in former time; I did this and this says one, I
thus and thus says an other, I help the Priest to say Mass says a third,
and by bragging of their stinking rottennes, and reviving their own shame:
Suppose they gain credit for such infamous practices, and commend themselves
to posterity, as men endued The vani^ie of some old men.
with notable exploits, but howsoever they boast they glory but in their own
shame, and by sporting at their wantonness, bewray their own guiltiness: for
if thou have committed any horrible offense in the time of ignorance, and not
repented thy self of it in time of knowledge, thou have given consent to thy
lewdness, and so stand guilty before God: and therefore the Prophet David
prays God to forgive the sins of his youth.

Licurgus by his laws forbad young men to play, or go idly up and down in
the Mart or common places, or to be nursed up in delights and pleasures, but
in husbandry and tillage, that in their first years they might not taste of
idleness.

And Zenocrates did use to divide the day into parts, reserving one part for
silence, that he might meditate how to speak: not only therefore the Realm
is prosperously held up by business and labor, but a man's private wants
supplied, and his domesticke needements maintained: whereas idleness
overthrows all: and therefore wars in a kingdom are more profitable (says
one) then peace, for wars stirs the mind to Virtue, when peace breeds
idleness. And as the Poet says:

Nam qui desidiam lux^mque sequetur inertem*
Dum fugit oppositos incauta mente labores.
Turpis inopsque simul miserabile transiget e^^m:
At quisqui^ duros causus, virtutis amore,
Vicerit, ille sibi landemque decusque parabit.
For he that gives his mind to sloth,
to riotize and ease,
And honest labors intermit,
his idle limbs to please,
Both naked, poor, and miserable,
old age on him will cease.
But if that he for Virtues sake
with labor hard exceed,
Mortal fame he purchases
for this his manfull deed.
How lamentable is it therefore for youth to be ignorant, and defeat their mind
of the store*house of knowledge, and so injuriously wrong themselves in the way
to bliss? for ignorance is fearful, an inconstant passion, base and
contemptible, and is soon seduced, because it knows not how to use that well
it possesses, but is rash and headie, taking falsehood for truth, Vice for
Virtue, not being able to distinguish one from the other; and by this deceit is
carried into errors, omitting all good examples and honest actions: for if the
carriage of wise and grave men be not observed, the mind is clogged with
ignorance, not only not able to direct others in any matter of doubt, but is
forced to ask counsel for himself in every trifle. But a fool (says
Solomon) is wiser in his own conceit, then seven wise men that can render a
reason: and drinking so much the water of self-love, does get such a buzzing
in his brains, that managing his business by his own wit, draws upon
himself speedy repentance.

O how soon Vice creepes upon the affections of youth in the spring of their
years, if idleness slip in: for being entangled in the net of liberty, does
chauke out to himself the way to trace in, affecting that which the multitude
seem to allow, be it never so contrary to sound judgment: and therefore the
best inheritance that fathers can leave to their children, is good bringing up,
as a sure stock to live on in oldeage: for to put wealth into the hands of
youth before he have wisdom to guide it, is as if he should set him on a
young coults back that was never sadled, needs must he dangerously fall,
having neither wit nor strength to rule him as he ought: or as if he should
put his patrimonic into a ship, and make his son Pilot, who for want of
skill, needs must suffer shipwreck. And youth is no sooner capable of reason,
but by idleness the mind is carried into a multitude of vices, like a standing
pond that gathers nothing but scum and filth.

Those parents therefore that put their children to be seruing-men, have small
care of their education, for that they do not only mispend the time, but
learn such vices as cleave fast to nature, not easily to be shaken A
Seruingmans life an idle life vnl^^ he be employed in some office.
off, that many times they are forced to unlawful shifts in youth, or beg
their bread in age. And Gentlemen incumber their houses with many vnqualified
servants, which devour and eat much, but get little, and under pretense of
service, do nothing less then serve without all contradiction; it is no
charity to foster such an idle superfluity of servants, with that which might
better be spent on the blind, lame, and poor people, then on such which serve
for nothing but to beautify a house and picture and show forth their persons.
Honor and worship rests not in keeping many servants, or riding with a great
troup, but in his own virtue. For though wise men for courtesy, and fools for
simplicity, do reverence and salute them, yet are they no whit the more
honorable, unless they be just, temperate, affable, modest, and have such
virtuous properties, and morrall conditions, as that they may be used in the
Commonwealth, for the service of their Prince and country.

Many idle persons drop out of Gentlemen's houses, who with a frown of their
master, are turned out of all preferment, not able to get their own
liuely-hood, but constrained through want to follow bad courses, and being out
of service, fall into offense of law, and are many times eaten up by Tyborne.

And yet some heirs of good possibilities, under color of learning civility,
humanity, and some commendable qualities, are by their parents made
Seruingmen, and their young wits so pestered with vice, that they sildome prove
good members in the Commonwealth.

To conclude, every one ought to betake himself to some honest and seemly
trade, and not suffer his senses to be mortified with idleness: for whom the
devil finds in that case, he soon possesses, employing him in some damned
work, and wicked practice, and for ever disabling him to be used in matters of
good consequence.

Sarge igitur duroque manus adsu^sce labori,
Det tibi dimensos crastina vt hor a cibos.
Raise up therefore thy lazy limbs,
apply thy mind to pain,
Both food and cloth, and all thing else,
with ease thou shall attain.
Rioting and drunkenness does both corrupt the body, and pollute the soul,
and is such an extreme madness, as it transformeth a man into a beast, saving
in form and portraiture, putting out the light of understanding, dulling the
wits, breeding diseases, hatching whoredoms, uncleanness, quarrels, strifes,
etc. which as a chain, draws one link after an other, until the link of
woeful wretchedness makes his death timorous and fearful by his leaud life:
yet notwithstanding so ordinarily practiced in most places, as it is scarce
noted as a Comunis error facit ius.
fault. An evil custom not contradicted, is made current by long use, But as
the schoolmen say, Bonum quo comunius eo melius: by how much the more common
goodness is, by so much the more is it prized. So it holds in the
opposition, the longer a beastly custom is in use, the more odious and
loathsome it is. This cacoethes, or ill custom, usurps such a privilege,
and incroacheth so upon the good manners of men, by coming in the habit of
honesty, that they are not ashamed to hide their filthiness with glorious
titles, and necessary colors, as a spur to quicken the wit, and set The
benefit of d^unkennesse.
an edge on a blunt capacity, a whetstone to memory, a breeder of love, an
enemy to melancholy, a chearing the mind, prompt the conceit, a readiness to
pronounce, and many such: youth that are easily catched with these baits, and
tasting the sweetness of this sin, are by manhood and age so deeply rooted,
that they rather seek to nourish an ill custom, then to frustrate so
abominable a practice, filling the body full of diseases, emptying the purse
of all thrift, and cause them to stumble on their graves before old age come.

Neither can these allegations imputed to this vice, excuse the dangerous
effects which proceed of her monstrous deformity. For as the Poets allude that
Medusa could turn men into marble pictures, Circes into swine, so the
excessive use hereof alters reason, understanding, and all the poores of the
mind, and wrap up many brutish conditions in a humane shape; for he that is
ouerladen with sensuality, loses the use of all those graces and divine
faculties wherewithal a modest and sober man is possessed. And as those
properties may hold in part, that is, so long as moderation bears sway, so
once falling into the more, it can no longer stand: for as one may sharpen his
knife with grinding, so by too much and often doing it, the edge and metal
may be quite ground away and made blunt; and therefore Anacharsis, a great
wine-bibber, who was choked with a husk of a grape, did notwithstanding preach
this doctrine: The first draught says he, cherishes the blood, the next
comfort the heart, but the third inflameth the brain, fumeth into the head,
and breeds drunkenness.

He said moreover, that the vine bareth three manner of grapes, the first of
pleasure, the second of drunkenness, and the third of sorrow.

O how far does intemperance make a man differ from himself, and forget the
final end of his creation, in procuring enemies against his own happiness!
O what lamentable Tragedies is by this Vice acted among wine-bibbing
companions! There be evils enough we bring with us into the world, and we have
work enough to hold war with them, though we procure no more, which are
always a temptation to our best parts.

Drunkenness is no inbred nor inherent sin, but procured by custom and bad
company, it corrupts the soul, sucketh out the juice of the body, withers
the beauty, dries up the sinews, and like a canker corrodeth and deuoureth
up all good motions, making that body which should be a holy temple, a
habitacle and dwelling house for the devil: for being ouerladen with wine and
gluttony, the body is so much broken, that as a holy Father says, it is a
wonder that those bodies made of earth and clay, become not mire and dyrt: it
stirs the mind to whoredom, for like twins they are never a sunder: Sine
cerere and baccho friget venus, without wine and belly-cheare lust would be
assuaged, incapable of conceit: for you shall never see a drunkard so well
advised to ask counsel, or with patience mark good documents, but either
fleere and laugh it out, or be furious and quarelsome: and therefore Father
Cate was wont to say, it was lost labor to talk of Virtue to the belly, for
that it has no ears to hear, because their loose life makes religion
loathsome to their cares. This wine-washing licour gives such scope and
liberty to the tongue, as it rowleth up and down restless, annoying the
whole world with unnecessary prattle, running into all degrees, censuring all
men, and laying out that openly, which modesty would conceal, pouring it into
the bosom of his pot-mate: for the tongue of a drunken man, is the clozet of
his heart; and that which a sober man thinks, a drunkard speaks. And as by
a noise of crows, one may guess where carrion is, so a flock of drunkards
may be found by their words, being so inflamed with the fume and strength of
the lycour, as it is impossible to keep silence. Therefore as Cicero says,
there need no racking to procure confession of the truth, for it may with more
ease be gotten by drunkenness.

And as Homer says, wine distracteth the wits of a wise man withvoluntary
madness, and his gravity is utterly quenched with indiscretion. A drunken man
is so prolixious and talkatiue, as he molesteth all his hearers: if he be in
company with a sober man, he wearieth him with talk: if he come to the sick,
he grieueth him more then his sickness: if in a ship among passengers, he
annoyeth them more then the waves of the sea: so that whersoeuer he comes, he
is troublous and irksome.

It were one of Herculus labors to describe their several humors, some apt
to quarrel, if but crossed with a word, and not pledged as he would be, and
ready to stab, and make wo^ke for the Constable: an other throws the pot
about the house, breaks the glass windows with his dagger, and calls his
hostise whore: some full of Apish tricks and toys, sing, hollow, whoope,
swear, and swagger, with such confused disorder, that a sober man coming
amongst them, would verily think he were in hell, carowsing healths on their
knees, at which great snuff is taken, if not duly pledged; and so great
indignity offered, as many times the field is challenged, where the devils
champions try their valor, which to some is untimely warning. Some like
swine, wallow in their own filth, and forced to disgorge and cast up the
superfluity and excess, which calls for vengeance from heaven, for so
monstrously abusing the good creatures of God.

And though a drunkard recover himself again, yet the effect does still
remain, leaving such a slyme behind, as defiles both body and soul: yet not
a few are rocked a sleep in this brutish desire: but o beastly and sinful
desire, to circumscribe a man's chiefest good within the compass of his belly,
and destroy all those good parts that inhabit about the soul, and suffer the
basest part of the body to overcome the five wits. What a madness is this,
custom getting victory by little and little, prevails so much with some,
that they become remediless, and have not only the map of drunkenness
drawn on their visage by continual use, but the whole man polluted with the
essential properties thereof. Oh how odious is this vice to God and good men?
and how does it putrify and contaminate body and soul, and yet how
plentifully does it reign in most places without suppression? for now all good
fellowship is in drinking, and he is a flincher that will not take his licour,
and be drunk for company.

This rises from sufferance and too much lenity: for if drunkenness be but a
May Game, and he accounted Alehouses the cruse of much drunkenn^s^e.
no good fellow unless he be a perfect drunkard, no marvel if it be so much
practiced. But the surplusage of Alehouses, especially those that ar^ kept by
unconscionable and irreligious persons, who make no scruple to open their
doors to every drunken mate, is no small means to multiply a swarm of
monsters in the Commonwealth.

Is it not lamentable that a poor man who has nothing to keep his charge but
his sore labor, spends all he can rap and rend in drunkenness and ryoting,
and his wife and children want that which he leaudly wastes, and where is the
cause but in such base minded people, that for greediness of filthy lucre do
suffer them to drink out their eyes, and swear out their hearts so they may
gain: but let them be assured that hell mouth gapes to swallow up such greedy
accursed monsters, unless they turn with speedy repentance.

It is now grown an exercise and a game of actiuitie, to swill and quaffe
much, and he that drinks most wins the prize, whereof he is as proud, as
if he had carried an ox with Milo at the Olympian games. And by your leave,
drunkenness is too gross a term, and deserves the stabbe. For although all
those fine terms and prittie Epithites, which are given to that sin, import
as much, yet (forsoothe) it must be covered with many sportiue denominations;
otherwise you shall incur no small displeasure, and bring your self into a
drunken danger. But let them blind it so long as they can with never so many
fair attributes, yet sobriety and reason will unmask and lay them open, to
their utter obliquie: and though they frame this naked excuse, which they
allege as a poor shift to save their credit, that they are not drunk so long
as they know what they do, can go, stand, hold their first man, and keep a
just reckening of their pottes. But he that drinks more then will content the
want of nature, and falls into the excess, though his brain be so well
settled as he is not by and by bereft of reason, yet he deserves no other
epithet then a bowsie beastly drunkard.

And when by coaction one shall be urged either being not a thirst, or his
appetite not moving, the one offends in offering, the other in taking: and
hence it is so great strife and quarelling arises, and so many frayes and
field-meetings grow.

Drinking one to an other (according as I conceive) is no other but a
participation of love, and a kind communication, The use of d^inking one to an
other.
as when a man says, Sir, I drink to you with all my heart this cup of wine;
being as much as if he should say, all the strength and good this wine shall
minister to my body, I am ready to spend it in your service, which being
gratefully requited by the other, is full of humanity.

The often bibbing at feasts, breaks the bonds of modes^ie. Some are never
well but when their nose is in the pot, and so are made drunk by accident.
Many noisome detracting evils lie hid in the bosom of a drunkard, which
breaks out upon every occasion, in so much as he can never be at peace, but
one torment succeeds an other; which as eating vulcers or sores, byte and
gnawe continually, never suffering body or mind to have one hours respite for
intolerable anguish.

The body I say, is subject to so much pestilence and rottenness, as cannot in
few words be expressed, the face blowte, puffed up, and stuffed with the flocks
of strong beer: the nose so set out with pearls and diamonds, that by the
reflecting beams which they cast from so glorious antiquity, the bye-standers
may see to walk as by a lighted tapor: and the whole body so impaired and
shaken Thus does God pursu^ them with his judgments: some the gallows knits
up, the sword deuour^, the pox, marble^, etc.
with goutes, sciaticaes, panges, palsies, appolexies, etc. that for the most
part lie under the Physicians hand: who though they live, yet such life is a
living death, for Medice viuere est misere viuere. And being thus surfetted
live disconsolate, and hasten their own destruction by casting themselves
headlong into the bottom of endless wretchedness. For the excellency of
reason being thrust forth of her cabin by wine*washing excess, they
incidently fall into woe and misery.

Lot being drunk, committed incest with his daughters. Noah was mocked of his
sons. Holofernes had his head cut off by a poor woman: for it is an easy
thing for the devil to accomplish his will, if the mind be bent to surfeiting.
For this is that poisoned fountain out of which flows so many maladies,
grievous and long discases, impostumations, inflammations, obstructions,
ventosities, and what not, whereby the mildness of nature is disturbed.

And therefore one of the Sages being asked why he refused a cup of wine when
it was offered him, because (quoth h^e) I take it to be poison: for this other
day when I was invited to a Feast, I saw that every one that drunk of it,
soon after decayed, both in mind and body, having lost both reason and use
of their limbs: and as the Poet says, Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur at
as.

But these strange events happen not simply in respect of the wine it self,
being in it own nature good, (for if it be moderately taken it comfort the
body, and cherishes the mind, strengthens the sinews, and helps the
eyes: and that was the cause Saint Paul counseled Tymothie to drink a little
Wine) but only and altogether in the intemperate and immeasurable usage.

So is it likewise in meats, when one does gurmandize and feed upon
diversity and disguised dishes of manifold operations. Many accidences arise
and diseases grow, and this is by reason of the contrariety and different
natures of those meats, and in the superfluity and abundance as the proverb
says, much meat much malady: whereas in simple and uniform kinds, delight
never exceedes the appetite: and he that feeds but of one dish, lives
longer, and is more healthful then those accidental dieters and queasie
stomachs that glutte themselves with eueric kind artificially compounded,
sometime of easy digestion, then of hard digestion, that many times before
one can be concocted, the other putrifieth in the stomach, and this is very
familiar in common knowledge, that the ploughman that lives by curdes, bread
and cheese, and such homely fare, works hard all the day, and lies uneasy
at night, is more sounder, healthfuller, and more free of malladies then those
fine, nice, and curious dyeters.

Now when the body is thus misdieted by surfeiting and drunkenness, it is not
only subject to diseases, and afflicted with torments and incurable laments,
whereby it becomes vnweildie and unfit for any virtuous exercise, but also
draws the horror and judgments of God upon both body and soul. How ought
men therefore to live soberly and chastely, and stop the abuse of such
abominable Epicurisme: and as wise Cato says, Eat to live, and not live to
eat, like the Epicure, that puts all his felicity in Bacchus his
belly-cheare.

By this the quick conceit of the spirit is dulled and made impregnable, the
glorious sunshine of Virtue eclipsed, and all good motions quite extinguished,
that a man cannot be said to be a man, but the trunk or ca^kasse of a man,
wherein an infernal spirit in stead of a soul does inhabit.

Hereby he becomes rash-headed and unadvised, doing that in haste, whereof
he repents at leisure.

As Alexander, who in his drunken nesse would sley his dearest friends, and
being sober, w old be ready to kill himself for anger: and all those noble
virtues and princely qualities wherewith he was endued, were all defaced by the
intolerable delight he had in drinking. The famous City Persepolis in a
drunken humor was burned to ashes, which was no sooner devised by Thayis the
harlot, but was executed with great celeritie: but recovering his wits,
repented his folly: for with this spirit is a drunken man always possessed to
attempt things rashly, to despise good counsel, to undertake great exployts,
but never with mature deliberatio^, unruly, disobedient, and violating the
laws both of God and man: and lastly, with the foolish Trojans, (sero sapiunt
phriges) be wise when it is too late. If this Hidra infuse her venom into the
tenderness of youth, and not crushed down when it begins to peep, by killing
the serpent in the egg, but suffered to grow ripe, o how it distilleth into
the soul, and pulles down the whole frame of Virtue, whereby he is cast down
headlong from a high promentarie, into a deep ugly dungeon: it weakeneth the
nature, and makes them fools and meacockes, not fit for any employment.

To give wine to you^h, is olium igni addere.
And therefore the Spartans and Lacedaemonians at their great festiuals, would
show unto their children drunke^ men, that by seeing their beastlines they
might shun the like practice.

Vinum est quasi remedium aduers^s duritism senectutis largi^^^ est.
It was a great shame among the Athenians, for a young man to haunt tauernes or
common tap-houses: in so much as on a time when a youth being in a tavern,
and seeing Diogenes come toward him, shifted into an other room for fear he
should see him. Nay quoth he, stay young man, the more you go in that way, the
further you go into the Tavern. If Diogenes or Polemon lived in these days,
they should have wo^ke enough to sweep youth out of Tauernes and Alehouses,
being now traded up in it, as in an occupation.

If we see a man often frequent the Physicians house, we by and by suspect his
health, and suppose he is not well, his body out of temper, and some infirmity
breeding: so when we behold one often to repair to such places of ill note,
we may censure him, and safely conclude his wits are distracted, and
daungerously infected with Opprobrium medicorum.

Nevertheless, leaud company is the overthrow of many good wits, which
otherwise be ingenious, and of a lively promptitude to Virtue, getting such
vices in an hour, as tarrieth with the^ many days: for bad company is as a
stench about a man that annoyeth the sense. And as clear crystal water is
corrupted if it fall into a a stinking puddle, so a virtuous mind is stained
with the leaud vices of loose livers: and therefore no man can be freed of the
effect, till he shun the cause: for conuersing with naughty people, the good
disposition is soonet infected with their evil manners, then the bad reformed
with their good conditions. For as by a contagious air the soundest bodies are
soonest infected, so the tender and green capacity is soon violently carried
away into all voluptuousness. For as it is impossible to hold the hand in the
fire, and not be burnt, so can he not hold fellowship with bad company, but
he must needs be the worse.

Every creature keeps a due course and order: the Sun like a ramping Lion,
runs about the Sunt septem ste^^^, in humero tauro.
world with a swift revolution: the Moon knows her sitting down and rising
up: the Pleiades keep their stations: the Stars go their circuit: the
earth, the sea, and every creature keep their time, only man is out of frame
and temper too, and every part disioynted, the natural impediment is the
very bane and putrefaction of the soul. O how hard is it then to pull out
those weeds within, which like rebels hold a continual war against all good
motions: a greater victory is it therefore to overcome a man's own self, then
to conquer a city: for he that vanquisheth an enemy, mastereth but flesh and
blood, but he that can humble his pride and rule his passions, overcomes the
devil: the one is but the son of man, the the other the son of God.

David could cut off the head of Goliath, yet was not able to tame his own
affections.

Sampson could slaie the Philistines with a iaw-bone, and yet was made a slave
to Dalilath.

In like manner the Poets ascribe to Hercules many incredulous labors, as in
killing the snake of Learna, maistering the wild bull of Aramanthus, clensing
Domedes stables, killing the Centaures, and such toilsome works, Ovid Metam.
that his taske-mistresse Juno was feign to cry out, Defessa sum iubendo, and
yet for all this was conquered by lust, and made spinne on a rock by Omphila,
with women's garments.

So that by this we may see, that it is more difficill to quench the raging
lust of concupiscence, and chase away the corruption of nature, then to do
these wonderful labors. Which thing Cicero in his Oration Pro Marcello does
well remember, speaking to the Emperor: O Caesar (says he) thou have subdued
kingdoms, subjected nations, tamed the Barbarians, and brought them under the
Roman yoke, and by thy matchless and heroical spirit, have made the
Capitol ring of thy glorious triumphs: yet notwithstanding, to beat down
ambition, to bridle fury, to temper justice with mercy, to be humble in
majesty, and conquer the unruly passion of the mind, he that can do this,
Non ego eum cum summis viris comparo, sed simillimum deo iudico. I do not only
compare him with the best men, but I think him rather a God.

By this it is manifest, that this Annarchie, this rebellion that is in nature,
cannot so easily be bridled and kept from rushing into disorder, but by
execution of laws: and to this end is the Magistrate set up, and the sword of
Justice held out, to tame the unruliness of nature.

Now therefore the whole felicity of man stands in temperance, and in
quelling those boiling lusts that set themselves against the nobleness of
Virtue.

Epictetus gives two rules, to bear, and forbear; by the first, patiently to
bear adversity, and the bitterness of Fortune: by the second to fly
concupiscence, and abstain from the will of the flesh; and these are the two
paths leading to Virtue. To conclude, there is no true joy without Virtue,
this is perfect honor and true nobility: she offers herself freely to every
man, she denies none, but is open and ready to all that will seek her, and
does neither require house, land, orworldly wealth, but is content with a poor
naked man: and therefore seeing that all is vain without her, it is a shame to
desire glory by riches or birth, and not rather deserve it by his own virtue.
For he that is therewith possessed, is famous in earth, glorious in the grave,
and immortal in heaven, according to the Poet:

Omni^ roscidulae quacunque sub orb Diana
Vivunt, sunt fatis interitur a suis
Virtus sola, mori diuorum munere nescit,
Cumque suis musae vatibus vsque manent.
All things that under Dians sphere does live,
or draws breath,
To fatal change are subject sure,
and unto greisly death:
But Virtue only with the gods remains
immortal aye,
Where her religious followers
do live in happy stay.
By Virtue the famous Camilli, Fabij, and Scipiones, are mounted up above all
earthly weakness, and a memory of their noble virtues co^me^ded to
posterity. For there is nothing in this world of so great price, and which
causes more to augment, then the trade of good manners. For by this means,
not only fathers of families have taken a domesticke form of regiment in
their houses, by good order keeping, but also Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and
public affairs, do hereby flourish, and are happily maintained. And for
this cause I have willingly adventured to move and stir the mind thereunto,
and that with a zealous affection. And although I have taken upon me a thing
very unfit for my rude and small understanding, yet I doubt not but the honest
and virtuous will gratify and approuc this my simple endeavor: especially
because they more esteem the preciousnesse of Virtue, then the pompious glory
of Vice: wherein they observe the counsel of the wise Heathen, who wishes
that no man should despise the simple labor of an other man, especially if he
speak good words, and give no offense to the weak. And this was Platoes
divine institution amongst many other sovereign decrees, that it is needful
in every Commonwealth to prescribe and give order that it be not permitted to
any man to publish any thing he has composed, except it be first perused and
allowed by indifferent Judges thereunto assigned. If this iniunction were duly
observed, so many leaud books, vain pamphlets, and scurrillous ditties would
not so easily pass, neither would idle wits bend themselves to write. For now
through the abundance of naughty books, we are greatly endamaged, for by
learning the sound doctrine of good men, the basest and blindest manner of
writers is most-what approved. From this spring or fountain is risen this
mortal and monstrous infection before noted.

Neither is this all, for there is a natural rebellion, which like a sore
runs over the whole body: so that if the ground of the heart be not fallowed
and ploughed up, and good seed sown therein, the happiness and felicity of
man is choked hith weeds, and poisoned with Hemplocke, iniquity has gotton
the upper hand so far, that if we look into the monstrousness of sin in
this age, we may see every abomination sport it self, as though there were no
God. Drunkenness is good fellowship. Whoredom and adulteri^, youthful
prankes: Swearing, the fire of manhood: Hypoc^isie, deceit and cousonage, a
common practice. In a word, there be too many whores, too many knaves, too many
brothel*houses, too little labor, too much idleness, too many Ale*houses, too
little love, too much hate, too little devotion, and too much hard-hearted
Christianity. But I speak not this to derogate ought from the diligence of
any. Nevertheless, it were to be wished, that more care were had to execute
Justice on such grievous malefactors. If I have done well to note what is
amiss, thou shall do much better to mend the abuse.

Or if it be ill and of little worth,
If thou can do better, I pray set it forth.
Finally, the consideration of these abuses before named, ought to stir up
both superior magistrates, and inseriour officers, to advance Virtue, and
reform Vice: because as the one begets most heavenly things in this earthly
world: so is the other the overthrow of all happiness, both here and in the
life to come. The Minister of the word therefore is not exempt from this
labor, for as he is the Physician of the soul, so is he to watch over the
sick patient; not so much to attendere famae and corpori, as to negligere
salutem ecclcsie, to be old in years, and young in knowledge: to covet to be
rich in purse, and poor in charity: to purchase pleasures, build great
houses, and show no fruits by the sequel and event that they worthily enjoy
their dignities: as many do in this age that stand in a spiritual place, are
notwithstanding mere temporal men, and so rooted in the slesh, as they yield
no fruits at all of the spirit: but they ought for care, conscience, and in a
godly zeal, holding sacred places, to labor earnestly and officiously, to
suppress those horrible evils that are so usual and commonly practiced; that
by this, sin and wickedness may be abolished, the true service of God
maintained, to his own glory, the good of his Church, and the happy and
peaceable government of this honorable City.

FINIS.
The faults escaped in the printing, I pray thee friendly Reader correct with
thy pen: for by reason of some earnest business, I have not so narrowly looked
to them as I would have done.


