A Mad Crew; Or, That shall be tryde.
To the tune of, Pudding-Pye Doll.

VVAlking of late through London streets,
A crew of good-fellowes together meets,
Not one of them sober, if not belyde,
Well, quoth the Maultman, that shall be tryde.
From thence I trauel'd, to see a new Play,
Whereas an old Widow in gallant array,
Sat pleasantly smirking, like a young Bride,
Well, quoth the Fiddler, that shall be tryde,
Then to a Tobacco-house, smoking hot
Went I, and called for my Pipe and my Pot,
The Weed was strong, but hardly well dryde,
Well, quoth the Horse-courser, that shall be tryde.
The Market of Cheap, I feign would then see,
Where soo^e a fine Cutpurse vnmonyed me,
And ventured a joint, to Tybourne to ride,
Well, quoth the Hangman, now that shall be tryde.
I afterward went, and took up mine Inn,
Whereas I found out, an Aunt of my kin,
Who feared no lashing, though all were espyde,
Well, quoth the Beadle, now that shall be tryde.
I met with a Gallant, that sold all his Land,
And after took money up, bound by Band,
Who when the day came, the payment denyde,
well, quoth. the Sergeant, now that shall be tryde.
I feign would then see a close Bowling Alley,
Where to a fine Cheater, I paid for my folly,
His slights were so nimble, they could not be spide
Well, quoth Justice too-good, that shall be tried.
Moore Fields being pleasant, the same I would see,
where Maids of our City, still whiting clothes be,
For forty weeks after, my love I there tide.
Well, quoth the Midwife, now that shall be tryde.
I went to Pye-Corner, to look for my Dinner,
where dining with smoke, it made me look thinner,
The reckoning being called for, the same I denyde,
well, quoth the Cook, now that shall be tryde.
And then in Smithfield I bought me a Nagge,
Where of all the four, not half a good leg,
Being tide to the Manger, he left me his Hyde,
Well, quoth. the Beareward, now that shall be tryde.
A Suit of good Satin I made me as then,
Where as five yards were stole out of ten,
And four of the others at last were denyde.
Well, quoth the Broker, now that shall be tryde.
I met then a Collier, that sold me good Coals,
Where two, of four Bushels, ran out at the holes,
Yet more then full measure, the Collier still cryde,
Well, quoth the Pillory, that shall be tryde.
The second Part. To the same tune.

GReat store of good liquor the Thames does contain,
Whereof the old Maltman does greatly complain,
That in the hot Kettle, the Malt will not bide.
Well, quoth the Brewer, now that shall be tryde.
The Carrier that travels by night very late,
When good Ale has quelled the strength of his pate,
Without either money, or wit, he may ride,
well, quoth the Thief, now that shall be tryde.
A Wench of plain dealing, makes use of her own,
The Beadles of Bridewell her shoulders have known,
The rod of correction, she will not abide,
Well, quoth Meg merry-tricks, that shall be tryde.
The good man, that leads a cumbersome life,
Where no day he scapeth the fist of his Wife:
And being thus beaten, his neighbor must ride.
Well, quoth the Milke-wife, now that shall be tryde.
The Good wife, that wastes her state unto naught,
In gaudy apparel her husband has bought,
May walk like a Peacock, her hands by her side,
Well, quoth the Cuckold, now that shall be tried.
He that his garments will pawn for good Ale*
And at his poor Wife like a Drunkard will rail,
May daily go naked, without any pride,
Well, quoth the Beggar, now that shall be tried.
She that a house and a charge will maintain,
Yet will not for laziness take any pain,
May like a Sow fatten, that is filthily styde.
Well, quoth the Drunkard, now that shall be tryde
She that by scolding still pays all her debts,
To the ease of her belly, sore sick of the frets,
May gallantly on the Cucking-stoole ride,
Well, quoth the Oyster-wench, that shall be tried.
He that each morning will call for his quart
At the Labor in Uaine, to comfort his heart,
May fear no ill savors, that Night-men abide.
Well, quoth the Iakes-Farmer, that shall be tryde.
Now those that my Ditty will kindly regard,
A Pipe of Tobacco shall have for reward,
With a Cup of Old Sherry, well suger'd beside,
Well, quoth the Ballad-singer, that shall be tried.
London printed for John Trundle.


