A LASTING JEWEL, FOR RELIGIOUS WOMEN.

In the sum of a Sermon, Preached at the Funeral of Mistress MARY CROSS,
late Wife of Mr. HENRY CROSS of Barnestaple in the County of Deuon Merchant,
Nouemb. 11. 1628. and now published with some Additions.

With a brief description of her life and death.

By WILLIAM CROMPTON, Preacher of the Word of God at Barnestaple in Deuon.

Thus shall it be done to them whom the Lord will honor.

LONDON, Printed for EDWARD BLOVNT. 1630.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL CHRISTOPHER BLACKHALL Esquire, and to the virtuous
Gentlewoman, Mistress DOROTHIE BLACKHALL, his Wife, Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
Worshipful Sir, my loss has occasioned this gain to the Church, the death
of my dearest friend giving life to this Monument: Jacob erects a Pillar upon
the Grave of his beloved Rachell, Genesis 35.20. my desire was, the memory of mine
might not perish; nor her Virtues with her body, be buried in the Land, where
all things are forgotten: for that end I have at length prevailed to make that
public, which was delivered upon a short warning (the speaker limited both for
time and Text) at her funeral: neither knew I any to whom I might more fitly
Dedicate the same (of right belonging to her nearest Kinsman) then to your
self, with your virtuous second: dear she was unto you, while living, and I
know the fragrant smell of a bruised rose, will not be unwelcome, though dead.
I could not then wish her to live still in misery; I now desire she may live
in memory; according to the promise of God, made unto his Saints; Psalm. 112.6.
Prou. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed; and the righteous shall be had
in everlasting remembrance.

Worthy Sir, if you may hereby reap any comfort, I shall have the more
content; if God may have any glory, the Church any benefit, religious Women
encouragement hence, the Author, I know, obtaines his expected reward: who
otherwise was unwilling to feel again the lashes of this censuring Age. Thus,
not doubting to find a kind acceptance of a good meaning; I commit all to the
blessing of God, leaving you and yours to the rich mercies of God our Father in
Christ, and rest now as ever,

Barum, this 14. Nouemb. 1629. Your Worships Kinsman to be commanded, in what I
am able, HENRY CROSS.

A Lasting Jewel, FOR RELIGIOUS WOMEN.
PROVE. 31.30.31. Favor is deceitful, and Beauty, vanity; but a woman that
fears the Lord, she shall be praised; give her of the fruit of her hands, and
let her own works praise her in the gates.
THis portion of Scripture, Right Worshipful, Men, Fathers, and Brethren (all
dearly beloved) in the best beloved Christ Jesus, is part of a Prophecy, see
the first verse of the Chapter, and therefore certain; 2. Pet. 1.19.
S. Peter calls it the sure word of prophecy, which came not by the will of
man, but men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. S. Paul
charge us that we despise not prophesying: either by unbelief, or by an
idle, fruitless hearing; a long Ex^rdium to prepare you. I shall not (and have
good reason to hope) I need not use, having hitherto, found you as loving,
willing, and attentive hearers, as ever I spoke unto (God grant continuance
with increase of practice) where attention will prove obedience to our Savior,
and obedience bring profit with delight, the matter carries its own weight to
procure entrance into the dullest ear; only take heed how you hear this
Prophecy which Solomon learned of his mother.

In the whole Chapter, you have first general directions for a good King, and
in him, for any that truly fear God, and desire to order their life according
to his word; and they are especially three, contained in the nine first verses:
First to deal justly with every one; Verse 8.9.
Give unto God the things that are Gods; honor, glory, with universal
obedience; give unto Caesar, and with him to every other man, what belongs unto
them, Justice first named, because first in being and chief in working.
by the Law of Nature, and Nations, raise not your selves upon the ruin of
your brethren, unjust increase will consume the principal: yet look not so
much upon others, as to forget your selves; Justice like Charity must begin at
home; he cannot be acceptably just toward another, in the acts of commutatiue,
and distributive Justice; who is cruelly unjust to himself in neglecting the
safety of his own soul: defraud not your own souls of spiritual food and
tillage; to starve, or permit them grow needy; is the greatest Injustice; sow
the seeds of grace, your souls require it, and you shall reap the harvest of
glory; your Savior has promised it.

Secondly to be temperate in the use of wine, Verse 4.5.6. Sobriety.
and strong drink; God commands it, nature requires it, common honesty calls
for it; a customary drunkard, (whether by quaffing, or slipping in passive or
active drunkenness, glorying in that shameful practice, to lay others asleep)
Tauerne-haunter, health-drinker, and destroyer, fights against all; giant-like
in his alie. Metamorphosis, thinks himself able to wage war with nature,
procures such a habit in it, as will not be removed without great difficulty,
forgets God, his service, himself, wife, Children, soul and all: let all
starve for bread, so he may have drink enough; makes himself unserviceable,
and consequently a slaggering burden, both to Church and Commonwealth, lays
himself nakedly open to the fierce wrath of God Almighty, to all the danger
and disgrace can possibly be thought on: as by many woeful examples we have
seen in every age: and finally loses all his friends, good name, estate,
health, and salvation, without speedy, and special repentance: read at your
leisure, 1. Sam. 25.37, 38. Prou. 33.19.20, 21, 29. Prou. 30.31, 32, 33. Esaias
5.22. 1. Cor. 6.10. Gal. 5 21. then consider how vile a vice drunkenness is,
and how hard to be left. Chastity. This is first in intention, last in
expression, as the subject of the following discourse required.


Thirdly, to be resolute in resisting all the deceitful baytes of feminine
beauty; unruly appetite, would betray our strength, and make us yield at the
sight of every weak woman; did we not hear another voice from heaven, Give
not your strength to women, nor your ways to that which destroys Kings. It
is reported that Alexander would not look on the wife of Darius, least he
that had overcome many men should be shamefully vanquished by one woeman; one
wanton eye may let in more ruins to the soul, then two hands can thrust out:
gaze not on beauty, it is vanity; listen not to the voice of favor, it is
deceitful; let not your hearts be ensnared with such known traps; the gain
of the flesh, is in this sense the loss of the soul: read what is written:
Prou. 2.18, 19.
The house of a whorish woeman inclines unto death, and her paths unto the
dead: None that go unto her; return again, neither take they hold of the
paths of life. She has cast down many wounded, strong men have been slain
by her, her house is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of death.
Prou. 7.26.27.
When the Fox saw many going, none returning from the Lions den, he refused
to go for fear of like danger: Let us hence learn to be wise, Foelix quem
faciunt, aliena pericula cautum.
least we complain too late. How have we hated instruction, and despised
reproof? how have we disobeyed the voice of our teachers? and refused to
incline our ear to them that instructed us?

Secondly, we have in this Chapter an exact description, and Commendation of a
virtuous woeman, beginning at the tenth verse: which I would commend to all
that are, or desire to be good wives: that you would peruse it once a week;
not omitting set Times, for reading other parts of holy writ: my Text is the
conclusion of it, wherein you may observe with me,

1. The fading Condition of outward endowments comprised in, Favor is
deceitful, and Beauty vanity.


2. The lasting worth and dignity of inward grace, contained in, But a Woman
that fears the Lord she shall be praised.


3. The duty of all men, toward virtuous women, Expressed in the last words,
Give her the fruit of her hands, etc.


Wherein I shall briefly touch these particulars: 1. Who they are must be
praised, Women.
2. For what? The fear of the Lord.
3. How they must be praised. By the fruit of their hands, and their own
worthes.
4. By whom? By their Children, Husbands, Neighbors; all are enioined to give
good women their due praise.



Of all which in their order, and first by way of Explication.

The censure of Nature and natural endowments, Favor is deceitful.


Favor, may be taken 2. ways: first, for inward affection, which is a motion
of the mind, stirred up by the apprehension of some excellency in the party
favored, as when we say this, or that great man favors us, smiles upon us,
loves us entirely: then this favor what more deceitful? who can tell when he
has it? or discover a false heart under a flattering forehead? did not Cain
commune with his brother, whom he meant to kill? was not Ioabs speech
peaceable, when his purpose was to smite Abner? how sweet were his words to
innocent Amasa? Art thou in health my Brother? when a sword was in his hand to
free him from all diseases? Absalon inuites his brother Ammon, to feast with
him, but the guest must be slaughtered by him: Judas cries hail Master, when
he came to betray the son of man with a kiss: What apish Complements,
bowing, becking, scraping, the foolish froth of feigned love, do we behold
amongst men? while there is no correspondencie between the heart and the hand?
what promises have we had? what protestations have we heard? which have
proved abortiues, living and dying in the same moment: who relyes thereon in
these days, builds on sandy ground. Believe them that speak out of
experience; trust not favor, it is deceitful: so true is that of the
Psalmist, men's words may be smoother then oil, when there is no truth in the
inward parts: Or suppose one to have it; who can tell how long he shall enjoy
it? health, and sickness, life and death, sunshine and storms, day and night
change not so often, as this deceitful favor; to day we may hear Jacobs
voice, to morrow feel Esaus hands; the least error, rumor, or conceit of one,
crushes this affection: rich words with an ayery issue, proclaims the Parents
folly. This favor of wicked men and women, is nothing worth: like smoke to
the eyes; or the reed of Egypt to the hand: what extremity of folly drives
worldly Politicians then, or boon companions and good fellows (as they are
termed) to prefer it before the favor of God, to seek more greedily for it
then reconciliation with God in the blood of Christ?

The favor of great men may be sought, preserved, good use made of it, yet one
dram of Gods favor in Christ is more worth then the favor of all the Princes
in the World. Let me be Gods favorite, I care not whether the World smile or
frown; let others pursue this deceitful favor; but Lord, do thou lift up
the light of thy countenance upon us.

Secondly, favor may be taken for outward proportion, in body, and face;
joined with a justly tempered complexion; when all the humors manifest an
equal power, without any selfe-ruining desire of dominion: this is the favor
here meant, and is deceitful two ways.

First actiuely, when it deceiues others, and that either in regard of
judgment, when men think women to be such as they seem to be, perfect for
parts, beautiful, healthie, sober, chaste, temperate; there being indeed and
truth not any one, but the shadow of these qualities in them: or in regard of
love, and liking, when men suffer themselves to be ensnared with the very
outward favor; making Sense the guide unto reason, and beauty the ground of
their affection: Genesis 6.2.34.2.
so were the sons of God deceived in the old world; Sechem, the son of
Hamor, Sampson with Dalilah; Judge. 16. 2. Sam. 11.2.
David with Bathsheba, and many more in every age: few eyes that have not thus
been foiled; looking through these deceitful spectacles, have been mistaken
in their object. Experience has taught us to tell you this, favor is
deceitful; and least it should not be enough deceitful of it self: there are
certain appurtenances which make it more deceitful, as painting, perewigs,
false eyes, arteficiall teeth, cawles of net-worke to catch wantons; round
tyers, chains, bracelets, mufflers, rings, earrings, with the rest of that
wardrobe set open by the Prophet: Esaias 3.19.20.21.22.23.
gaze not on this favor, fair and lovely it appears; but defiles the heart,
leaves a stain upon the Soul, and is it not deceitful?

Secondly, passiuely, deceiving it self; promising constancy, when nothing is
more frail; see if it ever could endure the shining of the Sun, blowing of the
wind, falling of the rain, the least inward grief; two or three fits of an
Ague, the small pocks, bearing of Children, consume and leave it no place; this
day it looks as if it would be always so; to morrow, as if it had never
been so; and is it not deceitful? a means it is to coozen many of the food
of life. They cannot go to Church in Summer for heat, nor in winter for cold,
it will spoil their complexion; and is it not deceitful? what mean the
multitude of vailes and maskes, the closer you keep it, the lesser while it
will last, and is it not deceitful?

Beauty is vanity: here we have a more lively expression of the former: I
know no great difference between favor and beauty: in our ordinary speech
they are often put one for another: except this favor is referred to
proportion, beauty to complexion: though in strictness of speech, beauty
being something arising from both.

Beauty is twofold. 1. Inward of the heart and mind mentioned. Psalm. 29.2.
Psalm. 45.2. Cant. 5.10.6, 4. Genes. 29.17, 12, 11.26.7. Ester 1.11. Genes.
39.6. 1. Sam. 16.12.25, 3. 2. Sam. 13.25.11, 2.
This is true substantial beauty; not here meant. Another there is outward in
the face and countenance; arising from a pure mixture, and quick motion of the
humors: as in Scripture we read often of such beauty; highly to be Commended
when it meets with a gracious heart: in Rachel, Sarah, Rebecka, Vaisthi,
Joseph, David, Abigail, Absalon, Bathsheba with many others: given to good
ones, lest it should be thought evil: given to the wicked, lest it should be
esteemed more then is meet: yet in both it is truly said to be vanity;
unprofitable and soon fading, like some pleasant flower, that stoopes to the
first sharp blast: Beauty and vanity may be compared to Zacheries two
staves, one is no sooner broken, Zach. 11.7.
but the other succeedes.

The praise of grace and gracious Actions.

But a woman that fears the Lord. What woman soever, young or old, maid or
wife, that fears the Lord: not with a slavish fear, that may be in Devils and
Reprobates which is to fear with hatred; nor with a servile fear only, Acts
10.34, 35.
though it be commendable, and in some sort necessary: Between slavish and
servile fear there is a graduall if no specificall difference.
but with a filial fear, joined, with a hearty love of him so feared: she
that is godly and religious makes conscience of her ways, hates every known
sin, delights in the society of Gods Saints on earth; uses Gods ordinances
in their season, performs that office her place requires out of faith and
obedience unto God; such a one shall be praised: Fair ones may be favored of
some for a time; good ones shall be favored of all for ever; grace brings true
honor; no glory without it; her husband shall praise her, and bless God he
ever saw her: her Children shall rise up in token of her honor, and call her
blessed; because fruitful; bearing Christ in her heart, them in her womb.

A good woeman was never barren; she cannot but be a mother of many Children,
in one sense or other: her comforts and lessons, works of piety and charity,
her speech and behavior: what are they all but so many issues of grace?
Praised shall she be of God, his word and servants, had in honor of all that
are round about her (if men were silent, the stones would cry out) and her good
name shall remain for ever.

Least a good action should miscarry in the manner, the holy Ghost in the last
clause of this book and Chapter describes how she must be praised:

By the fruit of her hands, by her own works:

The hands of a gracious woman walk faster then her tongue, the tongue is not
idle, nor ill employed; exercised often in the praises of her God: give her the
reward of her hands, not withholding the fruit of her lips.

The fruit of the hands, grows on three branches; in fervent praying; diligent
working: charitable giving: the first looks unto God; the second to her house
and family; the last to the poor and needy: her own works they are called,
because done by her self; enabled with Gods grace, during life.

Let others build Trophes to preserve their memory, after death: a godly woman
erects alasting monument with her own hands: whence we may note by the way;
first, that it is one property of the fear of God to make women fruitful in
every good, both of nature and grace; the want of this makes barren in each
degree. Secondly, that works of charity, truly praise-worthie, should be done
during life; let her own works praise her; not the works of others, though
done by her appointment.

Thirdly, to detain the just reward of praise from such good women, is
injustice: give them the fruit of their hands: let such wives freely enjoy the
benefit of their own labor; let them sit under the vines of their own
planting, and wear the cloth of their own making; Let husbands neither
restrain, nor suspect such as fear God; either they do not evil, or would
not do it; the will must be accepted for the deed: let their large provision
and ample portion, publish their just demerit in all assemblies; it is the
greatest pity and injustice that men should suffer virtuous women to want
competent maintenance; encouragement, by due praise, and commendation; he may
be punished with a bad wife, that deals unkindly with a good one.

Conclusions, or observations doctrinall hence naturally arising for our
instruction are three.

First that favor and beauty, as formerly described, are vanity; a seemly
proportion with the best complexion, is but a sandy foundation whereon to
build our affection; whether we consider desire, or praise; Beauty alone is
like a pleasant bait with a poisoned hook, to catch and gall us, not to feed
and comfort us; neither for this can any merit praise: For first it is the
work and gift of God; not to us, but to him especially appertains the praise.

Secondly, it is a thing common to good and bad: the worst women have often the
greatest share: most beauty, least grace; they dote so much of what they have,
as that they never think of what they want; as also with reasonable and
unreasonable Creatures: how far do some flowers exceed the fairest face.

Thirdly, beauty alone is very unseemly; like a gold ring in a Swines snout,
so (says Solomon) is a fair woeman without discretion. Prou. 11.12.


Fourthly, it is deceitful, both actiuely, and passiuely: besides, beauty and
favor in their best apparel; are but shadows of Good comparatively; as may
be gathered from diverse passages of the Preacher; and therefore none should
rely on them, whether owners, or beholders: First, because they are not
lasting, as has been noted in the exposition; that cannot make man happy,
which is capable of not-being: secondly, they can give no satisfying content,
while they do last: beauty and favor fill not the heart, though obtained:
the eye is not satisfied with seeing; Eccles. 1.8. Prou. 27.20.
that which has power to stay and satisfy the mind of man, is simply one;
affect beauty, we cannot wantonly and merely for it self without desire of
change; now this pleases, after that: delight in variety is the companion of
lust; neither of which can stand together with contentation.

The use of this may serve for instructiue information to men and women.
First, let fair women learn hence to esteem so of their beauty; be not
mistaken in your face; if you have nothing better, you are but as painted
Sepulchers; your outward structure couers a mass of foul Corruption: a flower
may be wondrous fair to look upon, yet we say it is but a flower, and
accordingly to be esteemed: so beauty, though justly admired, expressing in
some part the excellence of the workman; yet Solomon tells us, it is but
vanity, compared to the beauty of the inner man: nay, what is more ugly then a
fair face, with a foul, proud, lustful heart? the fairer any are, the more
careful should they be; not to offend by it, themselves or others, and the
more thankful for it, many good things of nature require more service to
glorify the author thereof: beauty with grace, a fair face with an humble
holy heart, are Jewels of inestimable worth. Did fair women know how highly
outward beauty is set forth by the presence of inward grace, Gratior est
pulchro, etc.
they would strive for it, and seek each to exceed other. Beauty without
grace, is one of Satan's snares to entrap possessors and passengers both at
once.

Secondly, men may hence learn wisdom in two respects. First to recall this
truth into mind, when they are tempted with beauty; shall we trust what is
known to be deceitful? Secondly, that they do not so much delight in, and
admire it, as to make it the chiefest motive, or ground work of their love and
liking, he is accounted in the judgment of wisdom a foolish man that builds
on a sandy foundation; Math. 7.26.
especially considering the following danger. For first, Stories tell us that
many great ones have fallen hereby: Prou. 6.25.7.26.
other men's harms should make us the more wary, principal pillars in Israel,
David and Solomon, father and son were foulely shaken; what may weak ones
fear? Secondly, besides the discord has been raised between Brethren; war
proclaimed, blood shed, only about this deceitful beauty: the practice of
Paris may at any time bring Grecians to the walls of Troy. Thirdly, and after
all, suppose it peaceably obtained, when outward favor decaies, that love
grounded first thereon will decay also, if no further hurt ensue. It is
reported of Helen, or some other of her complexion, that on a time, after
sickness, viewing her self in a glass, and seeing her beauty decayed,
suddenly fell into a relapse, and through the malignitie of a strong conceit
dyed.

Secondly, this censures and condemns the practice of many amongst us, both
men and women; women, who having and seeking nothing else but favor and
beauty, bestow all, or most part of their time about it, curling and cutting
the hair, painting, pinning, lacing, dressing, adorning, etc. it argues great
lightness, and want of the love of grace, to toil so about a known vanity:
how light then many of our English Dames are, their practice shows, looking
more on the Glass then on the Bible: being more careful of their faces, then
their hearts: pity it is fair Creatures should so befoole themselves, only
with a mere outside of good.

Men that are carried away most with beauty, let them learn to see, and
acknowledge their youthful error, as they desire to be saved: are not you one
cause of their misery? offenses may come; but woe to them by whom they come. I
see not how it can be avoided: for, did not women by experience see, men
preferring outward endowments to inward graces, we should quickly find a
general change; women would strive to be good, did they see men affect
goodness: it is ordinary policy to use that bait which the fish most delight
to play with: in this worst age of ours, what is most looked after in women
but beauty, riches, or both? are they rich, beautiful, of rich parentage; is
there any hope of preferment by them in the world? (Religion the chiefest link
between man and wife) grace and a virtuous education is little respected: this
makes women admire the one, as their chiefest good, neglect the other, as
little worth: Let such men know, a day will come, when they shall confess, and
bewail this pleasing and selfe-deceiuing error; if they be not arraigned as
guilty in part of Female folly.

Thirdly, here is comfort for such as settle their affection on better ground,
upon the image of Christ, and the graces of the spirit, shining in the party
affected: this Foundation is rockie, durable: the proportion will never change,
nor the beauty decay, the gates of hell shall never prevail against it; by
use it increases, and out-liues the nipping blasts of all-consuming time:
favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity: why should any be proud that
have it, or grieve that want it? a wrinckled forehead, swarthy complexion, a
person in body or in face any ways deformed; with a virtuous, religious mind,
appears more beautiful to the eye of judgment, then the fairest Creature in
the world: Not so, since Eve assented to the crafty Serpent, none of her
posterity appear beautiful; but such as are dipped in the blood of Christ, and
clothed with his righteousness: For the censure of some scornefully foolish
in bewraying their own ignorance; pass it over, it cannot harm you; a good
soul shall not be denied entrance into heaven for want of beauty.

Let me therefore exhort you (my dearly beloved in the Lord, men and women)
affect not favor, it is deceitful; dote not on beauty, it is vanity. To
Professors of Christ's Gospel I speak; fashion not your selves to this world,
mispend not precious time in pampring food for worms; the greatest gallant,
and fairest face, shall stoop ere long to lodge in clay: believe it now, or
else you will one day find it so, when it is too late: build not your affection
on such a sandy foundation, the sturdie winds will ruinate whatsoever you
erect thereon: Solomon spoke out of experience dear bought; you have wisdom
offered you at a cheap rate, and it may be as good as that which is further
fetched; contemn, nor flight it not; Consider what is truth, and the Lord
bless it unto you.

Secondly, in that the fear of the Lord is here opposed to favor and beauty,
and by opposition preferred; we learn, that the fear of the Lord with good
works, are woemens chiefest Jewels, things of greatest worth.

I join these two, because they cannot well be separated; no filial fear of
God without good works; no good works without the fear of the Lord: these
are wo^mens chiefest Jewels, and of greatest worth; in regard they last
longest, and become them best, yielding certain comfort, with a free reward:
that soul which once feels the benefit, will not part with it for all the
world. The Scripture is every where full to this purpose; Psalm. 19 9, Esa.
33.6. Prouer. 11.16.15.16.
the fear of the Lord is excellent, and endures for ever; the fear of the
Lord is a treasure; a gracious woman retains true honor, better is a little
with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure: better is a little beauty
with the fear of the Lord, nay fairer is the foulest face, with inward grace,
then Helens beauty, with a proud, wanton luxurious mind: Prou. 31.10.
who can find a virtuous woeman? her price is far above rubies: therefore it
is the Apostles advice, that women should array themselves in comely apparel,
with shamefastness, and modesty, not with broydered hair, gold, pearls, or
costly apparel: (no better ornament for a woeman, then an humble mind) no
richer pearl then a pure heart) but as becomes women that profess the
fear of God, 1. Timo. 2.9.10.
with good works; seconded by his partner in labor, 1. Pet. 3.4.
whose adorning (speaking of good women) let it not be that outward, of
plaiting the hair, wearing of gold, or putting on of apparel: but let it be
the hiden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament
of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.

Let common women gull themselves and others, with painted shows, every
virtuous matron knows good works to be a better ornament then cut or plaited
hair, pearls, gold, or costly array: many simple ones, either know not, or
believe not this, observe them strutting with their spangled foreheads, as
peacocks use to do with their tails, have nothing to glory in but what is
borrowed from the Creature, wanting the chiefest Jewel, all the rest are as
filthy rags.

This truth will further appear unto us, if we consider first that which the
Scripture speaks of, the fear of the Lord in those several places cited,
Psalm. 19.9. Prou. 1.7.10, 27, 14, 27. Math. 13.^5.^6. 1. Tim. 4.8.6.6. Philip.
4.11.
whereby we may easily discern the excellency of it. Secondly, that sweet
contentation of mind, with our portion allotted, as with what we are and have;
beautiful, or deformed, riches or poverty; which follows as an effect of
this fear; it has the promise of this life and that to come: Godliness with
contentment is great gain: hereby was S. Paul taught, in what estate soever
he was to be contented therewith: and good reason; for as the Prophet tells us,
there is no want to them that fear him; they want not beauty, riches,
pleasure, nor content; Christ is all in all unto them.

Thirdly, The continuance of this Jewel, it endures for ever, having the
promise of both Kingdoms, this of grace the other of glory: when favor
deceiues, and beauty fails, the fear of the Lord endures without change; when
all other pleasures leave a dampe behind, the fear of the Lord only makes
rich, and he adds no sorrow with it.

Fourthly, the desire of the best women in every age, seeking to attain it,
rather then beauty, riches, food, or raiment; whose actions, are for your
imitation; let others pin, plait, and paint, spend you these precious hours in
prayer: Let Martha be troubled with many things, take you Mary's choice, it
will bring Marthaes gain without her trouble. Like as Solomon asking wisdom,
obtained also honor, riches, long life; so falls it out with those that fear
the Lord, it brings with it all other necessaries: favor and beauty may be
without the fear of God: the fear of God not without them: and as it was a
chief part of wisdom in Solomon to desire wisdom: so is it a special part
of holy policy in women to choose the fear of the Lord, 1. Cor. 15. vlt.
as their chiefest ornament: God will add the rest: no man ever served the
Lord in vain.

In the application of this doctrine we find matter first to inform women,
what they should most earnestly seek after: if they would be good wives, and
bring a lasting portion with them to their husbands, The fear of the Lord.
Math. 6.33.
It is the Command of our Savior, strengthened by a promise: seek first the
Kingdom of Heaven, and all other things shall be added unto you: this makes
women most lovely and only praiseworthy: their presence highly esteemed
during life: and their memory honored after death: this makes women shine in
the darkest age; fruitful in every good work, conscionable in their ways
both toward God and man: observe, and you shall find how pious such are unto
God, dutiful to their husbands, careful of their household, teaching Children,
guiding servants, giving good example to both patterns of humility in speech,
going, attire.

They are helpefull, hopeful, every way beautiful; I want Epithetes to
express their excellency; a woman with this Jewel, is one of the greatest
outward blessings to man on earth; provided it hang not in the tongue, nor at
the ear only, but in the heart.

The Question only here will be; how this Jewel may be known?

Answer. By these, or some of these three things. First, by antecedents, or
things going before: First, knowledge of God, his will, presence, justice,
mercy; of our selves, what we have, we should not have, what we want, that we
should have. Secondly, sorrow of heart, for what we perceive amiss. Thirdly,
desire of amendment, which we must feel before we can attain it. Fourthly,
inquiry after, and diligently use the means, hearing, and reading of the word
of God, with prayer and meditation.

Secondly by some properties; which are, first to inlighten the understanding
in some measure according to the capabilitie of the subject. Secondly, to
purify the heart, not from the being, but from the reign of sin. Thirdly,
to heat, and enkindle zeal in the affection, for Gods glory. Fourthly, to
direct in the right way to heaven; like as the Lodestone turns the singer
toward the North; so this fear of God makes women still look unto Christ,
that they may safely sail, between the dangerous rocks, of doubtful, and
unlawful things. Thirdly, by some Consequents as first to hate every sin,
and foul fashion of the world, so soon as known. Secondly, to delight in the
practice of sincere obedience: without partiality, hypocrisy, formalitie, or
temporizing neuteralitie: to be more in deeds then words; to do more at home,
then abroad.

Thirdly, to make conscience of both these, to eschew evil, and do good in
obedience unto God.

2. Question. But how may this Jewel be attained?

Answer. First, by meditation upon the former particulars: secondly, by
practice; and that is first remotion of all lets and hindrances, with the wise
Merchant, we must part with all we have to buy this pearl.

Secondly resolution, to do what ever the Lord commands us in his word, both
for time and manner, without distinction, pretense, or exception.

Secondly, to teach men what they should most affect and praise in women; not
riches or beauty, though both the gifts of God: Did you know the worth of a
virtuous wife, her fidelity, sedulitie, sobriety, humility, patience, sweet
carriage and behavior, you would seek her more greedily then any hungry
Spaniard does the Indian gold, or any amorous wanton, his deceitful minion:
know this further, women would not offend so much about their faces, did not
men offend first in excessive praises of their fading beauty.

Thirdly, to stir up the parents care, by their godly endeavor, to leave
this portion to every one of their Daughters: you would have your children do
things praiseworthy, then give them good example, teach them the fear of the
Lord; and they shall be praised: God has spoken: the present sight of a
virtuous face is more delightful, then gold or laud; the one as uncertain
respects the body only: the other as a lasting Jewel; regardes both body, and
soul. But alas, the greatest care in many parents is, to sow in their
Children the seeds of pride, and idleness, by keeping them in the fashion for
their hair, face, attire, gesture, complement, etc. neglecting the old
fashion, after which God made them; to set them up on high, the churlish
thistles daughter, must marry with the Cedars son, only for his height;
plodding to leave them rich, though graceless: a greater fault there is in
some other parents, whose endeavor is to dishearten and hinder their forward
children in good courses; like the Scribes and Pharisees, will neither enter
heaven, nor suffer those that would. I advise children to honor their parents,
because of our precept, but God more, because of many, parents are dear,
Christ dearer; their love precious, his inestimable, the parents care may
adorn the body, this fear of the Lord is the souls ornament.

Secondly, this serves to vnuaile the deformed poverty of such women as want
this Jewel; though fair, yet faithless; and may be compared to an Irish
bogge or quagmire, which appears green and solid, till it be tried; then
opens her mouth to devour the passenger: such are fair rich women without
grace; to look unto they are like a bed of down; to touch, like a bundle of
the sharpest thorns: whosoever deals with them, had better grapple with a
nest of snakes: their ornaments are all outward, and such as are indeed, the
disgrace of Christianity, borrowing, poudering, frizeling, and cutting of
their hair; naked breasts, earrings, nose-iewels, with strange fantastic
fashions: yet what a gay show do such make; esteeming themselves no mean
persons, (no more they are not; for they are always in extremes) how haughty
are they, walking with stretched-forth necks, wanton eyes, tripping nicely, as
they go? how are they admired by simple ones, that know them not? when as
there is nothing in them praiseworthy; it must needs be folly, fl^ttery, or
both to commend them: if we give them the fruit of their hands, and let their
own works speak for them, what a harvest must they reap? will they not
blush to hear and see pride, idleness, lust, drunkenness, laid before them
as their own? Oh, consider this, ye backsliding proud wanton, wine-bibbing,
loudspeaking daughters; the fruit of your hand shall be given you, when nothing
can be spoken of you but will dispraise you here, and after death; your name
and memory shall rott away: it is not a bare outside will praise you, nor
painting that can preserve you; your muffes, ruffes, laces, lawnes, perfumes,
rings, bracelets, with the rest of that deceitful burden, (a completely
fashionable woman in our age, bears a little pack about her) laid aside, what
is left, but a barren carcass, that never did, nor is like to receive any good
without speedy repentance and reformation.

Let no virtuous Matrons, be discouraged hereby, nothing is spoken against;
yea, I have comfort for them in store: Fear not ye; I know you fear and
seek the Lord Jesus: and what can daunt you? should poverty? Christ is your
riches: sickness? Christ is your health; contempt in this world? honored you
are, and shall be in heaven, want of a good complexion? alas, it is nothing;
and it may be, it is in mercy those that have it, sin more about it, and
increase sinners amongst men, or of due proportion, amongst the parts of the
body? me thinks a little grace does abundantly supply all defects in nature:
a woeman that fears God, appears always most amiable and lovely; though in
body never so deformed: let this Jewel of the soul comfort you against all
other crosses, though you had nothing else in this world, glory in this, that
you know and fear the Lord.

I may stay no longer here: let me exhort you that have heard, or by any other
means, shall hear what I have delivered this day, to affect true praise: be
wives indeed, and truth, like helpful parts in a living body, not in name and
show only like artificial eyes, which supplying the room, perform no part
of the office of an eye: wives neglecting their duty; when they should be
helpful, become hurtful; are but the shadows of wives, and were they
shadows only, it were well with those that have them, if you would have the
reward, do the work of good wives: seek the chiefest Jewel, wear the best
ornament; then know, though favor be deceitful, and beauty vanity; yet a
woeman that fears the Lord shall be praised.

We all stand bound to acknowledge this grace in those women, on whom God has
bestowed it; husbands, children, neighbors; yea, the whole Church must give
them the fruit of their hands: whence arises for our instruction this third and
last conclusion. That it is a necessary, no arbitrary action, to give virtuous
women their due commendation: beauty is vanity, and favor deceitful; not
worthy naming; but a woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised; that
is, acknowledged for such, and commended: besides this precept we find the
spirit of God has practiced it elsewhere: it is storied of Ruth, Ruth. 3.11.
that all the people of the City did know her for a virtuous woeman, that is,
acknowledge commend, and praise her: of Abigail, 1. Sam. 25.3.
that she was a woman of a good understanding: in the book of Kings, 2. Kings
4.9.
we find the good Shunamite commended: and our blessed Savior himself,
enioynes it to be done of one woman, Math. 26.13.
for a good work performed by her: wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached
in the whole world, there also shall this that this woman has done, be told,
for a memorial of her. So of Tabitha the spirit records, Acts 9.36.
that she was full of good works, and almsdeeds which she did.

Neither is it without Gods guiding providence, but by special direction, that
humane histories, have been such faithful records, of the acts of virtuous
women (I confess some have impiously dipped their pens ouer-deepe in the waters
of Marah, going to describe the female sex, so painfully publishing their own
disgrace,) Suetonius makes mention of Claudia, who seeing her father, riding
through the streets of Rome, to be plucked from his triumphant Chariot by the
Tribunes, with a masculine boldness freed him from their hands, placed him
again in his seat, and never left till she saw him, received withal
magnificent pomp into the Capitol. Solinus mentions another Roman Lady who
when her mother was committed to straight prison by the Triumuiri, there to be
starued to death, she nourisht her with the milk of her own breast: Pliny
tells us of another who did the like unto her own condemned Father. We read of
Alceste, that died to save the life of her husband Admetus; drawing from her
own chaste breast, such, and so many solid drops of blood, as erected for her
self a living monument of honor to outlast time; the like instance I find in
Iulia, the wife of Pompey, mentioned by Plutarch: in Portia the wife of Brutus,
commended to us by Valerius Maximinus: and in Pompeia Paulina, the wife of
Seneca: with many others, whose names deserve to be engraven in pillars of
Marble, and all to teach us the necessity of this duty.

Which will further appear if we consider these enforcements. First, there
are many that have had and do deserve this praise, you have read or heard (I
presume) of Rachel, and the pillar Jacob erected in memory of her, of Deborah.
Hannah, Ester, Iudeth, Marie, Martha, Lydia, Sarah, etc. whose names, and
condions, are registered by a neuer-erring Historian; to tell us, God is as well
pleased with the gracious actions of good women, as with the best of any of
the sons of men; and that we, as he, ought to give them their due
commendation: who can pass over in silence the renowned names of our two
famous English Elizabeth's, without admiring the one for valiant doing, the
other for patient suffering, many calamities (the Lord in mercy, put an end
unto them in his time) and praising both for their virtues; many others I could
name where I live, and have lived, who deserve it, but desire it not; let their
own works praise them in the gates.

Secondly, this makes much for Gods glory, whose power is most seen in
weakness, what is praise worthy, is the special work of God: their
weakness magnifies his power; when they are praised for good works, he is
glorified.

Thirdly, it is a means to augment that which is commended in them: virtue
increases by praise, if it be in an humble mind; or else indeed it is not
virtue. Fourthly, it is a necessary part of distributive Justice, to give to
every one their own, praise to whom praise belongs. Fifthly, it is beneficial
to all others, as to excite and stir them up earnestly, to seek after that
Jewel, yea, to sell all they have, to buy it, which is so highly and generally
commended: so also it will serve as a pattern to show them how they must live,
if they would be praised; and although none would be praised, yet all must do
things worthy praise. Sixthly, it is comfortable to suruiuing friends: by this
means though death have deprived you of the presence of many good and virtuous
women; yet of the presence of their virtue and good works, it cannot: a good
name is left still, yea, a fresh memory, which will speak in their praise,
when they are turned to clay, grace our-liues death; it stoopes not to the
grave, but wa^tes on the soul to the throne of glory; beauty and favor
moulder into dust, the fear of the Lord indures for ever. It cannot be but a
great comfort to hear wise men, and religious women, speak truly in praise
of our departed friends; to see the pens of strangers employed as Gods
instruments to publish their due praise, a reward to them, an example to others.

In the application of this Lesson, we find matter of direction, teaching us,
as to practice what is here enjoined for the time to come; so to be sorry for
former neglects: we may not, we must not be silent in the praise of good
women: their number is small, the fault may be ours: when goodness is
slighted or disesteemed by most, weak women seek it not at all: let others
be condemned for not seeking it when they should; rather then any of us, for
not praising it, where it is: But stay; are we not too forward in this point?
do not most bedaube the dead with undeserved praises? too many no doubt: but
then the rule set down here is not observed: they praise them, but do not
give them the works of their own hands: they rob one to enrich another, take
Jewels from the Israelites, and give them to the Egiptians: as in Rome common
strumpets have been highly extold; so amongst us, those are often praised
after death, both in funeral Orations and ordinary talk, who never yielded
any fruit praiseworthy during life: by this fauning style, God is highly
dishonored, good men and women discouraged, and the vildest wretches
countenanced in evil: I speak not this as condemning al those which have, or
do cast a few flowers upon the coffin of the dead, it may be they saw more in
them then all others did: but could wish men in this kind, where sin reigns
evidently, above the fear of God, to be wisely sparing for fear of future
danger.

If any demand here how a good woeman may be known, that so they may praise
her and give her the work of her hands without offense to any? I answer; for
this end you must make use both of your eye and ear, a good woeman may be
known, partly by what you see in her, partly by what you hear of her: First,
by what you see in her, that she be (as far forch as is possible for man to
discern) first virtuous, inricht with competencie of knowledge, and a good
understanding agreeable to her Sex: able to discern between good and evil
morally; and accordingly to make choice, both for speculation and practice;
with wisdom (which consists in seeking for) finding out, following and
maintaining the truth, according to ability, place, and calling; with justice,
ready to give unto every one their own: piety to God, fidelity to her
husband, charity to the needy, and diligent industri^ to her charge in
family: with temperance, a virtue fetching back all extremes to a
mediocritie, and is employed in every virtuous woman, about these particulars
especially. First, her words, that they be not rash, hasty, loud, nor many,
especially in the presence of her husband. Secondly, her pleasure, that she
seek not so much as is desired by the unregenerate part, nor any at all, as
the flesh desires it: let that which is reported of Semiramis, Pasiphae,
Faustina, Messalina, with many other filthy women amongst the Gentiles, both
Grecians and Romans, Romans 1.26.
keep back all from submission of their reasonable part to the slavish
regiment of sense and carnal appetite; think not with delight of variety,
lest you desire it; desire it not, lest Satan offer you means to act it; act
it not, least after, in stead of expected satisfaction, it lay you open, to
further invasion. Thirdly, her diet, that she be neither careless, curious, or
excessive in meat or drink, for quantity, nor overmuch, (the guise of
drunken Gossips) for quality ouer-daintie, a sinful sauce, wherewith proud
Cleopatra entertained her familiar guest Mark Anthony. Fourthly, about her
apparel, that she be neither garish nor sluttish, that she pass not the
bounds of her Husbands calling, and ability, either in the matter, or manner,
ground or fashion of her attire.

Secondly, it is required she be religious in affection, profession, and
conversation; that she delight in the hearing of Gods word, observe due hours
of prayer public with the Church, especially on the Lords day, not slighting
it at other appointed times; private by her self, and after with her family,
so ordering her household business, that this duty may not be omitted, or
interrupted through her default: that she love Gods servants, countenancing
with her best endeavor the best things; without this all the rest are little
worth: choose no wife, praise none chosen, without some signs of grace, some
manifestation of the power of Religion.

Thirdly, it is required, she be obedient, humble, chaste, sober, discreet in
her carriage, and outward behavior: observe a woman in her house, table, and
furniture, for order and dsposition of things left to her trust, in her
clothing, going, laughing, and talking; and you may quickly discern her what
she is in these as in a glass, the mind is represented, formal hypocrites,
fail manifestly in some of these, when an honest heart keeps a decorum in all.

Secondly, you may judge of a woman by what you hear of her; not from every
tongue; some invent to publish what may please their own, or the itching
fancy of an il-willing neighbor; some pass sentence rashly, without
Judgment or experience, upon hearsay from others as bad as them selves; so
fame becomes a liar) but from the best and most judicious, who are so obseruant
of good things, that a gracious woman cannot miss a good report, where ere she
lives. Fear not, omit not to give such a one the fruit of her hands, and let
her own works praise her in the gates.

A sort of men there have been, and are (a viperous brood of degenerating
Adamites) who do so basely deiect woeman-kinde, as to think and say, nothing
they can do, is praiseworthy: so their actions, though painful and pious,
never come in remembrance to be spoken of, or in a cold slight, and scornful
manner only: how highly these offend and dishonor God Almighty, in denying
them the work of their own hands, and disesteeming that exact part of his
workmanship. I would they knew: envying the good they might see in them, or
fretting at their praise.

Notwithstanding this unnatural spite and wicked behavior of some men, in
denying women due praise, and giving them the heavy fruit of their unmanly
hands, beating in stead of praising, who have their reward: what comfort and
encouragement should the consideration of this Scripture, yield to godly,
virtuous, and religious women; though men should not, yet God you see does
respect you; he has done it, and will continually raise up others to give you
the fruit of your hands: only remember to do worthily in Ephrata, Ruth. 4.11.
and you shall be famous in Bethelem. You cannot lose the reward of well-doing;
1. Cor. 15. vlt.
your labor is not in vain in the Lord: sow nothing you will be ashamed to
receive; Gal. 6.7.8, 9, 10.
in due season you shall reap if you faint not: your own good works of
piety and charity done during life (though all things else should conspire in
a sinful silence) shall speak and praise you in the gates.

Of the Text hitherto.

And now for conclusion, it may be expected, and is, as it has been a
commendable custom in this and other Churches (in the purest season) I should
add something in particular, concerning the occasion of our meeting; which is
to interre the Corpse (ere-while containing a virtuous soul) of Mistress Marie
Cross: And were not my purpose such, I should be injurious to her name, unjust
to her desert, and first of all give ill example in thwarting my own Doctrine;
which I hope (through Gods grace enabling) I willingly never shall. It is no
arbitrary, but a necessary duty, to give this good woeman some part of her due
commendation, for the comfort of the shruiming friends, and the encouragement
of many virtuous Matrons left behind.

To name the Text only were sufficient, Favor is deceitful, and beauty
vanity, but a woman that fears the Lord shall be praised. You are all
persuaded (I doubt not) she was a woman that feared the Lord heartily, and
therefore must be praised: deal justly with her; give her the fruit of her
hands, and let us permit her own good works to speak for her, and praise her
in the gates. For my own part, as Peter and John answered the Scribes and
Rulers, Acts 4.20.
I cannot but speak of her the good things I have heard and seen; willing and
resolving, as Jerome concerning Marcella, to praise nothing in her, but what
was truly made her own by the gift of God: What Boaz said of Ruth, in her is
fitly verified. You have all long known her to be a virtuous Matron, every
way commendable, whether we consider her as a Woeman, as a Wife, or as a
Christian.

As a Woman; (with her Birth and Parentage I was never acquainted) this I know,
what the Scripture speaks of Abigail, applies it self unto her; she was a
Woman of a good understanding; wise, just, sober, chaste, loving, discreet in
all her actions, temperate in words, in pleasure, diet, apparel; from faults
I exempt her not; sins she had, inward corruptions, whereof she would often
complain with tears, else we nor she had been here to day.

As a Wife; you have been eyewitnesses of her dutiful obedience, submissiue
and reverend behavior; endued she was with a great measure of patience,
careful to content her Husband, govern her house, and to bring up her
children in the fear of the Lord, reading to them, examining of them in the
grounds, and principles of Religion, (the practice of every good woman,
according to ability) so spending spare hours, when others were at the
Gossips play; neither was it labor in vain, Gods blessing in her Children was
one of her chiefest comforts to her dying day.

As a Christian? she has been an ancient Disciple, a professor of Religion
in the power thereof, and a practitioner of piety in truth and sincerity;
this was her only joy, comfort else, being wondrous sickly, she had but
little in this world; ornaments, with other feminine toys she esteemed none;
in comparison of this Jewel: much good I have observed in her my self, but
have heard much more, admiring the truth and power of God, that some should
praise her for her pious devotion and religious behavior, who yet were never
guilty of any good. Three things especially are reported of her by faithful
witnesses: First, that she spent constantly some part of every day in reading,
and meditating on the word of God, and that she read over the Bible this last
half year before her death; as if her commission had run thus; read my will
once more, and then come home: a shame to such who have lived in health many
whole years, and hitherto have never read it over: many use their book a
little on the Lords day, turn to places, cited, as if they would note them for
future meditation: but returning home, the book is laid up in a spare room,
nere troubled more till some servant come to shake off the dust, that it be fit
for public use in the eye of the Church; with such formalities God is not
pleased: if she be blessed for delighting in the law of God day and night, as
she did; what are they?

Secondly, that she would not sleep on the Lords day; no, not in the greatest
extremity of her last sickness, notwithstanding that her weak body was
chiefly sustained by sleep, and her friends and Children would often persuade
to it, urging Gods gracious acceptance of the will for the deed, where ability
was wanting to actuate good desires: howsoever, in the judgment of the
strictest Divines, it is very lawful and tolerable, yet in the exuberance of
her zeal, her answer still was thus, or to this effect: no she would not
yield that day to sleep, it was the Lords day, the Souls market day: if I
lose this day, what shall the Soul feed on all the week after? How should I
answer it if my Lord should come and call to take me hence, finding me this
day sleeping? I will not do it; can I not watch one hour? the health of body
I both respect and desire, preferring still the welfare of the soul, and
though I cannot spend it as I would, being Gods prisoner, yet my endeavor
shall not be wanting in heart and mind, to join with the public assembly,
and such indeed her manner was to spend the whole day when she could not go to
Church (her lingering disease did stay her long and often) in prayer, reading
and meditation: a shame to such among us, that profanely mis-spend the Lords
day, sleeping all the morning securely, till the Bell calls them: as if putting
on of our best clothes, and running away, were all, nothing else required,
when some preparation is as necessary as the service: he shall bring home but
little good, that goes to market without money in his purse; greater shame to
such as come to sleep in the Church: her zeal would not permit her to sleep
in great weakness, on her bed alone, where none could be offended. Gods
awful presence cannot keep you from sleeping in health, in Gods house,
amongst a multitude, where many are offended thereby: if her vigilancie be to
be admired, take heed least Judgment find you napping.

Thirdly, that she observed constant hours every day for private prayer on her
knees; even when for very weakness she could not rise again, till some came
in to help her up. Oh happy Soldier! thy war is ended, victory won, and
the crown obtained; sing dear Saint the songs of Zion: thy tears are washed
away, enjoy thy rest.

I could delightfully stay here to admire this free prisoner, in her heavenly
conversation, till the hour of her desired dissolution. To behold in a weak,
lean, dying body, true beauty and to observe the picture of piety in this
spiritual anatomy: how welcome is weakness, when accompanied with such
strength of grace? but me thinks I see already your eyes full, and the glass
empty, I may not stay. One thing I would request of her Husband and Children,
before I leave, and that is, they would make known unto the world, their love,
duty, and respect unto her, by imitation of her in piety, humility,
sobriety, frugalitie and love toward Gods Children, follow her in grace, you
shall follow her to glory, and let this be engraven on her Tomb.

As she lived, in the fear of the Lord. So she dyed, in the fear of the
Lord.
Lastly, to conclude in a word to you all my right dearly beloved, if you like
this that you have heard to day; and desire so much might be spoken of you
after death, go home, and do likewise: sell all you have for this Jewel;
shake off your dearest sin; live in the fear of the Lord, you shall dye in
his favor, the fruit of your hands shall be given you, and your own works
shall praise you in the gates.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

