A SERMON OF THE PESTILENCE.

Preached at Chiswick, 1603.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, LANCELOT ANDREWS, late L. Bishop of
Winchester.



LONDON.

Printed by Richard Badger, and are to be sold in Saint Dunstans Churchyard,
near the Church-doore. 1636.

A SERMON PREACHED AT CHISVVICK IN the time of Pestilence, Aug. XXI. A. D.
MDCIII.
PSALM. CVI. VER. XXIX, XXX. Thus they provoked Him to anger with their own
inventions, and the plague was great (or, brake in) among them.

Then stood up Phinees, and prayed (or, executed judgment) and so the Plague
was ceased (or, stayed.)


HERE is mention of a Plague, of a great Plague; For, there died of it four
and twenty thousand. And we Number. 35.9.
complain of a Plague at this time. The same Axe is laid to the root of our
trees. Or rather, because an Axe is long in cutting down of one tree, the
Rasor is hired for Esaias. 7.20.
us, (...) ^eeps away a great number of (...) at onc^ Esaias calls it) or a
Scit^e that mowes down grass, a great deal at once.

But here is not only mention of the breaking in of the Plague, in the XXIX
Verse; but of the staying or ceasing of the Plague, in the XXX.

Now, whatsoeverthings were written aforetime, Romans 5.4.
were written for our learning; and so was this Text. Under one, to teach us
how the Plague comes, and how it may be stayed.

The Plague is a disease. In every disease, we The Division
consider the cause and the cure. Both which are here set forth unto us in
these two Verses. In the former, the cause how it comes. In the latter, the
cure how it may be staid. To know the cause is expedient; for if we know it
not, our cure will be but palliative, as not going to the right. And if knowing
the cause, we add not the cure, when we are taught it, who will pity us? For,
none is then to blame, but our selves.

I. Of the cause first: and then of the cure. The cause is set down to be
twofold: 1 Gods anger: and 2 their inventions.

Gods anger, by the which: and their inventions, for the which, the Plague
brake in among them.

II. The cure is likewise set down: and it is twofold, out of two
significations of one word, the word ( Palal) in the Verse. Phinees prayed
(some read it,) Phinees executed judgment (some other;) and the word bears
both. Two then, 1 Phinees prayer, one: 2 Phinees executing judgment, the
other; by both which the Plague ceased. His prayer referring to Gods anger: His
executing judgment, to their inventions. Gods wrath was appeased by his
prayer: Prayer refers to that. Their inventions were removed by his executing
of judgment: The execution of judgment refers to that. If His anger provoked
do send the Plague; Psalm. 99.8.
His anger appeased will stay it. If our inventions provoke his anger, the
punishing of our inventions will appease it. The one works upon God,
pacifieth Him: The other works upon our soul, and cures it. For there is a
cure of the soul, no less then of the body, as appears by the Psalm, heal
my soul, for I have sinned against thee. Psalm. 41.4.


We are to begin with the cause of the plague, in the first Verse: And so, to
come to the cure in the second.

OF the Cause. 1 First, that there is a cause. 2 And secondly, what that cause
may be. Of the cause.
That there is a cause (that is) that the plague A cause there is.
is a thing causall, not casual; comes not merely by chance, but has
somewhat, some cause that procures it.

Sure, if a Sparrow fall not to the ground without Mat. 10. 29.
the providence of God, of which two are sold for a farthing; much less does
any Man, or Woman, which are more worth than many Sparrowes.

And if any one Man comes not to his end (as Exodus 21.13.
we call it) by casualty, but it is GOD that delivers him so to dye: How much
more then, when not me, but many thousands are swept away at once? The
Philistims, in their plague, put the matter upon trial of both these ways: 1
Whether it were Gods hand; 2 Or whether it were but a ^^ance. And the event
showed, it was no casualty, but the very handy work of God upon them.

And indeed the very name of the Plague does tell us as much. For Deber in
Hebrew shows, 1 Samuel 6.9.
there is a reason, there is a cause, why it comes. And the English word
Plague, coming from the Latin word Plaga, which is properly a stroke,
necessarily infers a cause. For where there is a stroke, there must be One
that strikes. And in that both it, and other evil things (that come upon us)
are usually in Scripture called Gods judgments; If they be judgments, it
follows, there is a Judge they come from. They come not by adventure; by
chance they come not. Chance and Judgment are utterly opposite. Not casually
then, but judicially. Judged we are; For when we are chastened, 1 Cor. 11. 32.
we are judged of the Lord.

There is a cause: Now, what that cause is. 1 That cause is. ^ Natural.
Concerning which, if you ask the Physician, he will say, the cause is in the
air. The air is infected; the Humors corrupted: the contagion of the sick,
coming to and conversing with the sound. And they be all true causes.

The Air. For so we see, by casting ^ Exodus ^^
ashes of 1 The air e infected.
the furnace toward heaven in the air, the air became infected, and the
plague of botches, and blaines, was so brought forth in Egypt.

The Humors. For to that does King David 2 The Humors corrupted. Psalm. 3 2.4.
ascribe the cause of his disease: ( that is) that his moisture in him was
corrupt, dried up, turned into the drought of Summer.

Contagion. Which is clear by the Law: where, the leprous person for fear of
contagion from him, 3 Contagion. Lev. 13.45, 46. 52.
was ordered to cry, that no body should come near him: To dwell apart from
other men: The clothing he had worn to be washed, and in some case to be
burnt: The house-wals he had dwelt in, to be scraped; and in some case, the
house it self to be pulled down.

In all which three respects, Solomon says, A wise man fears the plague and
departs from it, Prove. 14.16.
and fools run on and be careless. A wise man does it, and a good man too.
For King David himself durst not go to the Altar of God at Gibeon, to enquire
of God there, because the Angel that smote the people with the plague, stood
between him and it: (that is) because he was to pass through 1 Chro. 21. 30.
infected places thither.

But as we acknowledge these to be true, that 2 Supernatural.
in all diseases, and even in this also, there is a By which, GOD.
natural cause: so we say, there is somewhat more, something divine, and
above nature. As somewhat, which the Physician is to look unto, in the Plague:
so likewise something for Phinees to do, and Phinees was a Priest. And so some
work for the Priest, as well as for the Physician, and more, then (it may be.)

It was King Asa's fault. He in his sickness, looked all to Physicians, and
looked not after God at all. That is noted as his fault. It seems his conceit
was, there was nothing in a disease, but natural, nothing but bodily: which is
not so. For, infirmity, is not only a thing bodily; there is a Spirit of
infirmity, we find, Luke 13.11. And something spiritual there is, in all
infirmities; something in the soul to be healed. In all, but specially in
this: Wherein that we might know it to be spiritual, we find it often times to
be executed by spirits. We see an Angel, a destroying Angel, in the Plague of
Egypt: another in the Exodus 12.13. Esaias 37. 36. 1 Chro. 21.16 Rev. 16.2.
Plague in Senacheribs Camp: a third in the Plague at Jerusalem under David: a
fourth, pouring his phiall upon earth, and there fell a noisome plague upon man
and beast. So that no man looks deeply enough into the cause of his
sickness, unless he acknowledge the finger of God in it, over and above any
causes natural.

God then has his part. God; but how affected? God provoked to anger: so it is
in the Text: God provoked to auger.
His anger, His wrath it is, that brings the plague among us. The Verse is
plain; They provoked him to anger, and the plague brake in among them.

Generally, there is no evil (says Job) but it is Job 5. 6.
a spark of GODS wrath. And of all evils, the Plague by name. There is wrath
gone out from 1 Chro. 21.7.
the Lord, and the plague is begun (says Moses, Numbers 16.46.) So it is
said, God was displeased with David, and he smote Israel with the plague. So
that if there be a plague, GOD is angry: and if there be a great plague, God
is very angry. Thus much for By what; for the anger of God, by which the plague
is sent. Now for what.

There is a cause in GOD, that he is angry. For which. sin in general. Hab.
3.8.
And there is a cause, for which he is angry. For he is not angry without a
cause. And what is that cause? For what is GOD angry? What, is God angry with
the waters when he sends a tempest? (it is Habacucks question.) Or is GOD angry
with the earth, when he sends barrenness? Or with the air, when he makes it
contagious? No indeed, His anger is not against the Elements, they provoke him
not. Against them it is, that provoke Ephos. 5.6.
him to anger; against Men it is, and against their sins, and for them
comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.

And this is the very cause indeed. As there is Putredo humorum; so there is
also putredo morum. And putredo morum, is more a cause, than putredo humorum.
The corruption of the soul, the Mica. 7.3.
corruption of our ways, more than the Genesis 6 12.
corrupting of the air. The 1 King. 8.38
plague of the heart, more than the sore, that is seen in the body. Romans 5.12.
The cause of death (that is) sin, the same is the cause, of this Psalm. 38.5.
kind of death, of the plague of mortality. And as the Ier. 8. ult.
Balm of Gilead, and the Ier. 48.^6.
Physician there, may yield us help, when Gods wrath is removed: so, if it be
not, no balm, no medicine will serve. Let us with the Woman in the Gospel,
Mark 5.26.
spend all upon Physicians, we shall be never the better, till we come to
CHRIST, and he cure us of our sins, who is the only Physician of the diseases
of the soul.

And with CHRIST, the cure begins ever within. For, Son thy sins be forgiven
thee; and Mark 9 2.
then after, take up thy bed and walk. His sins be first, and his limbs
after. As likewise when we are once well, Christ's counsel is, sin no more,
lest a worse thing come unto thee. As if sin would certainly bring a relapse
into a sickness.

But shall we say, the wrath of GOD for sins Particular sin.
indefinitely? That were somewhat too general: may we not specify them, or
set them down in particular? Yes, I will point you at three or four.

First, this Plague here, as appears by the 1 Fornication.
XXVIII Verse, the Verse next before, came for the sin of Peor (that is) for
fornication (as you may read.) And not every fornication, but fornication past
shame; as was that of Zamri there, with a daughter of Moab. And indeed if we
Number. 25.1.
mark it well, it fits well. For, that kind of sin ( fornication) does end in
Ulcers and sores; and those as infectious as the Plague it self: a proper
punishment; such sore for such evil.

Secondly, David's plague of seventy thousand 2 Pride.
(which we mention in our Prayer) that, came 1 Chro. 21.14.
for Pride, plainly: His heart was lifted up to number the people. And that
seems somewhat kindly too, and to agree with this disease. That pride, which
swells it self, should end in a tumor, or swelling; as for the most part this
disease does.

Thirdly, Senacheribs plague (it is plain) came 3 Blasphemy. Esaias 37. 36.
from Rabshakes blasphemy: Blasphemy able to infect the air, it was so foul.
In which regard, Aarons act might be justified, in putting odours Number. 16.46.
into his Censer, to purify the Air from such corruption.

And last, the Apostle sets down the cause of 4 Neglect of the Sacrament. 1
Cor. 11.30.
the plague at Corinth: For this cause (says he) that is, for neglect of the
Sacrament: Either in not caring to come to it; or in coming to it, we care not
how: For this cause, is there a mortality among you; and many are sick, and
many are weak, and many are fallen asleep. And this is no new thing. Moses
himself, his neglect of the Exodus 4.24.
Sacrament, made him be stricken of GOD, that it was like to have cost him his
life. And he says plainly to Pharaoh: If they neglected their sacrifice, God
would fall upon them with the pestilence: Exodus 5.3.
which appears by this, that the Sacrament of the passover, and the blood of
it, was the means to save them from the plague of the destroying Angel in
Egypt.

A little now of the phrase; that their sins are The phrase for sin, Their
inventions.
here called by the name of their inventions. And so (sure) they are: as no
ways taught us by God, but of our own imagining or finding out. For indeed,
our inventions are the cause of all sins. And if we look well into it we
shall find our inventions are so. By Gods injunction we should In matters of
Religion.
all live, and his injunction is: You shall not do every man what seems good
in his own eyes (or finds out in his own brains) but, whatsoever I command
Deuteronomy. 12.8.
you, that only shall you do. But we, setting light by that charge of his,
out of the old disease of our Father Adam (Eritic sicut Dii, scientes bonum and
malum) think it a goodly matter to be witty, and to find out things our selves
to make to our selves, to be Authors, and inventors of somewhat, that so we may
seem to be as wise as God, if not wiser: and to know what is for our turns,
as well as he, if not better. It was Saul's fault. GOD bade destroy Amalek all;
and he would invent a better way to save some (forsooth) for sacrifice, which
GOD could not think of. And it was S. Peter's fault, when he persuaded Christ
Mat. 16.22.
from His Passion, and found out a better way (as he thought) than Christ could
devise.

This is the proud invention, which will not be kept in, but makes men even not
to forbear in things pertaining to Gods worship; but there, to be still
devising new tricks, opinions and fashions, fresh and newly taken up, which
their Fathers never Deuteronomy. 32.17.
knew of. And this is that, which makes men that have itching ears, to heap
to themselves 2 Timothy 4.3.
Teachers, according to their own lusts, which may fill their heads full, with
new inventions.

And this is that, that even out of Religion, in In the common life.
the common life, spoils all. The wanton invention, in finding out new meats
in diet, in inventing new fashions in apparel, which men so dote on (as the
Psalm says at the 39. Verse) as they even go a whoring with them, with their
own inventions, and care not what they spend on them. And know no end of them:
but as fast as they are weary of one, a new invention is found out; which
whatsoever it cost, how much soever it take from our Alms, or good deeds, must
be had, till all come to naught. That the Psalmist has chosen a very fit
word, that for our inventions, the plague breaks in among us: for them, as for
the primarie, or first moving cause of all. Indeed for them, as much and more
than for any thing else.

We see then, 1 First, that a cause there is. 2 That that cause is not only
natural, but that God Himself has a hand in it. 3 God as being provoked to
anger. 4 To anger for our sins ingenerall (and for what sins in special.)
For our sins proceeding from nothing, but our inventions. Which cause if it
continue, and yet we turn not to the Lord (as Amos the 4.) then will not his
anger be turned away, but His hand will be stretched out still (as Esaias the
9.) And no way to avoid the one, but by appeasing the other.

For the cure now. One contrary is ever cured by II. Of the Cure.
another. If then it be anger; which is the cause in God, anger would be
appeased. If it be inventions, which is the cause in us, of the anger of God,
they would be punished and removed. That so, the cause being taken away, the
effect may cease. Take away our inventions, Gods anger will cease. Take away
Gods anger, the plague will cease.

Two Readings (we said) there were: 1 Phinees prayed, or 2 Phinees executed
judgment. Palal, the Hebrew word will bear both. And both are good: And so we
will take them both in.

Prayer is good against the plague, as appears: Not only in this plague in
the Text, wherein all Against Gods anger. 1 Prayer.
the Congregation Number. 25.6.
were weeping, and praying before the door of the Tabernacle: But in King 2 Samuel 24.17
David's plague also; where we see what his prayer was, and the very words of
it.

And in Esaias 38. 3.
Ezekiahs plague, who turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto GOD (and his
prayer is set down:) God heard his prayer, and healed him. And (for a general
rule) 1 Kings 8. 37, 38, 39.
If there be in the Land any pestilent disease; whatsoever plague, whatsoever
sickness it be, the prayer and supplication in the Temple made by the people,
every man knowing the plague of his own heart, God in heaven will hear it,
and remove His hand from afflicting them any further.

And it stands with good reason. For, as the Air is infected with noisome
sents or smells, so the infection is removed by sweet odours, or incense: which
Aaron did in the Plague (put sweet odours Number. 16. 48.
in his Censer, and went between the living and the dead.) Now there is a fit
resemblance between Incense and Prayers: Psalm. 141 2.
Let my prayer come before thy presence, as the Incense. And when the Priest
was within, burning Incense, Luke 1. 10.
the people were without at their prayers. And it is expressly said, Rev. 5.8.
that the sweet odours were nothing else but the prayers of the Saints.

Prayer is good, and that Phinees prayer. Phinees 2 Phinees. prayer as a Priest.
was a Priest, the son of Eleazar, the Nephew of Aaron. So as, there is Virtue,
as in the prayer, so in the person that did pray: in Phinees himself.

As (we know) the Office of a Sergeant being to arrest; the office of a Notarie
to make acts; the act that is done by one of them, is much more authentical,
then that which is done by any common Heb. 5.1.
person. So every Priest being taken from among men, and ordained for men, in
things pertaining to God, that he may offer prayers: the prayers he offers,
he offers out of his office, and so even in that respect there is ( caeteris
paribus) a more force, and energie in them, as coming from Him, whose calling
it is to offer them; than in those that come from another, whose calling it is
not so to do.

To this end, God says to Abimelech; Abraham is a Prophet, and he shall pray
for thee, and thou shall live. So that the prayer of a Prophet, in that he Genesis
20.7.
is a Prophet, is more effectual.

And in the Law, you shall find it all along: when men come to bring their
sacrifice for their sins, it is said, the Priest shall make an atonement for
them before the Lord, and their sins shall be forgiven them.

And in the Prophets we see plainly, in time of distress, Ezekia sent unto the
Prophet Esaias, to entreat him to lift up his prayer for the remnant that were
left: and so he did, and was heard by GOD.

And in the new Testament, S. James advice is, In time of sickness to call for
the Priests, and they to pray over the party, and that prayer shall work his
health; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. For where
the grace of prayer is, and the calling both, they cannot but avail more, than
where no calling is, but the grace alone.

The prayer of Phinees, and of Phinees standing. What need there be any mention
of Phinees standing? Was it not enough to say Phinees prayed? It skils not
whether he sat or stood; for praying it self was enough.

No: we must not think, the Holy Ghost sets down any thing that is
superfluous. Somewhat there is, in that he stood. Of Moses it is said Ier.
18.20.
before in this Psalm, that he stood in the gap to turn away the wrath of
God. In Jeremy it is said, though Moses and Samuel stood before me: So there
is mention made of standing also. And the Prophet himself puts God in mind,
that he stood before him, to speak good for the people, and to turn away his
wrath from them (that is) put God in mind of the very sight of his body.

For, though God be a Spirit, and so in Spirit to John 4.24.
be worshipped; yet in as much as he has given us a body, with that also are
we to worship Him, and to glorify him in our body and spirit, which both 1
Cor. 6 20. Rom 12.1.
are Gods: and to present (or offer) our bodies to God, as a holy and
acceptable sacrifice, in the reasonable service of Him.

And to present them decently. For that also is required in the service of God.
Now judge in 1 Cor. 14.40. 1 Cor. 11.13.
your selves, Is it comely to speak unto our betters, sitting? Sedentem or
are, extra disciplinam est (says Tertullian) to pray sitting, or sit praying,
is against the order of the Church. The Church of God never had, nor has any
such fashion.

All tends to this, as Cyprians advice is, Etiam habitu corporis placere Deo,
even by our very gesture, and the carriage of our body, to behave our selves
so, as with it we may please God. Vnreverent, careless, undevout behavior
pleases Him not.

It is noted of the very Angels, Job 1.6. Esa. 6.2. Dan. 7.10. that they were
standing before God. If them it becomes; if Phinees, if Moses, if Samuel, and
Jeremy, it may well become us to learn our gesture of them.

Prayer is availeable to appease Gods wrath, and Against their inventions. 1
Execution of judgment.
so consequently to remove the Plague: but not prayer alone. For though it
abate the anger of God (which is the first) yet it goes not high enough, takes
not away the second cause (that is) our inventions, which are the cause of Gods
anger. We see it plain in Number. 25.6. they were all at prayers, and Phinees
among them, he and the rest. Number. 25.7.8.
But yet the plague ceased not for all that: till (in the verse following)
Phinees took his javelin, wherewith in the very act of fornication he thrust
them both through, Zamri and his woman, and then the plague was stayed from the
children of Israel. For, as prayer refers properly to anger: so so does
executing judgment to sin, or to our inventions the cause of it.

Prayer then does well: but prayer and doing justice, both these together
(jointly) will do it indeed. And if you disjoyne or separate them, nothing
will be done. If we draw near to God with our mouths, and honor Him with our
lips, it will not avail us, if judgment be turned back, or justice Esaias 29.
14.
stand afaroff.

There are two persons. Both of them were 2 By Phinees as a Prince in his
Tribe, and a Magistrate.
in Phinees. For, as he was a Priest; so he was a Prince of his Tribe. So then,
both these must join together, as well the devotion of the Priest in prayer,
which is his Office: as the zeal of the Magistrate in executing judgment,
which is His. For, Phinees the Priest, must not only stand up, and pray: but
Moses (the Magistrate also) must stand in the gap to turn away the wrath of
God, that he destroy not the people. No less he, than Aaron with his golden
Censer, to run into the midst of the Congregation, to make atonement for them
when the plague is begun.

Moses, he gave in charge for the executing of them, that were joined to
Baal-Peor, Number. 25.4. Phinees, he executed the charge: Moses stood in the gap,
when he gave the sentence: Phinees stood up, when he did the execution. And
these two are a blessed conjunction. One of them without the other, may miss;
but both together never fail. For when Zamri was slain; and so when
Rabshaketh perished; and so when the incestuous Corinthian was excommunicated;
in all three, the plague ceased.

But what if Moses give no charge: what if Phinees 3 By every man upon himself.
do no execution, as often it falls out? How then? In that case, every private
man is to be Phinees to himself; is not only to pray to God, but to be
wreaked, do judgment, chasten his own body; and so judge himself, that he
may not be judged of the Lord. For every one, for his part, is a cause of the
judgments of God sent down; and so 2 Cor. 2.11.
may be, and is to be, a cause of the removing 1 Cor 9. 17.
them. Somewhile the King, as David by the 1 Cor. 11 3.
pride of his heart. Otherwhile the people, by their murmuring against Moses
and Aaron. So that, King and people both, must judge themselves, every private
offender, himself. Zamri, if he had judged himself, Phinees should not have
judged him. The incestuous Corinthian, if he had judged 1 Chr. 21. 1.8.
himself, S. Paul had not judged him. For, either Number. 16.3.
by our selves, or by the Magistrate; or if by neither of both, by God
Himself. For, one way or other sin must be judged. Zamri, by his repentance;
Phinees, by his prayer, or doing justice; or God by the plague sent among them.

Now then, these two; 1 Phinees stood up and prayed, 2 and Phinees stood up and
executed judgment, if they might be coupled together, I durst undertake, the
conclusion would be, and the plague ceased. But either of them wanting I dare
promise nothing.

To conclude then. 1. The plague comes not by chance, but has a cause. 2. That
cause is not altogether natural, and pertaines to Physic; but has something
supernatural in it, and pertaines to Divinity. 3. That supernatural cause is
the wrath of God. 4. Which yet is not the first cause. For, the wrath of God,
would not rise, but that he is provoked by our sins (and the certain sins,
that provoke it, have been set down.) 5. And the cause of them, our own
inventions. So, our inventions beget sin; sin provokes the wrath of God: the
wrath of God sends the plague among us. To stay the plague, Gods wrath must be
stayed: To stay it, there must be a ceasing from sin: That sin may cease, we
must be out of love with our own inventions, and not go awhoring after them.
Prayer, that asswageth anger: To executejustice, that abareth sin: to execute
justice, either publicly, as does the Magistrate; or privately, as every man
does, or may do upon himself, which joined with prayer, and prayer with it,
will soon rid us of that we complain; and otherwise, his anger will not be
turned away, but his hand stretched out still.

FINIS.

