INVICTA VERITAS.

An answer, That by no manner of law / it may be lawful for the most noble
King of england / King Henry the ayght to be divorced fro the queen's grace /
his lawful and very wife.

Set a part Christian reader all blind affeccion: and read this book with
judgment / conferringe it with the the other book agenst which this is written: and
I doubt not / but thou shall stand on the quenis part / as a favorer of the
firm and invincible Verite.

AD LAVDEM TVAM DOMINE.
HEr folowith an answer / that I Thomas Abell priest have made unto a certain
ynglishe book late put forth and imprinted: which doith falsely affirm and
say that it is against the law of God / and against the law of nature for a
man to mary his brothers wife a widow left without yssewe / and that the Pope
has no power to dispense upon such marriage: the which saing you shall se
declared and prouid false / more clerly and more largely by holy scripture / by
holy decrees / by doctors / and expounders of holy scripture / and also by
reason here within / than at the beginning of my answer / And in lyk manner ye
shall se this proposicion and sayng declared and prouyd true / that a christian
man may lefully mary his brothers widow left etc. both by the law of God /
and by the law of nature: and that the Pope has power to dispense upon such
marriage: for thowghe at the beginning of mine answer / I show sufficiently
the first saying to be false / and this other last proposicion and saying to be
true: yet for because that I am compelled to follow the process of the ynglyshe
book which I answer to: I declare and prove the rehersid proposicions more
largely within this mine answer according as the occasion is offered: the which
if I had done also in the beginning I should have / rehearsed one thing and one
proof many times / and so my answer would have been very tedious and long.

FOr as much as now of late there be certain persons that have made a book in
Latin and the same have translated it again into English / where they do
affirm and say that a man to mary his brothers wife a widow / left without
yssewe / is so unlawful and so against the law of God / and against the law of
nature / that the Pope has no power to dispense upon such marriages / whether
they be made and contracte al ready / or else yet to be made or contracte: I am
at this time compellid and constrained by my profession and promise that I
have made unto owr savior criste to answer unto this untrue sayng and to
speak against it.

FIrst for because to say and affirm that it is forbidden both by the law
of God and by the law of nature for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow etc
and that the Pope can in no wise dispense upon such marriage made / or yet to
be made is very false and untrue: and also great and high blasphemy to god is
law and to almighty God him self as I shall show ye here after

ANd secondly I am compellid and bound to speak against this proposicion and
sayng / for to admonyshe and give my neighbor knowleg of this untrue opynion
that is now set out in printe and goith a broad / to aduertyse him to take heed of this saying and to give in no wise credence unto it / for it is no small
daungere to men's sowles to believe this false sayng and great blasphemy / the
which ungracious persons have / and in their books do color and ornate with
myche rethorike and eloquent wordis to thentent that their false proposicions
and sayngis should be the sooner believed and accept of the reders. And so thus
for these causes I am compellid to answer and speak against this before
rehershed book / in the which answer I will with the assistence and help of
almighty God show ye how yt this proposicion and saying is false and high
blasphemy to almighty God to affirm and say yt it is forbiden and to be
against the law of God / and against the law of nature yt any man should mary
his brothers wife a widow / left etc: and yt the Pope has no power to
dispense upon such mariagis whether that they be contracte al ready / or else
yet to be made and contracte / and I will also here show ye yt this is true yt
a man may by ye law of God and by ye law of nature lefully mary his brothers
wife a widow left with out yssewe / and that the Pope has power to dispense
upon such marriages and to license a man so to mary.

Three things principally I note that the persons the which have setforth their
book do say. The first is this. In the preface of their book they say that the
universities have confirmed their determinacio^s upon ye leuitical laws by ye
which it is forbiden that any man should mary ye wife of his brother departed
without children. The second principal point and their saying is written in
the forsaid preface the which is this. That it is forbiden both by the law of
God and by the law of nature that any Christian man should mary the wife of his
brother dyinge without children. The third principal point and sayng is
written in the same preface joined unto the second sayng which is this / that
the Pope has no power to dispense upon any such mariagis whether they be
contracte all ready or else yet to be contracte. Now to their first sayng. where
they write that the universities have confirmed their determinacions upon these
leuitical laws by ye which yt is fo^biden that any man should mary the wife of
his brother departed without children. Behold here I pray ye upon how goodly
and substanciall a ground thies persons do say yt ye universities have builded
and set there determinacions. they say upon the leuitical laws by ye which it
is forbiden yt any man should mary ye wife of his brothr departed without
children: when yt in all ye leuitical law there is no such mariagis forbide^ as
every man may perceue and understand ye look upon ye leuitical laws / and also
as ye shall se it more largely declared here after / and by this also ye may
perceue what thies universities have determined / that is in deed no thing but
a proposicion the which is very false even like as the^ ground is that they
have bilded their determinacions upon. Now to the second point principal / and
saying of thies persons where as they say that it is forbiden both by the law
of God and by the law of nature that any christian man should mary the wife of
his brother departed without children: this is likewise falce / First it is not
against the law of God: for in the law of God / God him self by his servant
Moses did command and that upon great pain that every man of the Iues
should mary his brothers wife a widow left etc. as it is plainly expressed in
the old law / nor such mariagis be not forbiden in ye new law / as ye shall
se it evidently proved: Deute. xxv.
wherefore it is not against the law of God for a man to mary his brothers wife a
widow. nor any such marriage in none of the laws be forbiden / also for a man
to mary his brothers wife a widow / is not forbiden by the law of nature.

genesis xx
FIrst for because the holy patriarch abraham married his own sister Sara and we
may not think and say that so holy a man would wetingely do so greuouse a
syn as to break the law of nature / and to continue still in the same offense:
wherefore it is not against the law of nature for a man to mary his brothers wife
a widow etc. If it be not forbiden by the law of nature for a man to mary his
sister / than is it not forbiden that a man shall mary his brothers wife a
widow.

ALso Jerome says that at the time that Abraham maryd his sister / In
questionibus hebraicis super genesim.
such marriage was not forbiden by the law / and Jerome therefore excusith the
Patriarch Abraham also the Patriarche Judah married his second sone to his
daughter in law Thamar / for by cause her first husband Judas his sone died
withowt yssewe / they and also the same Patriarch after the death of his
secunde sone Thamars secunde husband promised her his third sone / and also
this holy man Judah commaundid his second sone to mary his brothers wife a
widow / Genes. xxxviij
the which he would not have commaundid / if it had been against the law of
nature / wherefore ye may se that it is not against the law of nature for a man
to mary his brothers wife a widow / when that these holy patriarchs did in the
time of the law of nature use such marriages and did command their childern
so to mary

ALso holy Crisostome says that when Judah the Patriarch co^ma^did his secunde
sone to take and mary his brothrs wife Thamar / super ge. ho. lxij.
and so to styre up seid and procure by her yssewe unto his brotther that was
ded: thus says Crisostom did Judah command by ye law and than there was no
other law but ye law of nature or else customs laudable and political gro^ded in
the law of nature of ye which this was one yt a man should mary his brothers wife
a widow etc. for else the Patriarche judah would not have co^maundid his sone so
to have maryd / Genes. xxxviij
also this doith appear evidently by judas words / for he confessid and
grauntid yt he had offendid and done wrong to Thamar because he had not married
his third sone unto her / and if yt it had be against ye law of nature for a
man to mary his brothers wife a widow etc. than Judah hade done no wrong to
Thamar in yt / yt he did ^ot mary his third sone unto her / but for as much as
yt was not against ye law of nature / therefore Judah did confess yt he did
Thamar wrong for because he had not married his third sone unto her /
according unto ye law / so now ye may se yt it is not against ye law of
nature for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow.

FIrthermore for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow etc. can not be
against the law of nature / for almighty God did never command any m^ner of
people to observe and keep that thing continually and upon a great pain that
should be against the law of nature / for that were evil of it self / Ec. xv
and therefore no soche thing almighty God did co^ma^d as it is written / nemini
ma^dauit impie agere / but almighty did command the Iwes to marye always
their brothers wifis left without yssew: and that onder a great pain / And this
commandment he would have continually kept during the time of that law /
wherefore you may see evidently that such marriages can not be against the law
of nature / this argument doithe conclude / it can not be denied.

I Did say in the first principal proposicion of this argument / that almighty
God did never command enny manner of parson to observe and keep that thing
contynewally and that upon a great pain which should be against the law of
nature / this I did say to take away certain obieccions as this / that
almighty God did command Abraham to kyl his soon that was innocent / but yet
almighty God did not command every man so to do continually: and likewise
thowgh almighty God did command the multitude of the people of Israel to
borowe plate of the Egyptians and to carye it away with them / yet almighty God
did not command the people of Israel to do so continually nor yet he did not
command them so to do upon a pain: but as I have said / almighty God
commanded the people of Israel to mary always their brothers wifes widows
left without yssew / and that upon a great pain / wherefore I say that such
mariagis cannot be against the law of nature: parauenture yet sum persons will
say that this commandment of almighty God that bownd the Iues to mary there
brothers wifis widows etc / was no law but a license and a dispensacion that
almighty God gave unto the Iues / whereby they might use such marriages / as
almighty God did before the law dispense with Jacob to mary.ij. sisters / and
hade them both wifes at ons / And also in the time of the law he did dispense
with certain kyngis to have.ij. wifes at ons / or mo / To this I answer thus
/ that thowghe almighty God did suffer such marriage before the law / and in
the time of the law that men hade mo wifes at ons then one / yet he never
commaundid that the Iues should take moo wifes than one at ons / nor yet
co^maundid the pluralite of wifes upon a pain / also almighty god sufferd the
Iues to forsake there wifes by the libell of repudiacion / and likewise the Iues
to use usury / but yet this / nor the other he did never command to be kept
as a law and that upon a great pain: but almighty God did command all the
Iues always to marye their brothers wifis wedowes left without yssew / and
that under a great pain / wherefore this commandment was no dispensacion / but
a plain law / and thus you may see that such mariagis can not be ageynste
the law of nature.

NOw to the third point and principal saying of these persons: whereas they
affirm that the Pope has no power to dispense upon mariagis made bitwixt the
brother and the brothers wife widow left without yssew / nor yet power to
dispense upon such marriage to be made. This saying is false likewise as the
other before: such marriage is not forbiden nether in the old law nor in the
new law as you have herd before / and the same you shall se here aftyr more
largely declared and prouid where as I bring in the doctors minds against
thies deceyuers opynion: wherefore now I say that this is false to say and
affirm that the Pope haith no power to license the brother to mary the
brothers wife a widow left without yssewe: for it is forbiden that a man may
mary with her that is ioynyd to him in the first degree of lateral affynyte but
only by the law and ordinance of the church as you shall here aftir se
prouyd by the myndis of great and excellent lernyde men / And the Pope has
power to dyspence against the prohibicion of his own laws only / this can no
man deny wherefore yt is false to affirm and say that the Pope has no power
to license a man to marye his brothers wife a widow left with out yssewe.

NOw here you have herd how that thies persons sayngis and opinion is false
which is this: that it is against the law of God and against the law of
nature for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow left without yssewe / and
that the Pope has no power to dispense upon such marriage: by the which
falshed ye may perceive how that this proposicion is true / that a man may
lefully by the law of God and by the law of nature mary his brothers wife a
widow left without yssew / and that the Pope haithe power to dispense upon
such marriage. First ye have seen that such marriage is not against the law
of nature. Also you have hard how that such marriage is not forbiden by the
old law / but in the old law such mariagis were expressly commaundid and so
by the law a man might lefully mary his brothers wife a widow etc. Mat. xxij
And also such marriage owr savior Criste did approbate in the new law as yt
is open where as the saduceys came to owre sauiowre Christ and shewid him how
that there was a woman with theme that hade maryde seuyn Brothern one after a
nothers death / the which marriage owr savior Christ did not reprove nor
speak against them / but suerly if such marriage had been against the law
of nature and against Christis law / than would owr savior Christ have
spoken against such marriage like as he spoke against the libell of
repudiacion whereby the Iues did use to refuse their wifes and mary other when
they were a live / and also the same wifes so refusyde and put away did take
and mary other men their first husbands being a live / and for as much as
theys manner of marriages were unlawful and against the law of nature owre
savior Criste did reprove theyme as he did reprove othere imperfeccions that
the Iues vside in their law, for owre savior Christ came to fulfill the law
with perfeccion / and so for as much as he did not reprove marriage between the
brother and the brothers wife a widow left without yssewe seeing that owre
savior hade occasion offeryd to speak upon such marriage / yt folowith that
he did allow and approbate such marriage / Parauenture yet sum persons will
say that thowgh owre savior Criste did not speak against marriage between
the brother and the brothers wife widow etc. yet it doith not follow / that he
did approbate such marriage: for owre savior did not forbid the father to
mary with the daughter / and yet it doith not follow that he did approbate
that the father might lefully mary his daughter / if this were true that owre
savior did not forbide the father to mary with his dowghter the which is
false / yet than this reason is not like the other. First by cause that marriage
between the father and the daughter is expressly forbiden by the law of nature
by the old law and by the new law / and so is not marriage between the
brother and the brothers wife / and secundarily for by cause there was no
occasion offerde / unto owre saviowre Criste to approbate or to have reprovid
marriage between the father and the daughter / as there was in the other marriage
/ but if the Iues had comen unto our savior Criste and showed him how there
was a man that had married.ij. or three of his own daughters / one after the
death of an other than he would have spoken ageynste such marriage by cause that
such is ill / and unlawful: but for as much as marriage between the brother /
and the brothers wife widow etc / is good and lefull by the law of Nature /
and by the law of good: ower savior Christ did approbate such marriage /
Now than seeing that marriage between the brother and the brothers wife is
lefull by the law of nature and commaundide in the old law and approbate by
owr savior Crist / than it folowithe that such marriage is forbiden only / by
the ordinance and law of the church / And the pope has power to licens
against that ordinance / and so consequently he has power to dispense upon
such marriage / Thus now you have somewhat herd thies deceyuers opinion prouid
false / and how that this is true / that a man may by the law of God / and
by the law of nature mary his brothers wife a widow left with owte yssewe /
and that the Pope has power to dispense upon such marriage. yet for asmich
as these disceuers have in their book that I make answer unto many clokyde
reasons with eloquent and rethorik termys and many false argumentis / and great
lies and much blasphemy to Good coueryd with the same manner of cloth: I will
discover you some of their errors to thentent that you shall not be deceuid nor
believe their false saynges / but yet I say that I will discover and rehearse
you but some of their errors: fore if I would tarry to rehearse you all I should
be compellid to make a great book / and therefore I will not take that way: but
rather towche / and speak of some: and by them you may perceue the residewe.

IN the first chapter of their book they say that before the flowde the
people set all their minds at al times to nawghtines and syn / in so much
that they took them wifis at adauenturs whom so ever they hade chosen sparinge
nor forberinge no manner of degree of affinite or kindered / this is there saying
/ groundinge them of this scripture. Ge. vi.
Videntes filij dei filias hominum quod essent pulchre / acceperunt sibi vyores
ex omnibus quas elegerant. This is the sense of this scripture / the childern
of God seeing the daughters of men that they were beauteful and fair / they
chose of al them to their wifis such as liked them And these persons write /
that the men took the^ wifes at adauentures whom so ever they hade chosen
sparinge nor forberinge no manner of degree of affinite or kindrede / And this
saying can no wise be takyn of the rehearsed scripture / but rather by the same
scripture it folowithe that thies persons say false / fore the Scripture
says that the childern / and the sons of God / seeing the daughters of men
fayer and beautiful / took of them wifes such as liked them / and it folowith
that they married not with their mothers nor their own sisters / nor their own
auntis / for they married with the daughters of men which were nether their
own mothers / nor their sisters / nor their auntes / and therefore it is false
to say that the people married them wifes forberyng nor sparinge no manner of
degree of affinite or kindred / this error is written in the.xvi. leyffe of their
book.

ALso in the same first chapter of their book in the.xvij. and.xviij. leyffe
they say that almighty God did command Moses to prescribe unto his people
laws of matrimony that should be conformable and agreynge with honestye and
shamefastnes natural / and to forbide such marriages that be foul of them self
/ and have dishonestye in them / and all this they say was commaundid in the
leuitical book / in the.xviij. chapter / And among the marriages that they
say be there forbiden is forbyden marriage between the brother and the brothers
wife widow left without yssewe / this thies persons speak of / or else all
that they say is no thing for their purpose / wherefore to this saying I
answer thus / First in the xviij. chapter of the leuitical book is not
forbyden that a man may not mary his brothers wife a widow left without yssew
/ no nor yet such marriages are not forbiden in no Place of the hole law / but
rather where as Moses did declare the Leuiticall law / ye and all the hole
law / that he had written before / he shewid unto the people how that almighty
God had ordyned and commaundid that every one of the Iues should mary always his
brothers wife a widow left with out yssewe as yt is manifest in the book of
the deuteronomi wherefore you may evidently se that in the.xviij chapter of
the Leuyticall law yt was not forbyden that a man might not mary his brothers
wife a widow left with owte yssewe / and also the prohibicione in the
Leuiticall law in the.xviij. Chap. xxv
Chapter can not be al understand that they forbide marriage with all such
persons as be there named. For there it is forbyden that a man may goo to a
woman when that she has a passion the which they call her flowers / And yet
yet is evident that a man may mary a woman when that she has them / And
likewise that a woman mayelefully mary when that she has them. wherefore you
may see that the prohibicions that be in the.xviij. chapter can not al be
understand to forbid marriage with al such persons that be there named / But
yet parauenture thies false deceyuers that has made the book that I answer
now to / will say that in the.xviij. chapter of the Leuiticall is forbiden
that a man may not mary his brothers wife. To this I answer that if they will
take that prohibicion to forbide Marriage between the brother and the brothers
wife / and not for the abusing of the brothers wife. Than it is thus understand
/ that no man may mary his brothers wife while his brother is a lyve. Thus
says thies persons great doctor Peter de Palude expowndinge the.xviij.
chapter of the leuitical book / and so doith other doctors say as you shall
see here after / and likewise says sayncte Augustyne expowndinge the.xviij.
Chapter of the leuitical book that there it is forbyden that a man may not mary
his brothers wife while that her husband is a live / nor a man may not mary
his brothers wife that was refused and repudiate of her husband / nor yet a man
may not mary his brothers wife a widow having yssew by her first husband /
But now by this rehearsed prohibicion nor by no other is forbiden that a man may
not mary his brothers wife a widow left without yssewe / yet further more
you shall understand that the leuiticall prohibicions can not al be understand
to forbyde marriage between al those persons that be there expressed / as to
forbide that the brother may not mary with the sister / or that the brother may
not mary with the brothers wife / for if marriage between thies persons were
forbyden there / than it shall follow that the Egiptians and the canoneis were
not poluted in all thies things that be called there abominacions the which is
plainly against the text: wherefore the prohibicions can not be al understand
to forbide marriage between all those persons that be there named / that this
should follow it is evident: for king Pharo did beleve that Sara was not
Abra^s wif / for as much as Abraham said that she was his sister and the
cause why Pharo did so believe was this for as much as in egipte the people did
not mary their sisters / and therefore when that Abraham shewid king Pharo that
Sara was his sister / he belevid that she was not his wife as the process in
the text doith evidently show / And likewise for because Abraham said in the
contre of Canan to king Abymelech that Sara his wife was his sister the king
Abymelech did believe that Sara was not Abraham's wife / for as myche as in that
contre they did not use to mary there sisters. genesis xii
and all this that the Egiptians and the Cananeis did not use to mary there
sisters / doithe thies deceyvers affirm in the.cxj. genesis xx
leife of there book speking there of Abraham and his wife. now than by this the
truth and there grant also / it folowith / that the prohibicions leuiticall
can not be all understand of forbiddinge of marriage / when that the Cananeis
did not use to mary there sisters as thies deceyuers do grant them self / And
than it folowith still / that if the Egypcions and Cananeis did not use to mary
their own sisters that than they did not use to mary there mothers nor their
auntis nor their mothers in law and so forth / for if the Egipcians did judge
to be against honest and reason to mary their sisters / and therefore they did
abstain for to mary them / than they must needs judge / that it is more
against reason and honest / for to mary with there mothers / with mothers in
law / with there fathers sisters / and with there mothers sisters / and so they
did therefore myche more abstain to mary with them / This reason can no man
deny / wherefore you may see by thies argumentis foundid in their own saying
that the leuiticall prohibicions can not be all understand that they forbide
marriage between all the persons that be named in the.xviij. chapter of ye
leuitical book / and so now ye may se evidently that al their ground / and
fundacion is false: for in that chapter they found falsely there false opinion.

ALso in the same first chapter of power book in the.xix. leyfe: these persons
say / that what man has married his brothers wife / the which is understand
of a widow left without yssew / should be Iuged of all the people not only to
have contempnyd and dispiced God the which has with so great magesty
commaundid the contrary / but also to have offendid by infectinge and
corruptinge the manners of the people by such myschevous example to have done
against the law of nature. this is their sayng the which I beseech you to note
and mark well. First they say that almighty God has with great mageste
commaundid the contrary to this that a man may lefully mary his brothers wife a
widow left without yssew / but this I would se them show / and where: but that
they can not do nor yet no man: for almighty God never commaundid the contrary
/ but he did expressly command that a man should mary his brothers wife a widow
left without yssew / beside this these persons do greatly blaspheme almighty God
in their sayng / for if the people should judge him that has married his brothers
wife a widow etc. to despise and displease almighty god: than should the people
judge that almighty God co^maundid the Iwes to contemn him and to despise him:
for almighty god as I showed you / commaundid the Iwes to mary there brothers
wifes / widows etce. Moreover if the people should Judge him that has married his
brothers wife a widow etcet. to offend and infecte and to corrupt ye manners of
ye people by such myscheuous example / and to have done against ye law of
nature / tha^ should ye people judge ye almighty god did command ye iues to
offend to infecte / and to corrupt ye manners of ye people / and also yt he
co^maundid ye Iues to give mischeuous example / and to do agenst ye law of
nature / for it was almighty God ye co^maundid them to mary there brothrs wifis
widows etce. and thus ye may now se how thies persons blaspheme almighty god
and his holy law: for they say yt for a man to mary his brothrs wif a widow
etc. is abominable and infection and a corruption of ye manners of the people a
myschevous example and a breking of the law of nature / and yet they can not
deny but that almighty God did command such mariagis / and so they lay all this abhominacion upon almighty God which is great dispisynge and blasphemy
unto him.

ITem moreover in the.xx. leife of their book thies persons say over and
beside all this / Consider with hou great strenght and weight of wordis and with
how great care and thowght God in decerning these laws doith ofen rehearse /
sayng yt is not for a man / yt is fowlnes yt is myscheuousnes / yt is cursidnes
/ yt is abominacyon / yt is not to be spoken / yt is not leful / yt is against
the laws of God / breuely yt is fylthy and sclanderows that a man should do any
such thing / Here now again these persons do hiely blaspheme almighty god:
for if that marriage between the brother and the brothers wife / be so ill and so
abominable as here they say it is / than they say that almighty God did
command that thing that is meat for no man to do / that is to say fowlnes /
that thing that is myscheuous / cursednes / abhominacion / yt is not to be
spoken / it is not leful / it is against the very laws of God / brevely yt is
filthy and sclanderous that a man should do any such thing / for it was
almighty God that did command that men should mary there brothers wifes widows
left with out yssew. The which marriages thies persons call abhominacion /
myscheuousnes and sclanderousnes etcet. For of such marriage these persons speak
/ Consider you here with how great strenght and weight of wordie these vngracius
persons do Blaspheme almighty god they call him the auctor and the commander
of abhominacion of filthynes / and of cursidnes etcet. who ever herd so great
blasphemy as is this?

Now where as before they said that almighty God in decerninge the laws
speaks with great strenght and weight of words yt is true he did so for he
speaks against the great vices and abominable living that the Egipcians
and the Cananeis vsid / but let thies persons show where almighty God doith
speak with great strength and weight of words against marriage between the
brother and the brothers wife a widow left without yssew. Against such
marriage almighty God did never speak but he did command expressly such
marriage.

ANd yet these false decevers do apply the spekinge of almighty God / where he
reprouid and spoke against the great syns of abominable living of the
Egypcians and the cananes / to be against the marriage between the brother and
the brothers wife / a widow left with out yssewe / and yt is no thing so /
wherefore you must note and mark well thies persons saying for they do not
care how falsely they say / nor yet how fasely they apply goddis sayng and holy
scripture nor other men's saying / so that they make such saynges to apere for
their false purpose / also you shall se them bring in many things that
perteyne no thing to this / for to show that it is forbiden by the law of God
and by the law of nature for a man to marye his brothers wife a widow left
without yssewe.

ANd you must note that in the old law all that ever is spoken with great
strength and weyghte of words and forbidden and callid cursyd and abominable
and fylthynes / is not things that be forbiden by the law of nature / Leui. xi
nor they be not so callid by cause they be ill of them self / for fysshe that
has no scales and sins as elys and conger were callid abominable for to ete
/ and yete it was not ageynste the law of nature for a man to ete elys and
counger / Leui. xi
Also all that crepith upon the ground was forbidden to ete in the old law /
and was callid abominable / and yet to ete snailles is not against the law of
nature / for snaillis be good and wholesome and be eten in many placis / and so
likewise / if a woman should have worn a man's germent she hade done
abominable in the old law / and for abominacion yt was forbidden / and yet yt
was not against the law of nature. And so were things in that law called
filthy and uncleanly and forbidden / and yet they were not against the law of
nature / leu. xv
as to touch caren of certain bestes / and many other things were forbidden
as fylthynes and foul things / and finally you must note that the great and
grievous punyshementis that were thretenyd in the old law / were not always
thretenyd for brekynge of the law of nature / as the child that was not
circumcisyd was thretened that he should perish from the midst of the people
/ and yet a child that is not circumcisyd / doith not offend against the law
of nature And yet beside all this ye must note that the same thing that was
one against the law of nature / is always against ye law of nature / for the
law of nature doith never move nor altere her self in no manner of time sens
Adam fell.

FIrthermore ye must mark and note that sayncte Jerome says in the Prologe
upon Oseas that almighty God doith command no thing but that which is
honest / nor almighty God commanding unhonest thingis doith not make them
honest such as be foul of them self: wherefore by this it folowith yt for a man
to mary his brothers wif a widow / was neur foul nor evil of it self / for
than it could never have been good thowghe almighty god had commaundid yt
never so much. But almighty God did command such marriage / wherefore such
marriage can not be against the law of nature / So now these few rewlys you
must take / and they shall help you to perceue the falsite of thies deceyuers.

NOw where as these deceyuers in the xx. seife of their book say / forsoith if
a man will way well and examine these forsaid things religiously and with
good conscience and so as they owght to be / how can he but approve the truth
and allow the conclusions and determinacions of thies universities and think
certainly that yt is forbiden both by the law of God and by the law of nature
that a Christen man should mary his brothers wife a widow? this is these
persons sayng. To the which thus I answer / forsoith if a man will way well
this case of matrimony / if a Christian man may mary his brothers wife a widow
left with out yssew / and examyn yt with good conscience as it owght to be /
how should he not straight way reprove and disalowe the conclusions and
determinations of thies universities that say the contrary / and to think
certainly that it is nether against the law of God nor against the law of
nature for a Christen man to mary his Brothers wife a widow and cetera. This
shall every lernyd man that haith good conscience judge to be true.

Moreover where as thies deceyuers in the.xxi. leife of their book say that ye
sonnis of Cayn the which were drouwnyd in Noys flowid / they were so punyshed
by cause they did foully abuse their sisters and their brothers wifes /
wherefore these persons would conclude that it is against the law of God and
against the law of nature for a man to mary his Brothers wife a widow etc. Here
you may see a goodly Argument. Cayn sonnys did fowly abuse their sisters and
their brothers wifes / wherefore yt is against the law of God and against the
law of nature for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow etcet. What should a
man say to so lewid an Argument? but as the conclusion is manifest false / so
is all yt the makers of the argument go about to prove.

ALso where as they say in the same leif of their book / Here ye may see
before yower eyes the holy laws of God / here you may see the lively
Prophecyes and the words of exceeding virtue and strength etc. And anon after
they say / forsoith it be comyth a Christian heart more to regard the words of
God and his auctorite / which doith forbide and so has in abhominacion / so
doith punyshe and revenge such matrim mary his stepmother / wherefore yt is
forbiden by the law of God and by the law of nature that a man should mary
his Brothers wife a widow left without yssew / the mayor of this argument is
false / the which is this. That yt is forbiden in ye same place of the law
for a man to mary his stepmother where yt is forbidden for a man to mary his
brothers wife a widow etce. This proposicion I say is false: for yt is not
forbidden in all the ho^^ law for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow
left without yssew. and so therefore the words of saint polle helpith nothing
for thies persons Purpose.

ANd also such marriage and fornication that the Apostle doith here reprove /
is not spoken of in the Leuitical prohibicion: for this young man that had
married his mother in law / did take her from his father: and so married her /
his father being a live / as the words of sayncte Poll a fore rehearsed do
show / and therefore sayncte Poll did not ground him in the Leuiticall law
when that he rebwl^ed this Coryntheane for mariyng of his fathers wife. That
the father was a live of the Coryntheane that married his mother in law / it
semyth also by thies words of the Apostle where he says there is not such
fornication herd of among the gentiles / and sayncte Poll being so well
lernyd as he was knew very well that the Gentiles had sum time abusyd their
fathers wifes / also he knew that the Iues had abusyd their fathers wifes
both before the law and in the law: before ye law Ruben abusyd his fathers
wife / and so did Absalon in the law abuse his fathers wifes / therefore this
offense that this Coryntheane did was more than for to lie with his fathers
wife / or ellis saint Poll would not have callid yt such / and so grievous
fornication as has not ben hard of / among the gentiles. But for a man to take
away his fathers wife from him and openly mary her and so keep her still /
such manner of fornication has not ben herd of among the gentilz: and for by
cause this Coryntheane had done so / therefore the holy Apostle did call that
such fornicacion as had not been hard of / and therefore he did sharply rebuke
yt and grievously correct yt.

ALso Theophilacte expoundinge the v. Chapter prime Epistole ad Corinthios /
doith suppose that the father of this Corintheane was a live / when that this
young man married his mother in law. For Thephilacte doith call that marriage
adultry / and also in a another place expoundyng still the same Chapter / he
callith this Corinthians act again adultry / And the abusion that man doith
with a woman that is not married is not callid adultry / Wherefore by thse yt
semyth that this young man's father was a live when that he married his Fathers
wife

Radulphe of Laundun expoundinge the.vii chapter of the second Pistill ad
Corinthios doith say / this yongman took away his fathers wife / and so he did
his father injury and wrong.

John de ruppella expoundinge the rehershid Chapter says the same.

Peter de Tarantase upon the same Chapter do likewise affirm and say.

In the.xxij. leif of their book they say that sayncte John Baptiste did
reprove herod the king by cause he had married his brothers wife and he shewid
the king that such marriage was not leful nor that king Herod could not
keep his brothers wife: this is truth for Herod had married his Brothers wife
/ his brother being a live as shewith saint Jerome in commentarijs super
Mattheum. Cap. xiiij. And so do Iosoph the great storiagraphe of the Iues
libro.xviij. Antiquitatis Capite. ix. And also the same Joseph again in the
same book. Cap. xi. says that king Herodis brother was a live when that Herod
married his brothers wife. And likewise doith say the old writer and doctor
Egesipe Libro secundo Capite quinto of the destruction of Jerusalem.

Druthmar writing upon sayncte Mathewe says Herodes Brother Philipp was a
live when that Herod took away his brothers wife / and therefore sayncte John
did rebuke king Herod

Hugh Cardinal writing upon Matthewe says that Philip Herodes Brother was a
live when that Herod took away his wife and married her / and therefore sayncte
John did rebwke King Herod.

Albart the great writer upon sayncte Mark says that John did rebwke King
Herod because he had married his Brothers wife his brother being than a live.

Also the interlynyall gloyse shewith upon Matthew that Herodes Brother was a
live when Herod took away his brothers wife / and so does many diverse other
doctors.

Sayncte John therefore did justly reprove king herod for he did nowght to
mary his brothers wife her husband being a live / but now sayncte John did not
say that a man might not lefully mary his brothers wife a widow left without
yssew / For sayncte John knew very well that such marriages were good and
lefull and commaundid in the law. So now ye may perceve that this saying of
sayncte John doithe nothing favor thies decevers purposse.

NOw in the.xxvi. leife of their book they bring in the counsels of the
Apostils that they kept in Iherusalem where the Apostils decreyd that the
gentiles that were new come in to cristis faith should absteyne and forbere
fornicacion / and forbere to ete of any best / bird / or foul that was
suffocate or stranguled / and to forbere to ete any manner of flesh that was
offered to ydols / and to forbere to ete blood as to forbere to ete puddynges
that be made of blood / and now thies deceuers affirm that in / and under the
name of fornicacion the Apostils did forbide that a man should mary his brothers
wife a widow left with out yssewe But this is very false / for fornicacion was
always forbyden in every law / But for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow
left without yssewe / was never forbidden in the law of nature nor in the
old law / nor in the new / but as ye have hard / such marriage was in every
law good and lefull. Wherefore you may see that it is false to say that the
Apostils under the name of fornicacion did forbid that a man should marey his
Brothers wife a widow left without yssewe.

ANd again these persons can show no doctor that so expoundith the decre of
the apostils. Here you may see how these deceyuers do expound and apply
scripture falsely for their false purposse.

Now where as thies persons in the.xxvij. leif of there book bring in Tertulyan
the which they say does affirm that this Leuiticall forbiddynge that a man
should not mary his brothers wife / was brought in / tawght / and ordyned
specially and by name of Christ him self / and his apostils / because that all
the hole church and company of Cristes faith should observe an^ keep yt with
devotion and reverence. This thies persons say Tertulian writes: but yet it
helpith them no thing / for their false purpose: for after th^yr writing and
allegyng of Tertulian / he says that ye Leuiticall forbidding that a man
should not mary his brothers wife was brought in and tawght / and ordyned
specially and by name of Criste him self / and his apostils. and I show you
that for a man to mary his brothrs wife a widow left without yssew is not
forbidden by the leuitical law: and therefore this auctor helps thies persons
not a whit.

NOw where as thies persons do bring in Tertuliane again in the.xxix. leif
and in the.xxx. leif: that says the com^a^dment that bound the Iues to mary
their brothrs wife widow left without yssew is now ded and ceased: and the
contrary of this law has place: and he shewith why the commandment is now
caessed / for the causes wherefore such marriage was commanded in the old law
/ be now taken away. And there he shewith.iij. causes why almighty God did
command the Iues to mary their brothers wifes widows left without yssewe.

The first was because almighty God would that the old blissynge / Encreasse
you and multiply / owght than to run forth and continue.

The second cause he says was this: For as much as the childern were punyshed
for the fathers fawtes than.

Thyrdly for because that the dry and baren persons were had for defamyd
persons.

Here be now the causes that tertullian allegethe why almighty God did
command in the old law that every man should mary his brothers wife a widow
left without yssew. And for as much as thies causes (after Tertulians mind) be
now takyn away / therefore he says that the commaundment that bownd the Iues
to mary their brothers wifes is now ceassyd and ded / and the contrary of this
takes now place.

First here I will answer to these reasons: second I will show you how this
commandment that a man should always mary his brothers wife a widow left
without yssew / is now ceassyd and deid: And thyrdly how this is false to say
that ye contrary of that commaundment haith now place And finally I will show
you / for what reasonable causes almighty God did command the Iues to mary
their brothers wifes widows left without yssewe.

Now I will turn to the reasons of Tertuliane where as he says that the cause
that almighty God did command his people the iues to mary their brothers wifis
widows left without yssew / was for by cause as yet the old blissing of god
Encreasse you and multiply / owght to run forth and continue. This cause is
nothing worth nor yet meyt to show why almighty God should command ye
brothers to mary their brothers wyfs widows etc. For if other men beside the
brothern had married the widows of the Iues that were left without yssew / the
old blissyng of God / Increase you / and multyply / might as well have
runnfurthe and contynewid as thowghe the Brothers had married their Brothers
widows left without yssew.

This no man can deny: therefore Tertulians reason yt but small.

The second cause that Tertuliane does assign why almighty God did command
the Iues to mary their brothers wifes widows etc. was this: for because than
the children were punyshed for their fathers fawtes / and every man now is
punyshed for his own syn / this is not true For almighty God says by his
Prophet Ezechiel that the soon shall not be punyshed for his fathers fautes.
Ezech. xviij
Also yt were against reason that almighty God should make a law to punyshe the
child for the fathers fautis / when the child is innocent / and the father
fautie / also yt were more against reason to punyshe the child for the fautes
of his own father natural / and for the fautes also of his father that is his
father but by the law: wherefore this can be no reasonable cause why almighty God
did command the Iues to mary their brothers wifes widows left without yssew.

THe third cause that Tertulian doith assign why almighty God did command
the Iues to mary their brothe^s wifis widows left with out yssewe was this:
because that the barren and dry persons were hade for defamyd persons: therefore
an ordinance was made that they should have yssew by other of their kyn as you
would say by a proctour / This cause likewise is nothing worth / for the dry
and barren persons might as well have had yssewe / if other persons / besides
their brothern and kinsfolk / had married their wifes widows etc. as though
their brothern had married their widows / this is euydent / Wherefore thies
saynges of Tertulyan do not seem to be causes why that almighty God did
command the Iues to marye their brothers wifes widows left without yssew

Now to the second point that I said I would show you that this commaundment
that bound the Iues to mary always their brothers wyfes widows left without
yssewe / is now ceased and ded: that is to say / that no man now / Iue nor
Gentile / nor Christen-man is bound to mary his brothers wife a widow left
with out yssew under a pain. For this commaundment was in the old law a
Judicial: and all those commandments be ded and ceased. Now as touching
the bond and pain / this is true: But yet yt folowith not of this that now
it is against the law of God and against the law of nature for a man to mary
his brothers wife a widow left without yssew / and that the Pope haith no power
to dispense upon such marriage: and so it is false / which is the third point
ye I said I would show you / to say that this judicial commaundme^t / that
bound men to mary their brothers wifis widows etc. is ceased and ded after
this facio^: and thus ye contrary to have place as ye may se by example. If a
king in his realm would make this law that who so ever put out a man's eye
should lose his own eye for it / who than could say that this law were now
against the law of god and against the law of nature? trewly no man And yet
this was a Judicial commaundme^t and law with the Iues the which is now
ceassid and ded: that is to say / it byndith no more now by that law. And yet
the same may again be a new constitucion. ye and likewise this commaundment
might have be made again by the church / that a man in certain causes should
have been bownd to have married his brothers wife a widow left without yssew.
Wherefore you may see / that it is false to say that this commaundment that
bound men to mary their brothers wifs widows etc. is now ceassid and ded / and
the contrary now to have place is false to: that is to say / that it is now
against the law of God and law of nature / for a man to mary his Brothers
wife a widow etc.

ALso that this is false / yt is evident by the opynion that Tertulyane held
and did conclude upon this sayng: for Tertuliane had this opynion / that it
was unlawful for any woman to mary again after the death of her husband / Thus
he makith his reason / the law is ceassid whereby a man should be bound to mary
his Brothers wife / wherefore if a woman's husband be ded she may not mary her
husbands Brother / for that is now forbidden: and she may not mary any heythen
man: for that is likewise forbidden to every christian woman: and all Christen
people be brothern in God ergo etc.

All this saying is Tertulians / and of this saying it folowith that a woman
after the death of her husband may mary no more. For first Tertuliane faith that
a woman after the death / of her husband may not mary her husbands brother /
for that / he says is now forbiden / and all Cristenmen be brothern in
Christ: and so than by that mean they be brothern to her husband that is
deed: and than she may not mary any of them / nor again / she may mary no
heythen man / for that Tertuliane says is forbidden also: Wherefore he
concludethe that no Christian woman may mary after the death of her husband: the
which I say is false / and against the holy Apostil saying where as he
writes / that if a woman's husband do die / let her mary / says he / where
she will / so that she mary a Christian man. i. cor vij
And Tertuliane in his saying / and book that he writ it he yt in / is conuicte
and condemnid for heresy. And thus I say therefore it is false / and heretical
to say / and affirm / that this commaundment that bound the Iues to mary
their brothers wifis widows etc. is now ded and ceassid and the contrary has
place: that is to say / that yt is now forbidden by the law of God and by the
cawe of nature that a man should mary his brothers wife a widow left without
yssew. And the Pope has no power to dispense upon such marriage.

ALso by brynging in that heretic Tertuliane on this wife and in the book that
is condemned for heresy / you may perceue with what spirit and conscience thies
persons have written and made their book / Here they leve out the books name /
where they allege Tertulian: and they say on this wise in the.xxviij. leif of
their book: and the same Tertuliane writith in an other place / and so they
leve out the name of the book: which in deed is callid monogamia the which
book is condemnid. Also in their ynglysshe book they leave out part of
Tertulians sayng and argument / where he would have concluded to have condemned
the second mriages. By this you evidently perceue that thies persons opinion
and sayng / where they affirm that it is against the law of God and against
the law of nature / for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow left without
yssewe is evidently false: ye and suspecte heretical / seeing that they goo
about to prove their rehearsed opynion and saying / by tertulian where he is
condemned for an heretic. Now to the fowrth I will show ye / for what reasonable
causes it was comaundid in ye old law yt every man should mary his brothers
wife / a widow left etce.

The first was that the land is of the iues the which should goo and continue by
inheritance / should not goo owte of the blood / and name and house that it came
of / and therefore it was commaundid to the Iues that they might not sell their
inheritance: leuiti. xxv.
and than it was commaundid and ordyned that if a man died without yssew that
his brother (if he had any / Deute. xxv
or else his next kinnesman) should mary his wife / and the first child that
this second brother hade by his brothers wife / should be named the first
brothers child and enjoy his land and so keep up the ded man's house and name
Wherefore holy Crisostome says that almighty God in commanding theiues to
mary their brothers wifes widows left without yssewe / Super mat. homelia. xlix.
did excogite and made a mean to counfort such persons as should chance to
dye without yssew. This is holy Crisostomes mind / so by this commaundment and
law if he chanced to dye without yssewe he was in a suerty that the next of
his blood should enjoy and inheret his lands / and uphold his house and name /
the which was alwais to him yt so died a comfort. For every man naturalli had
lever yt one of his own blood should enjoy and have his lands than a stranger
not of his kyn / also every man would gladly have his name and house yt he came
of / to remayn and continue: also beside this conforte that ye man had / this
law was a mean to confort ye widow who is husband dyed without yssew / for
thowgh she left her husband / yet she was suer to be married again to one of
his next kyn / which was no small counforte to her / to be in a suerte to mary
one that she louyd for her husbands sake: and also to mary one that louid her
for her husbandis sake: Also this manner of marriage was a mean to cause her
husbands kynred to bear and owe love and favor still unto the woman that had
buried her first husband: for by cause she married again her husbandis kynsman
for whose sake this kindred had loved her husband before: the which love would
sone have wexid cold and grown sklender toward the wedow / if she had maryd
out of her husbandis kyndred / as we may see / daily by experyence. And finally
/ this manner of marriage was a special mean to keep and continue ye love and
kyndenes that was between the woman's kynred and the kynred of her first
husband: ye which love / and kyndenes would have mynyshed and have decayed / if
the wife had married out of her husbandis kindred / wherefore so to marye was a
special mean to keep love and kyndenes between kindredis. And if sum of thies
causes had strength now in this Realm by an ordinance decreyd / they would not
be iuged but good and reasonable / As this that no man should sell his
inheritance / nor again that many inheritaunces should never come to one man's
hand / this were parauenture a good and a reasonable law. So thus you may see
that thies be reasonable and honest causes / and political meanis / and very
mete for that time for the commonwealth of the Iues: and therefore almyggty God
made this law that every one of the Iues should always mary their brothers
wifes widows left without yssewe: And commanded the Iues to keep it / Wherefore
you may evidently perceue that it can not be against the law of nature and
reason for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow etc. And also it is hy
blasphemy to almighty God to say that he with his infinite sapience and wisdom
did make a law against reason and command it to be kept upon a great
pain. But now where as thies persons say that this law that commaundid such
marriage / is now ded and has no strength: sewerly that is true for men (as I
showed ye before) but yet stands it in their lyberty to mary or not marye
their brothers wifes widows etceter. and so it doith not follow that it is now
ageynste the law of God and ageynste the law of nature for a man to mary his
brothers wife a widow left without yssew: and that the pope can not dispense
upon such marriage.

IN the.xxx. leif of their book they b^ynge in Gregory answeryng to a question
that saint Augustyne had mouid concerning marriage with in degreys of affinyte
/ saying on this wise. There is a certain erthly and a worldly law with in the
dominacion of Rome / that the sone and the daughter of brother and sister or
of.ij. brothers germayne / or of.ij. sisters / may mary together: but we have
lernid by experience that there could never yssew cum of such marriage. To this
it may be thus answered: that now at this present time there is comen of such
marriage noble and great yssew: as the Emperors children: for the Emperowr and
his wife that now is / came of.ij. sisters germane / for the Emperors mother
and his wifes mother where both sisters and daughters to Don Ferdinando that
was king of spain. Also we may se great and noble yssewe that is come of a man
that maryd.ij. sisters germane the which marriage is hyer in the degreys of
affinite than is the children of the brother and sister germane in
consanguinite. As the king of Portingall that now is / and his brothern and the
Emperors wife and her sisters the which came of the King of Portingaill /
this man's father that maryd two sisters germane that were both daughters to Don
Ferdinando King of spain. And this said King of Portingaill had by both
thies sisters yssewe / ye and yet after the death of thies two sisters / his
wifes / he mariyd the third sisters daughter the which lady is now the
french Kings wife: and by this lady also the said King of Portyngaill hade
yssewe which is yet a live: Wherefore we may see that of such marriage cumythe
yssewe.

IN the.xxxj. leif of their book thies pesons do aduertyse the reder to mark
iij. or.iiij. things of Gregores sayng. First that ye leuitical laws where it
is forbidden that a man should mary his brothers wife with the other / be the
very laws of allmyghty God / And now the same laws be of the same strength
that it is not lefull to contracte matrymoney contrary to that which is
forbid^en in the same. This saying helpith no thing to thies deceyuers pupose:
for it is not forbidden in the Leuiticall law that a man may not mary his
brothers wife a wydowe and cetera. As I have often said before. Moreover thies
persons say that saint Gregory writes that the occasion of saint John's
martyrdom was this / by cause he would maintain and uphold the truth of the
same laws against Herod the king / which had married his Brothers wife.
This saying likewise makith no thing for thies persons purpose. First for by
cause that for a man to mary his Brothers wife a widow left withowte yssewe /
it is not against the trwthe and auctorite of the Leuiticall law: for there
is no such Marriage forbidden there / nor saint John did not suffer martyrdom
for reprouynge of King Herod / for mariynge his Brothers wife a widow left
withowte yssewe: for he did not reprove King Herod for such Marriage. But he
reprouyd King Herod by cawse he had mareyd his brothers wife / her husband
his brother than being a live: and so in that king Herod did against the
law of nature / and against the leuiticall law / and if saint John did
uphold the trwth and the auctorite of the Leuitical law: we must suppose that
likewise he would uphold the troth of the Deuteronomicall commandment that
bound the Iues to mary their brothers wifes widows left without yssew / and
than it is manifest that saint John spekith no thing that can make for thies
menys false purpose / In the same leif thies persons do affirm that Gregory
doith write that marriages which certain ynglysshe men had contracte with
their brothers wifes / and that even before they had taken them: says upon
them to be so unlawful and not to be spoken / that they could notwithout dedly
syn render the dewty of marriage one to a another / nor yet abide still in the
same marriage. Here thies persons say falsely upon Gregory and against his
words and against his mind. For Gregory did admit those ynglyshmen that had
married their brothers wifes to be Christian / and to retain and keep still their
wifes and also to cum into the church and receive the blessed Sacrament of the
Auter / the which Gregory would in no cause have sufferd / if he had Iuged
such marriage to have been against the law of God and against the law of nature
/ nor yet Gregory would have sufferd thies ynglishmen to have continewed still
with their wifes / if it had been dedly syn to them to have continewed with
their wifes: And therefore ye may see that thies persons speak directly against
Gregoris mind: also ye shall se that they speak against Gregoris wordis if ye
will look upon Gregory / but Gregory did exhort and teache the ynglishemen that
were new comen to the faith / that they should no more mary as they had done
before / and made them laws of matrimoney that they should not marye their
kynswomen in the first degree of affinite or consanguinite nor in the second /
nor in the third / nor in the fowerthe.

THat they write also in the.xxxij. leif of their book: that Gregory saw that
marriage between the brother and the brothers wife a widow etc. of this marriage
they speak to be plainly ungodly and iuged it abominable before God and man
and also again the nature of man / and as nyghe as can be unto the nature and
life of bestis. This thies persons say Gregory saw and did judge such
matrimony o to be. In the which saying they affirm that saint Gregory doith
blaspheme almighty God: and also his holy law: for if Gregory saw and iuged
marriage between the brother and the brothers wife / to be abominable and
odious to God and man / and also to be against the nature of man / and as nyghe
as can be unto the nature and life of bestis / than must it needs follow that
saint Gregory saw that almighty god in commandinge such marriage did
command that thing that was abominable and odyous to God and man / and also
that thing that is ageynste the nature of man and that thing that is as nyghe
as can be to the nature and life of bestis: for as I have showed you almighty
God did command such marriage / and also by this their sayng of saint
Gregory / yt doith follow that he saw as myche abhominacyon in the law of God
which commaundid the brother to mary the brothers wife a widow left without
yssewe. And if it were so / than sayncte Gregory did blaspheme godys law. Here
ye may see what thies persons say by saint Gregory / also in the later end
of the same leif thies persons say that saint Gregory saw how grievous
punishment is abydinge them which have defylyd them self with this fowl syn.
That they understand in the rehearsed marriage: therefore he iugede that another
peace / nor faith and Cristendome / nor any other thing in this world beside
forth / is of such virtue and goodness that is able to recompense and way out
the maliciousnes of this deed: and so forth / with diverse great and sharp
words as you may see in their book.

NOw by this sayng thies persons do greatly blaspheme saint Gregory and do
say that he blasphemithe almighty God / for if saint Gregory should thus judge
by marriage between the brother and the brothers wife a widow etc. Than saint
Gregory should judge that almighty God in commaundinge such marriage / commanded
that thing that is so abominable and so evil / that there is no thing in this
world of such virtue and goodness that is able to recompense and way out the
maliciousnes of this deed / Who ever hard any man say that almighty God would
command so abominable a thing as these persons say Gregory iugithe marriage
between the brother and the brothers wife widow etc. to be? And such marriage
commaundid almighty God: Ancelme
wherefore this in no wise may be Gregoris judgment nor mind: for Ancesme (as
thies deceyuers do allege) says in a Pistell / that for certain honest causes
there were holy men both before the law / and in the law / that did mary in
the first and second degree of consanguynite / as Abraam Isaac and Jacob: Ios.
xv there may be honest causes why a man may mary his sister. in libro. de
Patriarcha abraam
In the law Caleb yt maryd his brothers daughter / than if there may be honest
causes why a man may mary his sister / there may be honest causes why a man may
marye his Brothers wife a widow and cetera. And than it folowithe that by sum
honest cause there may be a recompense for any offense in such marriage.

ALso saint Ambrose doith excuse the daughters of Loathe / saying that the good
zele that they had for to conserve mankind / the which they thowght should
have perished) did reward them so universally / that it coueryd their inhoneste
private act / and than it folowith that if their good zele that they had did
excuse their particulare fault / there may be sum thing in this world of such
virtue and goodness that it is able to recompense and way out the maliciousnes
of matrimoney between the brother and the brothers wife a widow etc. For in
this or such marriage is none offense against the law of God nor against the
law of nature / as ye have hard before. Wherefore it semith by this that saint
Gregoris mind was never to judge such marriage to be so evil as thies persons
would have him to do.

NOr Gregoris wordis do not so sownde nor signify / nor Gregory doith not say
that it is against the law of God and against the law of nature for a man to
mary his brothers wife a widow etc. And that the Pope haith no power to
dispense upon such marriage / and so all that thies persons bring in of Gregory
do nothing help their malicyouse purpose.

IN the.xxxiij. leyf of their book they bring in Pope zachary / the which
answered the bishop Theodore to his question whether that a man's natural sone
may marye with his fathers god daughter? and the Pope answerid on this wise /
we be / says he / by the law of God comaundid to abstain from owr own
kyndred Carnal / mychmore it is convenient that we should with all strength be
ware of her that is owr fathers daughter spiritual / Where upon thies persons
would conclude that it is against the law of God and against the law of
nature for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow left without yssew: and
that the Pope has no power to dispense upon such marriage / But this saying
of Pope zachary directly against their conclusion. For of his saying it
folowith / that the Pope may dispense and license the brother to mary the
sister / and than it folowith that the Pope may license a man to marye his
brothers wife a widow left without yssewe. for it is no more forbidden for a
man to marye his brothers wife a widow etcete. than it is for a man to mary
his sister / but the pope has power by this zacharias saying / to licens a man
to marye his sister. This you shall see prouyd. The Pope has power to license a
man to mary his fathers godoughter / for that affinite doith not let marriage by
no law / but only by the law of the church / as of it self it is evident /
and the Pope may dispense against the puer prohibicion of the church:
Wherefore the Pope may license a man to mary his fathers goddoughter / and now
Pope zachary says that it is more forbidden that a man should mary his fathers
goddoughter than his fathers daughter / and yet upon such marriage the Pope
has power to dispense: Wherefore than he haith power to dispense that the
brother may mary the sister / for if the Pope may dispense in the thing that
is more prohibit / he may dispe^ce in that thing yt is lose prohibit / and
than further / if the Pope may dispense upon marriage between the brother and
ye sister / he has than power to dispense upon marriage between the brother and
the brothers wife a widow etc. This you se doith follow of this Pope zachary
his sayng / the which makith for the truth / and against thies deceyuers
false conclusion.

IN the same leif thies persons do bring in the gloss that doith goo upon the
words of Pope zachary / the which gloss doith make argumentis that the Pope
can not dispense though he would / in the second degree of consanguinite nor
yet in the second degree of the first manner of affinite / for the second degree
of consanguinite and of this affinite has / his beginning of the law of
nature / and again because of the same degree it is forbidden expressly in the
old testament of God. Here thies persons show that the gloser makith
Argumentis / and say that the Pope cannot (though he would) dispense in the
second degree of consanguinite nor in the second degree of the first manner of
affinite etc. But they will not show you how the same gloser doith also make
arguments to show that the Pope may dispense in theyse degreys of
consanguynite and of affinite / and yet ye same gloser makith argumentis for
both parts and finally he determines another this / that the pope may
dispense / nor yet this / that the Pope can not dispense / but this these
deceyuers will not rehearse in their book / and so now ye may see that the
gloser which they do allege doith nothing for their purpose / And also if the
gloss had said that the Pope could not have dispencyd in the rehersh^d degreys
of consanguinite and of affinite / he had spoken directly against the text:
for the text says that affinite spiritual in the first degree is more
forbidden (in the which the Pope may dispense) than is consanguynite Carnal
in the same degree / as you have hard before / and thus thies persons would have
the gloss to destroy the text which can not be.

FIrthermore they bring in Pope Innocent the third to whom sent the
Arch^diacon of biturs to know whether that wife that was departed from her
husband without judgment of the church / by cause her husband and she were in
so nyghe degree of kyndred that the sea Apostolyk could not / nor yet was wont
to dispense with / owght to be restored again to her husband? mark well this
questyon and case that this archediacon asked of the Pope: and than you shall
and may perceue better the Popis answer that he made to the question and case
/ The Pope answerithe and says this woman which doith know the kynred
between her husband and her specially in thies degres which be forbidden by
the law of God can not have to do Carnally with this her husband without dedly
syn / and so finally the Pope says that the woman shall not be restored again
to her husband. Here the Pope answerith verey well / and no thing for thies
men's purpose. For as the case was put forth in general / so that case purposed
/ the Pope answers in general / that is to say that if a woman which was
departed from her husband without judgment of the church because her husband
/ and she were in so nyghe degree of kynred / that he sea Apostolik could not /
nor yet was not wont / to dispense with yt: Than says the Pope if the woman
knew this / and so upon this is departed from her husband she may not be
restored to her husband again / nor ly with him without dedly syn. For how
could she be restored to her husband again or company with him without dedly
syn? When that she knew her husband so nere to her of kyn that in kepinge him
company / and to be restored to him / she should do against the law of God / and
that the Pope could not dispense with her that she might turn again to her
husband / nor he was not wont to dispense in such a case: all this is trwthe
/ but all this is in general: for it is not shewid in what degree of kynred the
woman could not be restored again to her husband / nor in what degree the Pope
could not / nor was not wont to license a woman that was departed from her
husband to be restored again. And so all this saying of Pope Innocent makith
no thing for thies men's purpose. For the case that they speak of / is
particular and special that is it against the law of God and against the
law of nature for a man to mary his Brothers wife a widow etce. And that the
Pope has no power to dispencr upon such marriage. This Pope innocent doith
not say / nor upon all his sayng / this no man can conclude / But this Pope
innocent is directly against this false opinion / as it is manifest in the
chapter. Deus qui Ecclesiam. Where yt appears that he sufferd the Iues which
turned to Criste and received Baptism to continwe still with their Brothers
wifes that they had married before. But the heythens that turnyd and received
baptism / the said Pope would not suffer them to have mo wifes then one: which
before had married them to mo. And thus by this may ye se that Pope innocent is
against thies deceuers false opinion / and likewise he is against them in the
chap. Gaudemus.

IN the.xxxvi. leif they say. Now beside all this we shall prove the same by
ye auctorite of holy counsels. This they mean that they will prove by the
auctorite of holy councels that it is against the law of God and against the
law of nature for a man to mary his brothers wife / a widow left without
yssew etc. To all the counsels that these persons do bring in / yt may be
brefely answered / that there is none of them that say yt is against the law
of God / and against the law of nature / for a man to mary his brothers wife
a widow left without yssew / nor yet this. That the Pope has no power to
dispense upon such marriages.

Moreover ye must note that the prohibicions that the counsels have decreyd to
let marriage in degreys of affinite / were not made for because such affinite
did set marriage by the law of nature as it is manifest / in the third and
fowerthe degree of affinite: no more is the first nor the second degree in the
right line in the second line after the mind of thies persons great doctor /
Peter de Palude: for he says upon the.xviij. Chapter of the Leuiticall book
that the Pope may dispense in all the degreys of affinite there contained.

NOw where as there be diverse counsels and many decreys and saynges of fathers
that do forbide that a man shall not mary his sister / his brothers wife / his
nece / nor his cousin germane: of sych counsels decreys and saynges / a man
may gather that in the beginning of Cristes church the people did use
comenly to mary their sisters / their brothers wifes / their nere kynswomen:
and such as were nigh to them in affinite / for else sewerly the councels and
fathers would not have spoken so often of such marriages as they did: for
experience doith teache us that counsels parliamentis / and sinodes do not often
times make many decreys against those things that be not in use / but where
therbe many decreys and laws made against a thing: the same decreys and
laws do evidently show that the thing that they speak so much against was
greatly in use. Wherefore seeing that therbe diverse counsels and many decreys
and saynges that do now forbide that the people shall not mary in the first
degree of affinite / in ye ascendent line / nor in the side line / nor yete in
the second nor in the third degree of affinite: it is euydent that the people
did use to mary in thies degreys before / and at the beginning of the church
and than the people lived more justly and godlyer than they do now: Wherefore it
folowith that for a man to mary his Brothers wife a widow left with owte
etcete. or in the second degree of affinite / can not be against the law of
God / nor against the law of nature. For if such marriage had been so evil /
the people that lived so justly and so holely before the prohibicions of such
Marriage were made / and at the beginning of the church / would never have
vside such Marriage. So now by this reason you may see that the counsaills
and decreys that do forbid now such marriage make against these Pestilent
persons false opinyone.

TRewly the cause why thies Fathers and counsailles did orden and decre / that
the people should no more marye with their kynred and affinite in the first /
second / and third degree / was this. For asmyche as those holy Fathers and
prelates did se and manifestly perceue that the charitable love and kyndenes
that was wont to be among Christian people did sore mynyshe and decay. Wherefore
thies Fathers and Prelates ordenyd and decreyd that the Pope should mary all out
of their kindred and affynite / to knyte in love such people to gither by
marriage that were not knyte to gither in love by kynred and affinite. We se by
common experyence that by marriage the kyndred of both the persons that be maryd
do love together: Wherefore the holy Fathers and consailles did lymit owte
certain degreys of affinite and kindred in the which they supposid that love
would contynewe without the help of marriage / and so they did forbide and
command no man to mary in non of thies degres of affinite and kyndred without
the Popes license. But that the people should mary out of thies degres of kynred
and affinite. This did thies Fathers and councels orden and command to the
intent to spreyd abroad and sow love and charity by marriage among the people
that were not ioynid together in kynred and affinite. Here ye have hard the
causes why the counsels and decreys did forbid marriage in the first / the
second / and the third / and fowerth degree of affinite and kyndred whereby ye
may see that for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow etce. or his nece or
cosyn germane / is not against the law of God / nor against the law of
nature: but against the law of ye church: with the which the Pope may
dispense

IN the.xxxvij. leif of their book / thyes persons bring in the counsel of
Necene and the synod of Gregore the yongar: where it was decreyd according to
the words of God: that a woman which had been married to.ij. Brothern should be
put bake from communyon / and from the receyuinge of the sacrement until she
died / and a man that had married his brothers wife / should be an Anatheme / In
the which synod / al to gither answered / Anatheme be he / that is as myche
to say (as thies pestilent persons do expound it) as damnacion to
everlasting death / To this sayng of the counsel and synod / I answer: that
their saying and excommunycacion is understand to be applied unto such persons
as do mary them selves in such degreys of affinite without license of the
Pope. As that woman that doith mary her self after the death of her husband to
her husbands brother: and so in like wise / that man which maryeth his
brothers wife a widow etcet. For they that presume to mary on the rehearsed
manner / owght to be punyshed as it is a fore spoken of: except that they be
penitent and sorry for that they have done / ye and leave and forsake / the men
their wifes / and the women their husbandis: without the Pope license them to
mary the said men and women that they hade taken before / But yet the counsel
and synod did not decre to punyshe that woman / which after the death of her
husband / married her husbandis brother: nor yet the man which maryd his
Brothers wife a widow etc. for by cause they married against the law of God /
and against the law of nature / as it is manifest. For there is another the
counsel / nor the synod that doith decre and say that such marriage is
against the law of god and against the law of nature. But the counsel and
synod did orden and decre the punyshements before rehearsed for such persons
as did presume to mary / as the woman with her husbandis brother / or the man
with the Brothers widow against the prohibicion and decre of the church / And
so now this counsel and sinode do not help thies ungracious persons false
opinion / But yet if these deceyuers will say that the sinode and counsel /
or any other decre or counsel doith forbid that a man shall not mary his
brothers wife a widow etc. for by cause that such marriage is against the law
of God and against the law of nature: when that they show me this of any decre
or counsel: I shall be ready to make answer to it.

IN the.xxxij. leif of their book / they say on this wise last of all / and for
a conclusion. That ye sentence of Wiklif wherein he did hold yt the
prohibicions of matrimoney written in the Leuitical / be only judicial
preceptis of Moses / and therefore the causes of divorce brought in by the
mean of kindred and of affinite to be brought in without ground and fundacion /
and only by the ordinance of man / was condempnyd as contrary to all virtue and
goodness / and as heretical / and expressly against holy scripture / in ye great
convocation yt was first at London / and after at Oxforde: and last of al in ye
counsel of Constancy. Here these persons say falsely / and they lie on
Wicleffe: for Wik lef did neur say yt al ye prohibicions of matrimoney written
in ye leuiticall law be but only judicials: nor ye co^uocation / nor yet the
counsel doith not condemn Wiklyf in ye point: and yet if he had said / yt al
thies prohibicions of matrimoney had been but only Judicials / and the
conuocacion and counsel to have condempnyd him for ye same saying / and to have
iuged all thies prohibicions to be moralles: yet al thies would no thing have
helped thies deceuers falls opinion: For as much as in ye leuitical prohibicio^s
is not forbid^ (as I often times said) yt a man shall not mary his brothrs wife
a widow left without yssewe / and thus ye may see that all that they bring
in / for them can do them no service.

IN the same leif of their book / they say there be decres of other counsails
and answers in writing of other of the popes which do subscribe and agree to
thies foresaid determinacions / and a none after this / it folowithe in their
book. But we trust ge^till and indifferent reder / that thies forsaid rehersyd
things shall fully content the / for thou seyst here first of all in manner an
hole comen assent and agreement of the holy church / and firthermore thou seist
the Popes them selves do give so great majesty and godly auctorite unto the
Leuiticall prohibicions / that they do plainly affirm and hold steadfastly:
that who so ever doith mary contrary to the commandment of thies laws be not
(in ded) man and wife: nor they cannot render one to the other the dewty of
matrimony without dedly syn: nor they can not be together by any judgment of
the church / thus say the Popes / all this is these deceyuers sainge / and so
with thies words and saynges they would swade and move the reder to believe that
it is against the law of God / and against the law of nature / for a man to
marye his Brothers wife a widow left without yssew: and that the Pope has no
power to dispense upon such marriage / but this (as ye have seen prouyd before
is verey false: and where as they say you may in manner se a hole comen assent
and agreement of the hole church / (the which they understand to their
opinion) this is also false. For the hole assent and agreement of the church
has agreyd that the Pope may dispense upon marriage between the brother and
the brothers wife widow etc. And consequently that such marriage is another
against the law of nature: for else the hole church / and lernyd men of the
Princes and Popes counsel / would not have consentyd that he should have
dispensed upon such marriage: if it had been against the law of God / and
against the law of nature / and thus you may see / that thies persons saying
is false / which is this. That ye hole assent of the church doith affirm
matrimony between the brother and the brothers wife / to be against the law of
God and against the law of nature / But the hole church of Cristendom has
without reclamacion approved such matrimoney lefull and good: Where as thies
persons say that the Popes them selue have given great majesty and godly
auctorite unto the Leuiticall prohibicions: thies persons name verey often and
rehearse their Leuiticall prohibicions in general. But I would see them name one
prohibicion Leuiticall / which doith forbide that a man may not mary his
brothers wife wydowe left with owte yssew. This they should bring of the
Leuiticall law the which would do them sum service / and make well for their
purpose: but this they cannot do nor no man for them: for as I have showed you
such marriage is not forbiden in the leuitical law / and therefore you may
plainly see that to bring in the Leuiticall law / is no thing for their
purpose.

IN the.xxxviij. leif of their book / they say finally to make an end. Thou
shall understand gentill reader / that the requestis and suetes of diverse
persons / which have desired dispensacions in thies degreys have many times
here to fore been denied and repellid by the Popes of Rome which answered them
thus. It is not in any case leful for us to dispense with the laws of God: and
this we shall show you here after. To this their reason and sophistical
argument / I answer that al thowghe sum Popes have denied to dispense in such
degreys of affinite: yet upon this no man can conclude that therefore such
degree is of affinite do set marriage by the law of God and by the law of
nature. For the Pope may deny to dispense in the third degree of consanguinite
/ and affinite in the side line / and yet every man knowithe / that the third
degree of affinite and consanguinite doith not let matrimony by the law of God
/ and by the law of nature / and also their argument is nowght and sophistical.
Also the Pope may lefully deny and not license a manis sone to mary his
fathers goddoughter / and yet such marriage is neither forbidden by the law of
God / nor by the law of nature / and thus you may see / that thies persons
reason is no thing worth. They say / that you shall understand / that Popes
has denied to dispense in such degreys: And I say that you shall
understand that Popes have dispencyd and lycencyd the Brother to marye the
sister and the son to mary the Fathers Sister / and the Brother to mary the
Brothers widow / and one man to mary two Sisters / and also the same man to
mary his wifes nece. And that Popes have licencyd moo persons to marye in such
degreis of affinite and consanguinite / as I shall show you here after.
Wherefore you may perceive thies deceyuers reason is of no strength.

NOw where as they say that the Popes / when they denied to dispense in such
degreys / they answered thus. yt is not in any case lefull for us to dispense
with the Laws of God / and this thies persons say they will show here after
/ and I will make answer unto yt when that they show it. Finally to make an
end: you shall understand / that in the.xxxviij. leif of their book / they
make an Epilogacyon / And a great heap of shameful lies / saying / Moreover
thou see (and except we be deceived) thou doist grant etc. I rehearse no
more of their letter / because you may see the residewe in their book which is
all together false / and so in the end of their second chapter in the.xxxix.
leif that makes a conclusion of the same stuff / sayng / that the sentence
and determinacyons of their universities is of as vndowtyd credence and
auctorite / as can be. Where they say / that to mary her that is left of his
brother dyinge without children / is so forbidden / both by the law of God /
and by the law of nature: that the Pope is not of power to dispense with any
such marriage / whether they be all ready contracte / or else to be contracte.
This is the sentence and determinacions of their universities: yet thies
persons (as ye have seen) have not prouyd it / another by auctorite / nor
reason / nor they never shall / for the sentence and the determinacions of their
universities / ar manifest false and a great error heretical: wherefore if these
persons had said that the sentences and determinacions of the universities / be
as vndowtid falsehed as can be / where they say: That to mary her that is
left of his brother dying without children / is so forbidden both by the law
of God / and by the law of nature / and that the Pope is not of power to
dispense with any such marriage / than they hade said truth: for without fail
/ the sentences and determinacions of their universities are vndowtid falsehed /
as you have partly hard / and as ye shall hear more / her after.

IN the third chapter in the.xxxix. leif of their book / they say thus. We
think that we have well and sufficiently confirmyd and stabilished owr intent
and purpose by the Popes laws / and by the auctorite and counsels. Now next
we will go about to fortifye and make good the same by the most excellent and
most faithful interpreters and most true doctors that expownde holy
scripture. Here they say that they have well and sufficiently confirmid and
stablysshed their intent by the Popes law and by the auctorite of counsels:
And yet you may see that they have brought nether Popes law nor counsels that
affirm this their false purpose. That it is against the law of God / and
against the law of nature / for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow etc.
And that the Pope has no power to dispense upon such marriage. Wherefore they
should have said that they hade another well nor sufficiently confyrmyd and
stabilyshed their purpose: nor yet never shall by no faithful interpreters and
true doctors that expownde holy scripture / had thies persons said thus /
they had said trowth. But that they love to say as their book doith evidently
show / Now I beseech you mark and note well what thies doctors say that
they bring in / and how well they fortify thies deceyuers purpose. First they
bring in and allege the great clerk Origene / where he expowndith the.xx.
chapter of the Leuitical. Now I beseech you look well upon all that they
bring of Origene / and you shall see that in no point he helpith or
favoryth their opinion.

IN the.xli. leif of their book / they say that Crisostom doith agree with
Origin / and they say truth / for he doith no thing say that makithe for
their purpose.

IN the.xlij. leif of their book / they say that Basilius the great / is of
the same sentence and mind / that thies other two foresaid doctors be / and if
yt be so / than he doith not fortyfye their opinion: for the other two doctors
in no case favor and affirm this thies persons opinion. That it is against
the law of God and against the law of nature / for a man to mary his brothers
wife a widow etc. nor yet thies doctors do not say that the Pope haith no
power to dispense upon such marriage. Nor this can not be gatherid of thies
doctors words nor conclude / as you may se in thies persons book / where they
allege thies doctors / and if this doctoure Basilius be of the same sentence
and mind / that Origene and Crisostome be: than he helpith no thing thies
persons opinion: and it is in deed truth / for Basilius in all his goodly
pistill doith not say that it is against the law of God / and against the
law of nature / for a man to mary his Brothers wife a widow left without
yssewe.

IN the.xliij. leif. they allege Basilius again saying / If it fortune a man to
be ouercum with shameless and uncleanly affeccion to join so vnlefully / that he
coupilith him self by marriage with two sisters / this man is iuged not to have
contracte any marriage: And that he must not be admitted in to the communion of
the church / or cum in the company of Christian folk before that they have
broken this so unlawful couple or bond / and be departid the on from the
the other / To this saying I answer thus. That it is understand on this wise that
if a man ouercomen with shameless affeccion / couplyth him self by marriage
with.ij. sisters without the Popes license / that than he owght to be iuged not
to have contracte any marriage with the second sister: for by cause he did
against the ordinance of the church: which has decreyd that no man shall
mary two sisters: and also if any man will attempt the contrary / and mary.ij.
sisters: that than the couplynge with the second Sister to be iuged no
marriage: but rather the persons that so did couple them selves under the
pretense of marriage against the law of the church / not to be admitted in to
the communion of the church or cum emonge Christen people before that they
have broken their vnteafulle couple and bond / and be departid the one from
the the other. Thus on this wise all Basilius saying is trwthe / and makith
against thies persons purpose and opinion. But they should rather have brought
(if they hade could) Basilius to have said that he / which couplyth him self
to.ij. sisters one after the death of the the other for honest respectis and causes
with the Popes license doith against the law of God / and against the law
of nature / so that the Pope can not dispense upon such marriage. If thies
persons hade brought in this of basilius saying / it would have done them sum
service. But they can not / and therefore Basilius helps them nothing.

IN the.xlviij. leife these persons allege ysichyus / Gregorye Nazanzeus
scolere an excellent lernyd man in holy scripture to be of Origens Chrysostom
and of Basilius side / for he expunding the Leuitical law says thus etce. To
this I answer / that if ysichius be of the rehearsed doctors side / than it
folowith that he says no thing for to aid thies deceyuers false opinion.
For nether Origin Chrysostom nor Basilius speak no thing in to the favor of
thies persons opinion. and thus Isychius / being of the other doctors side /
ca^ not help thies persons opinion / nor he doith not help them in deed in no
manner of point: as you may manifestly se in thies persons book / where they do
allege him / for they allege him where he expoundith the.xviij. Chapter in the
Leuiticall book: where it is not forbidden that a man shall not mary his
brothers wife a widow left without yssewe. As I have often times shewid you:
Nor Isichius doith not say that such marriage is there forbidden: nor he doith
not say that such marriage is forbidden by the law of God and by the law of
nature / nor yet he doith say that the Pope haith no power to dispense upon
marriage between the brother and the brothers wife a widow left with out
yssewe. And therefore ye may perceue that Isichius doith nothing for thies
deceuers purpose.

IN the.li. leif of their book / they say on this wise. Now with all thies
doctors opinions agree saint Ambrose / saint Hierome / and saint Austyne.
And first thies persons allege saint Ambros where as he answers to one
Pattern which would have married his dowghters dowghter unto his own soon:
which son was the maidens half uncle. For Pattern the father had his sone by
an other woman / and in this case saint Ambros said thus. That the sone might
not mary with the fathers dowghters dowghter / nor yete the nece with the nece
/ saying that the law of God forbiddith that the sone should mary with the
brothers dowghter. This is now saint Ambrose his mind. To this I answer that
expressly we have in the same law of God that saint Ambrose spekith of: that
the uncle married the nece / and the nece married with the nece. As Othoniel
married his Brothers dowghter / which was callid Axa: and the nece married with
the nece / as the daughters of Salphat married with their uncles sons / Nume.
vltimo
and here no man can say that thies persons married their uncles sons by a
dispensacion and license of almyghtye God: for they were not lycencyd but
commaundid by almighty God so to mary / for there was a law made and publyshed
by the reason of the dowghters of Salphat as the very text here shows.
Respondit Moses filijs Israel and domino precipiente ait: recte tribus
filiorum Joseph loquuta est / and hec lex super filiabus Salphat a Domino
promulgata est / and sequitur / fecerunt filie Salphat vt sibi fuerat
imperatum. And so thies women married their uncles sons according to the law
and commandment of almighty God / and so in lykwise / the daughters of
Eleazar married their uncles sons. i. Par. xxiij.
By this you may se it is not forbiden by the law of god the sone to marye
with the Brothers dowghter / nor the nece with the nece. but such marriages
were commanded by almighty God in his law. Thies persons say in the.lij.
leif / that saint ambrose doith affirm to be against the law of nature for a
man to mary his daughter. This is true and noman will say the contrary. but
this saying is no thing for thies persons purpose / let them show where saint
ambrose says. It is against the law of nature for a man to mary his brothers
wif a widow left without yssewe. This thies deceyuers promise to show and
bring in / but they do not.

IN the.liiij. leif of their book / they bring in saint Hierome that
meruelyth at the Patriarch abraham for by cause he married his sister: seeing the
thing is so abominable / and seeing again that almighty God ordenyd
afterward a law for it. wherein he thretenith that who so ever shall take his
sister / other on the fathers side / or on the mothers side: and shall se her
fowlnes: yt is a rebuke and a shame / he shall be driven out of his country in
sight of his own kynne: he haithe vnhilled the priuetes of his sister / he
shall receive his reward for his sin. after this saing / thies deceuers make
an exposicion upon saint Hieroms writing: and for because yt is not to the
purpose / I let it pass / thowghe it be false / and to saint Hierome sayng I
answer thus. what so ever saint Hierome says where they do allege him / I
would show ye / that saint Hierome doith not meruell nor judge abraham's
marriage to be evil: but doith excuse abraham in that he maryd his sister saying
/ In the Hebrew tongue / yt soundith that Sara was abraham's sister: In q^sti.
hebraicis super genesis
and in his excuse he says that at that time such marriage was not forbiden by
the law. Here ye may se that saint Hierome doith excuse the Patriarche abram
in yt he married his sister: and says yt in ye time of abra^ such marriage was
not forbidden by the law: the which must be understand / that such marriage
was not forbidden by the law of nature. For if that such marriage had been
lefull and against the law of nature: than saint Hierome had not justified
and excused Abraham in that he married his sister saying: that such marriages at
ye time were not foebidden by the law. And so thus now you may perceive that
Saint Hieroms mind and writing here is / that it is not against the law of
nature for a man to mary his sister. And so by this saint Hierome is against
thies persons false opinion.

IN the.lv. leif of their book / thies persons bring saint Augusten where he
writith against Faustus the great heretik and says that the commaundment of
God that bownde the iues to mary with their brothers wifes widows left
without yssew / was a figure / and did signify that the preachers should labor
in ye gospel to styre up the sead / unto his brother departed: that is to our
savior Crist / which died for us. Here ye may see that saint Austen says
that the commaundment of God that bownde the Iues to mary their brothers wives
widows / was a figure / and then it can not be against the law of nature: as
to offer up incense and to be circuncysed were figurs / and yet now they be not
against the law of nature and thus Saint Augustyn is not for these menis
purpose.

IN the.lvi. leif / They bring in saint Augustyn in an other place where as
he says. Althowghe in time past men married their sisters / yet that thing was
done because necessite compellid men unto it / but this thing is not now so
old / nor was never so necssary: but it was made afterward as damnable /
because religion doith forbid yt. Thus here is the englisshe of saint
austens words / and after the same wordis that thies persons have in their
Latin book. but they have in their ynglishe book that it is not now as damnable
/ by cause religion doith forbide it / And saint Austen says is was made
afterward as damnable / because religion doith forbide yt. And than if this /
for a man to mary his sister be now made dampnable because religion doith
forbide yt: Than it is evident that for a man to mary his sister / is not
damnable of the own nature: for that thing that is damnable by nature / was /
and is always dampnable. and saint augusten says that this thing / for a man
to mary his sister / was made afterward dampnable / because religion doith
forbid yt: and therefore it is not against the law of nature for a man to mary
his sister: also saint augustyn says in the same place where thies persons
allege him / that in the beginning of man kind (...) was leful by all meanys
ye brothern to mary wit^ sisters: but now (says he) ye custom is so agai^^^ ^e
marriage as though siche marriage had ^^^er ben lawful. By this ye may se yt
for a man to mary his sister / is leful by ye law of nature: and it is ^^^^^den
(...) ^e custom: and than yt folowith that if such (...) ^e be lefull by the
law of nature / it is (...) ^y the same law for a man to mary h^ (...) ^s
wife a widow left withowt yssewe. For this can be no more forbiden than for a
man to marye his Sister. And thus you may perceive that saint augustyn is
against thies persons false opinion.

IN the same leif / thies persons would have you call to yowr rememberaunce of
the judgment of thies great divines four / or five things. First what so ever
person of Cristes believe brekith any of the leuiticall prohibicions of marriage
/ he shall be dampened both body and soul into everlasting deith in hell. Note
here I beseech ye how thies pestilent persons openly sclaunder and say false
upon saint ambrose / saint Hierome / and saint Augustine. For there is none of
them that doith judge / that what so ever person of Cristes believe brekith any
of ye leuiticall prohibicions of marriage that he shall be dampened both body
and soul into everlasting deith in hell / as thies persons do say upon them
but it is thies 'pestilent persons own malicious judgment: and yet all this
makith nothing for their false opinion. For there is no prohibicion leuitical
that doith forbide that a man shall not mary his brothers wife a widow etc.

THe second thing that they would have you note of the judgment of saint
ambrose / saint Hierome / and saint augustine is this. That not only the Iues
did abstain from marying their Brothers wives even as you would say / for fere
of sum mischef / and yet they might have don it by auctorite of their law: but
the very heythens also after the death of their wives / did evermore abstain
from marriage of their wives sistern / as from a certain impiete or
abominacion against nature. Here thies shameless persons falsely sclaunder
again thies holy Doctors / for they never did judge nor say that the Iues did
abstain from maryinge of their Brothers wives for fere of sum myschefe that
should fall upon them / for so maryinge. Nor yet thies holy men never said
that the heythens did evermore absteyne from maryinge their wives sisterne / as
from a certain impiete or abhominacion against nature. Wherefore you may
see that these ungracious persons do falsely say and sclaunder Saint Ambrose /
Saint Hierome / and Saint Augustine / and not only in this their false sainge
sclaunder these holy men / But they also do blaspheme almightye God: for in
saying that the Iues did absteyne from mariynge their Brothers wifes for fere
of sum myscheif that should fall upon them for so mariynge / they say that
almighty God in commaundinge and biddinge the Iues to mary their brothers wifes
widows etcet. commaundid and bound them to a thing that myschefe should cum
to the Iues for fullfillinge and keeping of the same commandment / ye and
beside all this yt followithe that almighty God in commanding and biddinge the
Iues to mary their Brothers wifes widows etcet. set the Iues in a miserable
state and in a grievous perplexite / for if they maryd their brothers wifes
widows etc. according to the commaundinge of almighty God: than they lokyde
for myschef to fall upon them for so mariynge, and again / if they did not
marry their brothers wifes widows etc. than they should be punyshed with
perpetual infamy and dishonor. For so had almighty God commaundid to punyshe
all those that would not mary their brothers wyfes widows etc. and thus by thies
false deceyuers saynges almighty God in commaundinge the Iues to marye their
brothers wifes widows etcet. set them in a marvelous grievous perplexite. Who
durst thus say by almighty God / seeing that he nouresshed the Iues with
singler benevolence and marvelous kynenes holy and just laws concerning them
and their time? Wherefore you may see thies persons in their sayng do highly
baspheme almighty God: and do falsely say upon thies holy men and Doctors.

NOw to the second part of this their second saying / where as thies persons
affirm that the verey heythens after the death of their wives did evermore
abstain from mariynge of their wives sisters as from a certain impiete or
abominacion against nature. Here thies deceyuers confound them selves and
speak against their own writing. For in the.xviij. leif of their book / they
say: that beside other myscheuous vices this thing was also lefull and
customable among thies haythens to myngle and marcy them self by the most
shameful lust and pleasure of their bodies with them that be most nyghe of
their blood and affinite puttinge no difference between them and other women.
This they said and write there / and here they say the contrary. They say
that the heythens after the death of their wives did evermore abstain from
mariynge of their wives sisters as from a certain Impiete or abhominacion
against nature: Therefore you may clearly se / thies persons be past shame / and
care not whate they write and say / that they might cause the reder to believe
their false opinion.

THe third thing that thies deceyuers would have you note of the judgment of
saint Ambrose / saint Hierome / and saint Austen is this. That marriage
contracte contrary to these prophibicions be uncomely and abominable and as
nere as can be to the life of bruyt bestis etc. ye and forther / they be the
transgression and breking of all the law. Here these false liars say again
falsely on these holy men. For this they can not show to be the judgment of
Saint Ambros / Saint Hierome / and Saint Augusten. Also thies lies and false
saynges make no thing for their purpose. For they speak of the leuiticall law
and there ground the them self: where it is in no wise forbiden that a man shall
not marey his brothers wife a widow left without yssew.

THe.iiij. thing that thies deceyuers would have you to note and mark of the
judgment of saint Ambrose saint Hierome / and saint Austen is this / That
marriages made contrary to the leuitical prohibicions be so grievous and so
hateful in the sight of God / that they have destroyed holl nations / poluted
the land / and being polutyd caused it naturally to gruge and to put them out
which hade committed such things. Here again these deceyuers say falsely
upon thies holy men: for they cannot show thies their sayngis to be thies
doctors judgment. Also thies lies and false saynges make no thing for thies
persons false purpose: for all their saying is grownded in the Leuiticall law:
and there yt is not forbidden that a man shall not marey his Brothers wife a
widow left without yssewe.

THe.v. thing that thies persons would have you note of the judgment of saint
Ambrose / saint Hierome / and saint Austen is this. That the prohibicions
leuiticall perteyne not only to theiues / but to all Cristians which cum to
serve God. And that they which be poluted with any of thies not to be spoken
dedis / ar defilyd with them al. Here thies shameless liars say falsely on
Ambrose / Hierome / and Austen: for as I have shewid you / they cannot bring
where that this their sayng should be thies holy menys iugementis. and again
this their false sayng doith not help thies deceyuers false opinion / as you
have hard before / by cause they grownd them in the leuitical prohibicions: But
now for as much as in this their saing / they affirm yt if a man be polutid
and corrupt with any of thi^s not to be spoken dedis / he is defylid with the^
al: her ye may se how like the^ self they speak / for of this their saing / it
folowith yt if a manly with his sistr and so is polutid in yt syn: yt than he
is poluted with his mothr / with his stepmothr / with his daughter / poluted
with his nece / and with bruet bestis / polutid with offering his sede in
sacrifice to ye ydol Moloch. For all thies and othr mo / be forbide^ in ye
leuitical law: who would say thus but thies filthy and lying persons? Now you
hard how thies deceyuers have sclaundered and falsely said of thies.iij. holy
men saint Ambrose / saint Hierome / and saint Augustine.

IN the.lvij. leif / they exhort you to mark well saint Ambrose his saying /
and to that you have herd my answer before.

AFter thies doctors thies persons bring holy saint Ancelme. Briefly he in
all that pistel / which thies persons say is his / doith not say that it is
against the law of God and against the law of nature / for a man to mary his
brothers wife a widow etce. nor yet this that the Pope haith no power to
dispense upon such marriage: nor this can not be gathered nor concludid of
this saying of saint Ancelme in the rehearsed pistle as it appears in the.lx.
leif of their book. That Cristiane religion and perfeccion haith ordyned that
the boundis and butailes of consanguinite should be streched furthe unto
the.vi. degree on every side / according unto the decreys of holy fathers and
canons: so that kynsfolke being in the.vi degree may not marey toghither: by
this you may se that saint Ancelme doith speak of such marriage as is forbiden
by the law of the church: and therefore in the end of his pistel he shewith
that both before the law and in the law / men upon certain honest causes and
consideracions married their nere knswomen / as their sisters and their neces:
before the law / as Abraham / Isaac / and Jacob. In the law / Othoniel / the
which marriages saint Ancelme doith not say that they were against the law
of nature. But he doith approve them good: for because the persons which so
married / did marey for good consideracions and honest causes / yet for all that
(says he) Cristiane religion and the perfytnes that owght to be in a Christian
man will judge nothing to be honest that is against the honesty of nature. So
here saint Ancelme doith swade that we should not mary now owr kinneswomen /
but mary other for to spreyd a broad love and charity / for it is against the
honestye of nature aftir his mind / to mary within the.vj. degree. For men and
women do by the reason of affinite and kindred bare love naturally unto that
degree. And therefore saint Ancelme did extend the honesty of nature to
the.vi. degree / as it aperith by his sainge before / And thus you may se that
saint ancelme doith not say that it is against the law of nature for a man
to mary his sister and nere kynswoman: but that for honest cawses men have so
married.

IN the.lxv. leif / thies persons bring in Hughe Cardinal: Rauffe Flamacensis /
Rute Tintiensis / Hildebart Cenomanese / Iuo Carnotense / al bishops and one
water of constance archedeacon of Oxforde / and truly the first two Hughe
Cardinal / and Rauffe flauiacensis expoundinge the xviij. chapter leuitical.
Brefely here I answer / there is none of thies Doctors that says it is
against the law of God and against the law of nature / for a man to m^ry his
brothers wife a widow left without yssew: nor yet this that the Pope haith no
power to dispense upon such marriage: nor this can not be concludid of their
saynges. Wherefore I pass over unto the.lxxv. leif of thies deceyuers book
where they allege for their purpose the scholasticall doctors.

NOw among the scolastical doctors thies persons do bring in Thomas in
the.lxxviij. leyf of their book: which says that at the beginning of mankind
there were exceptid from marriage the father and the mother / that is to be
understand / that the father might not marey with the daughter / nor the mother
with the soon / but afterward when mankind was encreaside and multiplied there
were many moo persons except by Moses law. Brefely saint Thomas in all his
reasons before and after doith no thing but declare that the father and the
dowghter / the mother and the soon were forbiden to mary together by the law
of nature. The other persons that were afterward except / he says were
forbiden to mary together by the law of Moses: which law / Thomas callith
sum time the law of God. This may you see plainly in all the process that
thies persons do bring in of Thomas from the.lxxv. leif / unto the.lxxix. leif
/ and thus Thomas speaks not one word against this that a man may mary his
brothers wife a widow left withowte yssew / nor yet against this / that the
Pope haithe power to dispense upon such marriage.

THies persons promised to bring doctors to speak against thies things: but
they be verey slake in performinge their promise.

IN the same leife / thies persons do bring in Thomas sayng / infidels
contracte within the degreis forbiden in ye xviij. Chapter of Leuitical /
contrary to the law of God: whether both to or one of them be conuertid to the
faith: they may not bide still together in such marriage: for as myche as
saint Thomas speaks here of the degreys forbiden in the.xviij. chapter of
the leuitical: I will answer no other wise but thus / yt is not forbiden in
the.xviij. Chapter of the leuiticall that a man shall not mary his brothers
wife a widow left with out yssew: and therefore saint Thomas spekith nothing
for thies deceyuers purpose.

ALso to Altissiodorensis saying / where they allege him to say that the
preceptis Leuitical be moralles: this saying doith no service to thies
deceyuers false opinion. For as I have shewid you / and am compellid often
times to show you / that it is not forbiden in the Leuitical law that a man
shall not mary his brothers wife a widow left without yssew. And if thies
deceivers were not paste shame they would not allege so often the leuitical
law and prohibicions as they do seeing it makith nothing for their purpose /
or else they should rehearse sum prohibicion leuiticall that doith forbede that a
man shall not mary his Brothers wife a widow left etc.

IN the.lxxxij. leif / they bring Peter de Palude: which says the Pope has
no power to dispense in the first degree of affinite no more than he haith in ye
first degree of consanguinite: for mariageis forbiden by the law of God in the
first degree of consanguinite or affinite not one streghter above the other: but
the one of side half to the other as the brother and the sister in this degree.
Also ye Pope has power to dispense because it is sumwhat against the law of
nature / and a little after this Docter Peter de Palude says that the Pope has
no power to dispense that a man should mary the wife of his brother althowgh he
died without children / for how be it men were sufferde to do thus in times
past: yet that was not but by dispensacion / ye and that dispensacion was by
the law of God and not by the law of men / and again a little after this he
says that the Pope has no more power to dispense with a man to mary his
brothers wife a widow left without yssew / than he haith to dispense for a
pluralite of wives. For marriage between the brother and the brothers widow
left without yssewe: was sufferd for a certain time by the dispensacion of
almighty God / like as it was to have many wifes. Here is this Doctors mind
which spekith sum what for thies persons purpose.

NOw to this Doctors saying I answer thus / and first to this point where he
says that the Pope has no power to dispense in the first degree of affinite no
more than he has in the first degree of consanguinite and that not only in the
right line no more than in the side line: as the brother to mary with the
sister: for by cause this is sumwhat against the law of nature. To this / this
Doctor Peter de Palude expownding the.xviij. Chapter of the leuitical says:
that the Pope may dispense in all the degreis of affinite contained in the
leuiticall / for all thies degreys (says he) seem to be forbidden by the law
posytiue. And now you may see by this doctors mind that marriage between the
brothers widow and the Brothere / is not against the law of nature: for this
doctor says that the Pope may dispense in that degree of affinite. and where
as he said that the Pope could not dispense that a man should mary his brothers
wife a widow left without yssewe: here he says the contrary. For he says the
Pope may dispense in all degreis of affinite that be contained in the leuiticall
law. Also where as he said that the Pope has no more power to dispense with a
man to marey his Brothers wife a widow left with out yssewe / than he has to
dispense for a pluralite of wyfes: here you may see that this Doctor says
the contrarey. For he affirms that the Pope may dispense in all degreys of
affinite contained in the Leuiticall law. And finally where as he says / that
it was suffered for a certain time that the brother should mary the Brothers
wife a widow left withowte yssewe / but this he says was but by the
dispensacion of almighty God: like as it was to have many wifes. This saying
can in no case be true: for almighty god did not despence in the old law /
that a man might mary his Brothers wife a widow left without yssewe: but did
expressly command that all the Iues should always marey their brothers wifes
widows left withowt yssewe. And they should so mary upon a great pain. And
therefore it is not true to say that almighty God did dispense with the Iues
that they might mary their Brothers wifes widows left without yssewe / for
they were bownde to mary their Brothers wifes left without yssewe / by an
expressid law of almighty God / also this can in no wise be callid a
dispensacion: for a dispensacion doith always presuppose a commaundment
contrary to the lycense and dispensacion: but in all the hole law there is no
commandment that forbids that a man shall not mary his Brothers wife a
widow left with owte yssewe: as it is manifest. Wherefore it can not be said
that almighty God did dispense and license the Iues to mary their Brothers
wifis widows left with owte yssewe. Finally by license and dispensacion a
man is set at liberty to use his dispensacion or not to use it: but the Iues
were not at liberty and at choice to marey their brothers wifes widows left
with owte yssewe / or ellis to leave them. But rather the law compellid the
Iues to marey their Brothers wifes widows left with owte yssewe. or else to
punyshe such as would not marey their Brothers wifes widows left without
yssewe / with perpetual infamy and great dishoner. Wherefore it can not be said
that almighty God did dispense with the Iues to marey their Brothers wyfes
widows left with out yssewe / but he commaundid them so to marey The example
also and similitude that this doctor Peter de Palude brought to show that
almighty God did dispense with the Iues that they might mary their brothers
wifes widows etc. doith not prove in any case. He says on this wise that
almighty God suffered the Iues to mary their brothers wifes widows etc. like
as he did suffer sum persons to have mo wifes at ons than one. This saying is
not like: for the first / almighty God did command / and bound every man to
it: but the second / that a man might have mo wifes at ons than one / almighty
God did never command to persons in general nor in special: and so you may
see that the exemple and similitude doith not prove. Here parauenture sum will
meruyll at this doctor Peter de Palude which in expowndinge the laws
leuitical doith so directly speak against that he wrote in his book upon the
sentences. To this it may be answered that when he wrote upon the sentences he
held that opinion: but when he came afterward and would expound the leuiticall
/ he forsook his opinion / which he held before: and here upon the
leuiticall book he wrote ye trewthe: wherefore upon the.xviij. chapter
leuitical he says thus. In certain books it is written / no man may take his
brothers wife which (says he) is thus understand. No man may take his
brothers wife (his brother being a live) for as much as the law in a another
place doith command that a man shall mary his brothers wife a widow. And now
by this saying / this Doctor peter de Palude is not only against the
deceyuers opinion in many pointis as ye have seen before: but here also he
utterly doith destroy all the ground where on thies persons would bilde their
false opinion. For he says that the prohibicion leuitical that forbiddithe a
man to take his brothers wife is understand / to forbide him that he takes
not his brothers wife while his brother is a live / for as much as in an other
place the law doith command that a man shall mary his brothers wife a widow.
Thus ye may perceue that this their great Doctor Peter de Palude doith utterly
destroy al thies deceyuers false opinion / for he shewith and affirmith that
for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow / is not forbiden in the leuitical
law but he says such marriage is commaundid in another place of the law.

IN the.lxxxiij. leif of their book / thies persons bring in the auctorite of
the bishop of florens and Iohne de Turre cremata which (as thies persons do
say / do agree in this matter with Petr de Palude / now if yt be so / than they
speak directly against their false opinion: for Peter de Palude spekith against
yt / And if these deceyuers will say that th^rchbishope of florens and John de
Turre cremata doith agree with Peter de Palude / where he did err / and not
where he said truth. than suerly they should nothr be beleuid nor accept.
Breuely thies two rehearsed Doctors and Alexander de Ales whose saying and
opinion thies deceyuers do not recyte / they al grownde them in Peter de
Paluddes first opinion / which he him self did after forsake and reprove / and
in the prohibicions leuiticall to the which I have answered often times that
it is not forbiden there that a man shall not marey his brothers wife a widow
left witheout yssewe / and likewise doith the Doctors that they bring after
the said Cardinals and Walden that says the Leuitical laws be moral
preceptis and of the x. commandments and that even to so many degreys as be
rekennyd up there unto the fowerthe / this unto the fowerthe / these deceyuers
leave out of Waldens saying: thowghe this opinion of Walden be false / yet I
would not tarry upon it / nor upon Pope martines approuinge of Waldens book /
nor yet upon the Doctors which they name without any rehersinge of their
writings and opinions. For all thies be impertinent to the purpose as every
man may see in these deceyuers book Wherefore I pass over to the.lxxxvii. leif.

IN the.lxxxvij. leif / thies persons do allege two glosers of the law of
Canon / John Andre and John Imola which do gather and conclude by the words of
the very text of the chapter Literas: and also by the wordis of gloses there
/ that the degreys written in the leuiticall law be the same self degreis in
the which Pope innocent him self doith say that the Pope has no power to
dispense with. Here thies persons say falsely of John Andre: for in the end of
his answer he concludith that the Pope may dispense in the first degree of
consanguinite after that the matromony be ons co^summat / thus ye may se how
thies shamles persons do lie.

IN the.lxxxviij leif / they say yt master Abbot is of John andres opinion:
and here also they say falsely upon Master abbot / for he there rehersinge
diverse opinions / finally doith conclude yt ye Pope may dispense in the first
degree of affinite after yt matrimony be consummate. Thus ye may se that thies
false deceyuers do not cease to lie.

IN ye.lxxxix. leif / thies persons say yt to those persons which ye law of god
doith call neyest of blood / there can be no good nor just cause for ye which it
might be sufferd or dispensed with ye one of the^ yt should diskour ye fowlnes
of a another / nor there can not be alleged anything so honest / yt is able to
covr ye dishonesty of this thing. This is your own pestilent saying: here they
greatly accuse Abra^ / Isaac / and Jacob: for they maryd with their sistern and
with their uncles daughters / and if there can not be allegid any thing so good
and honest / yt is able to cover ye dishonestie of such marriages / than thies
persons do condemn thies holy patriarchs / and say yt in mariyng their
kinneswomen they did shamfully / and even yt thing which is so evil yt there can
not be alleged any thing so honest that is able to cover the dishonestye of
their Marriages. Who will say thus by thies holy fathers and patriarch^s / but
thies ungracious persons? Saint Hierom doith excuse Abraham in that he married
his sister / and shewith that in so mariynge he did not offend / as ye have
hard before. And saint austen against Faustus the manachye / shewith that
Jacob did not offend in maryinge of his uncles daughter / and saint ancelme
in the epistle / that thies persons affirm to be his / says that for certain
consideracions and honest causes / men sum time married their nere kynswomen
both before the law and in the law / before the law / as abraham / and Isaac
/ and Jacob / in the law / as Othoniel / thies holy men judge thies marriages to
be honest / just / and good: which thies ungracious persons do falsely
dampne for to color their dampnable opinion.

IN the.lxxxx. leif / of their book thies persons would have you to mark
specially / which diverse of thies holy and approbate doctors do hold / also
that the brother can not mary a woman that is but only handfaste unto his
brothere: and if he do: the marriage can not stand by help of any
dispensacion / and that al such marriages must needs be utterly broken / Of
this opinion thies persons say is master lyre / and also the noble divine
Hugh de sancto victore. and so in the.lxxxxij. leif of their book / they say
that marriage in the first degree of consanguinite and of affinite is not only
forbiden in the leuitical law: but also marriage in the first degree / for a
justice groundid only upon a certain common honest and comelines / is
forbidden by the law of God in the leuitical: and so can not be dispensid with
all by me. Here ye may se how openly and without all shamfastnes they lie they
bid you mark which diverse of the holy and approbate Doctors do hold that
the brother can not mary a woman that is but only handfaste to his brother
after his death (thus they must understand yt) and if a man do: the marriage
can not stand by help of any dispensacion. First thies persons have brought
no doctoure that this doith affirm / and there is nether master Lyre / nor
Hughe de sancto Victore that doith say that the pope can not dispense with a
man that he may mary that woman which was only but handfast to his brothr
aftr his brothrs death. Hugo de S. vic. in all his long process that thies
persons bring in / has not a word of the Popes power and dispensacion / nor
master Lyre in this case / moreover yt is evident that it is but only forbiden
by the law of the church that a man may not mary his brothers spouse after
the death of his brother. there is no scripture nor Doctor saying that such
marriage is forbiden by the leuitical law / nor again there is no Doctor that
doith say that the Pope can not dispense in this case. you may se what persons
be thies / they care not how falsely they say / they be not ashamid to speak
against al reason and lerning

FOr to prove their a fore rehearsed saying / they bring in a case: that there
was a man which had his eldest soon hand fast to a maid / and so this young
men died: and than his father bound him self by an other to the maiden / that
he would marey his youngest sone to her / and upon this / he made suyte to the
Pope which was Alexandre ye third: and he would not dispense and license this
mannis younger sone to marey the maiden: but let the man that swore he would
mary his younger soon to the maiden be pariuride: where upon thies persons
would conclude / that the Pope can not dispense that a man may mary his
Brothers spouse after his brothers death / which is false: for this argument is
naught to say. The Pope will not dispense upon such marriage: wherefore it
folowith that he can not dispense upon such marriage. This you se doith not
follow. For the Pope doith not alwais dispense where he may dispense. Also if
the Pope were bound to dispense in the third and fowerth degree of affinite
with every man that did or would swear to mary in thies degreis / than the
prohibicion were no prohibicion / Also where as thies persons say that the
Pope alexandre did affirm in his answer to the Bishope of Papye / ye it is
written in ye leuitical / yt ye Brother can not have the Brothers spouse / and
the^for he commaundid the bishope that he should not suffer henry that has
sworn to mary his young soon to the maid to fulfill his purpose. To this I
answer that it is not forbidden in the Leuitical law that a man shall not mary
his brothers spouse: nor there is no manner of mention made of any such marriage
/ and so ye may see that all that ever they bring / is not for their false
purpose.

IN the.lxxxxiij. leif of their book / upon their undoubted falls lies and
sayngis / they would thus conclude their false purpose sayng. Wherefore seeing that
thies things be thowghte true to so many and discrete auctours that it is not
leful for a man to marey his brother spouse: how much more unlawful owght we to
think this thing / that a man should mary his brothers wife a widow with whom
his brother has had carnally to do and that he should uncover the priuites of
her and cet. Here again they continue in their customable lying. For they say
ye many discrete auctours have iuged yt it is forbiden in ye leuitical law yt a
man shall not mary his brothers spowse: and yt such marriage is so unlawful / yt
ye Pope can not dispe^ce upon it. This ye se is manifestly false: for there is
no discrete auctor that so says / and if there be any auctores yt so judge: why
do not these persons bring them in? but they say verey falsely: for there be no
discrete aucto^r^ that so judge and say.

Wherein this their sayng they would have men to judge and believe that it is
unlawful for a man to mary his brothers spowse. And than much more unlawful
for a man to mary his brothers widow with whom his brother has hade carnally
to do etc. Here thies false deceyuers speak covertly. but I will show you a
verey treuth / which is this. The Quenis grace that now is / was a maiden when
her grace was married last / and in witness and record that this is true her
grace haith sworn / and testyfyed upon a book and received the blessid
Sacrament of the auter / that she was a maiden when her grace was last married.
Wherefore the determinacions of the facultye of divinity and the canon of the
university of Paryse (though that they be false) yet they make nothing against
this matrimony / nor the determinacions of both the facultes of law / of
thuniuersite of Angew. nor the determinacion of divinity of the university o
Biturs / for thies have determined on this wise: That if there were paste
between the husband and the wife / carnal copulacion: that than the brother /
may not marey his brothers widow: nor the Pope can not dispense upon such
marriage / so now thowgh the determinacio^s of thies universities be false / as
be al ye othr: yet thies reherside / help no thing ye pestilent and malicious
purpose of thies pestilent persons: for as much as ye Quenis grace was a maiden
/ when she was last married.

HEre now ye have hard part of thies shameless persons manners: part of their
manifest errors / part of their dampnable lyenge: and part of their
blasphemy / you have also herd how that they have brought in holy scripture /
counsels and doctors for to have colored and fortified their ungracious and
false opinion: and yet they can not bring it to pass nor never shall. Wherefore
/ althowghe in the beginning of this my answer I shewid and prouid
sufficiently the trewthe of this proposicion. That it is not against the law of
god nor against the law of nature / for a man to marey his brothers wife a
widow left without yssewe. And that the pope haith no power to dispense upon
such marriage: now yet / I will show you the same more largely by holy fathers
/ doctors / and Popes saynges / and first that such marriage is not against
the law of nature.

FIrst saint Hierome doith excuse Abraham / in that he married his sister / and
doith iustifye and defend Abraham for so mariynge. In q^st. heb. super genesis
For such marriages says saint Hierome / were not than forbiden of the law of
nature. And if it be not forbiden by the law nature a man to marey his sister:
miche less was it forbiden / a man to marey his brothers widow left without
yssew.

Saint Austen says yt in ye time of Abraham / men might lefully mary with
their sisters of the one side: co^t. faustum li. xxij. ca. xxxv.
or of both sides. and if yt were leful and not against ye law of nature than
for men to mary their sisters: it is not against the law of nature then for a
man to mary his brothers etc.

super mat. ho m. xlix
HOly Crisostome does show reasonable causes why almighty God did command the
Iues to mary their brothers widows etc. and than such marriage cannot be
against the law of nature and reason.

TErtulian / these deceyuers doctoure doith allege certain causes which be
iuged good and reasonable why the iues should in the time of the old law marey
their brothers wives widows etc. Wherefore he did not judge such marriage to be
against the law of reason: saying he assigned (after his mind) reasonable
causes: whereby men might lefully mary their brothers widows. yet ye shall
understand that I do not approve Tertulians reasons / that he shewith for
such marriage: but yet by his reasons it appears that he did not judge marriage
between the brother and the brothers widow etc. to be against the law of
reason and nature.

RVperte upon the leuitical / says that Abraham after the custom of the
heithens / among the which he dwelled / did marey his own sister: and yet for
all that he did not syn / for asmoche as unto that time / he had not by the law
commandment to the contrary: nor yet by the voice of almighty god. Now where
there is no commaundment (says he) there is no transgression of the law. so by
this doctors saying / ye may clearly se / that it is not against the law of
nature for a man to mary his sister / and than it is not against ye law of
nature for a man to marcy his brothers wife left without yssewe.

HEwgh of saint victore says that in the institution of matrimony / there
were but two persons except: li. iij. de sacramento p. ij. ca. iiij
that is but the fathr and the mother: so that it was forbiden than / that the
father should not mary with the daughter / nor the mother with the son. but
al other persons might lefully mary together by the first institucion of
matrimony. After this (says this doctor) came the second institution of
matrimony / which was made by the law written / and that did except certain
other persons beside the father and the mother / and this was done / other for
to ornate nature / or else to augment and increase chastity. And than to marey
the Brother with the Sister or the nere kynsman with the nere kynswoman began
to be unlawful by the prohibicion that before was lefull / and granted by
nature.

By this doctors mind ye may evidently se / that it is not against the law of
nature for a man to mary his sister / and than it folowith that it is not
against the law of nature / for a man to mary his brothers wife a widow etc.

ix. lib. iiij. art. xiij.
Saint Thomas says that the prohibicion leuitical that forbideth that a man
may not mary his sister / is a prohibicion and a commaundment judicial / and
he in likewise says in another place / p^. ij. 2. q. 9. arti. iiij.
that it was not forbiden by ye law of nature that a man should not marey his
sister / wherefore if it be not against the law of nature for a man to marey his
sister / it is not against the law of nature for a man to marey his brothers
wife a widow left etc.

In.iiij. sen. dis. xl. corpor. q^st.
Saint Thomas again says that by the law of nature / it is forbiden that the
father shall not marey his daughter nor ye mother her son: other persons nere
of kyn be forbiden / by the law of God / and than it folowith that for a man
to marey his brothers widow etc. is not against the law of nature.

PEter of Blesen says that at the beginning there were no mo persons except
from matrimony / but the father and mother / and is to say: that the father
may not mary the daughter / nor ye mother with the sone. And therefore says this
doctor / it was said for matrimony / a man shall leave and forsake his father
and his mother / and take him to his wife. But afterward (says he) the
lawmaker did except mo persons and forbade mo degres.

Saint Bonauenture in answeringe to an argument that infideles which turn
to cristes faith ought not to retain their wives which they had married before
/ In.iiij. distinct. xxxix. q^st. iiij.
if so be they had married the^ self to their sisters / or nere kinswomen /
such as be against the order that Christen people do keep in marriage / says
thus: that for a man to mary his sister is forbiden by the commaundment of the
church: and therefore when heithen turn to ye faith they must conform
the^self afterward to ye order of the chirch: and not to mary against ye
churches prohibicion: but if they married their sisters before: than they may not
be separate: for the ordinance of the church doith not extend to that / so
saint bonauenture doith say that for a man to mary his sister / is but
against the law of the church / and not against the law of nature: for if it
were against the law of nature: than the ordinance of the church would
dissolve and break it: the which saint Bonauenture says / the church can not
do: and than / if it be not against the law of nature for a man to mary his
sister / it is not against the law of nature for a man to mary his brothers
widow etcete.

In.iiij. did. xl. conclusione ij.
THomas also of Argentyne show that infidelis may marey in the degreis that be
forbiden to Christian men. For if they be Iues / than they may mary with their
kinswomen in the.iii. and.iiij. degree: for there was forbidden to them but the
first and second degree as show the xviij. Chapter of the leuitical / and if
the infideles be gentiles and follow only the law of nature than they may mary
in the first and second degree: for thowgh the written law positive / do forbid
such marriages: yet it semith that the law of nature doith not forbid them: the
which is manifest in ye old fathers that were before the law. For abraham
married his sister / and Jacob his uncles daughter. and if yt be not against
the law of nature / for a a man to mary his sister: it is not against the
law of nature for a man to mary his brothers widow left without yssew.

ALso Pope zachary says (which these deceivers do allege for them in their
book) that it is more forbide^ that a man shall not mary his fathers
goddoughter: and that a man ought more forbeer to marey with her / than to
marey with his fathers daughter: and yet it is evident / that it is not against
the law of God nor against the law of nature for a man to marey his fathers
goddoughter for that is forbiden but only by the law of the church. Wherefore
it folowith that it is not against the law of nature for a man to mary his
fathers dowghter. For if that thing that is more forbiden be not against the
law of nature: than that thing that is less forbidden in the same kind of
forbidinge / is not against the law of nature / and this pope Zakary speaks
of one manner of forbiddinge of marriage / and than yt folowith upon this saying
of this Pope that it is not against the law of nature for a man to mary his
sister. And so than it is not against the law of nature for a man to marey his
brothers widow etc.

NOw ye have hard by these holy fathers and men of great learning how yt it
is not against the law of nature / for a man to mary his sister. Whereof
folowith that it is not against the law of nature for a man to mary his
brothers wife a widow left with owte yssewe. The hole universal number of
expownders of holy Scripture do affirm / that from the first Institucion of
matrimony unto the time of the law of Moses: there were no moo persons
except and forbidden to marey to gether by the law of nature: but these / The
Father with the Dowghter / and the Mother with the Sone / All other persons
might marey to gether in the side line in any manner of degree of consanguinite
or affynite. co^. fan. li. xxij. ca. xlvij
Wherefore Saint Augustyn does defend the holy Patriarch Iacobe the which
married two sisters and hade them both at ons: and they were his nere kynswoman
/ for in the second degree / and the one of them was joined to him by Alians in
the first degree of affinite / and beside these two wives / this holy man Jacob
had othr two wives and they were to him and among them self in the same degree
of affinite. And yet saint Augustyn does justify this holy patriarch Jacob in
thus marying: sayng on this wise. yt is said on to Jacob for a great offense
that he had four wyves but he is cleryd and quite of this offense by a
general proclamacion. First for asmoche / as when the manner and custom was to
have moo wives than one / than to mary so was non offense. but to have moo
wives at ons now / is offense: by cause that the custom is contrary / and it
folowith anon after. Sum sins and offensis be against nature. Sum be against
customs / and sum be against preceptis and commaundmentis / and when it is thus
/ what offense is laid to this holy man Iacobe in having many wives? and if ye
ask nature why Jacob had so many wives / she will answer for him that he did
not take them fore the inordinate lust and pleasure of the body: but he vsid
his wives to increase and multiply faithful people / if you ask custom why
Iacobe took so many wives: it will answer that at that time in that country
their manner was so to mary: if ye ask the commandment why Iacobe took so
many wives: it he will answer / for by cause that there was no law that forbode
yt. but wherefore is it now an offense to take mo wives at ons than one? that
is for because laws and customs do forbid it / ye and that although a man
would take moo wives for to increase and multyply faithful people. Thus you
may se by saint Austyn that it is not against the law of nature for a man
to mary in the first degree of affinite. Parauenture sum will make this
obieccion / and say that almighty God did dispense with Jacob that he might
mary on the rehersid wise / and in such degreis of affinite and consanguinite
/ and so he did likewise with other holy men before the law. saint Augustyns
words do take this obieccion clean away: for a dispensacion (to this purpose
here) is a license granted against sum law or a declaracion of sum law. And
by saint Austyns words than there was no law that forbode Jacob so to mary /
and than had he no need of license to mary so: nor there was no law to be
declared / and therefore after saint Augustines mind: Iacobe did not offend
against the law of nature / and than after this time almighty God did forbide
certain degreis of consanguinite and affinite: as the first and second by law
positive and commandment which Moses did declare unto the people: and these
prohibicions have now no strength / but by a new ordinance which that ye
church made that Christian people should not now mary in these degres nor in
the third. Thus have ye hard before of the sentence of Thomas of Argentyne /
and the prohibicion leuital: that a man should not mary his brothers wife
(understand a widow) to be a law positive: and the same we may have of holy
Chrisostoms sayng. super matthew. ho. xlix
He shewith why almighty God commaundid the Iues to mary their brothers wifis
widows left without yssewe. And than he asked whi a man might not mary his
brothers widow that had children left by her husbonde. To this he answerethe
and say that it was done for by cawse that the law maker would have affinite
to go further a broad / whereby men might be knyt together. So by this yt
apereth that the prohibicion leuiticall which for bode that a man should not
mary his brothers widow / was a law positive and a political precepte which
now has no strength but by the reason of the constitucion of the church.
Also it do apere that it is not against the law of nature for a man to mary
his sister: his nere kinswomen: for if the custom and law of the church to
the contrary were a way / many discrete men with right judgment of reason had
lever mary their sister and nere kinswomen than other women. And yet not for no
filthye nor uncleanly desire: but rather for the natural love that they have to
their kinswomen / they should be moved to use them verey honestly ynal actis: ye
and myche better than they should use any other women. This I suppose that the
most part of discrete men and women (yt do or will examyn this well) will thus
judge. Thus now ye may perceive that it is not against ye law of nature for a
man to marey his brothers wife a widow left without etc

NOw I shall show ye yt it is not against ye law of God for a man to mary his
brothers wife a widow etc. First it is not against the old law of God: but
there is and was a commanded law universal / and bound all the Iues to mary
always their brothers wives left etc. and that upon a great pain as ye have
herd declared before / and no man can say that the Iues married their brothers
wives widows etc. by a license and dispensacion of almighty God: for yt ye
have seyn manifestly improuid.

Saint Chrysostom says that the law did compel the iues to mary their
brothers wifes widows etce. and so such marriage is not against the old law /
but it was there co^maundid super Mat. ca. xxii ho. lxxi


ALso for a man to mary his brothrs widow etc. is not against cristes law: but
rathr or savior crist did approve such marriage as ye saw her at ye beginning
of mine answer. also in alt he new Testament there is no expressid prohibicion
against ye deutronomical precepte which bond ye Iues to mary their brothrs
wives widows etc. nor yet of al ye new testament no man can gathr to conclude
a prohibicion against ye deuteronomicall commaundment / ye and beside this there
is no man that can conclude of any scripture in the new Testament any
prohibicion to let Marriage in any degree of affinite or consanguinite beside the
prohibicion of the law of nature / this is manifest: wherefore / for a man to
mary his brothers wife a widow is not against the law of God / for it is
nether against the new law nor the old.

But yet for as much as diverse Doctors do say / that it is against the law of
God to mary in the first and second degree of consanguinite and of affinite ye
shall understand that the church has made certain constitucions and laws
upon the judicial commaundments and examples of ye old law / as that
priests and religions men shall say their Canonical hours and service / of ye
which constitucion the church took their ground in ye old law: as in the
Psalm Septies in die laudem dixi tibi domine. And again / media nocte
surgebam ad confitendum tibi. Likewise the church has ordined and constitute
that we shall fast the lent: In the making of this law / the church grounded
it in the examples of the holy fathers of the old law: which fasted.xl.
days: and in the example of the fasting of our savior Christ / and upon this
saint Augustine / saint Hierome / and maximyn / say that the lent is
commaundid to be kept and fasted vi the law of God. Also the church has
ordined and decreid that no man shall mary in the first and second degree of
affinite and consanguinite / and took example and occasion in the prohibicions
of the old law in making this decre and ordinance / and therefore often times
doctors say that it is forbiden by the law of God that a man shall not mary
in these degreis. Wherefore these rehersid things and laws which be only
ordinances of the church / yet be they callid the laws of God: for because
the church in making them took occasion and example in the old law / Therefore
when any doctor says yt is forbiden by the law of God / that a man may not
mary in the first degree of consanguinite and affinite: yt must be understand
that such marriage is said to be forbiden by the law of God: because that
upon the prohibicions in the old law (which now have strength) the church
has made a new co^stitucion which doith forbid marriage in these degreis. This
rwle perceived / now I will show that the Pope has power to dispense and
license a man to mary his brothers wife a widow left etc.

THe Pope haith power to license and dispense against any prohibicion made by
the church: This is so evident yt no man can deny yt And it is only a
prohibicion of ye church yt a man shall not mary his brothers wife a widow etc.
Wherefore yt folowith that ye pope may in this case license and dispense / yt a
man may mary his brothers wife a widow left etc.

THis reason and argument is good / and the first proposicion of it is true.
And the minor and second proposicion I will prove / that it is but only a
prohibicio^ of ye church / yt a man may not mary his brothers widow etc. First
it is not forbiden by ye law of nature / nor by the old law nor in ye new law
/ as ye have hard. Wherefore such marriage is only forbiden by the prohibicion of
ye church.

in.iiij did. if.
THe same doith affirm Master dunse / saing ye affinite settith matrimony. but
yt is not but because of ye statute of the church. and so than it is not
forbide^ / but by ye statute of ye church that a man shall not mary his
brothers wife a widow.

in.iiij did. xl. q^st. ij. in corpore quest
Saint Bonauenture says yt it is not unlawful for a man to mary his sistr / but
for because that the statute of ye church has forbide^ yt no man shall mary his
sistr. and tha^ it folowith yt it is not forbide^ / but by ye statute of ye
church yt no man shall mary his brothers widow etce. for this can be no more
forbiden than the tothere.

in. iiii. dis^^nc. xxxix. q^in.
ALso saint Bonauenture says yt a Iue which has married his brothers wife a
widow / and so turns to christian faith: ought not to be divorced from his
wife. and so by this holy Bonauenturs sayng / it is not forbiden but by the
church that a man shall not mary his brothers wife a widow. For if such
marriage were forbiden / other by the law of God / or by the law of nature than
the jew that had so married and came to the faith: ought to be divorced and
seperat from his wife: yt which Bonauenture doith deny / wherefore it is not
forbiden / but by the ordinance of the church yt a man shall not mary his
brothere widow etc.

ALso these false deceivers great doctor Peter de Palude expoundinge
the.xviij. chapi. leuitical / says yt all degreis of affinite their contained
seemed to be forbiden by ye law positive.

ALso Frances Marro says yt at ye beginning of cristes church / affinite did
not let persons to mary togithr: In.iiij did. xli q^stio. v nica In supplemeit
to gavi elis in iiij. did. xli. q. i.
for there was than no law positive for it.

WEndelyn says ye affinite lettith marriage only by ye statute of ye church:
which have ordined ye persons joined in certain degreis of affinite / shall
not mary together.

Now by these doctors myndis / ye may perceue / yt it is only forbiden by ye
law of the church yt a man may not mary his brothers widow. wherefore the minor
/ and second proposicion of the reason principal is true. and so is this
conclusion / yt ye Pope may license and dispense yt a man may mary his brothers
wif a widow etc. There be also doctors that do confirm this conclusion. First
Peter de Palude expounding ye.xviij. cha. leuitical says that it semith that
the pope may dispense in all degreis of affinite that be contained in the same
chapter.

In.iiij. did. xli q^sti. iij.
Also doctor De rubone says yt ye church may dispense in any manner of degree of
affinite or co^sanguinite yt is of ye side line: as with the brothr and ye
sister / and so forth in consanguinite / and ye brothr with the brothers widow
and so forth in affinite.

super decre. xxxv. q^st. ij. iij
ALso John Cardinal de Turre Cremata disputinge in the degreis of affinite and
consanguinite and aftr answeringe to an objection that he maid against this.
That the Pope suffers ye Iues that hade married their brothers wives
according to the old law to retain their wives still after yt they be
Cristened. He says if a man died without yssew / yt than yt was not forbide^
by ye law of God / but yt the brothr might mary the brothers wife / and therefore
he says yt the Pope doith not properly dispense with the Iues yt thus come to
that faith. But rathr he doith command or consent that the Iues: shall still
remain with their brothers widows that they have married / so by this doctors
mind it was not forbiden in the old law yt a man might not mary his brothers
widow left without etc. also yt the Pope may consent to such marriage In
commentari^s super secundam secunde diui thome.


ALso Tacitan says yt ye Pope may dispense with all persons in marriage exc^pte
ye father with ye doughtr / and ye sone with ye mothr: now by thies doctors
myndis ye se that the conclusion of ye principal argument is true / yt ye Pope
may dispe^ce yt a man may mary his brothrs widow etc.

Now beside all this evident proof: yet to stablesshe and fortify this vndowtid
trowth that a man may by the Popes license mary his brothers widow etc. I will
show ye the same truth by experiens of Popes which have dispensyd in like
marriage / or in marriage yt is as greatly forbide^ as for a man to mary his
brothers widow etc.

FIrst Pope Innocent the third / willed and consentid that Liuonienses which
had married their brothers wives / and afterward turned and came to Cristes
faith / that they should continewe and keep still their brothers widows / as it
appears in the decretallis / capi. deus qui ecclesiam.

ALso Pope Martin the fiueth did dispense and license that the brother which
had known his own sister carnally / to mary afterward ye same sister

ANd Pope Alexandre the sixte did license the king of Portingale that fast was
/ to mary his wives sister / not withstanding that he had by his first wife a
child. And also the same Pope dispensed with the same king after the death of
his second wife / his first wives sister to mary his wives ne^e: and yet he
had many children by the second wife.

ALso Pope Alexandre did licenc^ and dispense with Don ferdinando king of
Cycill to marey his fathers sister: which is more than to dispense with a man
to marey his brothers widow etc.

ANd Pope July the second did dispense with the king of England that he might
marey his brothers wife a widow left etc.

ANd Pope Leo the tenth grauntid unto the Austyn friars thorowgh Cristendome
that they might dispense in the first degree of affinite: that is to say that if
the brother had married or contracte with the brothers widow wittingly or
otherwise: that thois friars might license thois persons to continewe still so
married: so that the persons married or contracte in that degree of affinite were
not accused / nor openly complained on before a judge or ere they required the
dispensacion.

ALso in like degree of affinite the Pope did dispense now of late with a
noble man of France / who is called my Lord of luce: so thus now you may se
by the Doctors minds / and by the experience of the Popes excercisinge in
this case licens and dispensacion / that the Pope may license a man to mary
his brothers widow and ceter.

FInally / this confirmith the great lernyd co^sel of Princes and Kingis:
which were examined to show ye treuth / whethr that ye Pope had power to
license men to marey in the before reherside degreis of affinite and
consanguinite / And these great learned men yt were of those kingis and princes
counssailles affirmed and granted / yt the Pope might license and dispense
upon such marriage / and so did also the popes lernyd counsayl / ye and so did
the universal noumbre of the lernyd men in Cristendome: for they herd and knew
of such licenses and dispensacions granted. And the marriages by the licenses
were made / and yet they never reclamyd nor spoke against them. Wherefore now ye
may euidentli se and perceue / that the opinion of these deceyuers is false:
where as they say that it is against the law of God / and against the law of
nature: for a man to mary his brothers widow etcet. And that the Pope has no
power to dispense upon such marriage / and yt this is verey true / yt for a man
to mary his brothers wife a widow / is another against the law of God / nor
against the law of nature: and that ye Pope has power to dispense upon
such marriage. And also by this / you may clearly see / that the
determinacions of the vniuersytes / be manyfestly false.

NOw these deceyuers opinion thus openly reprouide / and shewid to be false /
and the truth in this matter declared: I will return again unto their book.

In the.lxxxxiiij. leif of their book these persons say that there be many /
and that strong and invincible resons / the which may seem to declare and
lyghten the sentence of thuniuersites / and theys reasons they will bring in.
and for this purpose they bring in many diffinicions and descriptio^s of ye law
of God / and of ye law of nature etc. The which I do not pass upon: because I
would not be to long / and so I come to the.c. viij. leif of their book /
where as they say on this wise.

Therefore seeing that God him self here doith plainly pronounce and give
sentence: that the Cananeis and Egipcians did file their land and spot yt with
filthynes / while that they did contracte marriage with their brothers wifes:
and that he / for that cause did greatly aborre them: and did most rightfully
take vengeance upon them and punyshed them most sharply: yt cannot be no
another wise / but it must nedis follow / that god has iuged this thing to be
shamfully dishonest: and of it self (as they say) morally evil and nowght: and
also against the rightwisnes of natural law and reason: ye and to be
abominable and abhorred. This is these false deceyuers own saying / and note
and merke it well. First it is manifestly false / for almighty god did never
punyshe the Egipcians and Cananeis for because they married their brothers wives
widows left etc. Nor he did never abhor them / nor there is no scripture /
nor doctor ye says that almighty God did destroy / and punyshe the Cananeis
and Egiptians / because they married their brothers widows. Wherefore it is
shamfully false: to say yt almighty God did punyshe and destroy the Cananeis
and the Egipcia^s for marying their brothers wives widows left etce.

ALso in this their sayng / these deceyuers speak directly against their own
writing / for in the.lvj. leif of their voke they write / that the verey
heythens after the death of their wives did evermore abstain fro mariyng of
their wives sisters as from a certain impiety or abhominacion against nature.
This they wrote there / and here they write ye almighty God did take vengeance
upon the Cananeis and Egipcians for marying of their brothers widows etc. the
which is no more impiety than for a man to mary his wives sister after their
own opinion: yet beside this / these deceyuers in their a fore rehersid saying
do greatly despise and hiely blaspheme almighty God / for it folowithe of this
their saying that almighty God in commaundinge the iues to mary their brothers
wives widows left etc. that he commaundid the^ to fyle and spotte their land
with filthiness / while yt they did contracte marriage with their brothers widows
etc. and yt for fulfillinge of his commaundme^t he did abhor the Iues / ye
and of these deceyuers sayng / it folowith that almighty God in commanding
them to mary their brothers wives widows / did command them to do that
thing: for ye which he should take right vengeance upon the^ and punyshe them
most sherpely / and also that almighty God did command the Iues to do ye
thing / ye which is shamfully dishonest / and of it self morally evil / and
nowght / and against the rightwisnes of natural law and reason / ye and to be
abominable and abhorred. All this these persons say by marriage between the
brother and the brothers widow etc. For of this manner of marriage / is their
spekinge: or else it is not for their purpose / and almighty God commaundide the
Iues to mary their Brothers widows left etc.

ANd this did not almighty God only comaunde: but also commaundid to punyshe
with a grievous pain al these that would not mary their brothers widows /
wherefore to despise such marriage / is nothing else / but to despise and
blaspheme almighty God: which commanded such marriage. Who ever herd any man
that durst say that almighty God did command any manner of people to do that
thing / which is shamfully dishonest of it self / and morally evil etc. as these
blasphemers say marriage to be between the brother and the brothers widow
left witheowte yssew / is? Which Almighty God did command. Therefore you
may clerly se how hiely and grievously these persons blaspheme almightye God.
Here now you have herd one of these persons invincible reasons / that they
said they would bring in for to give light unto the determinacions of their
universities.

IN the.c. and.xj. leif of their book these persons say that there was never
nation so beistly / none so without al humanite / but that they perceived and
knew / that they ought this honor duty / and reverence to their brothern /
and brothers wives: that they should refrain from their marriages. This is these
persons own sayng: here they despise and blaspheme almighty God again: for of
this their sayng / it folowith that almighty God in commaundinge the Iues to
mary their brothers wives / that he was more best lier than any nation / and
that he did not perceive / nor knew that ye people ought this honor / dewtie
/ and reverence unto their brothern / and brothers wives: that they should
refrain from their marriages. This great blasphemy you may se folowith of
their saying. And thus now you have herd a another of these persons
invincible reasons. In the same leif of their book / these persons say / that
he that haith seen any thing in the old stories and laws must nedis know
that this manner of inceste have been had in great infamy / reprove / and
sclaundre / and yt not only in one cite / or country: but almost in every
place / and among al men been condemned as a certain wikednes against nature.
This is against these persons own sayng: wheryn they add more blasphemy. For
of this sayng it follows that almighty God in commanding the iues to mary
their brothers widows etc. commaundid them / and yt upon a great pain / to do
yt thing yt is condemned in all contreis and cities / for a certain wikednes
against nature. Here now ye have herd another of their reasons invincible:
Sewrely these may well be called strong and invincible reasons / in blaspheming
and dispisinge of almygty God for I think no man / no nor yet the devil him
self can make none stronger / nor more invincible for to despise and blaspheme
almighty God than these pestilent persons do here make.

But now for as much as these ungracious persons do thus despise and blaspheme
/ not only almighty God: but also his holy law and commaundment I am
compellid to desire ye to call to yowr remembrance that thing which I have
shewid ye before / that is to say / that almighty God did never in all the old
law command any thing to be continually kept / and yt upon a pain: but
that which was just / good / and holy / and a mean that the kepers of it
might besauide / and come to everlasting life. And therefore almighty God says
Custodite leges meas atque iudicia: leuiti. xviij
que facie^s homo / viuet in eis. And this is the cause that ye blissed Apostle
callith the old law holy / and the commaundment holy / just and good / sayng.
to. vij.
Lex quidem sancta / and mandatum sanctum / iustum / and bonum. For thowghe the
Iues in the old law used certain things that were nethr good nor godly /
yet was there nothing commaundid in the old law to be continually kept / but
that was holy just and good to the keeper: and (as I have said) a mean /
whereby he might be justified and sauid / and in that law it was commaundid
that every man should always mary their brothers widow etc. wherefore such
marriage was holy / just / and good. This Argument is evident / both by the very
words of almighty God / and also by the words of the Apostle / and so now by
this ye may evidently perceive how that these ungracious persons / in
dispisinge of marriage between the brother and ye brothers widow etc. do
despise and blaspheme almighty God and his holy law

IN the.c. vij. leife of their book they say that they will show two reasons /
which shall prove as openly as it can be / that a man can not mary his brothers
wife. First because that affinite doith as well let marriage as doith
consanguinite. Second / because that he that so marieth does shame and
dishonestye unto his father. And for to prove the first reason / these persons
say / that not only by the law of God so many persons be excludid from
marriage in the line of affinite / as to be excludid and forbide in the line of
consanguinite: but that also the church is compellid to set the bonds of
marriage in the lines / both of affinite and consanguinite in like distance and
degree / and for to show this ordinance of the church / these persons bring
in saint Gregore / and Pope July / saint Austen / Isodore / and master
Abbot. Thus now I suppose these persons would make their argument Affinite
doith as well let marriage as consauguinite: but it is forbiden by the law of
God / and by the law of nature that a man shall not mary his sister / because of
their co^sanguinite: Wherefore it is forbide^ by the law of god and by ye law of
nature: yt a man shall not mary his brothrs wife because of their affinite To
this argument I will answer. First with their own doctors saying Peter de
Palude which expounding ye.xviij. chap. leuitical / says yt it femeth ye ye
pope may dispense in all ye degreis of affinite there contained / but not in all
ye degreis of consanguinite / and with this sayng / this doctor doith deny
these persons principal proposicion of their argument which is this: yt
affinite doith as well let marriage as co^sanguinite / for he says yt affinite
doith not let marriage as doith co^sanguinite / because yt (after his mind) ye
Pope may dispense in all degreis of affinite contained in ye.xviij. chap. of ye
leuitical law: and so he can not in all degreis of consanguinite that be there
forbiden.

ALso this first and principal proposition of these persons argument is false:
yt affinite doith as well let marriage as consanguinite: for consanguinite may let
marriage by the law of nature / as the father may not mary with ye dowghtr / nor
the sone with the mothr / by reason of their consanguinite: and therefore these
persons were forbiden to mary together by the law of nature / and exempte at ye
first institucion of matrimony / but so were no manr of persons in no degree of
affinite: wherefore this proposicion is false / that affinite doith as well let
marriage as doith consanguinite.

ALso in the decreys Ca. Non dz / extra de consanguinitate and affinitate / yt
is written and decrreyd that the child that is had in the second marriage may
mary with the kynne of the first husbonde / and thus if I married a wife and so
died / the children yt my wife had by a nothr man / might mary with my kin /
as the sone yt my wife had by a another man / might mary my sister /
notwithstanding the affinite that was sumtyme between my sister and my wife:
and this decre was made by counsel general / but after my death my sone may
not mary with my sister / by the reason of consanguinite / which by me
remains still in my sone toward mi sister. And therefore it is salse to say
that affinyte doith as well let marriage as doith consanguinite.

FIrthermore and if it were grauntid that affinite which is between the brother
and the brothers widow did as well let marriage as doith consanguinite that is
between the brother and the sister: yet this grauntid / it would nothing help
these deceyuers false opinion / for it is nether against the law of God / nor
against the law of nature for a man to mary his sister. First it is not
against the law of nature for a man to mary his sister / as ye have hard it
declared before: nor it is not against Cristes law. For owr savior Crist did
never forbide such marriage: nor no man can conclude of any scripture in all the
new testament / that it should be forbiden that a man may not mary his sister:
and as to the old law where it was forbidden that a man should not mary his
sister: that prohibicion now has no strength: and therefore yt is not forbide^
by the law of God nor by the law of nature for a man to mary his sister.
Wherefore the second proposicion of these persons Argument is also false:
which is this. That it is against the law of God and against the law of nature
/ for a man to mary his sister. and therefore their conclusion is false / which
is this / that it is against ye law of God and against the law of nature / for
a man to marry his brothers wife a widow left without yssewe. Thus you may
see that these deceyuers first reason in false and nowghte.

THe second reason / that these persons say doith openly prove that a man can
not mary his brother wife a widow etc. is this. because that he that so maryeth
doith shame and dishonestye to his father. The which in the.cxxviij leif of
their book they go abowte to declare on this wise: He that maryeth his brothers
wife / takithe his fathers flesh and blood to marriage: the which thing
plainly is against the law of nature / for seeing the husbonde and the wife be
one flesh and blood: truly he yt takith his brothers wife / takith also ye
flesh and blood of his fathr / and as for our brothr is the flesh and blood
of our father and mother / and ye more nerer to them than any of both their
sisters / because he is their own sone / therefore if it be against the law of
God and against the law of nature to mary our fathers sisters or ower mothers
sisters / or else the wife of our fathers brother or our mothers brother / whose
wifes be but of affinite to us / and that only in the second degree: truly
much more it should be against nature to mary our brothers widow: for the
nerer that they cum to the stoke to be one flesh and blood: the more they
ought to be forbiden: but our brother is more nerer unto our father / as is
above said / than either own vnkilles or auntis. This is now these persons
second reason the which I beseke ye to note and mark well / and ye shall se
whate goodely lerning and sophestry they show in it. For to perceive this
their Argument / ye must note how the husband / and the wife be one flesh
and blood: and how the father and the sone be one flesh and blood. First the
husband and the wife be one body in consenting together in their myndis and
willis / and in geuinge and granting each of them to other the use of their
bodies / and thus on this wise be the husband and the wife one body and blood
/ and the father and the sone be one flesh and blood / by the reason that the
sone is engendered of the fathers seade and substance by natural propagacion /
and now for to say that he that marieth his brothers widow marieth his
fathers flesh and blood / that is to say the same flesh and blood that
came of the widows husbandis father by generation: is openly false. For the
widow doith not come of the sead and substance of her husbandis fathere nor no
part of her body and blood comith of her husbands fathers flesh and blood:
for to make her on this manner one flesh and blood with her father in law.
And this these Sophisters must prove if they would have their Argument good /
for they must show that like as the father and the sone is one flesh and
blood / so is the sone and his wife one flesh and blood. Which is false: for
the sone and the wife be one body after one manner / and the sone and the father
be one flesh and blood after a another manner: as I have shewid ye before / and
therefore their argument is nowght and doith nothing conclude for their purpose.

Also the widow is no more one body with her husband that is dead: and
therefore he that marieth the widow doith not mary her father in laws flesh
and blood / the antecedent may be declared thus: if the widow were still one
body with her husband that is ded) she might never mary more: for she might
not grant and give the use of her body to no man: for she is one body still
with her husband that is deid / and so than might she never mary / which were
the heresy that tertulian was condemned in: wherefore it is false to say that
he that marieth his brothers widow / marieth his fathers flesh and blood.

FArthermore of this these persons reason / ye may conclude: that the father
and the sone may not mary ye mother and the daughter thus. For he that takith
and mariyth his fathers wives dowghter / doith mary and take his fathers
flesh / and blood / for the father and his wife is one flesh and blood: and
the daughter / also is one flesh and blood with her mother and with her
father in law / by the reason that he is one flesh and blood with her mother
/ and who so ever mariyth his fathers flesh and blood: doith against the law
of nature / wherefore the sone may not mary with his mother in laws dowghters:
which is manifestly false.

OF this reason ye may conclude that.ij. brothern may not mary.ij. sistern /
thus: he yt marye his brothers wives sister maryeth his brothers flesh and
blood / for the brother and his wife be one flesh and blood / and ye brothers
wife and her sister be one flesh and blood / and the brothers wives sister is
one flesh and blood with her sisters husbandis / and he is one flesh and
blood with his father: wherefore his brother may not mary his wives sister for
as much as she is his fathers flesh and blood / by reason that her sister
has married his brother / ye may se whate a Sophistical reason these persons
bring in greatly to their own rebuke and shame if they had any shame.

ALso this is manifestly false / yt they say yt he which maryeth his fathers
flesh and blood / doith plainly against ye law of nature for a manis sone may
mary by the law of nature his brothers daughters daughter / which is his
fathers flesh and blood. This no man will deny wherefore it is false to say yt
he that marith his fathers flesh and blood / doith against the law of nature.
Here now ye have hard these persons second reason / by the which they said
that they would prove yt a man might not mary his brothers widow etc. and they
have nothing done but showed them self sophestres / full of words and empty
of al treuthe and reason.

ALso in this their second reason / they say yt is more against the law of
God and against ye law of nature for a man to mary his brothers widow etc. than
for a man to mary his aunte of any side / of this sayng / it folowith yt
almighty god in commaundinge the iues to marey their brothers widows did
command / them to do that thing that was against ye law of god and against
the law of nature: and bond them to the same upon a great pain: and yt thing
yt was less against ye law of nature / he forbadde them: which is a
commanding and a doing against ye right order of reason. For reason willith yt
the thing which is most evil / should be most forbiden / and of these persons
saying it folowith yt almighty God did contrary in the old law / and thus
these persons / despises almighty Goddis commanding and doing.

IN the.c. and.xlj. leif of their book / they say that criste another did
nothing / nor said no thing: but yt he had takyn of his fathr: nor brake no
thing of them: which his father commaundid / and would have done. This they
understand in things yt were commaundid and in such as were forbiden in ye
old law: for they would by this their sayng conclude that ye Pope haith no
power to dispense / and license a man to mary his brothers wife a widow etce.
for by cause they say / that such marriage was forbiden in the old law. And
our savior crist did never break nothing of them which his father commaundid
/ and would have done: wherefore the Pope that is Cristes vicare / can not
license upon such marriage / upon this their saying / yt folowith that the Iues
be bound still to mary their brothers widows left without yssewe: and to
circumcision and to all the ceremonies and Iudicialls: For almighty God would
that the Iues should keep them / and commaundid them to keep these and owr
savior Criste did never break nothing of them which his father would have
kept. Wherefore the Iues be now bound to al these / ye and to all the hole law
of Moses. This is false and against the techinge of the Apostle where he
says, if ye be circumcised Crist shall do you no good: Gala. iiij. and. v Gal.
ij.
nor the keeping of his commandments shall be nothing profitable to you. And
again saint Pol speaks against Peter to his face / because he would ye
gentiles that were conuertid to keep the ceremonies of the Iues. Here now ye may
see that the Apostle did teache the people to break and to do contrary to the
old law: ye and so haith the church decreid and made / that no man shall now
mary his brothers widow which is against the commaundment of the old law.

But for as much as they say that our savior Crist did never break ^o thing
of them which his father almighty God commaundid and would have done: you must
note and understand that almighty God did command certain things to be
kept for a certain time / and in like manner certain things he did forbide
for a certain time / as the Iudicialles and ceremonies of the old law he would
have such as were commaundid to be done / the people to fulfill them and keep
them: and such as he forbade that the people should not do them / and yet for all this / almighty God did not command the Iudiciallis nor ceremonies always
to be kept: but he willid that the Iues should keep them unto the time that it
should please him to send his sone to take upon him our nature: and so to be
very God and man our savior Crist: and so to show unto the world further his
fathers will and pleasure / and what he would have all manner of people to keep
and obey from that time forewarde: and than our savior crist did dissolve the
Iudicialles and Ceremonies of the old law / so that no man should be bound
to keep them any longer: nor put any longer hope or trust of salvation in them.

And from that time forth ward that almaner of people should put there hope
of salvation in beleuinge in Almighty God and in Justly kepinge such Laws
and such commaundmentis as almighty God had sent unto them by his sone ower
Savior Criste. And thus owr Savior Criste took away after his coming the
Iudicialles and Ceremonies of the old law according unto his fathers will
and commandment. For ye time of them was than exspired / but now I must
return unto these persons saying which is this. It was commaundid by almighty
God in ye old law that a man should not mary his brothers widow etc. and or
savior crist never brake nothing of them / which almighty God commaundid and
would have done: wherefore the Pope can not dispense upon such marriage. To this
reason I answer that ye mayor of ye reason is false: which is this / that
almighty God commanded in the old law that no man should mary his brothers
wife widow etc. for in ye old law almighty God did expressly command the
Iues always to mary their brothers wives widows left etc. and that upon a
great pain / and therefore it is false to say that almighty God did command
in ye old law that no man should mary his brothers widow etc. and so therefore
is this false that ye Pope have no power to dispense upon such marriage: which
these persons would conclude upon there false proposicion.

IN the.c. and.xlv. leif of their book these persons write that ye leuitical
prohibicion that a man should not mary his brothers wife a widow etc. Thus they
must understand yt or else it is not to ye purpose though it was lymyted and
restrained of almighty God in ye Deuteronomi / yet for all that: because
afterward ye said restraynt was taken away of God him self: by ye coming of
Cr st: here these persons do not declare whate they mean and understand / by
lymytynge and restrayninge of the leuiticall prohibicion / nor yet what they
would have understood by the taking away of the restraint / at the coming of
or savior crist: but where as they say yt the leuitical prohibicion that a man
should not mary his brothers widow etc. was restraynide in the Deuteronomi /
here these persons say manifestly false: for as I have said oftin times / and
as ye have hard many doctors say / ye and as the leuitical law it self says
/ yt there is no such prohibicion there. and therefore there was no restraint
made upon that prohibicion: nor yet owr savior Criste did not at his cominge
take away the restraynt: for there was none to be taken away but in the
Deuteronomi almighty God did plainly and streyghtely command that the Iues
should mary always their brothers wives widows left etc. and this confirms
Isichius sayng: in comme^. leui
that ye law Deuteronomical did not only comma^de me^ to mary their brothers
wives widows: but it did also compel them so to mary. This therefore can be
callid no restraynt: and thus all these persons saying is false.

IN the same leif / these deceyuers say / yt if the Pope now a days could by
dipensacion / cause yt a man might mary after ye law of ye Deuteronomi his
brothers wife which doith dye having none yssewe for to reyse up sede to his
brother: without doughte he should make Christian men at this day to follow the
Iues ceremonies and supersticion sues / which the Pope can not do / no more
than he can cause that we should keep the Sabot day: or that they should be
circuncisid. To this I answer / that the Pope can not by dispe^sacion cause a
man to mary his brothers widow etc. as the Iues in ye old law married theirs.
Nor the Pope doith not license a man to mary his brothers widow after ye
facion and manner: but the Pope doith license and dispense yt a Christian man may
mary his brothers widow as a king or a prince to mary his brothers widow / to
be mean that queytnes and peace may be kept between realm and realm: and
for to continue love and frendeship between Christian princes / and for other
such reasonable and profitable causes concerning the common welthe of
Cristendome / and thus for these / and such causes the Pope doith and may
dispense that a man may mary his brothers widow etc. and not after the manner
of the Iues: and therefore these persons bring in a thing that no man will deny
/ and yet it is nothing for their purpose.

IN the.cliij. leif of their book / these persons say that like as a man may
freely fulfill his purpose of a more holyer living (the sayng nay and froward
forbiddinge of his indiscrete prelate notwithstanding) even so it is in marriage
that if a man's conscience move him to divorce: that he dyuorse him self though
the church say contrary. Here now ye may se and perceive these pestilent
persons ungracious and maliciouse intent: and what they counsel / and would
have done (ye is to say) a man to divorce him self / and to forsake his wife
if his conscience move him to divorce) without any further proof or showing of
any just cause: and to mary where yt plesid him though the church said the
contrary: which is clerly against al reason.

ALso by this their saying you may perceive that these persons would utterly
destroy the blissed sacrament of matrimony. For by this mean and way: every
man as often as he would change his conscience to divorce / so often he might
change his wife / ye and the wife her husband / without shewinge of any other
proof or cause / and without any manner of sentence and judgment of the church:
ye and thowgh the church said and commaundide the contrary / and so by this /
should the sacrament of matrimony be destroid. Here ye may se what pestlent
persons these be / which have compiled this book that I answer to.

FVrthermore their comparison and similitude: whereby they would prove that a
man may divorce him self from his wife by his conscience / thowghe the
Church say contrarey / is openly false. Fore thowghe yt be so that a Priest
/ be mouede in his mind to be a religious man / may freely fulfill his purpose
of a more holier lyuinge (notwithstanding ye nay of his indiscrete prelate) yet
it doith not follow / yt even so yt is in marriage: yt if a man's conscience move
him to divorce / yt he may divorce him self and forsake his wife / and mary
anothr / thowghe ye church say contrary: This case is not like the othr: first
forbicause yt a priest which goith to religion for a more holier living / may
fulfill his godly purpose lefully (notwithstanding ye froward / forbidding of
his indiscreet prelate) for as much as the priest being at liberty / and doing
no wrong to no person by the reason of his going to religion: but seruith
almighty God better. Thus he may fulfill his godly purpose though his
vndiscreite prelaite say contrary / but so may not a man that is married /
divorce him self when his conscience mouith him to divorce / for because the
married man is not at liberty / For he is bound to continue with his wife
according to ye laws of matrimony during al ye time of his life / nor he can
not depart from his wife for to mary anothr: while yt his wife is a live.
Wherefore there is no conscience that can help a married man in ye matter of
divorce / except he can manifestly prove some just cause before ye church:
that his marriage is not good. And than he must abide and stand to the churches
judgment and determinacion. And therefore this is false / to say that like as a
priest may for a more holier lyuinge / fulful his purpose (notwithstanding the
forbiddinge or nay of his vndiscreite prelate) even so it is in marriage / that
if a man's conscience move him to divorce: that he divorce him self thowghe the
church say contrary. Now here ye may se what thing these persons would have
done / and after what manner.

NOw for to come to an end / these deceyuers say in ye preface of their book:
that the universities will put for the reasons of more weight shortly to all the
world than these persons have shewid in their book: sewerly so had
thuniuersities need to do. For these persons (as ye have seen) have brought
noone but such as be abominable / shamful and false / but the universities
aftr due ordyr and reason / should a put for the first their reasons: and than
their determinacions / and that specially in determininge a matter or a point
of our faith / and I suppose so they would have done / if they had determined
the trowth / but for as myche as they have determined that thing that is very
false / to be true: therefore they put forth no reasons with their
determinacions: nor they can none find to put forth / why they have thus
determined: wherefore I breuely conclude / that the universities have determined
falsely in this case that I have spoken of / and that this proposicion is false
/ that yt is against ye law of God and against ye law of nature for a man to
mary his brothers wife a widow left etc

Now ye have hard part of these persons blasphemy / part of their errors /
part of their shamful lies / and falsnes / and beside all this ye may perceive
how these ungracious persons have given great occasion to destroy kyndenes and
amite among christian princes / and ye they sow for love / hatered and discord
/ and also ye may perceive what great myscheif these persons with their labor
/ counsel / opinion / and book have begun ^ye and how much more myscheyf they
would do / if they might bring their maliciouse purpose to effect: ye may
lykwise perceive in what confusion (with their false opinion) they would bring
princes concerning their marriages. And finally what a sisme and a division
(with their opinion) they have stered up in cristendom / for by their opinion /
they affirm yt al cristes church haith thus many years erred in ye faith in
dispensing in ye first and second degree of affinite and consanguinite / all this follows of these ungracious persons false opinion / with much more than I
rehearse / wherefore let no man judge yt in my answer I rebuke them / with ire and
passion: but rathr I had cause to reprove them sharpelyer for ye they have so
hiely offendid almighty god: ye and they cause many so to do / wherefore these
evil persons ar well worthy rebuke and reprove. or savior crist vehemently
rebuked ye false scribes phariseis and false teachers / because they offendid
god and taught other so to do / also John bap. reproved and sharply rebuked
false prophets and teachers / so did Pol and John in their pistils / Hierom /
Ambros / austen and many othr holy fathers: for nothing offends God more than
teachers of false doctrine / nor there is non so incurable a pestilence / nor so
hurtful to man's soul / as is false doctrine / if it be accept and believed /
wherefore ye may perceive yt I had a just cause to rebuke and reprove these
ungracious persons yt have set forth this book yt I answer to. For they teache
false doctrine and would have yt to be accept and believed: and though I have
not so substancially and profoundly answered here in every point / as other
better lernyd men parauentur shall do heraftr yet for all yt my conscience would
not suffer me to hold my peace / but compellid me to offer with ye poor widow a
farthing of my lerninge to the honor of almighty God. Wherefore I will mekely
beseke ye to accept this my answer / my zele / and will / in good wurth: as I
trust he doith / for whose sake and cause I took upon me to make this answer /
which is owr savior crist: to whom be given all honor and laud. AMEN.

The lefe / pagyn / and line. the fautes. thame^deme^ts B. i. Pagi. i. Lin. i.
almighty almighty god H. i. Page i. Lin. viij. is it it is N. i. Page ij. Lin.
viij. other oath N. iij. Page i. Lin. xv. has no power / has power.

Imprinted at Luneberge the year of ower Lord God. M.D.XXXII. in May


