A VVEDDING-RING, FITTED TO THE FINGER OF EVERY PAIR THAT HAVE OR SHALL MEET
IN THE FEAR OF GOD: OR, THAT DIVINE CIRCLE OF HEAVENLY LOVE, WHEREIN man and
wife should walk all their days. THE POSIE WHEREOF IS AN expression of A good
Husbands Kindness toward his virtuous wife, with her retaliacion of like
affection.

Woodcut printer's device showing an old man standing beside an olive tree;
above him, on a scroll, the motto 'Noli altum sapere' (McKerrow, 310).

LONDON, Printed by ELIZ. ALLDE for EDWARD BLOVNT. 1632.

To my worthy and much honored friends, M aster William Hackwill Esquire, one
of his Majesty's Justices of Peace for the County of Buckingham, with his
truly virtuous and religious Bedfellow, Mistress Elizabeth Hackwill, the dew of
Heaven, and fatness of the Earth, Grace and Peace be multiplied in Jesus
Christ.
Worshipful, and right dearly beloved: I have often sought opportunity to
salute you jointly; acknowledging my self your debtor many ways, and which is
more; unable to satisfy any: it was the grief of Darius, that he should die
indebted to his friend, which departing he bewailed, as his last, not his least
mis-hap, having received a courtesy, he should not live to requite it. if
such an acknowledgement may not go in part of payment, I might despair;
having received many from you, both while J lived near you, as since my
remouall at your motion, into these parts (distance of place has not stopped the
current of affection, nor absence begot oblivion) and yet find my self able to
do no more: only this is my comfort, Good Will has not been wanting; if
ability answered desire, you should find me as ready to pay, as to confess:
J would not faigne a debt; to increase it, the property of insinuating
flattery; neither would I deny it, where it is due, the guise of servile
baseness; judging it better thus to publish my own poverty, then to be
censured as ungrateful, or of my friends forgetful.

Preaching at the Marriage of Mr. John Berrie.
Occasion lately directed my meditations upon this subject: wherein the mutual
happiness of your choice, did often present it self unto my thoughts; the
matter and manner of handling;

(If the testimony of an experienst friend may be thought impartial) applying
it self most fully and fitly to you both; that I could not forbear to impart
it as a messenger of thankfulness, no work of worth; except you be pleased
by acceptance, to make it worth perusing: here you may read your selves, and
be stirred up to bless God, the maker of Marriages, for his good providence in
your meeting; here you may see that Wedding-ring, which you both put on, in
conceit and resolution, at the Marriage-day; that Divine Circle or heavenly
round of hearty reflecting-loue, wherein you do, and all married persons
should move during life; to account of their own virtuous mates, as excelling
others; am I deceived? or experience has taught me what I have written: no
more: neither may I speak; what I have seen and observed, of your happiness
in this kind: live long more happy; it is lawful to pray, as Ioab for David:
2. Sam. 24.3.
The Lord your God add unto it an hundredfold, that your eyes may see it: the
Lord increase your content daily, and double the portion of the saving graces
of his Spirit upon you both: otherwise I cannot steed you; prayers you shall
not want, while I remain.

From my study in Barstaple, January 1. 1630. W. CROMPTON.

A VVEDDING-RING: FITTED TO THE FINGER of every Pair, that have or shall meet
in the fear of God.
PROVERBS 31.29. Many-daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all.


FRom the tenth verse of this Chapter to the end thereof, ( Reverend, right
Worshipful and all dearly beloved,) you have, and at leisure may read, an
Artificial Wedding-song; or a divine Hymn, describing and commending Marriage
with virtuous women: penned or appointed, as may be probably conceived, to be
said or sung at Solemn meetings; especially upon such occasions; every verse
begins with a letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, in order from the beginning to the
end: composed much after the manner of those Pshalmes of degrees with
Rhethoricall gradations: Psalm 110.121.122.123.124.125, etc.
partly they might be more sweetly uttered; either in parts by many, or
altogether by one, to the greater content of the speaker, profit of the hearer,
and delight of both; partly the matter therein contained, might be with more
case remembered, and longer retained.

In it self, it is a Prophecy, containing much good counsel, therefore
called, (if I mistake not) The Crown of Solomon: Cant 3.11.
good Counsel to a King, respectively, about the choice of a wife, is as his
Crown, or the Crown of his Crown, for the consolation of all true hearted
subjects and preservation of the publike-weale.

Go forth, O ye Daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon, with the Crown,
wherewith his mother crowned him, in the day of his espousals, and in the day
of the gladness of his heart: that Crown I take to be this Prophecy;
wherein, as out of a sparkling Diamond, you may see the reflecting image of
true beauty, and read both the work and worth of a good woman: and fitly may
it he called a Crown: every wife thus qualified, is a Crown to her husband,
says Solomon elsewhere; Prou. 12 4.
her virtues and graces are as so many Rubies or glittering Pearls of great
price, which do well become and adorn a Crown: Go forth therefore, O ye
Daughters of Zion, and behold Solomon with his Crown, whereon we find this
Posie engraven as with a pen of iron, in letters of gold, never to be forgotten.

The price of a virtuous woman is far above Rubies.

Take notice first of her fidelity: Verses 11, ^
the heart of her husband does safely trust in her; free from those boisterous
storms of jealousy, and distracting cares about household affairs, whereby
others are tossed day and night, he rests himself in quiet repose, like a ship
at Anchor in the calm harbor, knowing his wife will answer her trust, being
never idle, nor ill employed.

Secondly, of her industry, she seeks wool, Verse 13.
and flax, and works willingly; delays not, till materials inuit her, but
sends and seeks; her thoughts prevent occasion; her hands and eyes contend
with time, she does those things freely, which others may do, constrained
through fear or necessity.

Thirdly, of her vigilance, Verse 15.
she rises while it is yet night; diligence expels drowsinesse, and teaches
good wives to remove darkness by an artificial Sun, that the goodness of
God in the approaching-light, may be opportunely met (not meritoriously matched)
with some good work of theirs: weakness I know ties many, but sloth more,
too long in bed; lazy humors are best purged by early rising.

Fourthly, of her charity: she stretches forth her hands to the poor and
needy; Verse 20.
like some pleasant river she feeds and clothes the neighboring valleies,
which through the heat of cruelty, or the cold of poverty, were ready to pine
away; hungry bellies and naked arms are the subject of her meditation, it is
not enough others know her to be good, except they feel it; helpful
compassion is a mark of true devotion while she feeds or clothes her body with
rich dainties, she is observed to sigh and say, What abundance do I enjoy,
when many a good soul wants necessaries? her fullness yields no satisfaction,
unless it ouerslow by communication.

Fifthly, of her providence in governing her little Kingdom; Verse 21.22, 23,
24.
like a well-ordered Army, every one furnished, has his place of employment
assigned; Laws enacted; hours of examination appointed; and lest she should
err in judgment, she looks well to the ways of her household, her eyes are
in every corner: children learning, servants laboring, all obedient to the
beck of her hand and eye, such soueraignety shines in the face of virtue: she
gives maidens a portion; their lavish singers may not be their own carners,
who care as little in the spending, as they did in getting their Masters
estate; she clothes her family with scarlet, the lasting-weed of deserved
honor; implying what she is, and deserves to have: makes her self carpets of
tapestry; the furniture of her house and table is the fruit of her hands, made,
not bought; ornaments in a Family are commendable Emblemes of pious industry,
as more useful things; God allowing not only to sustain, but to delight
Nature: she keeps her husband ever in that decent fashion of attire, which
becomes his age and calling, so that he is specially noted when he sits in the
gates, amongst the chief of the Land: no pains about him is grievous to her,
for whose sake all the rest are chearefully undertaken.

Sixthly, of her wisdom and discretion; Verse 26.
in speech she opens her mouth with wisdom, her words are few, seasonable
and weighty: attire, not curious nor careless, but such as the time allows in
modest and grave Matrons: strength and honor are her clothing: and for
behavior; in her tongue is the law of kindness, she prouokes none to evil
thoughts by lightness; neither sends any from her discontented, through sour,
sullen, and heavy sadness; her carriage is so sweetly tempered with modesty and
humility, that at once she cheares the virtuous and curbs the vicious-minded.

Lastly, her piety, she fears the Lord, Verse 30.
which is a corner stone in this building, the foundation of all; what good she
does, is in obedience unto God* and will be constant in doing, till the Lord
leave commanding: Vide The lasting Jewel.
but of this I have spoken enough already, upon another occasion, in explaining
the two last verses of this Chapter. Who has or can find such a virtuous
woman? her self is portion enough, she passes her weight in gold: her dwelling
is a representation of heaven; O happy man, and therefore happy, because
husband to such a wife, who brings joyful content to his heart, delight to his
eyes, glory to his head, and helps him keep a continual feast. Adam might
have had a garden, no Paradise without Eve; man is imperfect without a wife,
unhappy without a good one; what the heavens have bin thought to be above him,
and his soul within him, that a virtuous wife is indeed about him, like
well-tuned Virginals, her life is perfect Music: no harsh sounds, nor iarring
strings on her breast: if she entreat, it is with humility; if she complain, it
is with tears; if she chide, it is with smiles: how can she displease, whose
harmless thoughts are still intent to please? he has put off nature, that
finds no content in such a Turtle; not to acknowledge such a helper, argues
want of grace: let him seek her that wants one, let him mourn that has lost
one, let him praise her that enioyes one; so much is employed in the Text. Her
husband also he praises her, saying, Many daughters have done virtuously, but
thou excellest them all.

The words are a conclusiue branch of the Prophecy; a speech of praise
delivered in the person of an experienst husband, and grounded upon observation:

Dividing themselves into A Commendation, and A Comparison.


Commendation of virtuous daughters, with their number: Many daughters have
done virtuously.

Comparison, wherein one so qualified is preferred to all, But thou excellest
them all.

Daughters carry their duty in their name: (...) A radicae. (...) A disicare.
the word in the Original springs from a root, which signifies, A building, or
to build; and may yield us a twofold instruction.

First, that every virtuous daughter is a building: and therefore in the
creation of woman, it is said, that the Lord built her of the ribbe; as men use
to do stately houses, fair, strong, Genesis 2.22.
and well-seated, for their delight and profit; without which they cannot well
be. What Tisaphernes Lieutenant to the Persian King spoke once of Alcybiades,
comparing him to a fair house of pleasure, Plul. in vit. Aleybiades. See the
Prophets prayer Psalm. 144.12
is truly verified of a virtuous daughter; she is a building both delightful
and fruitful. Compared for stateliness and profit, to a Merchants ship, Prove.
31.14. Now in all buildings, we may observe cost, comeliness, and use; no
less in virtuous daughters; comely they are to the eye, many ways
beneficial, and they want no cost, will spare none, or else none should be
spared for their good: they are the Lords building, Psa. 122.3.
like Jerusalem, a house that is compact together at unity in it self: not
like the dropping house, Pro. 19.13.27.15.
mentioned in the Proverbs, but like our Saviors house built upon a rock;
Math. 7, 24
which proves a constant defense for the owner, against the boistrous winds of
violent assaults, and the scorching Sunshine of alluring temptations, for
outward structure of several parts in order, for inward furniture, gifts and
graces of the mind, admirable: observe and see, the foundation, turrets,
windows, doors, inner-chambers, all hanged with rich jewels of intellectual
virtues, and divine graces, and you will say, This only deserves the name of
None such: no building to the sight so pleasant, none for use so profitable, as
this living, Spirabile Coelum. Bodin. li. 1. c. 4.
moving, speaking Tabernacle: I might stay you ouer-long in the Entry; should I
stand to vnuaile the whole Fabric: you may admire the rest by what you see a
far off, I dare but point to it, and pass away: excellency in any
workmanship, calls for an exact or no description; lest fruitless haste
should eclipse the praise and glory of the Workman.

(...)
Secondly, every virtuous daughter is, and must be a builder; we have seen what
she is, idle she may not be, her name implies such action, as tends to
perfection: a builder she is, first, to her decayed parents, by upholding the
credit of an ancient family, by renewing and continuing their name, and nature
with posterity, and by repairing the breach, age has made in the ruinous
houses of their bodies, with a timely supply of all their wants; Pro. 23.22.
a virtuous daughter makes old parents begin to live young again, partly by
feeling present comforts, and partly by feeding upon hopes of future happiness.

Secondly, she is a builder together with her husband, as copartner,
yoke fellow, Genesis 2.18.
and help meet for him, in the work committed to their trust; if one should
build, and the other pull down, we might expect a Babel, no prosperous
building; but Solomon tells us, Pro. 14.1.
every wise woman builds her house, the foolish only pluck it down with
their hands; and that was the reason his building in the later end, went so
backewardly-forward, 1. Kin. 1.3, 4, 7, 8.
having so many vicious daughters about him: a good woman raises up the ruins
of decayed places, studying how to preserve her husbands credit and good name,
both in regard of God and men; when the contrary, makes the stateliest turrets
stoup, through pride, O domus antiqua quam dispari domino dominaris?
riot and idleness, dismantling ancient monuments of strength, to bury her
husbands honor in the rubbish thereof: the dwelling of one is like the
pleasant spring, even in the midst of Winter, fresh, gay, and pleasant: the
house of the other, like stormy VVinter, in the middle of May, torn, ragged,
and ill-fauoured: Pro. 24.30, 31.
I went by the field of the slothful, and lo, it was all grown over with
thorns, and nettles, and the stone wall thereof was broken down.

Thirdly, she is a builder in regard of her children, instrumentally to give
them being, Education of children is the foundation of the Commonweal.
and well-being, both for conception, birth, and education, by her industrious
care, tender infants at first, like unto the creeping Iuy on the wall, come to
be tall and goodly Cedars in Libanon, profitable pieces to underprop a
declining state; whosoever knows, has seen or heard of this labor, what it
is to bear and bring up children, will say, that she is a painful builder:
her nauseous pangs before, and sleepelesse nights after the birth, when variety
of change cannot alter, nor give content to her tearelesse crier; one while she
sits and sings, to deceive or flatter the tediousness of time, with
counterfeited mirth; anon she sighs and weeps, (the burden of her song,) and
sings again, Genesis 3.16.
as if variety did ease, though not remove her grief; all which do
sufficiently tell us, her building in this kind, is multiplied sorrow.

Fourthly, she is a builder to her self, of a good name, Eccles. 7.1.
which is a rare monument, better then precious oynment, rather to be sought
then great riches, Pro. 22.1.
no shining titles of fading glory so famous, no glittering trophies of ancient
Worthies so durable, as this building: a virtuous daughter cannot be obscured,
no more then a City built on a hill, Fame borrowing the tongues of strangers to
publish her desert: every action speaks of her, and even while she sleeps,
the building goes forward.

Fifthly, she is a builder in regard of her neighbors, either by confection of
salues, distillation of waters, or preparation of other necessaries for their
relief, supply, and succor in time of need: a vortuous daughter is a true
neighbor, every one near her is the better for her; Innocence bears such
sway in her, and is so powerfully preualent, that she cannot think of an
injury with delight, either to do it to another, or to revenge it, done to her
self by others; neither will her habitual goodness suffer her to be a
careless helper; when Satan has sown the seeds of strife and discord, and
stird up men by division, to weaken themselves with their own, hands, she
sleeps not, till those tares be plucked up, and peace and love replanted in
their affections.

Sixthly, she is a builder, in regard of the Church and Commonweal, though she
may not publicly be seen, in her retiring rooms, she helps forward the
building by prayers, tears, advice, and the labor of her hands: like the wise
hearted-women under the Law, who are commended by the Lord himself, as
builders, Exodus 35.25.
every one preparing and bringing something toward the finishing of the
Tabernacle: let not women be discouraged, because they are not called to
public offices, virtuous daughters want not employment, Familia prudenter
instituta ciuitatis imago, Bodin, l. 1. c. 2.
neither are they excluded, (as some vnwisely-ambitious, have
repiningly-murmured,) from this honorable service; by their private diligence
in pious, exercises, the Magistrate rules, the Minister teaches, the
husbandman labors, Right ordering of a Family, is a branch of regal
discipline.
the Physician cures, the Lawyer pleades, and the Soldier fights the better:
let them not think themselves therefore contemned, or that they can do
nothing, because they do not every thing, God has wisely disposed of his
creatures into several ranks, as an expert Captain does his Army, allotting
every one such and so many talents, as his place required; be content with your
portion, the lot is fallen out unto you in a good ground.

And so you see the subject of this commendation, A daughter.

She is a delectable building, only let her be mindful, that she weary not
her Lord, with over much needless reparation; she must avoid fantastike
fashions, curious gawdinesse, with all vain superficial trimmings; such
printed paper-houses pleases children only, but cannot withstand a storm, and
are justly derided by every understanding passenger.

She is a conscionable builder, let her remember, she be not idle, nor
slugglish in her labor, but like the spinning-Spider, or the gathering-Bee,
let her daily bring some honey to the hiue: and in this common lation of a
daughter, we have three things commended to our observation.

First, the necessity and benefit of History, to record the virtuous deeds of
such daughters: the phrase here used implies so much; presupposing a Catalogue
of names, laid before the Pen man of this Prophecy, (Many daughters:) History
unto memory, is as a good wife unto her husband, a help meet for him; in
regard of truth, both the mother, and nurce thereof, if the disposer be a man
experienst in the affairs he treates of, judicious and impartial: it is a
faithful trusty Counselor of state, by whose advice and direction a
Commonweal may be framed, governed, reformed and preserved; an Army ordered,
enemies vanquished, victory obtained: we read of Lucius Lucullus appointed
Captain General over the Roman Forces against Mithridates, having no
experience or knowledge in war, Praesat. vit. Plutarch.
more then he had gotten by reading History, and yet proved a discreet and
valiant Commander, vanquishing at that time, two of the greatest Eastern
Princes. It is and may be the directour of meanest men in any of their actions;
wherein they may see without danger, how others have behaved themselves upon
several occasions, and what has followed: speculatiue experience yields the
cheapest wisdom.

It is a punisher of vice, presenting aged folly, green and fresh to
posterity, not suffering sin to dye, much less to be buried in oblivion:
the name of the wicked shall rot, says Solomon, that is, Prou. 10.7.
the evil savor of their filthy life, shall be conveyed through History to
generations unborn: it is a delusion of Satan, to think otherwise, sin
cannot be concealed: venture not on sin, upon a presumption of secrecy; birds
of the air shall carry the voice, Eccle. 10.20.
and that which has wings, shall tell the matter: many pens are employed
this way, silently to observe and note humane passages, that secret works of
darkness, contrived in closest corners, may be published hereafter on the
house top; men blinded with the glistering outsides of Satan's Jesuits pleasure
and profit, cannot see into private Studies, (the unwilling prisons of rich
Records,) nor think of that which will disgrace them in the ages to come.

It is a rewarder of virtue, the proper end of History, to reserve worthy
deeds, for imitation; a good work, though it dye in doing, is a reward to it
self, yet that some dull natures might be stirred up the more, and all
benefited by seeing gracious steps before them: this only is exempted by a
firm Dec ee from the stroke of death, to live in History, virtues
preservative, against the devouring grave, encouraging many to do well, that
they may hear well; to do worthily in Ephratah, Math. 4 11. Math. 6.2.
that they may be famous in Bethlehem; Trumpets are for glozing votaries, who
study rather to seem, then to be good; let them hunt after applause, who know
they deserve not to have it brought home unto them: be silently constant in
good courses, commit your ways unto the Lord, Psa. 37.5.
trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass; retired virtue yet never lost
her praise.

But to return: the History here meant, especially is Gods own Book, wherein
we find the names of many virtuous daughters; as of Sarah, Deborah, 1. Pet.
3.6. Judges 5. 1. Sam. 1.25.3.
Hannah, Abigail, Ester, Judith, Mary, Martha, Lydia, etc. That of our Savior
is most remarkable, enioyning the use of History, to preserve the memory of a
good woman, Math. 26.13.
Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached thorowout all
the world, there also shall this that she has done, be spoken of, for a
memorial of her: Hence it is that humane Histories in imitation of divine,
have been so careful to present these jewels to posterity, lest any virtuous
daughter should be forgotten: only this I find, men generally too sparing in
praise of good women: seeing the Lord has done it, men may proceed from a
certainty of the lawfulness, to a necessity, his relative actions are for
example, and so have a binding power, saying to us as our Savior did to the
man in the Gospel, Luke 10.37.
Go and do likewise: it is a custom as commendable as ancient, at funerals,
to mention those virtues most eminent in the parties deceased; whosoever buries
virtue in silence, or slubbers over worth in any by a careless style, commits
a threefold injury; one against God the Donor, whose praise and glory is
hindered; another against the persons in whom it was, robbed thereby of some part
of their right; and a third against all suruiuing followers, who should be
encouraged by such justice, to wrestle with vice that so at last, they might
go home adorned with this Crown of honor* let none envy the dead; by
negligence to enroule good women amongst this number of many.

Secondly we have here the manner how he commends her, not before he had given
others their due praise: detraction from others, is no solid ground, for the
commendation of our own; we may not steal from our neighbors, to enrich our
selves, or those we love, with goods or good name, nor dispraise others, to
augment our own praise: it was an injurious practice of the proud Pharise,
Luke 18.14.
I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, nor as this
Publican: building his own perfection upon the weakness of his brother;
concluding himself (proudly) good, because not so sensibly bad; sound, because
not so apprehensiuely sick as others: it is a cold kind of praise, that is
drawn from the vices of any, a deceitful demonstration, taken from the worser
part: The relation of imperfections, is meat to feed malice only, sitter it is
to bewail them in secret, then to publsh them with delight for any end;
table-talke in any places, Quisquis amat dictis abscutum, rodere vitam.

Hanc mensam indignam nouerit esse sibi. Aug.


is too much faulty this way; it were good Catoes rule might be observed;
either good of men absent, or nothing at all: so in matters of commendation
keep this method, observe and see amongst the multitude if many be religious,
virtuous, industrious, give them first their due, then may you prefer your
own: good order observed in doing, beautisies the action, and commends the
workman.

Thirdly, we have here the matter of his commendation: it is not said, Many
daughters have been beautiful; Prou. 31.30.11, 4, 23.5.14.
favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity: nor, Many daughters have been
rich: house and riches are the inheritance of Fathers, which profit not in the
day of wrath, but make themselves wings, and fly away as an Egle: neither is it
said here, that many daughters have been, and are borne of high parentage, Qui
genus lactat suum, aliena laudat Sen.
it may be a benefit, no praise unto women to come of great kindred; a good old
stock may nourish a fruitless branch, a Noble family yield and impious
progeny; the commendation runs not of riches, beauty, or birth, (though these
be commendable in their place and rank,) but of virtue.

Many daughters have done virtuously.

Teaching us this lesson, That virtue only wins women true praise, and wives
deserved commendation: we find Sarah commended for obedience, Rebekah, for
wisdom, Rahel, for plyant love, sweetly-winning, and firmely-holding
affability toward her husband; Abigail, 1. Sam. 25.3. Ruth. 3.11.
for a good understanding, and Ruth, for virtue in general: the Spirit of God
moves the hard question, not of a rich or beautiful, but, Who can find a
virtuous woman? Men may easily find fair women wantons, rich women proud, and
surely, great women idle and impious, more then comely or lawful; more
difficult to find a virtuous woman, Job 28.15, 16, 17, 19.
chaste, humble, obedient, discreet, fearing God; whose sweet composure of her
self in all places and company, stirs up in the beholders an admiring
affection; let him say, and think he is rich enough, her prize is far above
Rubies, no pinching poverty could ever lodge with such a Pearl: let him say,
and think, Prou. 18.22, 19, 14.
he has found favor with God, a prudent wife is from the Lord, who must be
prayed unto before, and daily praised after: virtue is amiable, wheresoever
found, but most of all in women; the weakness of their sex, adds a kind of
strength and luster to their graces: virtue from beauty, even in men is most
attractiue, but in women, we find it has a power strangely coactiue, causing
not only the good, but the worst of men to honor it: virtue has had this
privilege in all ages; beauty may please the eye for a time, as an object
ouer-delightfull to unregenerate nature, but by the presence of any of deaths
messengers, it is put to slight, not daring to receive a thought of death, much
less the sight; riches may serve to gild over many imperfections in women, and
make them seem lovely, which never were, while passion guides reason, and the
sensual appetite vsurps authority to sway the will, against the voice of
judgment: the flesh will be satisfied with either of these, the mind fully
contented with neither: both are momentary and mutable, insufficient to make
women honorable; that is virtues prerogative Royal: honor is a virtue, and
will be employed about nothing but virtue; nor stick to any thing but what is
immortal, free from change, as virtue is; were there ten thousand ages,
attended with as many diseases, which should come tumbling like Jobs
messengers, one in the neck of another, yet virtue like some impregnable
Castle, would still flourish, out-facing the storms of age, sickness, death,
and the grave: the more virtue suffers, the brighter it is, Virescit vulnere
virtus.
the longer it lives, the younger it grows, increasing by the communication,
the oftener seen and used, the less feared to be lost; thieves cannot steal,
nor time deface it: who can find a virtuous woman?

Lest any hasty to answer, should be mistaken, either in estimation of
themselves, affection to, or commendation of others, let us enquire what it is
to do virtuously.

It is no ordinary act of common ciuility, (as many in their conceits are
mistaken,) but an habitual practice of something more then morality: none can
do virtuously, without a habit of virtue; one action yields no denomination;
and whosoever has the habit of any one in deed and in truth, Augu. Epi. 29.
Hieron. Aqui. 1.2. q. 65. art. 1.
must of necessity have the rest in some degree; virtues, (excepting the
intellectual only, which have no such dependence nor connection among
themselves,) are linkt as in a chain together; if you be owners of one, the
rest will follow.

To this practice of virtue, there are three sorts of virtues requisite: all
having, and keeping both their place and time, in a virtuous daughter, the
eminency of some above others, breaks not the harmony: the first are
intellectual, and those either speculatiue, as knowledge to discern, wisdom
to direct, and understanding to choose, according to both: or practical, as
prudence which is active in electing, and Art, which is operative in performing
the election, according to the rules of virtue. The second sort are virtues
moral, such are Providence, or skill to give good and wholesome counsel, when
occasion is offered, to order all her affairs by the rule of right reason, to
their proper ends, for the benefit of humane societies: Justice, by an upright
division, to give to every one their own portion: Temperance, consisting in a
discret limitation of passion and affection, about words, diet, apparel, and
pleasure, that the fleshy part ouer-sway not reason: Fortitude and well-guided
magnanimity, not against, but in defense of her husband, his person, goods, and
good name, boldly to resist all evil motions and temptations, with a constant
opposition of carnal lusts, which fight against the soul.

The third sort, are virtues Theological, such are those precious graces of
Faith to apprehend, Hope, to hold fast, and Love to glue her to the mystical
body of Christ; So that an understanding, sober, godly woman, is the virtuous
daughter here meant; to be judicious, industrious, religious, in act and
exercise, is to do virtuously; many daughters have been so, many have done so,
and this is matter of commendation.

Men may esteem thus of virtuous daughters in general; it is not sufficient
in a husband, without some special application: his own, if she strive to do
her best, and be in any tolerable measure so qualified, must be preferred in his
conceit, as most virtuous and best for him; such direction we have from the
comparison, which is my second part, and comes in the next place to be discust;
Though many daughters have done virtuously, yet Thou excellest them all.

A Commendation, it is something beyond comparison; to excel any, yields
matter of praise always; to excel and pass all, affords matter of
admiration; which shows the power of true affection, to change in respect of
it self, the nature of things, and to produce effects above reason: a hearty
Lover can never be a sound Grammarian; Grammarians acknowledge and make use of
three degrees of comparison; a true Lover admits no positive, all his
comparisons are superlatiue; he thinks none so virtuous, none so sit for him,
as his own portion; and it is better, seeing the case thus stands, that all
Grammarians should be angry with us, then one God offended by us: whose will it
is, as we see here, that one should be preferred to all. Thou excellest all: A
good woman must be singular in good.
Delivered not absolutely, in regard of any one here meant, and pointed out in
the Text, (though some might coniecturally appropriate it, to Bathsheba, or to
the blessed Virgin Mary,) neither is it to be understood, as meant, or spoken
of any, out of pride, vain glory, flattery or a boasting humor, (it is
unlawful for men so to praise or prefer their own,) but respectively, with
diverse limitations and so applyable to any: as first, in regard of
qualification, such a one answering the description prefixed, Videa ver. 10. ad
finem.
is preferred to all that do not, and are not so.

Secondly, in regard of the husbands special notice and knowledge, many have
done virtuously, but thou in my judgment and apprehension excellest.

Thirdly, in respect of his affection and liking, amongst many, none appear to
him so virtuous.

Fourthly, in respect of his contentation with the endowments of his
yokefellow, he is best pleased with her endeauours.

Fifthly, in regard of his resolution, upon the former grounds, forsaking all,
to cleave unto her, above all others; whosoever meets with a virtuous Daughter,
thus qualified, is bound in conscience to think and say, To me thou excellest
all.

(...) Aradice (...) Scandere. Asicadere.
The word signifies to ascend by climbing: as men in the field of war do
aspire after honor, so women in the calm school of virtue, do strive to go
higher, degree by degree, step after step; yielding us many lessons worth our
observation.

First, that every virtuous Daughter is humbly high-minded and holily-ambitious
after the best things; climbing to ascend, that they may excel in every good
work: the Apostle does elegantly express it of himself, which I may here
apply unto them; Psalm. 3.13.14.
they count not themselves to have apprehended, but this one thing they do,
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before; they press toward the mark, for the price of the high
calling of God, in Christ Jesus: it is the property of a disposition basely
seruill, always to look downwards, and to think it self high enough,
before there be any beginning to ascend; whence it comes to pass, that many
conclude they can do nothing, because they dare not patiently think of the
difficulty of doing; judging sinful sluggishnesse, to be contented humility;
when noble spirits aspire daily after high and difficult things inossensiuely.

Secondly, that the way of virtue is the way to honor and preferment, in the
love of God, Prou. 11.16.
and opinion of good men: in Rome there was no coming to the Temple of honor,
but by, and through the Temple of virtue: though it be narrow, yet it is an
infaillible way: whosoever climbes in by the windows, as into the Church, John
10.1.
so unto honor, is a thief and a robber; by treading upon the pins of an
unlawful ladder, men and women may ascend, not excel; either by the mist of
deserved censure, they are covered, and so not regarded, or else through the
suddenness of a shameful fall, they have no leisure to embrace their seeming
happiness; when virtue advancing any, like the radiant Sun expels all clouds,
and makes them shine in the fullness of strength; observe and see, whether such
as went in any other path, did ever finally prosper? When women rise by
falling, men by fawning and flattery, paying money, in stead of practicing
virtue, the higher they go, the rarther will their infamy fly abroad; only
virtue leads to true honor.

Thirdly, that virtuous daughters having once begun, never leave good and godly
courses, till they have perfected their virtues by action: she that looks
back, is not sit for the Kingdom of heaven; remember Lots wife: it is a
miserable thing to have been happy; when that may be verified of them which
the Apostle speaks of his Galatians, Ye did run well: ye were virtuous,
chaste, Gal. 5.7.
sober, religious: But, etc. Goodness is discerned and commended by
continuance; either resolve to go on, or begin not; climbing is painful, yet
men usually desist not; till they attain the top, and end of their desires;
especially if their aim be at such fruits, flowers, and shows, as are in this
eminent Garden of virtue; good women are no less valiant, with unwearied
patience, to undergo the heat of the day, knowing they shall not be deprived
of their hope; their labor cannot be vain in the Lord: 1. Cor. 15. vlt. Reu.
2.10.
perseverance unto death, brings a Crown of life.

Fourthly, that such virtuous women must not want encouragement by
commendation: give them the fruit of their hands, let their own works praise
them in the gates; Many daughters have done virtuously, etc. There was a feast
ordained and kept in Rome, Plut. vit, Romans
called, Matronalia, in honor of those women, which procured a peace between
the Sabines and the Romans; with diverse privileges annexed unto it, as to
give them place in all public assemblies, to speak no dishonest words, nor
do any unseemly thing before them; it is a sin to be silent in their praise,
that deserve it, provided it be done justly, seasonably, and discreetly: I
would not wish men to dawbe over rotten posts with deceitful colors, to
burden vicious women (their own wives,) with undeserved praises; nothing more
foolish and ridiculous: I would not have men make their wives, though good and
virtuous, the ordinary subject of their talk, in all places and company; no
custom more unseemly, if not dangerous; but when convenient occasion is
offered, to speak the truth of them, for the glory of God, manifestation of
their comfort, and excitation of others, by such good example.

Fifthly, that understanding husbands, are best pleased with the virtuous
actions of their own partners: many have done virtuously, but thou to me, in
my eye and judgment excellest all; A duty I confess, easier to think, and
speak of, then to perform: an impure, adulterous heart, thinks directly the
contrary, that any man's wise his better th^n is own; Satan casts many rubs in
the way, showing men through a deceitful glass, and saying, See, and observe
in such a one, handsomnesse, beauty, wit, diligence, far excelling thine;
enjoy her at least in desire; and prevailing passion, yielding to this
temptation, blinds judgment; so that many there are, who have and do deem
their own choice worst of all, nothing pleases, that passes from them, no, not
when it is the same, which they approve and admire in others: therefore the
understanding must be conuinc't, the heart seasoned with grace, the eye emptied
of adultery, and the mind freed from the restless motion, and perturbation
following desire of change, before any can say truly of his own virtuous
second, Thou excellest all. Take Solomon's counsel; Pro. 5.15, 16, 17, 19.
drink waters out of thine own Cisterne, and running waters out of thine own
Well, let thy Fountain be blessed, and rejoice with the wise of thy youth; let
her be as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe; let her breast satisfy thee at all
times, and be thou ravished always with her love; give affection leave here to
extend her self something beyond truth, either there is no way to err, or no
danger in erring this way.

To wind up both, the Commendation, and Comparison on one bottom; I shall
conclude all with the time, in certain specialties, by way of application.

The whole may serve to inform us, first, that men should be experienst, able
to discern good from evil, virtuous from vicious women, before they make
choice of a wife, that men so soon as they are married, should be able to
commend good wines, is expressed in the Text* that they should be as able to
condemn the evil and vicious, is necessarily employed; none can commend a good
one, but he that knows a bad; and can discern through the veil of hypocrisy
and mask of dissimulation, lest one be mistaken for the other, virtue
vnderualewed, and vice approved; such events are common, where experience is
wanting: hence it is, many marry they know not what, and may amend their
choice, they know not when: When Caesar was to pass Rubicon against Pompey, he
left the land with this resolution, as I remember, That a man could be undone
but once; As it is in the government of a Common weal, or in the ordering of
an Army, a Commander can err but once, (which is a miserable happiness,)
overthrow and ruin following so close, he cannot have leisure to be twice
faulty. So oftentimes it falls out in the choice of a wife, men have not leave
to change often, one blessed or crossed, ever so, during life: it is a practice
dangerous and intolerable in a well-gouerned State, to force an union between
young years; where there is no actual power to choose, nor judgment to
discern; common reason tells us, we should be long in doing that, which can but
once be done, lest after we vainly wish it were to do again: beaduised, it
is a long bargain; rash adventures yield little gain.

Secondly, we are further informed, that virtue is the chiefest flower in A
good wives garden: for this she is commended, preferred for this; riches, beauty,
parentage, favor, and proportion grow in lower ranks, and serve to adorn the
borders; the heart is virtues place; which shows it self to be alive, Math.
7.16.
by the present fruits of virtuous actions; none have chosen well, who have
preferred any thing to this, in their choice: look first on beauty, and you buy
a Picture; look first on riches, and you make a purchase; look first on
parentage, and you match with a multitude at one time; but look first on
virtue, and it is a marriage indeed, two made one by a mystical union,
representing that between Christ and his Church: Ephesians. 5.26, 27, 28.
the Law may tie two together, that meet upon sinister ends, virtue only
unites them; therefore this is most excellent and praiseworthy; all other
flowers dye in Winter, this flourishes most in old age; others droupe under the
stormy blasts of hoary Autumn, while this enioyes a perpetual Spring.

Thirdly, we are hence informed that wives should therefore strive to excel
one another in virtue chiefly: Plut. vit Lyeur.
Licurgus made the Lacedaemonians equal in livings and riches: his reason was,
that they might strive to excel one another in virtue only: I seek not such
a Law, supposing equality of desire this way, may well stand with inequality of
condition: the excellency of riches and poverty consisting in this ability,
through a virtuous disposition, to make a right use of either: we see many
contend for superiority in place, who shall stand, sit, and go before; we may
observe women strive with their neighbors, who shall excel in decking and
trimming their bodies, adorning and setting forth their houses, following new
fashions, and out-stripping one another in excessive feasting: evident signs
of great lightness, to wrestle about, or deem themselves the better, for any
of these trifles: emulation only in the race of virtue, is worth commendation;
Covet earnestly after the best things, 1. Cor. 12. vlt.
says the Apostle, Who shall be most rich in grace; most zealous and forward
in good duties; who shall excel most in the virtues of humility, temperance,
chastity, modesty, providence, charity, etc. such covetousness is commendable,
such contention the issue of sinlesse-ambition: let all care give place to
this, all strife be turned into this, how you may excel one another in virtue,
so shall love regaine her ancient soueraignety amongst neighbous, in spite of
envy.

Fourthly, we may hence learn, that married persons should conster the actions
one of another in the best sense; to say, and think, (if it be true in any
tolerable manner,) their own choice excels all others: and that first, in
token of their submission to Gods disposition, who ordaines meet matches,
allotting to every body his own ribbe: secondly, to manifest their
contentation with their portion, when they can say heartily, their lot is
fallen out unto them in a good ground: thirdly, for a testimony of the truth of
their affection each to other; it is one property of love, to cover a multitude
of infirmities, and sometimes to judge that excellent, which is but weakly
good; wives passing by their husbands faults, husbands pardoning their wives
failings, that so a good opinion may be still kept warm in the lap of mutual
affection.

First, the husband must thus think of his wife, and seasonably express it,
for a comfort to her against all her pains and trouble in childbirth, and
family affairs, as also to encourage her continuance.

Though many daughters have been virtuous, yet none so sit for me, thou
excellest all.

And to that end it is required she be, first, religious, a professed servant of
Christ, going and drawing others with her in the way to heaven; for how can
such be said to excel amongst men, who are so far from this spiritual
exercise, of climbing Jacobs Ladder, that they never yet looked up toward
heaven, with any settled purpose to go thither? under this I comprize piety,
charity, and sobriety, in words, food raiment, pleasure, etc. secondly, that
she be ossicious, a builder together with her husband; ready and willing, both
in regard of earth and heaven, body and soul; under this, she is enjoined to
be loving, obedient, helpful in all good things, to the uttermost of her
power; Let such a husband so inricht, remember to be thankful unto God, who
has done more for him then parents, his purse, or all the world could do;
good servants are a blessing, good children a greater, but a good wife best of
all.

Some may reply here, and demand, How can we say, as you teach, without sin,
when we see and feel the contrary? I answer, first, it may be so, many
daughters have been vicious, Dub. page 243. impost.
yours worst of all; naturally women are wavering, weak, unwise, sight,
credulous, news, lovers, given to lies: Many have been and are irreligious,
enemies to profession in the powet thereof; Many are given to pride, idleness,
wantonness, drunkenness; witness those conceited conditional Laws,
attributed to Zaleucus the Locrian, restraining women, that none should be
attended with more then one maid in the street, except when she was drunk;
that none should go out of the City in the night, except she went to commit
adultery, and that none should wear gold or embrodred apparel, except when
she purposed to manifest herself to be a common strumpet.

Many are given to lying, swearing, cursing, brawling, and fighting, like
devils incarnate, (such ribs are Satan's shaftes, taken from the sides, to be
shot against the heart of man to vex him, and to be as rottenness in his
bones) and yours it may be for want of grace, are worst of all: of such never
think nor say, that they excel in virtue, it is no part of the Doctrine here
taught, but the contrary; women must do things praiseworthy, that will be
praised.

Secondly, blame your own choice; beauty, or riches was the Star that led
you, how could you escape shippe-wracke? you sought not for a virtuous mate, no
marvel if you found her not: but she was once better: take heed then; some
untoward behavior in you, may occasion those unruly passions in her: a wife is
like a ship, well steered, she goes smooth, if otherwise, she be guided by
an vn-skilfull hand, she turns and tumbles would make one sick to see her:
how-euer, know it is a burden laid on you by the Lord, to chastise your former
folly, try your patience, or to exercise your skill.

Thirdly, suppose many failings in your wives, yet if there be a will to do
well, (a wise man may easily discern between habitual wickedness, and
intermissiue frailties,) deal with them as you would God should deal with
you, Accept the will For the deed:


Suffering, is the way to victory; to yield unto them in some things, is a
means to make them more obedient in all.

Secondly, the wife must have the same conceit of her husband, else the Ring
goes not round. Though many sons have done virtuously, thou to me excellest
them all: and to that end, he must be, first, judicious, a man of
understanding, able to manage the affairs of his general, and particular
calling; 1. Pet. 3.7.
under this I contain wisdom, knowledge, experience, sobriety, Christian
care, to provide for his charge, etc. want of discretion accidentally begets
contempt. 2. Tim. 5.8.


Secondly, he must be courteous in his behavior toward her, (a churlish Nabal
can hardly be brought within the compass of this round,) good words, and
looks, give women great content, especially from those they love: I would not
have men so soft and silly, as to be displeased with nothing, neither to be so
hot, and hasty, as to be angry with every thing; there is a golden mean: and
under this I place patience, bounty, familiarity, like that of Isaak with
Rebekiah, Genesis 26.8.
encouragement in good and defense of her person, and name against all others:
Let such a wife so enricht, remember to pay the debt she owes unto God, of
praise and thanks; is not such a husband better unto her then ten sons? 1.
Sam. 1.8.


But alas, I am so matched as never woman was, many husbands have been vicious,
mine worst of all? I answer, First, it may be so in your conceit only, want
of affection with desire of change, may mislead judgment: Secondly, say it be
so indeed, he runs abroad, frequents Tauernes and Alehouses, mis-pends his
time and means in gaming, etc. take-heede you be no cause thereof; Many are
so light-heeled, and nimble-tongued, their husbands have no delight to stay
within. Thirdly, how-euer it be, prayers and tears will prove your best
weapons, with a patient expectation of his reformation, knowing it to be the
just hand of God, for your youthful wantonness and neglect of his service:
the best counsel I know to give you, is, Please him, and Pray for him.


Lastly, be you all advised; if married, to examine your condition for a
perfect union is attended with this opinion; if unmarried, resolve to match
with none, except you be thus persuaded of them: resist Satan's suggestions,
all carnal motions, whereby many untoward marriages are made amongst us, that
you may wear out this conceit each of other as your

Wedding-ring.

The benefits following, which may move you to put it on, are many. First, all
harsh conceits are hereby prevented or removed, what is done or spoken, shall
be well taken; one weyghing still the works of the other, in the balance of
good will, either finds none, or freely pardons the want of weight.

Secondly, no strife can be raised between you, which is not soon appeased;
passion and suspicion may prevail so far, as to darken, but shall never live
so long, as to put out the eye of affection: their iarres are attended with
words, (love offended cannot long be silent,) words beget looks, and looks
are followed with smiles, so the storm is laid.

Thirdly, good example is given, to children, servants, neighbors, and to the
Church of God: O, how pleasant a thing is it, to see man and wife to spend
their days in perfect amity? one bearing, the other forbearing, both studying
to give content: so that other may see that happiness which they cannot
attain, and be driven to admiration, though not to imitation.

Fourthly, hearty love shall be maintained and increased daily, so that you
will never desire to change, hearts nor hands, with any other; the longer you
live, the more loving you will be, such virtue there is in this Wedding-ring:
pray you may find it; endeavor to wear it, resolve to live and dye with it,
that men may after fix it as an Epitaph on your tombs, to be seen and read
of all with just applause.

I end with prayer for you both: the Lord guide you with his Spirit, season
your hearts with his grace, and make you truly virtuous, that as Isaak and
Rebekah, Jacob and Rahel, you may build up the house of your fathers, live
peaceably, and dye comfortably; that so this which has been spoken for you on
the day of your meeting, may be verified of you, after the day of your parting.

Many sons and daughters have done virtuously, but you have endeavored to
excel them all.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, be given all honor
and glory, now and for ever.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.

