THE CRIB OF JOY: Containing Spiritual Exercise, for Christmasse. S. Steven.
S. John. Innocents. Circumcision. Epiphanie.


John 7.37. In the last and great day of the Feast, Jesus stood up, and cried,
saying: If any thirst, let him come to me, and drink.

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Purset, dwelling near Staple Inn in
Holborne, at the sign of Marie Magdalens Head. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN God, John, by his Divine providence Bishop of
London.
RIght Reverend, it is the custom of all sorts of writers, to seek a patro^
for their books dedicatio^: wherefore I the publisher hereof, being a poor
member of your last flock (and the Author to me unknown) have emboldened my
self to choose your Lordship (knowing none more fit) to be the Guardian of
this Orphane, under whose protection I render both it and my self: the rather
because the earnest desire of all those who ever read this little Treatise,
entitled, The Crib of Joy, has moved me to the publishing hereof. Therefore,
right Reverend, if either the Work it self may receive passage through your
Lordships good favor, or my duty toward you herein may be accepted, craving
pardon for my presumption, I end, continuing my prayers for your long life,
with eternal happiness:

Your Lordships most humbly to be commanded, Christopher Purset.

CHRISTMAS DAY.
The three circumstances of person, time, and place, may draw the lineaments of
this days joy.
1 WE may rejoice, that our Savior and Reconciler to God, was manifested this
day, to be a person, and no inferior creature: That the Jewish sacrifice of
beasts, and birds, or other oblations, were not in them selves propitiatory:
but in eye to a worthier Mediator. It had been a disgrace to our reasonable
soul, the image of God, to have been valued at so base a price: An indignity
to God himself, to have had his anger against sinners alayed and his justice
satisfied with the killing of a calfe: a thing indecent in our conceit,
preposterous in nature, Heb. 10.4.
impossible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away the sins of
the soul.

2 We may much more rejoice, that it was not the person of any man, or
Angel, or new made creature; but of God himself manifested in the flesh.

If Noah, Ezck. 14.14.
Daniel, and Job should stand up before God, and make intercession for us; God
tells us, they should only save their own souls: and yet not that neither,
without further mediation. Noah's wine must needs be don away with blood: Jobs
sin with sacrifice, and Daniels imperfection with mercy.

If a holy Angel should set his purity between God and us; he might justify
himself: but his white robes of innocence were too short to cover our
nakedness.

If any creature should offer himself to death for us, we might thank him
for his good will; but he had neither authority to lay down his life for
another, nor power to take it up again for himself.

Our Mediator is God and Man, one Christ. God: that he might pacify and
satisfy, by his worth, the person offended; for he is as good as he. Man: that
he might suffer for the offender; for he is flesh and blood of the same nature
with us. One Christ: that he might unite God and Man inseparably, who were
disioyned before by sin: for the same person, who, as Man loves man, being
also God is infinitely beloved of God: the same Christ an intercessour for man
in his manhood, cannot be denied of his Father for his Godhead sake. Therefore
so long as his humanity sticks fast to his divinity, tied with that
inseparable knot of the unity of person (which the point of the spear could
not dissolve) herein is our rejoicing, Romans 8.38.39
That neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

3 We may most of all rejoice, that of the divine persons, the second was this
day incarnate, for in him the love of God is doubled upon us; God the Father
loved us before he gave his Son: had he not loved us, he had never bestowed
so precious a gift upon us; but having now given his Son, thereby to make us
sons, he must needs love us one degree more, in that we are his sons. God
the Son loved us before he became man: but being incarnate, we may challenge
a degree of love more, in that we are his brethren. He loved us before he gave
himself: much more now we are his own, for he has dearly bought us. That
precious ointment streaming from Aarons head; that blessed Spirit, which the
Son our Savior, of his fullness distilleth upon us, loved us, in that he
ouershadowed the Virgin for us; loved us, in that he infused faith into us,
renewed our hearts, reformed our wills, sanctified our persons: but shall he
not now love his handie work much more, whereupon he has bestowed such cost?
If God loved us when we were strangers, runnagates, rebels; and so loved us as
he then intended to adopt us: what will a fatherly affection move him unto? If
the Son loved us when we were yet his enemies, and so loved us, as he
forsook himself for us: is it not intended he will love his friends, and
brethren, heirs and fellow-heires of the same kingdom? If the holy Ghost
loved us, and so loved us as he took in hand such untoward prices, such hard
hearts, such waiward and crooked affections; shall we doubt, that dwelling in
us, as in holy temples, he will not keep us in reparations? Thus the triple
love of the blessed Trinity is multiplied upon us; they all love us, because
they loved us; they loved us, that they might love us more; they love us more,
in that the second person, being the natural Son, has made us adopted
sons: in whom God is our Father, and from whom the holy Spirit is derived.

Rejoice then, that he was a person, and no inferior creature; a divine
person, and no creature: and again I say rejoice, in that the second person in
Trinity, the eternal Son of God, as upon this day was borne of a pure
virgin.

2. Circumstance.
THat which is good, rare, and brings joy with it, must needs be acceptable
unto us: but yet more welcome if it come in an acceptable time.

1 In good time was Christ borne, when the Scepter was departed from Judah, Genesis
49.10.
and a lawgiver from his feet. When Israel was subject to the Romans; and
the true Israelites made servants unto them that were slaves unto sin: then
was that little Stone, cut out without hands, Dan. 2.45.
which dashed the kingdoms in pieces, and became a mighty mountain. Then was
the little Child of Bethlem incarnate of the virgin without a father, borne
without a midwife, swadled without a nurse, preferred without the help of man
to an everlasting kingdom, to rule over us for our spiritual freedom and
eternal bliss.

2 In good time under Augustus, when the world was quiet from the sword, and at
leisure to listen after the great field fought for our souls, was our grand
Captain borne. Then might the Gospel have a free passage, and the sound
thereof be heard from Bethlem to Arabia; from Jerusalem and Samaria unto the
ends of the world.

3 In good time, Mat. 4.9.
when Satan laid claim to all the kingdoms of the world for his own, and
was invested with that large title of the prince, Ioh. 12.31.
yea the god of this world. When a universal deluge of sin covered the face
of the earth, so as the holy seed of Abraham was become a viperous brood: when
the regions were white already unto harvest, Ioh. 4.35.
and that good corn that was left, ready to shed out of the husk and perish:
in this fullness of time did the King of glory arm himself with the frailty
of humane flesh and blood to cast Satan out of his kingdom, to purge the
world from him, and prepare the good corn for the everlasting barnes.

3. Circumstance.
THe birth of this great King, is a matter of estate, for he is not crowned,
but borne a King: Math. 2.2.
the fullness of time wherein he came makes expectation; not so much but the
tankerd-woman of Samaria looks for him: Job. 4.25.
expectation makes provision. Where is then the place of his receipt? What
city shall entertain him, whose seat is in heaven, Esai 66.1.
and the earth his footstool? It must be Jerusalem at the least: Mat. 5.35.
For that is the city of the great King.

But would you think this King should remove his court from Heaven to
Bethlehem, the least among the thousands of Judah? Mich. 5.2.
can you imagine he would take up a stable there for his nurserie, or a cratch
for his chair of estate, or a poor carpenter and his wife for his courtiers?
Yet so it was, and not without cause. For vain man at his first entrance to
the world, thought himself so goodly a creature, that Paradise was too little
for him; he must be as God.

Therefore the mighty God, to make amends, looks as low as man did high:
contents himself with a little Bethlehem, the least of a thousand. Miserable
men, the sons of Adam, affect pomp and state too much. God, to reform that,
boweth the heavens and comes down: nay, boweth himself and comes down, like
a shower of rain into a fleece of wool, Psalm. 72.6.
and makes no noise.

Paul was sometimes glad for to grace himself with the place of his birth:
Tarsus a famous city of Cilicia; Act. 21.39.
but he that brings all honor with him from heaven, will grace others, but
himself be graced of none. Little Bethlem shall be honored by his noble birth,
when famous Jerusalem by his death shall dishonor her self. Thus the great
God, who by birth made himself little, delights much to make little things
great; so went his Mothers song of him: Luke 1.48.
He regards the lowliness of his handmaide, and he that is mighty has
magnified me.

If the Scripture names be not empty, but carry in them matters of
providence, then does this Child of Bethlem perform what the name of Bethlem
did promise; It signifies a house of bread: Ioh. 6.33.
and this is the bread of life which came down from heaven (upon this day)
into Bethlem, like Manna in the wilderness. Moses tells us, Exodus 16.14.
that bread was a small round thing upon the grass. The Angel tells us, this
is a little Babe, laid in a manger: Luke 2.12.
and yet this manger contains more food then the wilderness and all the
barnes in Egypt; for it feeds Jerusalem and Samaria, and the ends of the
world.

Write this then in the catalogue of this days joy, that Christ was borne in
Bethlehem. 1. If it grieve thee that ever thou wast proud or high minded,
rejoice that Christ in Bethlehem became as lowly as ever thou wast lofty;
amends is made. 2. If thou be little and base in thine own eyes, rejoice; he
that chose the least of the thousands of Judah, will magnify thee. 3. If thy
soul long for food, and desire to be satisfied; come down from Bethauen unto
Bethlehem, Hose. 4.15.
from that house of iniquity (which never brings contentment, but vanity and
vexation) unto this house of Angels food, that blesses the soul with
everlasting felicity.

2 Bethlem was but a little town, yet a town though; therefore some variety
of houses, though but small. Amongst these he makes resort to an Inn. It
seems there was but one in the town, and yet he makes choice of that. Me
thinks he comes into the world, as though he meant not long to stay. If he
that built heaven and earth, will neither build, nor so much as hire an house
for himself on earth, but take up an Inn; his purpose is in short time to
return home to his Fathers house. And this also is glad tidings for us. For he
has given his word; if he go before, we shall not tarry long after; he is but
gone to prepare a place for us. Ioh. 14.2.
In his Fathers house, there be many mansions, not made with hands, but
eternal in heaven. Here we are strangers and pilgrims, and wayfaring men;
even our fathers house where we are borne, is but an Inn; here to night, and
gone to morrow: but our surest home, our kindest Father, our truest joy and
felicity is in heaven, else are we of all others most miserable.

3 What entertainment Christ found in this Inn, is worth the inquiry. S.
Luke tells us, there was no room for him; Luke ^.7.
yet room enough for bibbers and blasphemers. I make no question then: the
Son of God finding no room in the Inn amongst men, betakes himself into
the stable amongst the beasts; and yet whether worse beasts were in the Inn or
stable might bear a question. This Inn was not the holiest house in the
town, nor this stable the cleanest place in the Inn; yet this holy one of
Israel comes to an Inn: for he came not to call the holy, but sinners to
repentance.

This Sun of righteousness may shine through a dunghill, and yet the beams
thereof gather no pollution: albeit I must needs blame the Inne-keeper, who
assigned our Savior his birth-chamber in a stable (like some mighty men, who
build themselves stately palaces, and if they have any room bad enough, it is
good enough for a chapel) yet, herein does consist some part of our
Christmasse joy, that Christ took a stable and made it a temple, Mat. 2.11.
where the Wise men worshipped and offered oblations. Shall we then doubt of
his abode in our hearts by his Spirit, whose personal presence disdained not a
stable? Be it, that we are more unclean then stables, polluted with sin and
corruption, inhabited with many beastly affections, like horse and mule without
any understanding; like untamed haifers or wild ass colts without yoke or
bit; yet the presence of his divine Spirit will humble our affections, cleanse
our souls, and sanctify our members, to make them temples of the holy Ghost.

4 The worst room in the Inn was too good for him, but (thanks be to God) he
has gotten the best room in the stable, swadled and laid in a manger; Luke
2.7.
and why? in this place there was none but his friends, and those that loved
him well. His mother sought out the most sweet and soft place in all the
stable, to repose the immaculate and tender Lamb of God in. If any beast was
there present to feed in the manger (as likely at this general taxing, when
the Inn was so full, the stable was not empty) the very instinct of nature
did teach them to know their owner, and their masters crib; and after their
fashion to worship the God of nature. If sinful man be that stable wherein the
Son of God does vouchsafe to repose himself, assign him the best room, lay
him in the manger, give him thy heart, where all thy affections use to feed and
solace themselves, and that heart shall feel a heavenly joy within it, a peace
of conscience which passes all understanding; it shall send joy into heaven
amongst the Angels, who rejoice over one sinner that repents: Luke 15.10.
it shall fetch down Angels from heaven, with a company of heavenly
soldiers, to sing glory to God on high, in earth peace, and to pitch their
tents about thee.

A man knows not (says Solomon) what a day may bring forth. Prou. 27.1.
Verily, if one day brought forth thus many joys when it brought forth the
Son of God well may we crown it with the Psalmist his Epiphonema: Psalm,
118.24.
This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.

S. STEVEN.
WHen the Son of God had put on man, and covered his Deity with a veil of
flesh, for dazeling our eyes, great things by him were both done and suffered
for us. After that man therefore by virtue of those sufferings, shall have put
on Christ, Romans 13 14.
it is very meet, that in token of thanks, some thing be done and suffered by
man for the name of Christ. Bernard
Non decet sub spinoso capite membrum esse delicatum: since the Head was
crowned with thorns to save the body, let not the foot disdain to catch a
thorn in defense of the head: since Christ fought for us in our own flesh
till he sweat again, and sweat till he bled, and bled till he died: let this
blessed. Martyr teach, that the purest blood in our sinful bodies is not too
precious to be powered out for his Gospel.

All confess this to be true, but some say it is too tragical: a far unfit
meditation for this Feast: these bloody days of Steven and Innocents, might
better have been referred unto Lent, to accompany Good Friday. For there be
many wise men, both from the East and West, will with joy henour Christ in the
cratch, that would be loath to follow him to the cross.

S. Paul did fit the Kings humor well, Act. 26.29.
wishing that Agrippa were a whole Christian altogether like himself, except
those bonds. For if Christianity inflict bonds, or draw blood, it is
unsavory. Unsavory indeed unto flesh and blood: but he that has well tasted
of yesterdayes joy in the birth of a Savior, shall find it not allayed, but
well seconded by this days martyrdom.

The Apostles rejoiced that they were accounted worthy to suffer for his name:
Act. 5.41.
then sure there is some matter of dignity in suffering: and if they rejoiced
therein, why should we be sad upon this day? Christ told us before: Ioh. 12.32.
If I were lift up from the earth, I will draw men unto me. It seems there is
some hidden virtue in the cross of Christ, known to none but those that feel
the power of it; by which he enticeth men to follow him with delight, even unto
death. Therefore says Paul, 2 Cor. 12.10.
I take pleasure (...), in necessities, in persecutions, in (...). It is
honorable (thinks Haman) to be set upon the Kings own horse, and have it
proclaimed before him: Ester 6.9.
This shall be done to the man whom the King will honor. Our King of Heaven
was never better mounted on earth then upon an Ass and a Cross. The Kings on
Palfreies: that, to teach humility; this, to arm us with patience: this shall
be done to the man whom this King will honor. Which makes S. Paul to glory
in nothing but in the Cross of Christ; who still, as he is preferred to
greater dignity in the Court of Christ, assumeth to himself more honorable
titles: To the Romans, Corinthians, and the rest. Sometimes he calls himself
an Apostle, sometimes a Servant of Christ; but the last of all is the most
glorious, in his Epistle to Philemon: Paul a prisoner of Jesus Christ. It is a
Christian paradox: yet that Apostle puts us out of doubt, preferring it
before the best in his 2. Epistle to the Corinth (...) 23. They are ministers
of Christ, I speak (...) fool, I am more why? In stripes above (...) sure, in
prison more plenteously, in death often, etc.

3 There is a glorious company of the Apostles, a goodly fellowship of the
Prophets, but a noble army of Martyrs, as our Church has well sung. A noble
and a royal army indeed: for there is no army or host of God in heaven or
earth, which fights so like the King himself, as the Martyrs do, which
overcome by suffering; for which victory Steven does now enjoy that which his
name did signify, a crown, an eternal crown of glory.

If martyrdom then be delightful, that Saints take pleasure in it: if it be
to be affected as honorable, that the Apostles glory in it: if as noble and
royal, it will crown us with glory; let it not grieve us to reckon it
amongst our Christian triumphs. The standard bearer of this royal army was S.
Steven, (...).
the first Martyr in strict propriety of speech that ever was, the first (...)
of the Gospel of Christ, that conformed the same with his blood. The Innocents
lost their lives for Christ, but it was in them no voluntary oblation. John
Baptist bare record of Christ, but he died for a Legal truth: It is not
lawful for thee to have thy brother Philips wife. Peter resolved to have laid
down his life for Christ; but he was too weak. Verily it was decreed, that
no man in zeal should lose a drop of blood for the witness of Christ or his
Gospel, before Christ in the abundance of love had shed his precious blood for
the love of man. After Christ had finished his course, and was set at the right
hand of his Father, the first that entered the lists, was this valiant Martyr
Steven, who fought three notable combats: one in the schools, another before
the council, and a third at the stake.

1 Out of the College came Libertines, Cyrenians, they of Alexandria, Cilicia,
of Asia, Act. 6.9.
and disputed with him, and were not able (says Luke) to resist that wisdom
and spirit by which he spoke. wisdom going before as a guide, and spirit
following to set an edge upon it, this victory was easily got.

2 Since arguments could not prevail, of disputers they became sergeants, they
ran upon him, him. VVhereat Steven was so little daunted, as all that sat in
the Council saw his face as the face of an Angel; not only for confidence and
majesty, which was Angelical, Christ) made him a cheerful countenance. This
heaven he felt within him, Act. 7.56.
and lifting up his eyes he saw another about him, ready to receive him, and
the Son of man standing at the right hand of God. Did Steven epsy him
standing, whom Paul affirms to sit at the right hand of the Majesty? It is
true, Heb. 1.3.
the King of glory sits upon the throne in the highest places. But while his
blessed Martyr Steven shall stand before the Council as a witness for Christ;
Christ will appear standing before his Father, as an intercessour for Steven.

3 Justice will not convict him; they make a tumult, Act. 7.57.
stop their ears (lest his words might pierce their hearts, run upon him all
at once. The reasons and accusations are blunt, stones be sharp enough) they
cast him out of the city, Saul at his conversion enjoys the fruit of
Steuens prayer.

If Martyrs then be so happy, so wise, so valiant, so cheerful, so
Angelical, that neither school nor court, nor death nor devil can prevail
further then to hasten their eternal bliss: let S. Steven be in the catalogue
of joyful days, and let his example arm us to fight under the same banner.

SAINT JOHN.
Steven, of a faithful Christian full of the Spirit, was made a Deacon, a
Martyr, a leader of that band.

John, of a Disciple whom Jesus loved, became an Evangelist, an Apostle, as an
Eagle flying higher in divine mysteries, and looking more steadily upon the
Sun of righteousness then others.

Steven glorified God by his death; John by his long life. Steven by sowing his
blood; John by planting the Church in diverse nations, did glorify God.

Steven by his example taught us how to suffer: Revel. 1.9.
John foretold in his Revelation what things we must suffer: both arm us with
patience in persecution. Steven offered himself at once: John by peece-meales;
whose life was a continual martyrdom.

This Disciple excelled the rest in three prerogatives.

1 He was beloved of Jesus above other: he writ more of his own knowledge
which he had seen with his eyes, and heard with his ears, then others; and
left greater monuments behind him then others; not of his own fame, but of the
greatness of that little Babe which lies in a manger, and yet fills heaven and
earth. John was known by the name of the Disciple whom Jesus loved; but then
what moved Jesus to affect John more then the rest, may be curious to enquire,
and more difficult to find out, unless it was because he was younger then the
rest of his followers, and yet more constant and resolute. For a young man to
follow Christ, it is rare, and therefore amiable. If we urge youth unto that,
they tell us (as the devil told Christ) we torment them before their time. Mat
8.29.
For commonly the prodigal son is the younger. Luke 15.12.


Therefore since John was like that purple wool, Heb. 9.19.
wherewith Moses is said to have sprinkled all the people, both died in the
woll himself with piety, and an instrument also to besprinkle others with the
blood of Christ: it may be for this cause he was more loved then ordinary. So
was young Samuel favored of God: so was David, a man after Gods own heart, for
he was a man of God from a lad: and so was little Daniel, Dan. 10.11.
a man greatly beloved (as Gabriel tells us) unto whom no less revelations
were declared for the old Testament, then were unto John for the new. This
loving affection unto religious youth, our Savior might learn of his Father;
as S. Paul learned of him to love his young scholar Timothy, to whom he writ
as often as unto any Church which he had planted. A goodly motive to show
especial tokens of familiarity unto John, in suffering him to ask questions
in secret, to lean upon his breast, and to suck wisdom from him.

Me thinks John was unto Christ among his Disciples, as Benjamin was unto
Joseph among his brethren, twice beloved, and brother on both sides by father
and mother. For John was the adopted son of his heavenly Father by grace, as
also of his earthly mother by favor. For he spoke from the Cross to the
Virgin of John, Ioh. 19.26.
Behold thy son, and to John he said, Behold thy mother.

This was the fruit of his constancy and perseverance, who stayed by it when
the rest fled; who spoke little, and held out, when Peter said much, Luk 22.33.
and ran away. A sword pierced through his soul also, as well as his
mothers, when his eyes beheld the spear pierce the side of his Lord and
Savior. Ioh. 19.35.


Thus was Christ Alpha and Omega unto John, who was Aleph and Thau unto Christ:
who began betimes, and held out to the end; Ezekiel. 9.4.
marked in the forehead with the letter Thau, the last letter of the Hebrew
Alphabet.

2 This is that Disciple which testifies these things, Ioh. 21.24.
and we know that his testimony is true. Again, 1. Ioh. 1.1.
That which we have heard, which we have seen, which we have looked upon,
which our hands have handled of the Word of life, declare we unto you. So he
ended his Gospel, and so he began his Epistles, who saw, and heard, and felt
more then the rest. Mat. 17.2.
He saw the Son of God in his glory, he saw him in his full eclipse; he saw
him when his face shone like the Sun, and his garments glistered white as snow:
and again, when the same face was spit upon, Mat. 27.30. verse. 35.
and his garments divided. He saw him glorified on mount Tabor with Moses and
Elias: and after crucified on mount Caluarie, Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. He heard the lamentable
cry of the Son of God upon the cross: My God, my God, Mat. 27.46.
why have thou forsaken me? After this, he both saw and heard those heavenly
mysteries in that I Will of Patmos, Revel. 14 9.
which this of England does now enjoy: those divine Revelations, written by
John to the seven Churches of Asia, which are at this day extant in all the
Churches of Europe.

3 He has left behind him three monuments of especial note: I mean not his
three titles, of John the Evangelist, the Apostle, the Divine: but his three
works, his Gospel, Epistles, and Apocalypse. The first begins from before all
worlds, far above Moses his beginning of the creation, Ioh. 1.2.
In the beginning was the Word, etc. The last describes that heavenly
Jerusalem, Reul. 21.10.
which endures past all ages. The first is a narration of the Gospel of
Christ; the second, an exhortation unto the piety of Saints; the third, a
revelation of the state of the Church. The first teaches faith; the second
charity; the third, hope and patience: sufficient to make a man perfect in
Christ. This Apostle our Church has placed in this Feast of the Nativity, to
the end to teach us, who that Babe was which was borne at Bethlehem.

INNOCENTS.
Marvel not that children make up this train, Esa. 9.6.
for unto us a Child is borne, and such a one as evermore delights in little
ones, like his Father; to whom was never sacrifice more acceptable of beasts
then lambs, of birds then young pigeons. This Lamb of God carries the same
mind: Suffer little children to come unto me, Mat 19.14.
and forbid them not, for to such belongs the kingdom of God. And if the
kingdom belong unto them, good reason they should belong unto the King: yet
neither they nor the King shall enter into this kingdom without blood. Genesis
4.8.


So I thought, when God placed a sword at the gate of Paradise; his meaning
was, Genesis 3.24.
none should come there again without loss of blood. Thus passed Habel (the
first in the old Testament) by his brothers sword: Mat. 2.16.
and these Innocents the first in the new Testament, under Herod's sword and the
rest.

Some going before, some following, and the King himself in the midst, by
whose sole virtue and authority it was, that both to them before, and us
following, the gate of heaven was open, else had there been no passage at all.
Yet for all this, the King tells us, Mat. 7.14.
The gate is strait, and there be few that go in thereat, therefore we must
strive if we mean to enter. The impediments which make the passage so
difficult to us, be three in number; all which the example of those Innocents
teach us to avoid or overcome.

1 First the sword of tribulation, Act. 14.22.
for by many tribulations must we enter into the kingdom of God. Mat. 16.24.
Therefore if any will be my disciple (says our Savior) let him take up his
cross, as I have done. This let, they overcame by suffering, and got more by
Herod his sword, then if they had been maintained at his own exhibition. Let
not this stop us then: for why should any child of God be less patient in
suffering one death for an everlasting kingdom, then Herod was cruel,
inflicting many deaths for an earthly kingdom.

2 If sin lie at the door, Genesis 4.7.
it will stop our passage as it did Cains: whether it be some great notorious
sin, as his was, like a rock in the sea, or like a sand, many little ones
heaped together; either of them will dam up the gate, and make the conscience
to suffer shipwreck. Therefore to prevent that, these passengers were
Innocents, entering in this door before they had clogged it with many sins:
whose example in this kind, S. Paul commends unto us: 1. Cor. 14.20.
As concerning maliciousnes be ye children. For children have their faults, yet
commonly they proceed in them either of ignorance or infirmity, or both; and
so long God is merciful unto us. But if maliciousness and presumptuous sins
get a hand over us, they will stop the gate of heaven, and much ado shall we
have to pass: for this cause strait is the gate, and few there be that go in
thereat.

3 As we have made the gate strait through our default; so if we grow ouerbig,
so much the worse. A thread may enter where a cammell cannot. These Innocents
were little in body and mind, Mat. 2.16.
two years old and under: but the devils disease is a swelling disease, and so
infectious at the first, as our parents got it of him in Paradise; since which
time it is grown hereditarie to the sons of Adam.

This cast Nebuchadnezzar out of his earthly kingdom: Dan. 4.28.
and it must be assuaged in us, or we shall never enter the heavenly. The
Pharisy swelled in conceit of his own righteousness, Luke 16.14.
and stuck fast: the Publican stooped, and went in. Zacheus was great in
riches; Luke 19.8.
he diminished himself by restitution, by charity to the poor, and passed.
For this gate (it seems) is made for children only to creep through. Verily I
say unto you, Mat. 18.3.
except ye become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
God.

CIRCVMCISION.
THe month of Nisan (when Israel should be sprinkled with the blood of the
Paschall Lamb) was to be reckened the first month of the year, Exodus 12.2.
that by so good a beginning, the rest of the year might the better be
hallowed. It is not then amiss to begin a new revolution with the
remembrance of those drops of blood wherewith all the world was besprinkled,
and no doubt sanctified, at the circumcision of the Lamb of God. They were but
a few drops, I confess, not the whole price of our redemption; yet sufficient
though for an earnest penie: the entire Son was after tendered upon the Cross
at his passion. Yet because only the blood of Christ, and no other, was a
sufficient ransom for the world, it was therefore very behouefull, that before
he paid the ransom, he should approve himself to be the very true Messiah
and Redeemer; and this was performed at his Circumcision. For (says the text)
when eight days were accomplished that they should circumcise the child, his
name was called Jesus. He was circumcised, to approve himself truly man, flesh
of our flesh: and his name was called Jesus, which signifies God our Savior.
Circumcised, that the Jews might acknowledge him to be the Son of Abraham:
called Jesus, that he might be received for the Son of God. Circumcised, to
become subject to the law: Gal. 5.3
for he that is circumcised (says S. Paul) is bound to keep the law. Called
Jesus, to save us from the curse of the law. Circumcised, to take upon him the
similitude of sinful flesh, (for that was a sacrament of original
corruption.) Called Jesus, that he might save his people from their sins, as
the Angel expounded his name unto Joseph.

This Circumcision he first suffered for us in the flesh, and after performed
the true effect thereof within us by his Spirit, to wit, a Circumcision made
without hands (as the Apostle speaks) by putting off the sinful body of the
flesh, through the circumcision of Christ, who by his spiritual knife, first
cutteth off the foreskinne of our hearts, and makes them bleed, in sorrow for
our sins past: for Circumcision is a bloody thing (as Zipporah said to
Moses) and he that will be a true Israelite, his heart must bleed. 2. The
foreskin being removed, which hardened our hearts before, there follows a
tenderness of conscience, which gives a quicker sense of future
transgression. Next, he purges the vine branches that they may bring forth
more fruit: circumcising all superfluous and vain cogitations in us: lopping
all luxurious affections, lest ouergrowing they might overthrow us (like
Absolons hair) for want of cutting. So are we also of circumcised lips and
ears, when our mouth shall speak no vanity, and our ears relish the word of
wisdom,

Thus renewed in heart and affection, in soul and body (when old things are
passed, 2. Cor. 5.17.
and all things are become new) we may offer and present unto God, the poor
widows offering of two mites, our soul and body to be a living sacrifice,
and an acceptable New-yeares gift unto him (since it is all that we have)
thereby assuring our selves that our names are known, and called, and written
in heaven; for the Spirit has circumcised us.

EPIPHANIE.
WE may well conclude with the manifestation of Christ unto the Gentiles. For
without this, all that has been said is nothing unto us, who be (as the
Apostle tells us) sinners of the Gentiles. But now God persuades Iapheth to
dwell in the tents of Shem, that is, Genesis 9.27.
the Gentiles which came of Iapheth, to join themselves unto the Church, which
is the posterity of Shem; for which thing father Noah prayed long since. Job
38.13.
Now the morning takes hold of the corners of the earth (as God said to Job)
that the wicked might be shaken out of it: for the Sun of righteousness
shines to the men of the East. Zachar. 2.4.
Now Jerusalem begins to be inhabited without walls (as Zachary prophesied) when
the Church shall not be hemmed within the precinct of that nation. Now the
great mystery of godliness is revealed, when God manifested in the flesh, is
preached to the Gentiles. For these Wise Men were the first fruits of the
Gentiles: whereupon followed a mighty harvest. The harvest indeed is great,
Go and teach all nations. This word of life in David's time was but a light and
a lantern: Ps. 119. v. 105. Nun.
now it is a morning Star appearing in the East; and after, a Sun of
righteousness, which enlighteneth every one that comes into the world: Ioh.
1.9.
whose beams directly behold these corners and ends of the world; upon which
the firmamentall Sun looks but asquint. Now is the Gospel preached (as
Christ gave in commandment) unto every creature; not unto men only, but even
to those barbarous nations which scarce carried the face of men, these silly
creatures in times past unacquainted with the laws of civil humanity. This
is the mean crop: the first fruits were the wise men of the East: with whom
Christ deals in their own art: (that he might have the faster hold of them)
for he leads them by a star, because they were Astronomers, and therefore
able to discern a miracle in that kind. So he dealt with his own Disciples by
sea, stilling the tempest, and causing Peter to walk upon the waters, because
they were watermen: by those miraculous draughts of fish, because they were
fishermen: hereby showing himself to be that wise maister-fisher of souls,
which fitteth his bait to every kind.

We see the goodness of God unto the Gentiles, in that Christ was manifested
to those men: shall we learn the duty of the Gentiles toward God, by the
devotion of these men unto Christ? They came to worship him in heart, in body,
and in goods: they opened their treasuries; and where the treasure is, there is
the heart. The heart commands the body (as the Centurion his servant) saying
to the foot, Go, and it goes, etc.

Neither did they come to worship Christ empty handed, Deuteronomy. 16.16.17
but brought with them such gifts as their country did afford, gold, incense
and myrrh; Aurumregi, Thus Deo, Myrrhamorituro. Gold, not so much to relieve
the wants of his poor parents, (who were able to compass no better a
birth-chamber then a stable) as to show themselves tributaries to his Majesty,
unto whom was given the heathen for his inheritance, Psalm. 2.8.
and the ends of the world for his possessions. Frankencense was brought, not
so much to sweeten the place, as by incense to acknowledge the Deity of the
Son of God. Myrrh was also offered with no less mystery, then Mary her
ointment at the day of his burial: for it is to preserve his dead body from
corruption, who being dead and buried, yet saw no corruption.

1 If then we receive Christ for our heavenly King, and Sovereign of our
souls, in obedience unto his Evangelical law, it is as much as if we brought
gold, and much fine gold.

2 If we offer up prayers and thanksgiving, that is, says David, as incense,
Psalm. 141.2.
and the vplifting of our hands as an evening sacrifice.

3 If in devotion we relieve the Church, and preserve the members of his
mystical body militant, from corruption, distress and misery; this is as
Myrrh unto his natural body.

These be our Christian oblations: 1 Obedience to his law, the fruit of faith.
2 Prayers and supplications, grounded upon hope. 3 Devotion and alms,
proceeding from charity toward our brethren.


Noster enim taleis reddit agellus opes.

These be all which our earthly mould by the influence of heaven can yield:
which, that it may yield, look we steadfastly (with Elias) upon this little
cloud, 1. King. 18.44
rising at the first no bigger then a man's hand, or the breadth of a Crib; from
which we desire and expect those manifold drops of the graces of his Spirit to
fall upon our hearts, that we may return unto him, together with his Father
and Spirit, all praise, honor and thanks this time and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

