BELGIAES TROUBLES, AND TRIVMPHS. WHEREIN ARE TRVLY and Historically related
all the most famous Occurrences, which have happened between the Spaniards,
and Hollanders in these last four years Wars of the Netherlands, with other
Accidents, which have had relation unto them, as the Battles of Fleurie, and
Statloo, the loss of Gulicke and Breda, the Sieges of Sluice and Bergen, the
Conquest of St. Saluador in Brasilia, and the taking of Goffe by Charles
Lambert, etc.

Written by WILLIAM CROSS, master of Arts of St. Mary Hall in Oxford, and
sometimes Chaplain unto Colonel Ogle in the Netherlands.

LONDON, Printed by AUGUSTINE MATTHEW'S, and JOHN NORTON, 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND TRVELY noble Lords, the Earl of ESSEX, and my
Lord MOVNTIOY, William Cross wishes the increase of Temporal, and the
fullness of Spiritual happiness.
MOst Illustrious Lords, amongst all the List of our Time-VVorthies, I could
find none to whom I might consecrate this First part of Belgiaes Troubles and
Triumphs, sooner then to your Honored selves, as being the Sons of two so
Noble, and high-deseruing Fathers, the Mirrours of these latter Ages; whose
Examples concurring with the inbred virtue of your own Dispositions, inuit
you to the Patronage of Arts, to the Profession and Exercise of Arms: the
former you have manifested by your Munificence; the latter, by the free
adventure of your own Persons: as you my Lord of Essex, at your first ascent
into the Palatinate, for your Engagements in the Service of the Netherlands,
your and last attending with much Constancy and Valor, in the troublesome
Leaguers of Meede, and Rosendale. And you my Lord Montioy, for your worth and
Nobleness, exemplified at the Siege of Bergen op Zoom, for the rescuing of
Monsieur Breoutees Body from the Spaniards at Meede Leaguer near Breda, and
for the continual perseverance in your Noble Resolutions, and heroycall
Endeavors: The Author doubts that malicious Criticisme may haunt and ghost
this impartial Poem, which glorifies our English Nation, according to their
condign merits, a thing omitted by the Dutch and French VVriters, who give
enough unto themselves, but unto us too little attributes of Honor. For these
causes he seeks to shelter this Fraught under the Lee of your Protections,
which if he obtaines, by means of your Noble Graunts, he shall for ever rest

The devoted Servant of your Lordships William Cross

BELGIA'S TROUBLES AND TRIVMPHS.
The first Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN this part continued from the beginning of the year of our Lord God, 1621,
unto the Ascension of our Savior, in the year 1622, are contained the
expiration of the last Truce, with a Proposition of a new Treaty; which the
States reject, because the Spaniards would not acknowledge them for free States
in this Treaty. The preparations of both sides for war. The meeting of our
Troops at Skenckesconce. Their cruel March from thence to Dornicke. The
terrible Sickness which reigned in our Army. The imbattailing of our
Foot-Companies on the North side of Dornicke. Grave Henricks fortunate escape
from four Cornets of the enemies Horse. The burning of his Lodgings and
Stables by a casual fire. Spinolaes opposition against the Prince of Oranges
forces. Vanderbercks taking of Gulicke, and Inigoes repulse at Sluice: together
with the burning of 50 Dorps in little Brabant by the States Army, and the
taking of the Governor of Angola Prisoner by the Flushingers.

AFter the calmes of sweet-contenting Peace
Well passed were, and that luxurious ease
Had griped on those Arms, which fighting were,
Imbrued with blood, with danger, death and fear;
Bellona storming with a fatal rage,
Out of The Infernal Cells calls forth a Page,
Fell Discord hight, with whom she thus does treat:
Do not thy trembling veins dear Discord sweat
Whole storms of wrath? for that neglected war
Crest-fallen mournes in peace; and that, that bar
Of milk-sop Treaties stoppes our raging Arms,
Stained with the blood of Belgiaes former harms.
Behold that swelling State; observe and look,
How proudly she having the chains off shook
Of Castiles thraldom, lives in pleas^^g rest,
And roaues from Holland to the farthest West,
Spreading her tail unto The West Indies were first discovered by Columbus.
that Indian Maine,
Found by Columbus for Gold-thirsting Spain.
I long to drink her blood, and to intombe
Her goared carkeise in my gaping womb:
Rather let heaps of men, let millions die,
Then my blood-thirstie soul should want supply.
Think thou that Turnholts field where These three places in the Netherlands
were famous for those fights which have been made in them.
thousands fell,
Of slaughtred bodies could my longing quell?
Or famous Ostend, which for three years space
Maintained that siege, which did the world amaze?
Or that same blood, which fertiliz'd the sand,
That Mountain like does rise on Newports Strand?
These were but drops unto my dropsy soul,
Which drinking still does thirst; go fill my bowl
Brim full with vengeance, which I mean to power
In storms of blood on Belgiaes fruitful shore.
There Is liquor yet within the sacred veins
Of great heroicke Spirits, that remains
An object for my lust: there are the My Lord of Oxford, Sir Horace, and Sir
Edward Vere.
Veares,
Three thunderbolts of war, whose courage dares
T'affront whole Squadrons; there is Cecill brave,
These would I have to make the field their grave.
With these time-honour'd The Ogles of Lincolneshire came from the Ogles of
Northumberland.
Ogle let me place,
A Branch sprung from Northumbrian Ogles race,
And valiant Mountioy, who to Blunts great house
Fresh glory gives; with these then join and rouse
Saintleger, Conway, Burrowes, and the rest,
Whose daring valor fitly may contest
With Romes old Minions; let their whetted Arms
Upon thy summons take on fresh Alarmes.
And since for richer streams of Princes blood,
My soul does long to drink a crimson flood, A Horslee^ or Bloodsu^

Hirudo-like, feign would I suck the veins
Of great Nassaw, which with their moving strains
Give life unto the members of that State,
Who with their power the Spanish pride do mate.
With this fierce Discord moved, breaks all the bars
Of sleeping Peace, and sets discordant Iarres,
Doubtful suspicions, jealous lurking fears,
Fresh boiling in the breasts of Belgia sig^^fies the N^therlands.
Belgiaes Peers.
Nor does she rest, but to increase the fire,
Adds fuel to the flames, ioynes pride with ire,
Malice with false, but yet pretended wrong,
With which she makes the Spaniard to prolong
Treaties in show; but yet inflames his sprite,
With force to tame th'vnited Cantons might.
The cause grew thus, there were of colder blood,
Who aimed at Peace, and at the public good,
Unwilling that the Christians civil Iarres,
Should breed domesticke, and intestine wars.
These men persuade a parle, both condescend,
But dissonant, removed from concords end.
For Philip deeming that the twelve years truce, The King (...) Spain.

Did but the luster of his Right abuse,
And that the web of Barneuelts design,
Proved Fortunes scorn, an vnsprung fruitless Mine:
Besides, being vrg'don by the firm Decree
Of his own Counsel, and the Roman See,
And by their Engines taught, the Ignatian crew, The Iesui^^^

That 'twere more honor Belgia to subdue,
Then for to conquer from the Midland-Sea
The vast extent of Sunburned Barbary,
Unto those sandy Deserts, that Leuant sig^^fies East, o^ any place E^ward.
Leuant,
Whereas in troops th'Alarbian Rouers haunt:
Then to display their Ensigns on the Towers
Of proud Bizantiums Sultanized bowers
Or subiugate all Greciaes fruitful land,
From Hemus top to Hellespontus Strand.
These causes joined with his Titles prize,
Fair seeming to some rash beholders eyes,
By which he claims from Burgundies descent,
Power absolute, and supereminent,
Like fatal motives, did still animate,
The Spanish King, and Austriaes Potentate,
To seek out wars in peace, and Treaties feign,
By which they might time and occasion gain.
True Spanish wiles, of Gondamars own draught,
By which they have French, Dutch, and English caught,
And won so many Scepters, so much ground,
By their forged Parlees, false deluding sound,
Prevailing more with the Volponees case,
Read Guich. lib. 26.
Then e're they could win with the Lions face.
Thus did they wrest forth of the Frenchmens hands,
Siciliaes crested Hills, Calabriaes lands,
Sweet Piemounts Valleys, and those fruitful plains,
Which Thesin waters with his Crystal veins;
All those fair Regions, which extended lie
From the Alpine Mountains unto Tuscanie.
With this old Spanish trick they gave the foil
Frederick the Prince Palatine.
To Princely Frederick, and with Beamelands spoil
Loading their hungry Troops, enforced the Rhine
To quit his Tribute to the Palatine.
With the fair semblance of this glorious gloze,
They thought the entangled Hollanders to close,
A Nation learned in their Castillian drifts,
Their policies and Spaniolized shifts.
The Archduke Albertus.
For Albert does propound Conditions fair,
But Iudgement-weigh'd politic verbal air.
He Will seem to acknowledge these free men for free,
Yet manumiz'd by force to liberty.
He Will treat with them, as treating with free States,
They being not so, but this disanimates
Nullum simile est idem.
Them from all parle; for nothing likes the same,
Quoth they, and then shall we leave freedoms name.
Shall we be seeming slaves, and lose that good,
Which we have purchased with our dearest blood?
Shall we to Spanish thraldom chain our necks,
And basely stoop to those Imperial becks
Of Austriaes House? whose vaste ambitions fire,
To the Europeian Empire does aspire,
And seeks to give the Law to all those Nations,
Which in this Climate hold their habitations.
Why should not we be dealt with as the Swisse, Three free Commonwealths, and
so acknowledged.

Whose fredome sure and vndependant is?
Or as the rugged Grison, who does plough
The cragged Valtolinaes bending browe?
Or that Venetian Sea-commanding State,
To balance Austriaes power ordained by Fate?
We are as free as Grison, Swisse, or She,
That over the Seas claims wedded Sovereignty.
Our Forces are as potent on both Maines
In Shipping, men, and the vnexhausted veins
Of our Exchequers, (...) Treasuries.
Cantoors, the Sinews by which war
Supported is, and Kingdoms strengthened are.
Our Carbins mounted on their Frieseland Steeds
Are matchless pressed at all assayes and needs.
Our Foot are brave well disciplined to fight,
Equal to the ancient Greekish Phalangite.
Our Magazins are filled with Munition,
Stuffed with store, and swelling with provision,
Besides our Ships now Dockt within the Ports,
Our moving Bulwarks, and our flying Forts,
Like to the Persian Fleet obscure the sky,
Shadow the earth, and with their wings can fly,
Forth from those Seas, that beat on Amsterdam,
Unto the farthest Straights of Magellan,
To the Moluccoes, Ginee, and that shore,
From whence Castile transports her golden Oar,
With which she buys false hearts, and does unlock
The strongest gates without Bellonaes shocke.
Then like to brave Tuiscoes sons let us arm, Tuisco the father of Duchmen.

And choose the less, to shun the greater harm.
With this both parties leave their parling words,
Both Arm, and fall to right deciding Swords,
By which as by their Peers they mean to try
Which side should have the lawful victory.
The Spanish Galeouns which vnrigg'd had lied
Ever since our farre-fam'd Eliza dyed.
Those great Ships of war
Armadaes which for England stood
In Eighty eight, and like some Sea-borne wood,
Coasted from Plimmouth to that narrow Sound,
Where Neptunes surge from Dunkirke does rebound;
When Howard, Cross, and Hawkins did repel
That Western storm, which on our Regions fell,
Commanded are to take the curled Maine
Of foamy Neptune, and to entertain
The Hollanders with their broad-sided Tyres,
Like Aetna, spuing forth infernal fires.
The Tertio in Spanish signifies a Regiment.
Tertioes old, which Garrisoned did lie
In Naples, Sicill, and in Lumbardie,
In the Maiorcan, and Sardinian I Will,
Once Read Liuie, lib. 23 about the end.
famous for the Carthaginians foil,
Receive strict orders, and most strong commands
To pass the Alps, and toward the Netherlands,
With running Marches for to bend their course,
Albertus Army there to reinforce.
Nor do the Dutch like Lethargists secure,
Sleep being pricked, but do their minds inure
To all preuentions, policies, and care,
By which they may Castiles attempts out-dare,
And give the check to all their proud designs,
Their fearful plots, and dangerous new-sprung Mines;
And since upon defense that people stands,
Which dwells within the watery Netherlands,
Committees chosen are to view the Ports,
Their Sconces, Towns, and all their frontier Forts,
From Raise, and Embricke, and those Eastern Verges,
Where Rhine does meet with Issells billowing surges,
Unto the Rammekins, Flushing, and Briels head,
Seated upon the Western Oceans bed.
The like they do to Groningue on the North,
And all that bending Frontier, which runs forth,
From cold East-Friseland, and The river of Ems divides East and West
Friseland.
Ems frozen face,
Southwards to Waal, and Brabant bordring Mase.
Those full-mouthd Canons, which at Newports field
Enforced the Albertine Regiments to yield,
And with their Cases of Tin filled full of Musket bullets
Tarlin shot discharged sure,
Made the Sand-hills a common sepulture
For those hot bloods, which never could agree,
Nor simpathize in congruous quality,
New mounted are, and ready for to make
Upon their foes a second Flanders Slate.
Their high-proofe Armours for their temper equal
To At Millan and Siras are exceeding good Armors made,
Millans making, and to Siras metal,
Their Corslets strong, in which their armed Pike
Immured stands prepared to save or strike,
Swords, Carbins, Muskets, Instruments of fire
New furbisht are, to wreake their thundering ire.
Their winged Ships, the glory of their Arms,
From whom the Iberians have received such harms,
Famous for their Sea Fights made near the Kay
Of rich Saint Lukars, and to Hanannaes Bay,
New calked are within their ouzie Dockes,
TO encounter Castiles, and fierce Neptunes shockes.
And since that those Laconian walls of bones,
More stronger are then Rampierd Earth or Stones.
And since that all defensive means are frail,
If Maniples of armed Soldiers fail,
They send for reinforcements and supplies
From England, Scotland, France, and their Allies,
Swisserland.
TO Heluetian Cantons, and those German Peers,
Whom Austriaes greatness fills with jealous fears.
Thus Belgia being armed, and thus prepared,
For selfe-defence against Invasions made;
Orders were given to their trained Bands
Of Horse and Foot their choycest Vetera^^e signifies an old Soldier.
Veteranes,
When as that dreadful storm began to fall,
Which menaced the united Belgians thrall,
To take the Mase, and swallow swifter Rhine,
In their Samroses forced with horse and wind
Against the current of that purling flood,
Which near Brisach, a small town in Swisserland.
Brisach leaves Danowes neighborhood,
And runs along from out his Mountain source,
Unto the Ocean with a Western course.
The Randeuow's appointed near the Banks
Of Wahal, beating on the Southern flanks
The Rhine.
Of Skenks-Sconce, where this prince of German torrents
Diuides it self into two seu'rall currents,
And angry roaring runs into the Sea,
Because the Land parts Wahals company;
Which to revenge, when Winter once does frown,
He yearly does the A part of Guelderland, lying near the Rhine.
Betowes Surface drown.
The time when as our brave Battalions met,
Was when the Sun in Virgoes lap does set,
When mortals Ceres inn to make them bread,
And press down Bacchus fruits with clusters redd;
It Was Augusts month, ere the Nassauians marched
To Grauenweert, or Spaniards counter, marched
From Flanders, and from The Wall^un Countries.
Walchland, where are spunne
The finest Cambricks by the Belgian Nun.
Then after three days in that Station spent,
Wherein we looked for Friselands Regiment,
And the Amber-tressed Frisons being come
From Franekaa; and from their Northren home,
Through Issels Channel to that neck of land,
Where all our Ships, and all our Troops did stand.
Our Drums do sound a March, our Ensigns fly,
And with their Serean colors beat the sky,
Our men dismarch, and pass Rhines slimie ridge
Upon their Made of Punts.
Punted-new-compacted Bridge.
Thence leaving Eltam on the left hand file,
After the passage of a German mile,
We doubled Embricks Turrets mounted high,
Which opposite to famous Cleeue do lie.
From thence we came to Dornicke, a small village in Cleueland.
Dornicks Champion fields,
Which store of Corn, and Pulse abundance yields,
Where we dislodged West-Cleauelands sturdie Boores
From house and home, and fed upon their stores.
That day the Heavens powered cataracts of showers
Forth of Aquarius Tempest-breeding bowers
Upon those Sands, whereon with tired pace,
Our bodies did the storm it self outface.
So that not only out Fresh water Soldiers.
Besonioes faint
With this disgust, which did our Squadrons taint
With following Fevers, Agues, and Catarrhes,
With Leaguer Murraines, forced from the Iarres
Of angry Nature; but the old Phalangites,
The best Musketeers, and the brauest Pikes,
Whom never showers of bullets could affright
At Newport, Ostend, nor ar Turnholts fight;
Amazed with this Tempest, make a stand,
Upon the Surface of the tyring sand,
And lean upon their bended knees and arms,
Disconsolate for selfs, and others harms.
So that if ever Conons warlike host,
Pursued at large from the Aquileian coast, Concerning these two long Retreats,
read Sir Walter Rauleighs History of the World.

By Theodosius Revenge breathing rage,
Who^ floods of blood, nor slaughtred heaps could swage,
Being led by that bold Brittans sure command,
Through rich Italiaes tract, and Galliaes Land,
To that sweet shore, which opposite does lie
Unto the Cliffes of Charles blessed Brittanie,
Had ever day, wherein the storming sky
Distilled his anger on mortality.
If ever that time-honour'd Bhalanx had
A day tempestuous, ominous and sad,
When they retired above two thousand miles,
Maugre the Persians force-supported wiles;
From that high land which lies beyond the Verges
Of pearld Euphrates Arrow-swifter surges,
Unto the banks of Euxin, and that flood
Of Phasis, where free Trapizond then stood.
If e're (I say) they suffered Heavens frown,
In cataracts of stormy showers powered down,
Our men did then endure as much or more,
Then ever Greek or Britton did before.
In that days March, wherein their eyes might see
Grief strive with pains, pains with variety,
Contending which should have the leading place,
Amongst our bands that hardly now could pace.
For there you might behold the Curacier,
Who never did the flaming Pistol fear.
Here you might view the Carbins, taken figuratively for them who carry this
weapon. A stand.
Carbins belching fire,
The Pike-men stout, and Musketeers to tire;
And like some Ship stockt in the Lybian sands,
To halt it often, and often to make stands.
There you might mark the French and Lukar walls,
Two warlike Nations pressed at Mars his calls,
Who better can endure the scorching heat,
Then dropping showers, and sense-benumming wet,
From the Vangard unto the Rear cast back,
Their marching pase, and A Galliard found out by Pyrrhus, resembling the order
of marching.
Pirrhicke-Galliard slack.
Here you might see a Voluntier lack breath,
Whom Honor had enforced to seek out Death
In foreign Climates, whose sad destined lot
The Air did cause, yet seemed to weep thereat.
Nor was the sour tempestuous frowning night
More cheerful to us, then this first days light:
But being Twins, and brethren of one birth,
They both alike inflict the groaning earth,
Both light and darkness join their seuer'd hands,
To power revenge upon our weakened bands.
For after that our Squadrons quartered were,
Thirst was their drink, sharp hunger was their fare
Their Helmets were the pillowes for their heads,
Their glistring Corslets were their Iron beds,
In which like Basans King, they sleep, and dream
Of nothing else but their afflictions Theme.
Your shaggie straw more precious was then down
Then softest plumes; for which men rob the ground,
Despoyle the Floods, and search the Crystal sky
For these light Emblems of their vanity,
That so they might lodge in that various shell,
Wherein the plants and featherd fowls did dwell.
Our Gallants then wished for their Mistress Chamber,
Perfumed with unctious Nard, with Musk and Amber,
Who cross the Germane Sea to drink a Fan is four Cannes.
Fan,
And learn the Postures of a Leaguer Can,
Who for their Honors march upon their Steed,
When brauer men upon their feet must speed,
Clad all in Roabes of that new Scarlet Die,
Which to the Tyrian is but mockery.
But when we must some wall or Rampire open,
Or some strong Port by Petards to be broken,
When fights are to be made, and men releeu'd,
In Trench or Sconce, their courage then is steeu'd:
Their pendant Valor falls into their heel,
Before they do the Sword or bullet feel.
Yet these mock-Souldier Gallants having spent
Three or four months with fear and languishment
In some old Captains Hutt, who knows to drill
Them of their Coin, and his own purse to fill,
Return to London, where in every street
You may these plumed and Cassockt Souldats meet;
Where, ask what news they will tell you they have seen
The bloody Leaguer, and the deaths of men:
They Will swear th'aue been at Bergen, and that fight,
Which Mansfield made At Flewrie, near to Namurs.
in fenced Namurs sight,
And talk of naught but Orders, Postures, Motions,
Whereof themselves have scarce the verbal notions.
Thrasonian braues compared with Soldiers brave,
Who make the field their house, their bed their grave,
And scorn to speak of what themselves have done,
That so they may the Braggarts Stigma shun.
Nor were these glorious puffes the men alone,
Which cursed the wars, and wished themselves at home,
But other Capuan Soldiers, Carpet Knights,
Who with their Crowns had bought out merits rights,
And in the time of that long twelve years peace,
Wherein like Iades they lived in pomperd ease.
Procured had some Office of command,
By bribing gifts, and iuggling under hand:
These men whom means, not merit had erected,
With this disastrous night were much dejected,
And their crest-fallen courage did sink down
Lower then The Earth on which they lodged upon,
Cursing the day, wherein their fathers crowns
Had made them vassalls to Bellonaes frowns.
But after that The Moon.
the silver horned Planet,
Which hid her head like some declining Comet
In that fell Tempest, had vnloosd her Carre
In Latmos Mount, and that the Sun from far,
Mounting his Steeds in our Horizons point,
Enlightened had the darksome firmament.
Our men like to the Solar opening Flower,
Fresh courage took, fresh comfort in that hour,
Wherein bright Phoebus with his cheerful face,
Began to run the Zodiacks Western race.
Aduenue, signifies a passage.
Our Guards were then upon the Aduenues set,
Fires kindled were, and forage store was set,
Provisions by Direction were sent down
From Skenks strong Sconce, and Embricks rampard town,
Besides the ships wherein the baggage went,
Were to the durtie Dornicks quarters sent,
Wherein the Soldiers did receive supply
In this first ingresse to necessity,
Of those sad wants, which Custom known became
Another Nature, to their Virtues fame.
Here our Battalions did some three months lie,
Pressed with the terrors of Mortality,
With Lice, with Hunger, and incessant Rain,
Which filld the Rhine, with all the bordring plain.
Our men were shopt up in those Barnes and Cells,
Wherein the Milke-sop Cleuiaes Peasant dwells,
Where like some fleecie fold with hurdles pent,
We past our time in pining languishment:
And in that Signifies a standing ^ampe.
Leaguer was our patience known,
More then our active Valor e're was shown:
For having spent the relics of that store,
Which was provided by the vplandish Boore;
And after that rich Embricks fertile plain
Dismanteld was of trees, of corn and grain
By our Forragiers, who did better know
To cut, then plant; to reap, then till or sow.
Our Conuoyes then did for their forage poast
Beyond the River to that Southern coast,
Where stately Cleeue upon a Mountain stands,
Which all the Frontier thereabouts commands.
We marched near Goffe and Zantams new built walls
For straw and fuel at our Drums sad calls,
Where the proud Spinola, a Genouese by descent.
Genoan Marquess then did lie
With his best Horse, and choice Infanterie,
To stop our passage, and th'attempts to break
Of the Nassauian Squadrons, now growing weak
With a disease, which in their Troops did reign,
With frantic fits, with sense-confounding pain:
Which fierce contagion did not only touch
The French, or Scots, our English, or the Dutch,
But spread it self, like to some broken ball
Of sulphrous wildfire through our Quarters all,
From Eltam where Cleeues Votaries did wunne,
Southwards to Greets, and toward the rising Sun,
Where Raise being jealous of the bordring foe,
Her horned Works, and Rampires new does show.
Never that Simois-neere entrenched troop
With pestilence did more infected droupe,
When Phoebus moved for Concerning this plague, read Homer the first of the
Iliads.
fair Chriscis Rape,
Whom Atreus son to's lust did captiuate,
Darted his wrath upon those Grecian Bands,
Which would not yield to Chriseus fair demands.
Never the Plague wrought a more direful bane
In Salems City, when Vespasian Read Ioseph^ Bello Iud lib.

With his Pretorian Cohorts did surround
Mount Sions walls, and that more sacred ground
Whereon the Temple stood, proud Asiaes wonder,
Whose spired crest Osiris veil did sunder,
Then our weak Troops were with this murraine pressed,
Whose fury did our Cohorts all infest,
And like some sad Mephitis pierst their veins,
Procuring death with fierce tormenting pains.
Some Regiments which could two thousand show,
When we first marched unto the Randeuow,
Could scarce five hundred of that number tell,
Excepting those, who by this sickness fell.
Some Companies whose Squadrons were complete
Full sixescore strong, when we at Skencks-Sconce met,
Could not a Tertian of that List produce,
Fit for the Service, and Employments use;
Those that did live could scarce intombe the dead,
Nor give due rights to them that perished:
Those that were sound could not attendance give
Unto the feeble, nor the sick relieve.
In every place was naught but desolation,
Skie-piercing cries, and fearful lamentation:
Vollies of Shot a fatal Dirge did sing,
Which ecchoing from th'adiacent Rhine did ring,
Whose Golgoth'd banks became one vaulted tomb,
Enclosing heaps within their spacious womb,
Amongst which Signifies the slaughter, or mortality of men.
Carnage grim-fac'd death did stalk,
And on these Trophies did triumphing walk,
Wishing her hand with one all-killing blow,
Might all our Legions to The Infernal throw.
Some for this cause did blame the blameless Laws
Of potent Nature, and condemned that cause,
Which by some jealous A law amongst the Athenians, by which they banished
great men.
O estrocisme might banish
These Spirits from this world, and cause to vanish,
Those Seats of valor, that stupendous frame
Unto those Elements from whence they came.
Others again did curse false Galens Art,
And our Campestrian Leaches, who do part
The quintessentiall Spirits of trees and plants,
Of Stones and Mettalls: and supply the wants
Of feeble Nature with their Fomentations,
With their Elixars, Iulips, and Purgations,
Who give their patients some Aesonian pill,
As they pretend, by which their bags they fill
With Perues Gold, and with Arabiaes wealth,
Themselves being impotent, deuoyd of health,
Troubled with Coughs, with Agues, and Catarrhs,
With Dropsies, Gowts, with those intestine Iarres,
Which from distemperd humors do proceed,
When they deficient are, or do exceed.
But all in vain; for 'twas the firm decree
Of that all-changing, unchanged Deity,
Whose purpose through defects does never alter,
All potent, because impotent to falter,
Whose power is such, that in a twinkling eye,
It can consume large-spread mortality,
Not being tied to Fortune, Fate, or Chance,
Gods only known through man's mere ignorance;
'Twas he that struck with his all-powerfull hand,
Which checks the roaring Sea, which rules the land,
Our suffering Troops, whose Valor often had escaped
The Canons shot, and murdring Muskets fate.
'Twas he that made those fields a common grave
For The English, Dutch, and all those Nations brave,
Who scorning peace, themselves to wars did wedde,
And choosing those deceased in Honors bed.
But ere that this contagion was full spread,
Or that his force had got a Hidraes head.
Lerncan head,
About Saint Michaels day, the Archangels feast,
Fame bruited had, that from the bordring East,
Liguriaes glory, and proud Genoaes pride,
Great Spinola, for's Fortune Deifide
By the Saint-making Conclaue, was fallen down
From Weezels walls, to Goffe and Zantoms Town,
And that his Troops with more then Spanish have,
Upon their Punts the pearled Rhine had past,
Threatening to power forth their long cankred ire,
In dreadful storms of Bullets, Sword, and fire.
This rumor first was grounded on the voice
Of Fames Are those properly so called, who speak out of their bellies.
Engastromists, the vulgar noise,
Who trumpet out for loud resounding Fame,
Things not done for things done, and make the same
Which but appearing was, apparent true
To the deceived worlds deceiving view:
Who taking it, this Merchandise does sell
To those Retaylors, whose broad ears do dwell
In Tauernes, Barbers shops, and public Marts,
Where lies are sold to hollow Spungeous hearts,
For Beer, for Wine, and that cursed Indian weed,
Whereon these puffes of novelty still feed.
But this report high mounted on the wing,
In our Dornician Tents did forthwith ring,
And came to Nassawes honorable Count,
Whose Counsel does Spaines policies surmount;
Who like to Argus with his hundred eyes,
Attends the designs of their Mercuries,
Of their Proteian Enginees of State,
Whose subtlety does seek to master Fate:
He straight grows jealous, that this great Brauado
Might turn at length to some nights Camisado;
Or that the daring foes might courage take,
And our Disasters might them animate
T'incounter in Campania with our Bands,
Which now began to languish of all hands.
For these respects he fortifies at Greets
Close to the River, which the The Curtin is that part of the wall, which runs
in length from one Angle to another.
Curtin beats;
Then opposite to Embricke builds a Fort
Commanding all the South and Western Port:
Besides, he Reinforcements sends to Raise,
And sets strong Guards upon the neighboring ways,
Whose wide Meanders give a passage free
Unto th'incursions of that enemy,
Whose malice has long sought by Romes advice,
Over these Cantons free to Monarchise.
Nor so the Prince does rest, but takes th'Alarme,
Gives order to the Squadrons all to arm,
And draws them into Battle on that plain,
Which from the Camp respects This field lay to the Northward of the Leaguer.
Bootee waine.
This Phalanx first did stand upon a line
Whose depth was one above the perfect nine.
His steeled front which faced the rising Sun
From point to point three thousand yards did run,
Wherein each troop, with all the diffrent nations
Imbattail'd stood, and ranged in their stations.
The Vanguard our victorious English had.
With their red crossed Ensigns, Cecill ladde
Those Regiments, whom Gulicke once did see,
Chief in command are The English Infantrie.
When England, France and Holland did combine
For Brandenburge, and did their forces join
T'impeach the Spaniarde, and to break that plot
By which he Cleeue with Iuliers after got.
Near him with equal distance Sir Edward Veare Lieutenant Colonel to Sir
Horati^*
Veare does stand,
Who in Horatioes absence did command
Those hardy Cohorts, which had often tried
The Iberians force, and all their Braues defied.
Next Ogle rangd his bands, that Martial Knight,
Famous for Ostends siege, and Newports fight,
Where he preuaild both with his sword and parling,
And showed himself both Mars and Hermes darling.
Close unto these upon the left hand flank
Great My Lord Lisle.
Leisters son marched in the foremost rank,
Whose courage longd to revenge Sidneyes blood
Spilt near to Zutphen for our Unions good.
The battle by that nation was took up. The Scots and French had the middle
battle.

Who Nesses streams, and Fyndornes water sup;
With these were joined their ancient fast Alies
Whose native soil twixt Some and Garroun lies.
The French commanded were by Chatillion.
By Hotteriue and Curtimeers brave baron.
The Scots were Brogues and Hindersons sole chardge,
Whose honor death at Bergen did enlarge,
Where he being shot gave up his glorious soul
Into his hands, who Armies does control.
The rear consisted The Suitzers and the Dutch had the Rear.
of those warlike bands,
Which dwell in Bearnes, and Basils Cantond lands,
Of the long tressed Prisons, and the Dutch
Whom Countries love and liberty does touch
With an inflamed Patriots burning zeal,
Whose thoughts tend all unto the public weal.
Besides this list there were of Volunteers
Brave numbers, and of brauer martial Peers,
Who for religions cause, for honors sake
Had left their dearest deares, to undertake,
The wargods service: here Essex his Count
Appears as Leader in the foremost frounte:
With him marched he, that Holla^ds title bears
Amongst the list of our illustrious Peers,
And Hopton too, whom let me not forget,
Borne in the fields of flowerie Sumerset)
My friend and fellow both in Arms and Arts:
With the sweet tune of which harmonious parts,
Thou do enforce my self, my muse, my love
T'admire their worths inspired from above.
Thee vast Herciniaes woods, and Isters bed
Swift Albis current, and the Neckars head,
Know and resound their Panegiricke lays.
Which blazon forth thy fame deserving praise.
Brunswicke the scourge of that Monasticke fry,
Here likewise marched with our Infantery,
Mountgomrie, Chatillon, and diverse more,
From Almaine, France and cold Scotland
Albaniaes shore,
Whose boiling bloods did long to try their might
Against the Marquis in plain open fight.
But long they might, for that Marquis Spinola.
Ligurian Fox,
Meant not to try Bellonaes bloody knocks,
Nor to decide with dinte of trenchaunt blade,
The titles right, which Spaines grand Monarch made
Read the history of the Netherlands page 119.
Unto these Lands, over which as Charles heir
Near Nauncy slain he claims to domineere.
For though some numbers of the Spanish host,
Had past the River from the farther coast
T'infest our men with inroades and Alarmes,
Resolved still t'affroant all hostile harms;
Yet still the Marquis with his standing Camp
Near unto Zantum did himself in camp,
Whose Parties often with our forragiers meet,
Which sometimes beaten were, and sometimes beat.
Amongst the rest Grave Henricke passing Greets
With Brunswicks Duke, and his own Guidon meets
With four brave The colors which horsemen bear.
Cornets of Albertus side,
Whom our men saw of them being vndescried.
For that same morn the wind blowing South and west,
Sent forth a vapr'ous fogge, and friendly mist
From the Aeolian closets, which obscurd the sky
So that things near you could not well descry:
Which either unseen to the vision were,
Or else their shapes self bigger did appear,
The vapor darkening that transparent light
Whereby the Species conuoyed is to sight.
Besides the covert of a rising ground
Did so the prospect of these Troupers bound,
That till the Prince was from their danger free,
They did not once his glistring Cornet see.
Which had they seen, not all fat Hollands store
Grown rich with Perues wealth and Indiaes oar,
Not Ginees gold, nor all those precious grains
Which Orenoque laues from Guianaes veins
Could have redeemd his life, nor set him free
From certain death, or sure Captivity.
Their odds was great, yet Brunswicke cries to charge,
And bids our Pistols and Carbins dischardge
Their murdring shot against the Dutch horse men.
Reisters frount
Which four to one our numbers did surmount.
But the Nassauian Grave aduising flight
To be far safer then unequal fight,
Strait gives the check to The Duke of Brunswicke is also Bishop of Halberstat.
Halberstats desire
And makes his armed Curaciers retire:
Since no dishonor it is our backs to show
Where opposition needs must overthrow.
But in this space some Those who conducted the Conuoy.
Conuoyers of our side,
Who straggling near the Counts engagement spied,
Ran pricking on the spur, and voic'd it out
In the Mauritian quarters round about.
That either he and Brunswicke both were slain,
Or else that both were prisoners made to Spain.
This rumor posting swifter then the wind,
With winged speed does pierce the Princes mind,
Who like some Paphian consecrated Dove,
Which mournes the loss or absence of her love,
Suspecting this report, lamenting shares
His brothers chance with grief and feeling cares:
With whom each Chief, each Soldier does partake
And their selfe-griefes the Generals do make,
As when some dangerous Rheum begotten Ache,
The royal seat of reason does attach
That part being troubled, where the life does rest
The members all inferior are oppressed.
His steeled A Legion is here taken for a Regiment: a squadron is a third part
of a company.
Legions weep, his A Legion is here taken for a Regiment: a squadron is a
third part of a company.
squadrons mourn
Their hearts, though danger proof, for grief do yearne,
Whom neither fears nor terrors could surprise
The dreadful bugs of staggring cowardice,
These loose their mirth, and that soul gladding light
Whose cheerful rays do clarify the sprite:
But yet not so they give the raines to grief,
That in this while their labor slackes relief;
For forth they send their Curriers all in poast,
To search the Champions Rhine divided coast
Mounted upon their well breathd Coursers backs
Whose Pegasean swiftness scorneth trackes.
Those Cornets brave, whose garrisons did lie
Next to the frountiers of their Enemy,
And therefore best acquainted with their fights,
With all their Stratagem is a fear of war.
stratagems, and martial sleights,
Are forthwith orderd to repasse the Rhine,
And toward the rescue to dismarch in time
Their bands of Ordinance, whose high proof frounts,
Safeguard the persons of Nassaiaus Counts,
Commanded are as seconds to the horse
With their best powers their power to reinforce,
But if ingagd to far, then to retire
And like the The Prrthians when they retired did use to shoot backwards, See
Plut in vita Antonii.
Parthians backwards to give fire.
But mark the event: he skowring over the waste
Of that large Champion with preventing haste
Meets with those bands, which to the Rescue came
Upon the summons of his dangers fame
Close unto Greets, where all arriving safe,
Like some wrack scpaing mariners they laugh
At the remembrance of the danger past
Which not fore stald, was like to prove their last.
But although fortune favored his retraite,
And saud the Count, in that angustious strait:
Making this action happy by the event,
Yet no man can approve the president,
It being against the maxims of all war,
For those who chiefetaines in commanding are,
Without some weighty cause their lives t'expose
Unto t'hazard of the incountring foes.
For thus enuirond with a Punicke train,
Marcellus Romes great General was slain, Read Liuie lib. 27. about the
midst.

Who retchles went that hillocke to suruaye,
Where ambushed the Carthaginian lay.
Thus Bucquoie famous for our unions foil,
For Pragues rich conquest, and Bohemias spolie, See the Imperial history
page 806.

After the chance of sundry battles past,
By Gabors troops was vanquished at last,
By those Cossackes which warrelike Poland breeds
And t'Hussars fierce still mounted on their steedes,
Where he being pistoll'd by the barbarous foe
Resignd the trophies of Pragues overthrow.
But though the purling dew, the vapr'ous Air
Did our ambiguous hopes refresh, repair,
And Henricke save: yet the mallignant fire
Strait blighs this fruit of satisfied desire.
Whose flames being kindled through the Aires secret quills
His lodgings seazeth, and with terror fills
The quarters next where Ogles Cohorts lay,
Making the night look like another day.
The spoil was great, for when the raging flame
Unto those Inner Rooms with his fury came,
Precious nor priceles things were left vnspard
But both alike the common danger shard.
His Turkey Carpets of unvalued price,
Made of the Median silkewormes finest fleece,
His Arras clothes wrought by the Belgicke Dame
The portraitures of true reported fame,
See the Low Country history page 456.
Where storied out you might suruay at large
D'Aluaes intrenchment and the Reisters chardge,
Romeroes onslate, and the foul retreat
Made by these Almaines after their defeat.
Page 863.
Grave Williams life saud by a watchful Curre
The Alarm taking from the Spaniards stir,
Who by that Wallouns hand was after slain
Whom Rome had made an Assassine for Spain.
On the other side characterd you might see
In lively forms of wrought Imagerie,
Page 457. of the same history.
Count Egmonds death, and Horns unworthy fate
Ostends long siege and Flaunders bloody slate,
The Barneueltine false Arminian plot,
Fast bound with Castiles subtle Gordian knot.
These mooueables with all his curious plate
Fitting the greatness of rich Nassawes state,
Wherein t'Hollandish Ganimed did skinke
That Rhenish Nectar which the Gods might drink:
All these were spoyld by that consuming fire
Which on the Prince powrd forth his wreakfull Ire;
Nor so this burning Element does rest
But spreddes it self, and farther does infest
The stables, where his warrelike horses stood
Of Europes race, and Africks choicest brood.
The nimble Gennets coming from the maine
Of rich Granado, and the southern Spain,
From Alias Guadalquibir a great River in South Spain.
Baetis banks, and from that fertile shore
Where Civil does unlade that Idold oar,
Which from her wealthy mines rich India sends
To Asiaes bounds, and Europes farthest ends.
His Turkey steedes bredde near the slimie slowes
Of Strimon, which the rugged Thracian plowes,
Near Haemus mount, and those high crested fills;
Whose melting dew Peneius channel fills;
Those stately coursers which Barbaria yields
From Fezzes pastures, and Marocchoes fields, A great River in Barbary.

From parcht Numidia, and Zanhagaes bed
Which South from Atlas shows his rising head
Were burned quite, or half dead, half alive,
Twixt life and death did in this conflict strive
Till life being vanquished by all conquering death,
They lost at once their torments and their breath,
Nor in this time the Spanish fire does rest,
But malice fuell'd strives for interest
In Iuliers, Cleaueland and the Flemish coast
Flaming revenge with their most powerful host:
For these desiegnes great Spinola does lie
In Cleuiaes fields, and keeps a still-fixt eye
Upon our Legions, which began to break
Their Summer station, with the pest-grown weak
And westward fell unto that higher land
Which lies twixt Eltam and Rhines checkerd strande;
Twixt Embricke, and that Sconce which Skenke did frame
That so he might the doubtful Cleuener tame,
In Geldriaes farthest confines, where the Waal
From Rhines current to Mases stream does fall.
Another army by stout Borges led
For's service great and lineage honored,
By which he claymes an equal rank with them
Who show M^udozaes or Toledoes stem, Two of the greatest families in Spain.

And Grandoed are for their Donnized birth
Living like gods upon the Spanish earth,
Beleaguers Sluice, and does invade Cazaunte
Which Yperle seuers from the Continent;
Where opposite to Zealands watrie land
And Flushings seat this fortress strong does stand:
Famous for that far famed nauall fight
Which our third Edward made in Sluices fight,
When Phillip sent his sea Commanding fleet
With our well rigged Argozies to meet.
Who grapling with our force their force withstood,
And bathed their prowes in French and Flemish blood
Which issuing from the wounds of thousands slain,
With His color did the Yperlian current stain.
This town a Cock pit was for Mars his game
Both parties striving to possess the same
With bloody success of continual war,
Where those that conquered were, now conqu'rours are.
For when these States themselves did first unite
To resist Philips force and D'Aluaes spite,
And sought the oppressed Netherlands to free
From the hard yoke of Castiles tirannie,
Ere Anious Duke rich Antwerpe did Invade,
Or strove himself Lord Paramont to make
Of wealthy Brabant, Isendike and Sluice,
Subjected were unto the Unions use.
And so remaind till Parmaes duke possessed
With general power, his warrelike troops addressed
Unto the conquest of this town and I Will,
Which Sir Roger Williams and Sir Thomas Baskeruile, Read the Netherlands
history page 966.
Williams kept and famous Baskeruile,
Who for a season bravely did maintain
This place besiegd, against the strength of Spain,
Till by surrender they the same did yield
To the Castilians masters over the field.
They kept this same until Serrano lost
It to the Orangians, whose laborious cost
Regaind the town, whilst that besiegd Ostend,
Page 1616.
For thrice twelve months her bulwarks did defend.
By which advantage that commanding fort,
Which so much did all Zealands good import,
Recouerd was, which now with might and maine
Inigo strives for Isabel to gain.
For this project he draws with speeding post
From Antwerpe, Gaunte, from Bruges and Alost,
From all those neighbor garrisons which bide
In fruitful Flaunders, and in Brabants side.
An Army strong, which reck'ned by the List
Of thirteen thousand Soldiers did consist.
These under their Burgonian Ensigns marched
Unto the Leaguer, near to Augusts last;
Where being come, like undermining Moales,
Which make their way through the earths anfractuous holes,
They draw their rolling Trenches toward the mouth
Of the Town Harbor, which from West to South
Gives a free passage to the Cities Key,
For Ships of burden from the German Sea.
These with Crooked turns.
Meanders winding being cast,
And brought within fit distance at the last;
They raise their Platformes, A high work of earth upon which they plant
Ordinance.

A wall made of earth.


Caualiers and Mounts,
Whose height the Bulwarks breast by far surmounts,
Then plant their Cannon, whose Promethean fire,
Upon the A high work of earth upon which they plant Ordinance.

A wall made of earth.


Rampire powers his thundering Ire,
Which with incessant peales they still do plie,
That so our men might not re-fortifie
The broken breaches, through whose ruined vault
They thought with ease the Bulwark to assault.
Here Bullets glancing from the battered wall,
Amongst a Squadron of Defendants fall,
Whose mangled limbs, like men-shap't Meteors fly
Through th'horrid paths of the smoake-darkened sky.
Some other mounting over the Soldiers head,
Meets with two Lovers sporting in their bed,
Whose souls are hastened to the Elisian shade,
Through that swift passage which the bullet made.
Here fiery balls from murdring Great pieces of Ordinance.
Bombards shot,
And to their highest level being got,
Make the Louanian Students think from far,
That Phaeton is new mounted in his Carre.
Nor does our side their Shot and Powder spare,
But with thick vollies beats the trembling air,
Which lighting on the Iberians works much harm,
And with their blood the colder earth does warm.
The Towns chief command Vander Noet did wield,
His honored son, whom Newport once beheld,
To guard the Orangian Standart in that fight,
When warlike Maurice conquered Alberts might.
He like himself, and like his Fathers son,
Leaves nothing unattempted, naught undone
By which he might th'ingaged place maintain
Against all th'attempts of right-pretending Spain.
To farther this, the Pioners are bid
To raise new Platformes with the swiftest speed,
Our Great baskets of earth.
Gabions planted are, behind whose bulk
The smoking Gunners with their Lintstockes lurk:
Our Ordinance new mounted is to batter,
Which Babels walls, or Ecbatanes would shatter.
The Companies are quartred in the Town,
Or else without upon the Sandy Down,
Whose valor does their Metal stiff oppose,
To the utmost peril of the brauing Foes.
But although our side jealous of the good
And public safety, to their tackling stood
With matchless valor; yet Inigoes force
Their courage, skill, and labor did enforce,
To purchase that Yperlian peerless Gemme
Raught by the States from Flaunders Diadem;
Although that The Northeast wind.
wind, which from Tartaria blows*
From Rugeland, and Moscouiaes plashy slowes
Congealed had the Yperle, and the Lieue,
And made their liquid arms and branches stiff;
Yet still the Spaniards heated with the fire
Of Honor and Reu^nge, did still aspire:
So that the Winters storms, nor Natures threats,
Whose violence their hardy Legions beats,
Could once divert their valor pressed to die,
Or Spaniolize this Town by victory.
Sometimes a A Gentleman of a Company, who is to lie upon his duty.
Perdieu lodged upon the face
Of Frost-bound Tellus, in that very place
Where he was set, is by the Sergeant found
Frozen to death, and fastened to the ground.
Sometimes a Sentrie to his Posture standing,
And from the Rounders Quiuala demanding,
Ere the last Round Colossus-like does stand,
With His ashie Pike congealed to his hand:
Yet these disgusts of Nature joined with those,
Which revenge bandied from their Slusian foes,
Could not enforce Inigoes Troops to rise,
Proiecting still to gain Sluice by surprise.
But when the Sun with his All-cheerefull beams,
Had thawed the pauement of the Flemish streams,
And that his Phlegon swich'd by speeding time
Began t'approch that Heauen-diuiding line,
Whose Zenith perpendicular does stand
Over the Sunburned Ethiopian land.
Eighteen brave Cohorts were from Zealand sent,
With danger-daring Resolution bent,
To cut the Dike, and that low Champion drench,
VVhereon the Iberians did themselves entrench.
Then might you see that massy bounding frame
(Whose Rampire did the Rivers fury tame)
Pierst through and through, and give a free access
Unto the Floods, which made their swift address
To this enlarged rupture: then the Moales
Abandoned quite their hollow vaulted holes;
Conies their Burrowes, Hares their Forms forsook,
And their swift legs new postures undertook,
Swimming along with men-deuouring Sharkes,
With Musicke-louing Dolphins, scaly Carpes,
With bearded Barbels, and that ruddy Fish,
Whose Chines are served up for a dainty dish
Unto the Burgers, when their drunken Is a Fair, or Revel.
Kirmish
Inuites their brains with Rhenish wine to skirmish.
This Deluge made the Borgian Bands retire,
Crossed in the project of their proud desire;
Because they fayl'd both of Cazaunt, and Sluice,
Which they so longed to gain for Philips use.
But although Borges brave Design was croft
By wavering Fortune, and his honor lost,
Together with his Armies, pierst the heart
Of Isabella with repining smart.
Yet Vanderbercke, who Gulicke did besiege
With His Legions raised from Naples, Spain, and Liege,
Brought comfort to the Court, whose furrowed face
Looked frowning sad for Sluices late disgrace.
He, whilst that Maurice with his feeble Troops
Encamped at Dornicke, and his Army droupes,
Being pressed with sickness, marched unto the Town,
And there entrencht upon the bordring ground.
Pethan commanded for the Belgicke Peers
As Chief Governor.
Archprefect, who for some fore-past years,
The Cities Helm, and Dutchies both had steered
For's loyal care, for's government vnfear'd.
But now suspicion mounted on the wing
Of just pretense, bred iealousies within
Amongst our Captains, whose well trained Bands
Were subject to Pithans austere commands.
Hence sprung this cause, the wealthy Iuliers Boore
Had hoorded up in his well furnished store
Larger provisions, which might well supply
The pinching wants of our necessities:
Whose foreseen pressure did begin to threat
A Saguntine penuriousnesse of meat,
The tainted store provisions being sold,
By State-Commission, which the Town controld.
Besides those Pastures where the Roar, a great River in the Duchy of Iuliars.
Roar fills
His slimie channel from the purling hills,
Did swarm with Herds of that large German breed,
Whose use might full relieve the Cities need.
For this respect the Gulikans advise
Wavering Pithan provisions to surprise
From out the Champion, ere the approaching foes
Should stop the passage, and the Aduenues close.
Good was the Counsel, but like verbal wind,
It took no root within th'vnsetled mind
Of Gulickes Governor, whose wanting care
From all defense our warlike Troops does bare.
For what out-daring death, selfe-lauish Sprite
Can strive with hunger, or with famine fight?
Then thus suppose you see surrounded round
Fair Gulicks walls, and that their Trenches bound
Close to the An utter work commonly raised beyond all other Fortifications.
Rauelin, and those utter works,
Behind whose mass the stout Defendant lurkes.
Suppose you hear the dreadful Cannon play
From their high-crested Platformes, and display
Strange characters of Death, whose sad aspect
Might terror on Deaths second self reflect
Life's lavishness, whose Adamantine heart
Mean terrors do not move, nor cause to smart.
Close to these brazen Trunks, the worlds last wonder,
True counterfeits of Jove's amazing thunder,
Deaths p^ologue acts his part, the Musket sounds
Loud summons unto death, to blood and wounds.
Nor is this all we suffer, famine reigns,
Cleanness of teeth in every street complains;
Things horrid are devoured, Dogs, Mice, and Rats,
Loud croaking Toadpoles, hunger-starued Cats:
The Flemish Courser, and the Frison Steed,
High pamperd for the Saddle now must feed
The Riders Colon, whose unsatiate maw
Both against Reason, Nature, Customs Law,
Feeds on that flesh, whose living back did bear
Himself through horrors mouth, through dangers fear.
Those high-fed palats, which not long since fared
On Friselands fattest Foul, Westphaliaes Lard,
Zealandish Salmon, and the wild Boares haunch,
With which the richer Dutch does cram his paunch
On solemn Feast-dayes; these for want of meat,
Things vilifide and dunghil'd now must eat.
To redress this our men their Spirits rally,
And resolute appoint a valiant sally,
By whose adventure they might either die,
Or manumize themselves from penury:
Since better it is for Valor once to bleed,
Then still to feel affliction under need.
In this conflict Captain John Haydon.
young Haydon does appear
More then himself, out-facing Fate and Fear,
And with his Pistol armed, discharges sure
With every shot a certain Sepulture
To some blacke-visag'd Spaniard, who does fall
Never to rise, before the last days call.
Amongst the rest, one of the proudest foes,
As Challenger himself in Combat shows,
Advanced before the rest, and there defies
Goliath-like his brauer Enemies.
This Spur-gall'd Haydon, who accepts the fight,
And though unarmed, yet kills him in the sight
Of both Battalions, then recharg'd falls back,
To answer him too with his Pistols crack.
But the Retreat now sounded, parts the fray,
And our men disappoynted, cut their way
With their well tempred Fauchius, to that gate
From whence they made excursions but of late.
This Salley past, wherein with doubtful chance
Bellona showed her grimme faced countenance,
And all relief Debard, or shut up.
portculliz'd from the Town,
By Vanderbercks Intrenchments, who sits down
Resolved to win and wear, then courage droopes,
And mourning valor unto famine stoopes,
Whose Bilboe-steeled point was far more keen,
Then Spaniards wrath, or Vanderbercks fierce spleen.
These motives urged a parle, both condescend
To this condition, and Committees send
As Delegates in trust, whose sound advice
The present difference might full compremise.
Both parties being agreed, Count Henry takes
Reconquerd Gulicke, which Pithan forsakes,
Who now dismarching through the Coleine port,
Surrenders up this hunger-conqu'red Fort.
To reaffront this loss, when first the Spring,
To Winter-tyred mortals joy does bring:
When May first opens those selfe-named Flowers,
Which April blossoms with his pearled showers:
Nassauian Henry of Nassaw.
Henricke with selected Bands
Of Horse and Foot, in fruitful Brabant lands
Near to Breda, from whence his dreadful Arms
Transported work strange characters of harms
In little Brabant; Famine, Sword, and Fire
Glutting Revenge fresh boiling with desire.
Some fifty Dorpes were in a moment burned,
And their faire-fronted Edifices turned,
By the consumption of the raging flame
To that first Chaos, from whence first they came.
In midst of these Combustions Henry falls
Before well fenced, well manned Herentals,
Where seeking by Petarre to force the place,
Our wanting The Vanguard.
Van showed not that wonted face
Of ancient resolution, whose default
Debars the rest from A Town in little Brabant.
Herentals assault.
Yet after this repulse, our Foot surprise,
Partly by force, partly by Compremise,
Two Little Forts much used by the Dutch. An Incursion of Horse.
Sconces from the foes, whose trembling hands
Make good the Ports for Nassaws sure commands.
Besides our Horse a Little Forts much used by the Dutch. An Incursion of Horse.
Caualgado make
Close unto Brussels, whose burnt Suburbs take
Impressions of our wrath; the Archdutchesse sees
The frowning face of these sad miseries,
Yet cannot she redress them: for man's will
Proiected resolutions cannot fill,
Without just means of power, which Heaven sends
As Instruments t'accomplish humane ends.
Thus this incursion past, our men retire
Thorough the smoking flames of Brabants fire
Unto Breda, rewarded for their pains
With honors Crown, and conquered Spanish gains.
Nor thus alone the Land with slaughter bleeds,
But unto Neptunes Maine Bellona speeds
With Engines of destruction, where she stains
With streams of blood the Sea-gods watery plains.
Those vast Armadaes, which commanded lay
Near to Baioun, and Saint Sebastians Bay,
Their Galeouns houering near to Lisbones walls,
Where Tagus into Thetis bosom falls;
Their nimble Galleys slicing with their Oars
Those billowing waves, which beat on Affrickes shores,
Sometimes on The Oceans Maine incountring meet
With Amsterdams, or Flushings warlike Fleet,
Which homewards bound from Venice, or Ligorne,
From Scanderoun, or Egypt rich in Corn,
Do proudly plow the Mediterran Maine,
Swelling with profit, and full fraught with gain.
Sometimes again Moy Lambert, or L' Hermit,
Willeks, or fierce Hugen this loss requite;
Who traversing those Seas, whose rougher Tide
From Magellanus Streights does Northwest glide,
Near to the Honduras Gulf, Domingoes I Will,
Or the Terceraes, famous for the foil
Of valiant Strossy, meet some Spanish Hulke,
Or some swift Caruell, whose full fraughted bulk
Is laden with that rich At Petosi in Peru are most rich Mines of Gold.
Potosian Oar,
Which Lima sends from Perues wealthy shore.
Sometimes again near the Balsoran Sound,
Or Teneriffaes pike, where Amber's found
Of the highest price, some of their armed Ships
Encounter with some Carracke, whose strong ribs
Are ballast with those drugs, which Chinaes plains
Send from their fruitful Aromatique veins;
Or with those Spices, which for bartered Gold
Are by the The Inhabitants of Iaua, and the Moluccoes. A place in Afric,
subject to the Portugals.
Iauans, and Moluccoies sold.
Amongst the rest great Angolaes Viceroy
For Andaluzia bound, with smiling joy
The Atlantique Ocean cuts, and proudly sails
Thorough the Maine, till some Dutch Seaman hailes,
And bids him strike: then as the Hircanian beast,
Whom the pursuing Hunter does inuest
With His knottie Toils, first seeks to escape the danger;
But that being vain, he turns his fear to anger,
And fiercely coaping with th'incountring foe,
Does the utmost deuoir of his courage show.
The Portugueze unequal to sustain
The Flushingers encounter, plies amain
Both Helm and Yard, and forwards led by fear
Swifter then any wind, does nimbly steer
Over the ridge of those high-breaking waves,
Whose beating surge Terceraes foreland lanes.
But this being labor lost, he turns his head
Unto the combat with a side-wind sped:
Then their Canoniers with the An Engine which Gu^ners use to charge Ordinance.
Carteridge ply
Their great and lesser sized Artillery,
Larboord and Starboord ready for the charge,
Their Langrell, and their Crosse-barre shot discharge: Great shot used at Sea,

The Musketeers standing upon a Range,
Behind the Wast-cloaths do their bullets change,
Granado balls, from the hand, or Bombard sent,
With vaprous smoke obscure the Firmament:
So that suruaying water, land, or air,
Death, dread, and danger swarmed every where.
The Sea-nimphs were afraid, and Neptune hid
His forked Mase with fear astonished.
The trembling Mermayds did for horror quake,
As when th'inclosed winds the waters shake,
Thinking Prometheus having broke those bands,
Which manacled his Vultur-griped hands,
And manumiz'd from his tormenting pain,
Did imitate Jove's Thunderbolts again.
But when that both sides to their close fights came,
And tried the last chance of this martial Game,
From out the Scuttle-holes spouted streams of blood,
Which clotted on the curled Ocean stood,
The Murderers from out their higher Tires,
Discharged dreadful flakes of sulphrous fires,
Whose strong emissiue power with Tarlin killed
Whole hundreds, and with slaughtred carnage filled
Their upper Decks, which straight blown up did fly
Through the vast extent of th'inameld sky.
But at the length the Portugalls pursued
With danger of all hands, for Quarter sued
Unto the Dutch, who from the farthest South
The Angolians brought to The River of Flushing.
Scheldis watrie mouth,
Enriched for their hazard with that Gold,
Which heaped lay within that Galeouns hold.
BELGIAES TROUBLES, AND TRIVMPHS.

The Second Book.

WHEREIN ARE RELAted all the most famous Occurrences which have happened in the
Netherlands, from the Ascension of our Savior, 1622. unto this present time,
1625.

LONDON, Printed by Augustine Matthewes, and John Norton. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD, LORD CONVVAY, Baron of Raggely, and one of
his Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, And Sir HORACE VEARE, Col.
General of the English in the Netherlands, WILLIAM CROSS wishes that
happiness which they themselves desire.
RIght Honorable, your known loves to the United Provinces of the
Netherlands, and their Cause, sealed by your Honors with the free expense of
your dearest blood, and the frequent hazard of your lives, have besides those
other motives of your knowledge, judgment, and experience in Subjects of this
nature, invited me to this Dedication. The first Part of Belgiaes Troubles and
Triumphs, belongs to the Earl of Essex, and my Lord Montioy; the second part
is consecrated to your Honored selves: Both these are rather a Discourse, then
a Poem, as truly and Historically relating the most remarkable and
time-neerer Exployts, which have passed between the Dutch and the Spaniards,
in these last four years Wars of the Netherlands. In this List, the Siege
of Bergen, and that of Breda, the Battles of Flewry and Statloo, with the
taking of Saint Saluadour in Brasilia, challenge above the rest the chiefest
place and prerogative. The rest are minor gests, and deeds of less
consequence, yet worthy for their worths to be kept in the closet of
Remembrance. In all th^se as in a representing Glass, you may see the mercy
of God extended from time to time to this Estate, first erected from the
Inforcements of the Spanish tyranny, since supported by the Auxiliary means
of the English, French, and Scots, and maintained at this present in that
greatness, which the world sees and admires, by Policy, Power, and Religion.
If public censure be as impartial as is the Poem, the Author shall think
his endeavors fortunate: As for your Noble selves, he does presume upon the
candor and integrity of your Estimations, undoubtedly knowing, that you
accept a mite as respectively as a talent, and esteem the freedom of the
Giver, more then the value of the gift. Upon this assurance he does rest, and
so does for ever rest

Your Honors most devoted Servant, William Cross.

BELGIA'S TROUBLES AND TRIVMPHS.
The second Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN this second part continued from the Ascension of our Souiour, anno 1622,
unto this present time, anno 1624, are contained a Description of our first
Leaguer at Rees, with the killing of an Jtalian Captain by Beaumont a
Frenchman hand to hand. His Excellencies ascent to Gravenweert, and a Relation
of a Camisado, given by fourteen Troops of the enemies Horse upon our
quarters. Our march to the Busse, and our retreat from thence. The siege of
Bergen, and that famous Battle fought near Fleury, between Count Maunsfield,
and Gonsaluo de Corduba. The co^spiracie of Barnevelts two sons, and other
Arminians against the Prince of Orange. The Battle of Statloo, fought between
Tilley and Bru^swicke. The taking of S. Saluadour. The Siege of Breda, with the
surprisall of Goffe by Charles Lambert.

AFter our Troops had breathed, and that the date
Of that same Feast, which Mor^als consecrate
To Christ's Ascension, had proclaimed the Field
Tour Belgicke Troops, with strength and courage steeld,
Orders of Command.
Potents were sent forth, full six thousand poast,
Upon their Summons from that nether coast*
Of fertile Holland, to that higher land,
Where Rees ore-lookes the billowing Rhenus Strand.
There safe ariuing, with the deluing Spade
New horned Works, Intrenchments new were made;
Behind whose breast they might themselves defend
From Vanderbercke, whose Argian eyes attend
Upon our motions all, on each design,
Which he still thwarting, seeks to countermine.
Amongst the rest, with some Italian Horse,
He seeks to gain the A Turnepike is a gate which gives entrance into the Camp
Turnepike, and to force
Our Horse-guard led by Beaumont, who does frount
The dreadful shocke of this Italian brunt.
Him their Ligurian Leader having spied
By's wauing Plume, and Armor rich descried:
Come on, come on, quoth he, let us two try
The doubtful fortune of this Victory;
Those Arms, that Plume shall be the Conquerors spoil,
And honored marks of vanquished Beaumonts foil.
With this his spurred Calabrian Courser flies
Swifter then wind, and curuetting does rise
Beyond the bristled Haspels are Engines made to throw down before the
Turnepike, which point every way with pikes about an ell long.
Haspels, where they join
Force unto force this Combat to define.
Not Almaine-like they wheel about at large,
But Poldron unto Poldron, make the charge
With their death-belching Pistols, both which strike
With equal force, but fortune much unlike.
For Beaumont slightly's wounded in the thigh,
The Other is slain, and falls down presently,
Whose carkeise after many mortal blows
Recouer'd is, recarried by the foes
Unto the Camp, where they this chance lament,
This Italian was Spinolaes kinsman.
Sealed with the loss of one so eminent;
As alyed to the Marquess, and for's Spirit,
Not dignified so much by Blood, as Merit.
After some month in this first Station spent,
Eight thousand more were by Prince Maurice sent
Toward Skenkes-Sconce; who doubling Arnhams walls,
Arriues at Otherwise, Skenkes Sconce
Grauenweert, and from thence falls
Over the Wahal to those Southern banks,
Which Skenks-Sconce with his thundering Cannon flanks.
There being come, their Pioneers do raise
Strong Little forts which the Dutch raise suddenly for their defenses.
Redoubts on the passage of those ways,
Whose winding turns run from the Cleuian hill
To those Intrenchments which our footebands fill.
Our horse without, and vnintrenched lay
With watchful care safeguarding night and day,
Those small Batauian Villages.
Dorps, whose verge extends
From Nimegham to Geldriaes Eastern ends.
This seeming showed advantage does incite
Proud Vanderbercke the Reezian foil to quite, Camisade a^ assault in their
own lodginge.

With some fresh Camisade: for this design
Some fourteen troops pass over that Apennine
Where Cleuia stands, who covered by the night
And a still march, about the dawning light
Approach our utter Sentries, and surprise
Them and the Those that walk the Round.
Rounders, whose sleep sealed eyes
Betray the rest; hence traversing that way
Near unto which our Scottish horseguard lay,
These proud Burgonian Reisters forthwith find
Balfour surprisd in ods, but not in mind; Sir William Balfour that day
commanded the horse guarde.

Who thus ingagd receives the dreadful shocke
Of these swarte Rutters, rendering knock for knock:
Till at the length dismounted he does yield
Unto the stronger, who thence scourd the field
After his Cornet, which retiring flies
Couerd with fire, oppressed with Enemies,
And on the station of our Footeguards fell
Whose Musketeers these Carbins straight repel.
For now from every side th'Alarum takes,
And each man to the battle Champion makes,
Where naught was seen upon the bloody plain
But batterd arms, and carkeisses new slain.
The loss was like, for our men did surprise
The A Wallone who came the day before into our camp being disguised.
chief conductor of this enterprise
With a Burgonian Captain; of our side
Balfour was tae'n, and Weimars Duke lies by it,
Until some better fortune should decree,
The uncertain scope of his Captivity.
To requite this affrount this proud surprise
Prince Maurice with six thousand foot does rise
From Grauenweert, and floating down wards falls,
Without the rattling Drums, or trumpets calls
Beyond fat Bommelweert, where he does land
His Phalangiers, who passing by command
Waft over the Mosas Willow bordred banks
Whose waves do wash well fenced Huisdens flanks.
Ma^ching from thence our vauntcurrors descrye
Commonly called the Busse.
Shertokenbusse, whose maiden ports defy
All onslats, all attempts, and proudly stands
Upon defense with s^u'nteene chosen bands
Of VVallons, and Brabansons ready pressed
^^ich life, and limme to keep the seathred nest
Of th^se free booters, who by Derricke was Captain of two hundred free
booters who lay in the Busse.
Derricke led
Themselves to rapine, murder, pillage wedde,
And feeding on the contribution Boore,
Greas^ palms, and paunch with his consumed store.
There having viewed that well defenced town,
We made a stand upon the bordring down
About the time, that glistring Phoebus laues
His bright Carroch in Thet is western waves.
Then orders were given out, the casd Petarrs Engines made to blow up gates.
Petarres
Strange Engines found out in our modern wars,
Whose sulphr'ous power the brazen gates would shatter
Of Ecbatane, and that strong portall batter
The Iron gates which Alexander made upon the streights of mount Cancasus.
Whereas the steep Caucasean mountains rocks
Are chaynd as prisoners with his Iron locks:)
These Corbett did command, the first adventure
Was Tibals chardge, who foremost was to enter
With that selected crew, that chosen band
Which he as Veares Lieutenaunt did command.
Thus all things being disposed for the fight
We rose from thence, and marching all that night
Past thorough sandy, rough, Maeanderd ways
Where error led our small battalion strayes.
So that we came not to the Bussian gate
Before the dawning light, a time to late
The strong portcullizd Turnepike to surprise
Which Grobbend^ncke was as then governor of the town.
Grobbendoncke with his hundred watchful eyes
Safeguarded sure, who takes a close Alar'me
With all his bands, commanding all to arm.
This caused us to retire, and homewards bend
With out the effect of that proiected end,
Whose hopes had brought us to those Champion plains
Which Mase enricheth with his flowing veins,
The Spoils of Brabant, and the conquered Busse
Being the project of each wanting purse.
In this retraite our troops were hunger pressed
Tired with travail, and with thirst oppressed:
So that until we touched upon the Mase
Toward whose streams our Maniples did pace,
We fared like some Alarbian hungry thief
Who traversing the desert for relief
Follows the tracke of some known Carauan,
Which to fulfill their Heathenish Alcoran,
Visits that profane Mohammedan shrine
Placed by the Caliphs A^ ^echa in Arabia.
near the Arabian Sine.
Those stinking pooles, Cocitus like aspected
Which the Marashes vapors had infected,
Those puddle lakes wherein the water Toade
The Frogge and Horsleech keep their safe aboade,
Were sought, and searched out to alay the fire
Of appetite fresh burning with desire.
Whose liquour was more precious to the mouth
Then all those wines transported from the South
Which the Canarian Ilander does sup
On sollemne feasts in's Nectar crowned Cup,
Then that the Cretan near Cerathus drinks,
Or Bachrach sends from Rhenus sandy brinks.
Yet after those disgusts surmounted all,
Which like some storm upon our troops did fall,
And those freebooters all repulsed back,
Which followd our Nassauians by the tracke;
We past unto the A town in Gelderland belonging to the states.
Grave, where each man feeds
In plenties Magazin, and all our needs
Receiud supplies from those fat Geldrian fields,
Whose swarming stoare, Bread, Beef and Mutton yields
In greater measure, then that Eastern land,
The lands of Assiria and Hungary are very fruitful.
Which borders on the roaring Tigris strande,
Or those Pannonian pastures, where the grass
For's sudden growth comparison does pass.
Thus having well refresht our hungry bands
We doubled those high crested heathy lands,
Which forth extended from the billowing Mase,
Do ouerlooke the Betowes various face.
From thence our tired legions speeding came
Unto the ports of Nimegham stands high upon the hanging of a hill.
high built Nimegham,
There resting one whole night we made descent
Unto the plains of that low Continent,
Where near to our Intrenchments Waal does slide
From out the Rhines inameld diaprie side,
Whose weeping waves seemd to condole with us,
Because we mist the vnconquerd maiden Busse.
But in this space that war like Genouese
The Infantaes General scorning pampred ease,
With these alarums rowsd does angry fare
Like some Muscouian winter pined Bear,
Who when the Sun begins to melt the Snow,
Which pargetteth that Northern Climats brow
Forsakes his den, and roauing runs for pray
With all his Cubs their hunger to alay.
To quench this bloody thirst he sends commands
Through Flaunders, Heinault and those VVallon lands,
Whose Frontier from the British Ocean bends
To Limburge, and Burgundiaes western ends:
Inioyning all their Garrisons to arm
Upon the summons of this first Alarm,
And at a day prefixed themselves to show
Near Antwerpe their determined Randeuowe.
These Regiments, with those which Borges led,
Who near to Sluice were winter-billetted,
Upon this order to Steu'n Bergen past
In warrelike manner near to Iulies last.
That town being won, they lingerd not an hour
But straight-waies marched with their victorious power
To Bergen, where their men the A Terrier in properly any thing that puts it
self into the earth.
Terriers play
Behind that Mount, which opposite then lay
Unto the port of VVowe, from whence their works,
Behind whose covert all their Army lurkes,
Extended ran unto the Kickepotte forte,
Which ouerlookes the Cities Southern port.
Upon their first approach some Squadrons pressed
Did Sallie forth, and sallying did Inuest
That hillocke, where the Vauzian English stood, The English of my Lord Vauxes
regiment.

In Castiles cause selfelauish of their blood.
Hard was the fight, for nation against nation
English against English fought with emulation;
But still the Marquis sending fresh supplies,
With number more then valor won the prise
From the besieged, who with ods surchardg'd
Retired, and retiring still dischardg'd
Their murdring Muskets on the Spanish files,
Which six to one surpast our A Maniple is a division of files.
Maniples.
After the passage of this first affrounte,
The foes incouragd did their Cannon mount
Upon new A place to mount Ordinance on.
platformes raised, whose thundering reach
Having inforcd an assaultable breach,
They scald the ruins, and began the fight
Vaild with the Curtin of a Mooneshine night
About the second Round: with various chance
In this conflict Mars showed his countenance
Unto both parties, for the Martial foe
Sometimes was beat; sometimes did overthrow:
Thrice being repulsd, they thrice did reassaile
And though oppressed, their courage never did fail:
For knowing valor to be actions Spirit,
Which Crowns our proiects with successful merit,
They rallied still, till Phoebus lift his head
From pearld Auroraes saffron coulered bed:
Then being subject to the pointeblancke aim
Of every markeman, they forsook the game
Unequal of their parts, and backewards plied
Unto their Trenches from the bulwarks side.
The loss was great, twelve hundred Spaniards killed
The bending Circle of our A Fortification made in form or manner of a horn.
Horn^worke filled,
Two hundred of our side did likewise dye
Leaving their fames pawnes to Eternity:
Amongst the rest Purfry my noble friend
In honors bed sealed up his glorious end,
The like was Sir Michael Eueret and Captain Loueles.
Eueretts chance, and Louelesse lot,
Both which with poysned bullets being shot,
When Aesculapius skill could not appease,
Nor Surgerie the venoms rancour ease,
Exchaungd their living flesh to liuelesse dust
Till heaven thronizd immortal rise they must.
Inhuman war thou horseleech of mankind,
Which pleasure in displeasure still do find,
Whose mansions are deaths hollow charnelld caves
Large fields of slaughter, where thy fury raues
Unlimited, and boundeles in that lust,
Which naught but blood and murder content must.
Were not the Roman The darte which the Romans
pile, the Parthian shaft,
The Grecian The pike which the Macedonians vsd.
Sarisse, and Moriscan dart,
T'heluetian halberd, and our British bill
Potent enough thy greediness to fill
With slaughtred bodies? but that Organs new
Must terriblize themselves to mortals View,
Which thou have found out in this latter age,
To Cocker up thy blood still thirsting rage.
Now must that Great ordinance.
Brazen fire outbelching trunk
Found out by that accursed German Munke,
Whole myriads kill, and raise of bodies slain
Pyramide Mounttaines on the sanguind plain.
To furnish this device, those stinking cells
Wherein the loving Paphian Pigeon dwells,
Those Cellars, where our English skenker fills
That ruddie Claret sent from Gascoines hills,
Must now be searched for Saltpeter.
Nitre: Swethlands brass
Guipuscan Iron, and that heavy mass
Of palefac'd lead, sent from the Northern From the Peake in Darbishire comes
great store of Lead.
Peake
Must now with streams from mangled bodies reake,
Clay must be fetched from Padoaes fertile plains,
Sulphur from Sicills fire out belching veins,
Rozin from Rugeland, and that Borill coaste,
Where Riga stands, now to the Swethner lost:
To make These are ingredients with which Grenades and wild fire bals are
made.

See Machiael in the addition to his book of war page 45 45.


those fiery balls, Granadin Squibs
Aspected like crinited Comets glibs,
Which burning break, and breaking peecemeale rent
All that's opposd to this fell instrument.
But as though all these Engines were but weak
Thy blood Hydropicke thirstines to break,
The fatal bullet must impois'ned be,
To wreake thy malice on mortality.
So that a wounded arm, a skarred thigh,
A pierced hand shall as for certain die,
As if that hollow blood conducting vain
Some mortal hurt or damage did sustain,
Or those same cordial strings, which knit the life
Were sundred quite by some Rauilliacks knife:
Were not O Rome thy All these were notabletraitors
Gerrards, Lopes, Squires,
Thy Assassines, and fulminations fires,
Thy poysnie simples fetched from Concritan,
From Nubia, Tombut, and from Terminan,
From hot Cyrene, and that Ponlus.
Eastern coaste,
Whereon the roaring Ponticke seas are tossed,
Sufficient means to furnish with supply
The yawning gulf of thy new Purgat'ry?
But that thy darling, and thy minion Spain,
Thy ape of mischief, must her honor stain
Acquired by the fortune of fair Arms,
And blemish it with poyson-contriud harms.
But whilst that my digressiue muse thus falls
To this Inuectiue fit, the Cannon calls
Her wandering thoughts to Bergen whose loud sound
From every platform ecchoing does rebounde
With greater noise, then when the Two most furious batteries, see the Turkish
history page 418. and page 584.
Scodran towers
Were batterd by the Barbr'ous Turkish powers,
Or When the Rhodian bulwarks were defaced
By Soliman, and all their glory rac'd
Left nothing to the crossed Christian Knight,
But the sad aspecte of this dismal sight.
Our ordinance disposed by Gibsons care,
Whose merit claims an honorable share
In Bergens safeguard, did the Spaniards plie
With frequent Peales of their Artillery,
Whose leuelld shot unto the foemen sent,
Did Peecemeale Gabions, men and Rampires rent;
And whilst their bodies mounted, sent their souls
To griesly Plutoes dark Infernal hoales.
Some nine days after when the Crystal gate
Of that same day, which mortals consecrate
To mighty Jove, with shadie night was closed,
Companies of foot.
The Iberian Cohorts for the fight disposed
By their Campemasters, to the combat past,
Fast in their orders, in their marching fast:
Then having got the batterd Curtins base
They sought to mount upon that horneworks face,
Where Colonel Hinderson a brave Scots man
Hinderson with his, and our own nation
Aranged stood in point of his own station.
The fight was cruel, doubtful, full of blood,
Wherein Bellonaes Bridegroom wavering stood,
Uncertain to which side the palm should fly
To this of right, or that of Tyranny.
For though the Spaniards chardgd, ours still resisted
And though rechardgd, yet resolute persisted
In their defense, until the assaulting foe
His back unto the Orangian troops did show.
But mark how fortune with her powerful beck
As stepdame unto valor gives the check;
For although Hinderson like Scaeua a valiant Roman.
Scaeua stood.
Against oppositions face, and still made good
The engaged place, yet one foul random shot
The conquest from this brave Commander got;
Which banefull pellet robbed him of his breath,
Worthy to survive even in the spite of death.
After this loss Prince Maurice sends relief
From Grauenweert, commanded all in chief
By Sir Charles Morgan Colonel of a foot regiment under the States.
Morgan, who with winged measures speedes
Unto the town, that now for succor bleedes.
He wafting over the diaprie-purled Waal,
From thence unto swift Mosaes stream does fall,
And sailing through that narrow Midland sea
Whose channel gives access to Bergens Kaye
Arrived at his chardge, and there proposd
Great Nassawes orders, which being well disposed
By Rihoue was governor of Bergen, and Fama was Colonel of a regiment of
Wallons.
Rihoues counsel, and by Famaes care
From all advantage did the assailants bare.
He skorning like some Frozen Flemish hulke
To lie shopt up within the Rampires bulk,
Gives life to action, through the posterns Sallies
And though repulst again his squadrons rallies,
Until the vanquished foes of hope bereft
The dead half Moon unto our Legions left.
Then reassaulting they forsook the assault,
Through our men's valor and their own default;
For Morgan still repells them with thick hailes
Of Musket shot, with bristled Iron flailes,
With smoking wildefire balls, and blown up mines
Whose hollow vaults filld full with An instrument made like a flaile to throw
over the Rampire or parapet unto the Enemies.

Powder that is vsd in mines or great ordinance.

The Wallons of the Bishoppricke of Leoge.


Serpentine,
And taking fire by some sulphurous train
T'heauens with smoke, the land with blood does stain.
On the other side the Dutchmen taking heat
From our examples beams did bravely beat
The Spanish squadrons, which in success faild
As often as they our horned woe kes assaild.
The like the Frenchmen did, and that stout nation
Which in rich Lukeland holds their habitation,
But then being subject to Famaes commands
Employed their service for the Netherlands.
In these conflicts brave Mountioy, Morgan, Gibson,
Rich, Courtney, Conway, Halsewell, Hinderson,
Cook, Tibals, Pollard, Clarke and Killegree,
Knolles, Bacon, Turney, Kenniet horpe and Carey,
Showed matchles valor, and deserve to be
For this the children of Eternity,
Being all self lavish of their dearest blood
For Bergens defense, and our unions good.
Amongst the list of the Philippicke bands
Blunt Sergeant Mayor Blunt.
of his foes even admired stands
Haples in this, that home-spunne discontents
Made him to follow Spaines ambitious bents.
In this mean time Count Mansfield having left
The disunited union, and bereft
All the high Palatinate.
Of all those upper Countries, where the Rhine.
With Neckars stream his pearled streams does join,
And all that fruitful large-extended tract,
Which borders on the river, being sacked
By both their Armies, and the pillagd Boore
Despoiled quite of all his former store;
Which cluster-crowned Bacchus did afford,
Or Ceres yield from her all plenteous hoord.
The chardge of Manhein being given to Veare,
And Heidelberge designd to Herberts care,
Frankn'dale to Burrowes, and those Almaine bands
Which still stood firm to Fredericks commands,
The Palatinate.
His Excellence the Paltzian soil forsakes
In famous for our losses, and betakes
Himself to that retraite, which crowned his name
With the triumphant wreaths of glorious fame.
Vnparralleld for conduct, and the event
Except by Conons worthy president:
Or that Of these two retraites is mention made before. Z^nophon.
Athenians, who from Elams hills
Retired to those fields, which Phasis fills,
When Actaxerxes troops his Army chaste
And for two thousand miles his Legions faced,
For although Tilley reinforced with aid
This relation I had from Sir James Ramesey who was present in all this service.
From all The Imperial circles, had forelayd
Those passages, which give a free access
From Almaine to the Frountring Lorraneffe.
Yet the Mansfieldians having past the Sar
And Bliesses streams, (whose Crystal source from far
Extracted, for diurnall tribute yields
His glassie purles to Lotharingiaes fields:)
Arriud at Sauerne, where The Count Palatin.
the Paltzian Prince
Gives the farewell to Mansfields Excellence,
And safe conuoyd through friendly Galliaes land
Imbarks himself on the Calisian strande.
There hence our squadrons marched into Lorraine,
From whence the Guisians claim their Origin;
And passing by that Frountiers Southern side
Near unto which A great river in Lorraine.
Voloies current does glide,
They doubled Mortaignes woods, Volgesus Mountain,
Fat Vaignies valleys, and the Mosells fountain. Lottaringia or Lorraine took
his name from one Lotharicus See Mercator in his description of it.

Then leaving that Frauncelouing towenfull soil
Which Lotharicke did with his name enstile,
They bending Northwards, did their ensigns spread
In Lutzenburge beyond swift Semois head
And came through many perils to Sedan,
The Ducall seat of Princely Bullion:
Where having well refresht their pinching needs
And rested some few days, their Army speedes
With running marches o'r the winding turns
Of Rivers which run through Namures.
Houle and Mase, and that high mountains horns
Where Charlemont by Phillips Soldiers ma^nd
In view of Heinault and Namurs does stand.
Then having through that territory past*
They laid the fair Namurcan Burrowes wast
With fire, and sword, and all those hostile ills
Which hell with souls, the land with slaughter fills.
Gonsaluo Gonsaluo de Corduba General of the Spanish armed
moved with these affrounting harms
And jealous of his honor, forth with arms
With all those Walloun bands, and Spanish legions,
Which quarterd lay within that Frountiers regions:
And taking the The Champion.
Campaina, straight forelayes
The crooked passage of those broaken ways,
Extended forth from Mosa to those sloughes,
Which the rich Femming and Brabanson Plowes,
At Flourie near Namurs he pitched his Tents
With all the flower of his old Regiments,
Whose Maniples computed by the list,
Of s^u'nteene thousand Soldiers did consist,
Peazaunts of the Country.
And twenty thousand Boores well armd with glaiues,
With Firelockes, and Herculean clublike staves.
About the time, that bright Apollo steepes
His golden tresses in the Iberian deepes,
Count Mansfield does approach, and having spied
Their vaunt currours, unto that hillocke hied,
Behind whose covert all their Cohorts lay
To stop our march, and our battalions stay.
There ran a little brook between Man^field and Corduba.
Then wading through the flagge oreshaded brooks
Meander wise retorted turning nookes,
Upon the farther side he makes a stand
And to Gonsaluo tenders this demand.
Whether his valor were resolud to fight
Upon the appearaunce of the morning light.
Or that his patience would give parting leave,
And so the web of both their safeties weaue.
The Corduban thus summond, thus replies:
Thinks the Bohemian Mansfield was Marshall of Bohemia before he was General.
Marshall to surprise
My wisdom with his words? and curb my sprite
Lavish in this to do my sovereign right?
Can he conceive his Legions shall depart?
Who thus have torn the Imperial Eagles heart,
Despoild our vestall Nuns, ransackt our Friars,
And crammd themselves with pillagd Ments and Triers;
He must account for all Bohemiaes spoil.
At Hagenawe and Heseldorffe the Count overthrew th'Imperialls.
For to Hagenawne, and Heseldorffian foil,
Before he can our safeconduct obtain,
And free aduenue into Brabant gain.
Bohemiaes General warmd with this reply;
Does all the bent of his deuoirs apply
To cross their proiects, and with Linxean eyes
Unto the depth of each advantage pries,
By which he might his Phalangiers defend,
And great Gonsaluos Regiment is a number of foot consisting of more or less
companies.
Regiments offend.
He straight commands his Cohorts all to lie
Armd and unarmed, horse and Infanterie
That night in battle ray, behind that hill
Whose Southern brow our Maniples did fill,
Upon the morn when Sols irradiant light
Had rent the veil of Sable coulered night,
He marshalls his divisions, viewes their ranckes,
Suruaies all parts, both Vangard, Rear and flanks,
Gives motives to their metal, and does cheer
Their wavering minds against the bugs of fear.
These are, quoth he, those feeble beaten bands,
So often foild by your victorious hands,
The relics of the Leopoldian hoaste,
And of those Tertioes, which their honor lost
At Heseldorffe, when our men did defeat
Bauariaes General and their Army beat.
The rest are Peazaunts rude, Landesdayes are days of solemn meeting.
vplandish Boores
Acquainted better with their Landesdayes sturres
With taphouse quarrels, alefomented broiles,
Then with Bellonaes Hazardes or her toils.
We are those men, who have Bohemia sacked,
Conquered Three strong towns in Bohemia.
Prachadis, Pilsen and Pisacke
Have strove with natures threats, with dangers dread,
And through their sense afflicting terrors sped
Unto this bed of fame, where we must fight
Or else our honored lives abandon quite.
Behind us lies A high mountain in Lorraine.
Volgesus crested ridge,
Sambre before impassable by bridge,
Upon the right hand runs the roaring Mase,
Upon the left, great Corduba does face
Our armd battalions, so that we must die.
Or gain our selves by glorious victory.
All like this, but two thousand mutineers,
Who making pay the shadow of their fears,
Dislike their Gen'ralls motion and refuse
T'ingage themselves for his imploiments use.
The valiant Count on point of service set
With this refusal moved does storming fret:
As when a retriud Partridge mounts the sky
Some Fauckener lets a cast of Marlins fly
Whereof that makes it home, but this does fail
And Castrell-like does poorly turn her tail.
The Fawkner marking from some lofty tree,
The sad disaster of this sport does see*
And with stern words that's cowardice does rate,
But cheeres the metal of her soaring mate,
He chides them first, then seeks to move their hearts,
With melting flakes of his persuasiue arts;
He tells them, what dishonor tweare, what shame
Unto the luster of the German name,
Thus to forsake themselves, their friends, their chief,
And sequestrate the means of their relief.
He shows that these were not their solemn vows
At Manheim made, when they did there espouse
Their life's to's service, and obligd by oath
Against the Spaniards and Imperialls both,
Did freely promise never to forsake
His Princely colors, but to undertake
The share of all adventures, till the date
The free state of the Netherlands.
Expired were, for which the Cantond state
Of Holland had their Legions entertaind,
Never before with disobedience staind.
But all these words like fuel did increase
The raging fire of their stiff stubbornes,
Wherefore he leaves this plot, and does entreat
That if they would not fight, they would retreat
Or else advance themselves, and make a stand
Upon that place, where he should give command.
This last being granted, he does straight enlarge
The Frount of his battalions, and does chardge;
As when some raine-engendred Torrents shocke
Both beat upon an adamantine rock.
Or when some sulphrous fulminations fire
Lights on the crest of some piramide Spire
The Bombards first did with their Torlin play,
And hundreds slain upon the Champion lay,
The bullet furrowed field with shot sown
And all the plain with batterd Corslets strowen.
Then their Loose wings which begin the fight.
Forlorn death destined hope
With our loose wings of Musketeers does coope,
The lighthorse failing foul on both the flanks
Do chardge, and wheel, and wheeling change their ranks
The Musketeers from either side do pour
Of palefac'd bullets a death storming shower
The Pikemen push, and pushing with their Pike
Through maild habergeons, helmes and Corslets strike.
Foot sticks to foot, and hand does gripe with hand
Each Frounter with his Frounter next does band:
With streams of blood the bloody green does smoke,
Whose vapor took foment with every stroke.
Our Curaciers by valiant Otherwise called the Bishop of Halbershat
Brunswicke led
The last of all unto this combat sped
Whose footesteps dread and danger did attend,
Whersoeuer they did with their Cornets wend.
Here a brave Soldier wounded with a bruise
Through the orifice his fleeting soul out spues,
Here a sure Gunner shot off by the knees
Lives upward, whilst the nether fragment steeues.
Here a man-woman Amazonian dame
A Votaresse to Mars, and Venus game
Shot near her friend in his imbracements dies,
And living dying thus does simpathize.
But in the midst of this tumultuous broile
Brunswicke though shot out braueth fear and toil,
Both chardge and rechardge, falls on Frount and flancke,
Sometimes by file sometimes giving in by rank.
From morn till noone this dreadful fight did last,
But when It was a little after mid day.
the sun had the Meridian past
Some thirty minutes, all things being confusd,
The Spainsh vanguard broake, their Chief amusd
With our men's courage; Mansfield then appears
More then himself, and thus inflaming cheeres.
His last reserve: come on, keen up your spite
Against these Barbr'ous Demimoores despite;
Break through the Frount of that half broaken troop
And make their stiffnes to your valor stoop,
With your well pointed blades hew out your way
Through their battalions which your course forelay.
No sooner said but done, for forth they rush,
And like some winter storm do down right push
All that is opposd, and rowting file by file
Rank after rank they pass that iron toil
Unto the station of our mutineers,
Whose wavering fills both sides with jealous fears.
For Corduba surmising that they lay
For a reserve, his last pursuit to stay,
Durst not engage his ouertired band,
But on the place of battle kept his stand.
The loss was not unlike; four thousand slain
Of either side the Champions browe did stain
With Purple streams of their vermilion blood
Whose Rubie congeald on the Earths surface stood.
Amongst this honored list stout Weimars Duke,
And Rougiere their fatal deaths wound took
Mengesheim was taken, and Brunswickes arm was shot
Who lost his hand whilst he the laurel got.
This conflict being past, the Count does march
(Mounted upon a rich triumphant Arche)
Over the A river which runs into the Mase. The Prince of Orange.
Sambre, vanquisheth the Boores,
Passes through Brabant, joins there his powers
Near Rosendale with the A river which runs into the Mase. The Prince of
Orange.
Nassauian Grave,
Both being resolud thin'gaged town to save
From the Castilians, who with might and maine
Applied the siege Bergen-opzom to gain.
Fame bruiting this with her shrill Sounding wind
With jealous fears fills the Marquesses mind;
Who doubting that both Armies might Surprise,
His passage unto Antwerpe, straight does rise
With all his Regiments.
Tertioes, and to Vulcan turns
His straw built station, which inflamed burns
The large extent of that well fenced frame,
Ere our Bergheneers to the pillage came.
But what Toledoes wiles, The Prince of Parma.
Farnezes might,
Gonsaluoes power, nor Spinolaes despite
Could not effect; for nine times seven years
Against the fortune of the Belgian Peers;
Home-spunne Sedition, if not crossed by Fate,
Was like to work against our Unions State.
This faction first was leauen'd by the sower
Of called Arminianisme, whose clowdie shower
Seemed to deface the clear irradiant Sun
Of reformed Truth, which on these Regions shone.
New Sectaries these Rudiments did varnish
With fresh additions, and did fairly garnish
The Frontispice of that half rotten house,
Whose Architecture did the souls amuse
Of sundry Belgians, which for shelter came
To this faire-seeming scarce substantial frame.
This diffrence in Religion caused another
Diffrence in Faction, which the Arminians smother
For selfe-behoouing reasons, till the State
Was managed by to Hollandish Advocate,
Great Barneuelt, a Paragon for wit,
For faction, greatness, which entirely knit,
And linkt to's fortunes, were the golden bayts
That caught Plebeian minds with fond deceits:
He vassal'd as the rumor says, to Spain,
Envious to Nassaw, covetous to gain,
And sphere within his reaches that command,
Which Maurice held with his victorious hand;
Appalls the multitude with jealous fears,
With tickling rumors fills the glowing ears
Of his Associates, tells them that t'indure
The proud Nassauians yoke, and their grandeur,
Were to project their freedoms, and themselves
Against the ridge of those Monarchicke shelues,
Which mighty Philip the 2. King of Spain
Philip raised at the first,
To quench his vast ambitions Dropsy thirst.
Besides it were against the sacred Laws
Of God and Nature, to forsake the Cause
Of their Religion, which b' Arminius spread,
And replanted in Hollands fruitful bed,
By his Disciples, now despised, abject,
Was even suppressed by the Caluinian Sect.
Thus Policy joined with Religion shrowdes
The Barneueltine plots, and like those clouds,
Where a Parelion sits, deceiues the sight
Of rash beholders with their specious light.
But O divine Religion, why should thou
To men's designs; nay, palliations bow?
O why should thou, whose radiant tresses chain
God unto man, and man to God again?
Why should thy Name ineffable, divine,
Zeales Cabinet, and pure Devotions shrine,
Be made a stale to all the black intents
Of humane proiects? and the bloody bents
Of their pretenses, who pretending right,
Like Nimrods proud against thy Scepter fight.
So that there lives not that damned A damned Murderer.
Assassine,
Nor that vnloyall loyalliz'd Ignatian;
Not that Rauilliac, whose death poynted knife
Despoyl'd the brave Henry the 4. Gerard, who killed the prince of Orange.
Nauarrois of his life;
Not that Henry the 4. Gerard, who killed the prince of Orange.
Burgundian Murderer, that Squire,
Nor that Lopes, but draws the twisted wire
Of his rank Treasons from the fair pretense
Of gloz'd Religion, though his senseless sense,
Right Those that have the Apoplexy, are insensible.
Apoplecticke-like never feels the motion
Of piety, nor zealous true devotion.
But Barneuelt suppressed, his faction quelled,
His popular Collossicke props down felled,
The Lernean Head of that rebellious rout
Being sundred quite, whose falsehood went about
To subiugate the Netherlands again
Unto the rule of rule-desiring Spain.
Some few years after, this seditious crew
Makes head again, and freshly does pursue
Their ancient quarrel, whose proiected bent
Fuell'd with malice, fed with discontent,
Intends the wrack of the Nassauian race.
But in their weals weale-publike to deface.
There want not Catilines; The names of these 4. were Cor. Gerritzon Her.
Hermanson, John Nicolas, Theodorick Leonardson.
rich Harlem sends
From cold North- Hollands Frost congealed ends,
Four Climate differing Sprites, inflamed with fire
Of light Ambition, Soueraignties desire,
With Envy, and Revenge, whose fuming terrors
Distract their souls into a maze of errors.
But Barneuelts two sons, wind up the clue
Of all their doubts, and to their faction skrew
Other Associates, in which damned List
Daniel Slatius an Arminian Preacher.
Slatius has not the meanest Interest,
With Cornewinder, and Adrian van Deicks,
Whom blind fold zeal to false rebellion pricks.
Thus was the plot; four Assassines designd
For this black deed, were solemnly combind
By mutual vows, and interchanged oaths,
Which blushing Sol, and palefac'd Cinthia loathes)
To Pistol Maurice, Henricke, and the rest
Of the Nassauian stock; this being confessed
By two Conspirators, the Prince straight hies
From Ris^wicke to the Hague, Riswicke, ^ Dorpe near to the Hague.
and there descries
In an Arminian house four of this crew,
Whose malice did great Nassaws death pursue.
All these were seized by the The Prince of Oranges guard
Pretorian band,
Imprisoned, arraigned, and by the powerful hand
Of right-diuiding Justice put to death,
As men unworthy to usurp that breath,
Whose rancour had conspired their Countries sack,
State-alteration, and religions wrack.
Such was the doom of Slatius, such the lot
Of young Barneuelt, A small harbor within a mile of the Hague.
who to Scheueling got
Laruates his visage, does his name exchange,
And in a Skippers habit seeks to range
From Holland to the rich Hamburgers Seat,
Against whose walls the billowing Elbe does beat.
But found at Scheueling by the curious eyes
Of public search, he for this Treason dies,
For what reward can Treason else expect,
But punishment, and rigours worst effect?
But the other of the sons comes fairer off,
Who passing by the Geldrians unto Goffe, a town Cleeueland, as then under the
king of Spain.
Goffe,
There saues himself, and pentioneerd to Spain,
New proiects of revenge does entertain,
Hoping his Sires and Brothers death to quite,
Wrought as he says by the Nassauians spite.
The Winter past in tortures, April smiles
To see the labored preparations toils,
Which both sides take, to enrich the colder earth
With streams of blood, whose forced abortiue birth
With Ruby-colourd Roses decks the fields
Of rich Westphalia, which that The Bishop of Colen, who is also Bishop of
Munster and Leege.
Bishop weelds,
Whose triple-Mitred power, whose dreadful awe
To all the inferior Circles gives the Law,
Supported by the Popes, and Caesar's grace,
By Bauier, and potent Austriaes race.
He proud of these supports, and of that aid
Which Leege and Munster sends, had strongly stayed
The current of our Union; and devoted
Unto the Sea of Rome, had Clerke-like quoted
The Machiuillian Index, for the shifts
Of policies, and false evasiue drifts.
Brunswicke inflamed with this proud Prelates wrongs,
To revenge which his boiling spirit longs;
Abandoneth his former wintring place,
Repasseth Ems, and clear Visurgis face.
Then ransacking the crammed Westphalian Two great rivers in Westphalia.
Dorps,
With their relief he feeds the Soldiers corpse.
Strong was his Army, numerous and fair,
Which breathed naught but hoped Victoriaes air:
For now besides his old well-trained Bands,
Which wintred in the Paterbornian lands;
New reinforcements warlike Hassia sends
From flaggie Fulde and Eder, two rivers of Hessen.
Fuldes, and Eders rouling bends.
The like the Saxon does from those cold hills,
Whose Snow-bred torrent Albis channel fills.
Thus did the Rhinegraue; thus did Louestein,
Altenburg, Weimer, Schlic, and Vitgeinstein,
All Colonels of those farre-feared Legions,
Which Brunswicke raised in these upper Regions.
The Imperials were not for their number equal,
But passing our Besonian Bands in metal,
Consisting of those Cohorts which Mortaigne,
Which Truchses led, and Dane alyed Holsteine,
Of the Croatian Horse which Anhalt brought,
Of late unto the Spanish faction wrought,
Of the Calabrian Bands, and of that force
Which Paulus the Pope sent succors to the Emperor in these wars.
Paulus sent from Tibers sandy source.
About the time that Munsters wealthy Boore,
With Ceres fruits renewd his former store,
When Maurice lay within fair Arnhams walls,
And Mansfield lodged near to swift Emses falls:
The Duke to Statloo came, and on the banks
Of Honor is a river in Westphalia, which runs near to Statloo, the place
where the battle was fought. Are Croatian Horsemen.
Honor quarterd false Criphausens ranks,
To make that passage good against the foe,
Which near to Vulten did their Ensigns show.
But he being hooked by the golden bayt
Of Tilleys promises, forsakes straight
The place of his Command, which Tilley takes
With his Honor is a river in Westphalia, which runs near to Statloo, the
place where the battle was fought. Are Croatian Horsemen.
Crabats, and from that Station makes
To the Brunswican Vanguard, which being charged,
At first acquitted well, and well discharged
Their Martial duties; but at length being pressed
By the Croatian Rutters, which addressed
Themselves to their encounter, they forsook
The bloody Combat, and themselves betook
To a dishonored flight, which Brunswicke seeks
To stop with blows and words, but still he meets
Those fearful buggs, which cowards souls affright,
Who rather chose to die, then live to fight.
Are these, quoth he, the solemn Ale^bench braues,
Made by these lumpes of clay, these sodden slaves?
Who when they were but tickled with the heat
Of sulphrous Rhenish, would whole Armies beat,
Would quarter General Tilley, lard his heart
With points of steeled Pikes, t'auenge the smart
Done to my cousin Frederick, and his Queen,
By Ferdinands, and Philips mortal spleen.
But now being set upon their Fortunes trialls,
They prove but hollow caskes, but empty vials,
Big speaking puffers, glorious of their words,
But Iades and dastards, weaklings with their swords.
Fie, fie for shame, leave off to run and rout,
Rally Rally, is to reorder, or bring in order again.
your selves, and face it once about,
Then shall you see the God of Battles smile,
And vanquishers the Imperial Eagles foil.
But maugre all these words* they rout and run,
As when some horned heard the hounds does shun.
A small town under the States, which lay two leagues off.
They fly toward Breafort, whom the fierce Crabats
Pursue, and strike down with the thundering claps
Of their Carbins, so that for two leagues space,
You could see naught upon the Champions face
But carnage of mankind, but Corslets strowen,
But points of Pikes, of Swords, and Halberts sown.
Two hundred foes were killed, two thousand slain
Of the Brunswicans, and five thousand ra'en
With spoils, and Honor crowned Tilleys host;
But that which did enlarge their glory host;
Was their compassion, and their mercy known
Unto the captive Halberstadians shown.
After the fortune of this battle past,
By Treason, and our Soldiers rawnesse lost,
Brunswicke retires with his halfe-broken Band
Unto the Confines of fat Gelderland;
Where entertaining, all the chosen best
For the State-Seruice, he cashieres the rest
Of that defeated selfe-betraying rabble,
Whom cowardice, or sickness made unable
To follow his designs, whose Verge still bends
To cross the Spanish and Imperial ends.
Four times from this had Cinthia closed her horns,
And four times run complete her menstruall turns,
When near Decembers last, to Hollandish Fleet
Bound for Brasill, commanded were to meet,
If tempest scatterd, near that neck of land,
Where Sugar rich Saint Saluador does stand.
They from the The Haven of Amsterdam.
Texell loosing, plowed those waves,
Whose curled surge great Britains Foreland laues.
Then passing by rich Lisbornes foamie Bay,
And the Terceraes, they thence made away
To Teneriffaes Pike, and that deep sound,
Where Neptunes tumbling billows do rebound
From Gambra, Melli, and that Sunburnt shore, Countries i^ Affricke.

Whence Ginee sends her Idolized Oar.
Then sailing West Southwest they past the mouth
Of Maragnon is a River, which boundeth Brasilia to the Northward,
Maragnon, and bending further South,
They coasted all along that beachie Strand,
Whose checker borders fair Brasiliaes Land.
Here from the Aeolian wind out-belching cell
The God of storms sent forth a tempest fell
Upon the Dutch, which did their Galeouns beat,
And sep'rated their Sea-commanding Fleet.
So that e're Willecks came, mine Maragnon is a River, which boundeth Brasilia
to the Northward,
Here van Dort,
Arrived in Los Sanctos spacious Port,
Who thundering with his Cannon, gives the Alarm,
And makes the Willecks was Admiral, and my Lo. of Dort commanded for the
land. Negroes.
Blackes, and Spaniards all to arm.
Then back he falls into the watrie Maine,
To seek out Hollands Admiral again.
Three times the Sun had dipped his Phlegons feet,
And cooled his Pasterns in the western deep;
When that far famed Tiphis of adventure
Great Willeks, does with all his Squadron enter
The foamie mouth of the Brasilian Bay,
And within distance of their Platformes lay:
Whose Canoniers our moared Galeouns plie
With roaring peales of their Artillery;
These answer them from t'high and lower Tires,
With With vollies of shot returned again.
reuolets of their Promethean fires.
This salutation past, he straight resolves
To land his Troops, and seriously resolves
Each aduantageous course, no form, no shape
Of what exp^dient was, could once escape
His pondrous thoughts, for knowing words to be
The solacers of fears infirmity;
He thus inflames, thus comforts, thus exhorts
His Hollanders: Come on my brave Consorts,
Here Is honor, riches, profit, and what not
Within Saluador to be lost, or got;
Here are those Ingots rich, those precious grains,
Which Real, a River which bordereth Brasill to the Southward
Real washes from the mountains veins;
Here is that Oar, for which the Negro slaves
Unlock the closets of The Infernal caves,
Kept by these meagre Guardians, verbal puffes,
Big lookers in their high Castillian ruffes,
But mere Vain glorious Braggarts
Quixotes, Rodomantading braues,
Fair frontispic'd like to their Grandoes graves,
But full of emptiness, and those defects,
Which valor in selfe-bragging still detects.
So that the spoil is facill, if that we
Can beat this Hotch potch is any thing that is mingled; a Dutch-English word.
Hotch-potch of mortalitle;
These Spaniards, Portugals, Saluages, Moors,
Who keep not, but are kept within the Towers
Of Saint Saluador: Nor is private gain,
Nor private fame the sole proiected aim
Of this days service, but the public good,
Which bleeding Since the loss of Iuliers.
since our Iuliacke losses stood,
Must be the scope of every Soldiers bent,
To which if we give just accomplishment;
Then the Andian Mountains which divide the skies,
Shall open their veins to our new Colonies;
Then those Brasilian woods, The Andes divide Peru and Brasill to the Westward.
These Trees are so big, that whole families dwell in them. A great Lake in this
Country.
whose massy Trees
Saluages hiue, like swarms of Russian Bees,
With all those verdant Plains, which Oregliana,
Which Real waters, and curled The Andes divide Peru and Brasill to the
Westward. These Trees are so big, that whole families dwell in them. A great
Lake in this Country.
Eupana,
Shall be the guerdons of our glorious toil,
And honored Embleames of the Iberians foil.
This speech being past, stout Willeks does imbarke
Within the Long-Boates.
Skiffes, which from their Galeouns warpe,
Two thousand chosen men, whose ready sprite
Straight undertakes the danger of this fight.
Then the loud Cannon roares, the Soldiers scale,
The Mariners with Boat-hookes down do hale
The Are pales set up upon the top or bottom of a Rampire. Parapet is a Work
made breast high upon the top of a wall or Rampire.
Palisadoes: but the Fort well manned
At first to their defense did bravely stand,
And powered down from the Are pales set up upon the top or bottom of a
Rampire. Parapet is a Work made breast high upon the top of a wall or Rampire.
Parapetted walls
Pitch-burning hoopes, Grenades, wildfire balls,
Tarlin and Musket shot; but at the leng^h
These Spanish Hotespurres loose their former strength,
Being stiffely charged, and to the town recoyle,
Outwearied with this dangerous combats toil,
Leaving behind their ever honored Chief
Forlorn of all, deuoyd of all relief,
Who fights it out even at the Rapiers point,
Until surcharged with odds, and vigor spent,
He sheathed up his Bilboe-tempred blade,
And to the Conqu'rours this submission made:
I yield my self, this Castle, and this Fort,
Saluadors Town, and fair Los Sanctos Port,
To you my noble Dutch for all shall be
Now vassaliz'd to your new Seigneury:
Only my Soul vncaptiued remains
Free from th'aspersion of those baser stains,
Which brand these fugitives, who had they been
But Soldiers true, but hardy valiant men;
Sooner should Rio grande, a River which runs from the lake of Eupan^ into
Marag^^.
Rio grande have changed his course,
And retrograde reuisited his source;
Sooner should the Andian Alps have washed their head
In foamie Neptunes peeble-checkred bed,
Then any parcel of Brasiliaes land
Should once have stoopt to Oranges command.
The Governor thus seaz'd, the Castle won,
The Fort surprised, and Saint Saluadors Town
Being quitted by the foes; the Dutch Cohorts
Do forthwith enter those portculliz'd Ports,
Whose bending passage gives an open way
To this large City from Los Sanctos Bay.
Great was the spoil, for Jewels, gold, and plate
Inricht the public, and the private state
With pillage store; Potosies golden bars,
The supporters of these Philippicke wars,
Peruvian Wedges of Peruuian gold
Ingots, read Brasilian wood,
Rich Cochineale, and Sugar perfect good,
Became the guerdons of the Dutchmens pains,
And new additions to their ancient gains.
The rumor of this loss no sooner came,
Out trumpetted by truth-reporting Fame
Unto the Court of Spain, but revenge wrought
Within their Councels breast, whose rancour sought
To find some project out, by which they might
Los Sanctos loss, and Saint Saluadors quite.
Plots diffrent were proposed; but at the last,
This suffraged in Common counsel past
That Spinola by conqu'red Bredaes gain,
Must Spaines eclipsed Honor remaintaine.
For this design the fierce Spinola.
Ligurian takes
The field at Ballart, and from Ballart makes
Toward Hoochstraten, and renownd Turnhout, At Turnhout the Spaniards were
defeated especially by the valor of the English.

For our men's valor, and the Iberians rout:
Then passing by small Gilsen, Baerle, and Cham,
About mid-August all their Legions came
To Ginneken, and near the Merkaes banks
(Whose channel their entrenched Leaguer flanks)
They drew their Quarters out; the Italian Bands,
Which Baglioni the Lumbard proud commands
Were lodged at Terheiden, their Almaines led
By John of Nassaw, were all billetted
Within Terhague; the Marquess with the men
Of his Divisions, lay at Ginneken,
Resolved all to win that glorious prise,
Which Maurice got by Lamberts Turfe-deuice.
The Citizens on the defensive stand,
With new Supplies, and Reinforcements manned,
Which These were Colonels of the English, French, and Dutch.
Hauterine, which Gris, and Morgan ledd
From glassie Seines, and Tamse's fruitful bed,
Which Lockeren brought from the Crystal Mase,
From sandy Rhines, and Issells watrie face,
Commanded all by Justin of Nassaw,
Who to the Town, and Soldiers gave the Law.
Besides, the The Prince of Orange.
Prince reinforced with supplies,
Sent from his English friends, and fast Alies,
Which brave Southampton led, which valiant Writhsly,
Which Essex, Oxford, Veare and Willoughby
Commanded for the States, had past his Bands
From Holland through the rich Brabanson lands,
To Two villages in Brabant, where they first quarterd.
Meed and Stiuesand, where his care attends
To succor his Breda-beleagred friends,
With all those stratagems, which force or wit
Could yield, to farther, or to finish it.
The rumor of this siege, with th'expectation
Brought Volunteers from every Christian Nation
Unto both Leaguers, in which honored list
Poloniaes Prince claims chiefest interest: The Prince of Poland.

Who coming from the cold Sarmatian plains,
From Rugeland, and high Almaine rich in veins
Of sundry Mineralls, arrived at last
(After the chance of many fortunes past)
At Austrian Isabels renowned Court,
Where entertained with that Maiesticke port,
Which did befit his Greatness he retires
Unto the Camp from Bruxels stately Spires,
Desiring more to see the Leaguers face,
The Spanish Stations, and their Soldiers grace,
Then all that pomp, which Bruxels did afford,
To entertain this young Polonian Lord.
Upon his first approach the Spanish foe
New postures of their ancient boasting show;
They brag and brave it, that this brave Polaque,
Should take our strongest works, and Breda sack,
Should lay the Rampires level with the plain,
And Merks current with our Vermillion stain.
But his designs were safer, for the Prince
Knew that Experience should find difference
Betwixt our Troops, and those Cossackes which haunt
Meotis Fennes, and Tartaries Leuant:
He knew that here were no Tartarian Drouers,
No Turkish Prickers, nor Valachian Rouers,
No Muskouitish, nor Hungarian Bands,
Whose fight on number, more then valor stands.
But here were French and English nations bold
Within the Curtin of this Rampierd hold,
And these not led by These were Bassaes slain and defeated by the Prince of
Poland.
Alis-beg, nor Nahan,
Nor by Cirkas; but by Lock'ren, and Morgan,
By Gris and Hauteriue men of that merit,
That death nor danger could not sink their Spirit.
Moreover it was not the Castilians bent,
To take this place by forcible attempt,
By battering, Petarring, or Scalado,
By sapping, mining, or by Camisado,
They knew it were labor lost, it were work in vain
To seek by force this Fortress strong to gain.
But famine was the plot, the Fabian course
By which they meant the Soldiers hearts to force,
And skrew to their conditions: for what strength
So Adamantine is? but yields at length
Unto the force of famine; there is no law
Can give prescription to a suffering mawe:
For Caesar's self must yield, and Pompey veil,
If victuals with their hungry Colon fail.
T'accomplish this great Castiles army blocks
The friendly Mercke, and with their Cannon stoppes
The Land Aduenue signifies a passage
aduenues, five well fenced Forts
Do bar the mouth of our porcullizd ports
From all access: no Skoutes, no Spies could pass,
The Circling Rampires large extended mass
But their objected sight must straight ways be
The pointeblancke aim of Spaines Artillery.
Those mighty works, which with your wandering eyes
On The plains in Wiltshire
Wiltshires battle plains you may descry;
Those monuments left by the conquering Danes,
And the Saxons to eternize their names,
Were counterfeits, and works of little fame
Compard with this Giganticke massy frame.
To pierce them through, it were to divide the breast
Of Greekish Isthmos, or to cut the crest
Of Athos and Olimpus; twere to draine
That ebbing flowing Mediterran maine,
Which runs between the sweet The I Will of Dorts.
Dordrecian I Will
And bleeding Brabants Rubie coul'red soil.
His Excellence knew this, and for this cause
Without all dallying demurres all delays
He leaves his Meedan quarters, and does fall
From thence unto sweete-seated Rosendale,
Where he refortifies his winter station,
Uses the assurance of his former caution,
Seeks to cut off great Spinolaes Conuoyes,
And fill his Camp with Myriads of annoyes.
His brother Henericke at Longstratten lay
Upon the passage of the Upon the way of the Busse.
Boshian way,
To cut of those Supplies, which Brabant sent,
Which Namurs, Heinault, and Burgundia lent,
Which the Limburgers brought in rattling Carres,
As contributours to these Belgian wars.
Both Armies lying thus, excursions past
And frequent sallies, where the various cast
Of wavering Fortune gave the glorious prise
With doubtful revolution; in such wise
That now the Dutchmen vanquish, now the foe
The Netherlandish Soldiers does overthrow.
Amongst the rest courageous Breoutee
Left here this life t'acquire Eternity;
Whose body Mountioyes daring rescue gave
The sollemne rights of an obsequious grave.
Thus died the Captain of the Orangian guard,
Who sallying forth the like disaster shared,
With diverse others, which in honors bed
Deceasing live, entombed, unburied,
Worthy for worth even to survive that death,
Which spoild them of their hor our breathing breath.
But where the sword one petty squadron slew,
The Pestilence to Plutoes mansion drew
Thousands of souls, whose numerous Cohorts
Crowded the passage of the Stigian ports.
So that no straggling soul could portage gain,
From th'vpper world unto The Infernal maine.
But O thou scourge of Armies, why should thou
To Mars his steely train destruction vow?
Why should Bellonaes votaries endure
Thy bloody flux, thy madding Callenture?
Why should the swelling botch, the watrie blaine
That seat of valor with contagion stain,
And tainte that purer consecrated blood
Which vowed it self for Belgiaes public good.
Was It not enough to power thy malice forth,
Upon, the colder All those Northerene Countries were this last year much
annoyed with the Plague.
Regions of the North?
To plague the warrelike Danes, the sturdie Swecians,
The Rugians, Lappians, and the slow Norwegians?
Was It not enough for thy death miniond self,
To Golgothize the streets of stately Delfe,
And, make fair Leidens trembling students fly
From learnings once, now deaths Academie?
Was It not enough to lay west Frieseland waste
And waste Vtrocht.
Traiectum? but with winged have
Thou must invade the Princes warrelike Camp,
And thousands kill with that obnoxious dampe,
Which first infects the Subtle poared Air,
And from thence does our vital strength impair,
By tainting those vermillion flowing veins,
Those life-conducts with thy contagious stains.
And could not here plebeian blood assuage
The boundles bounds of thy Luxuriant rage?
But must South-hamptons Earl, must Oxfords self
Dye by the darts of this accursed Else?
Must My Lord Wriothesly eldest son to the Earl of Southampton.
Wriothsley, Windham, Chester, Halswell dye,
Slain by the shafts of dire mortality?
But dead they are, whether that angry nature
Envied to earth their moore diuiner feature;
Or being malignant both to Arms, and Arts,
Skornd this Sublunar should possess those parts,
Those seats of wonder, which with such a measure
Were powered forth of great Pandoraes treasure.
Yet these being gone, Sir John Ratcliffe ^^pulsed Pompeio and Branch^s^^, as
they thought to pass over the Waal, under the conduct of Bucquoy.
Ratcliffe reputed dead,
For Pompeyes repulse Fame-eternized,
Lives, and suruiues, new Honors to attain
From the defeated Colonels of Spain.
And since that they are dead, O that my Verse
Could give but life to their thrice-honour'd Hearse;
Then sooner should the Northern Coachman steep,
His falling Teeme within the Russian deep;
Sooner should Thames forsake his Eastern course,
And sliding back run Westward to his sourse,
Then that their Lawrell-consecrated praise
Should want the Crown of such suruiuing Lays,
Which might give life in death, and make that last
Beyond Times power, and cankred Enuies blast.
And as for thee, sweet Breda, which do stand
Upon the Merkaes peeble bordred strand,
Since thou beleagred art with sundry Legions,
Which came from those From Spain.
sun-scorched western Regions;
So that no store of victuals, no supply
Can bring relief to thy necessity.
And if the Spaniard still so strongly lies,
That neither Nassaws force, nor sly device
Can raise the siege; if those new levied Bands,
Which Brunswicks Duke, and Cromwels self commands,
Which under Maunsfields conduct, Rich and Lincoln,
Which Buroughs leads, which Doncaster and Hopton
Cannot enforce the Jberian Troops to rise,
Nor gain their way by Spinolaes surprise.
Then could I wish, that all that large extent,
Which lies within the Rauelins Continent,
Were full of Indian A strange kind of f^uit which grows in Peru.
Cocoes, which do grow
Upon those Plains where Perues streams do flow,
Whose strong oppletiue power does strangely fill,
And swallowed does both thirst and hunger kill.
Then could I wish, that some Spring-forced tide
Would make Merks current retrograde to glide,
And when the forced river thus does flow
Whole Cockly mountains it might upwards throw
When Rochell was besiegd, great store of shell fish were miraculously cast up
upon the shore for the relief of the Citizens.
Upon the strand; as when Aniou, and Guise,
Thought Neptune flanked Rochell to Surprise:
It once befell upon that sandy shore,
Where the Ocean does against Coreilles roar.
And then perhaps might Bredaes siege be such
As was Ostends or Bergens; and as much
The dammagd foe might then, and there sustain,
As they did in those former sieges gain,
When Veare and Morgan bravely did repel
That Spanish storm, which on their Legions fell.
But whilst my muse thus Prays, Fame from those cells
Where audience, rumor, and relation dwells,
Brings us sad tidings, that strong-flankt Breda
Reconquerd is by warrelike Spinola;
Who after eight months siege regaind that place,
Which so much did his Gray haird actions grace.
For although Maurice by surprising Cleeue,
By Antwerpes cold attempt sought to relieve
Beleaguerd Breda; though that Morgan brave
Resolved to make the engaged place his Grave,
And stood on the defensive with that troop
Which swoard nor famine could not make to stoop.
Although without stout Veare, and Oxfords Count
Most daringly the Spanish works did mount,
And wone two Rodoubts, whereas Payton, Win,
Tubbe, Dacres, Hawley, Stanhop got within
The Parapetted Rampire, bravely fought
And death amongst whole armed squadrons sought.
Yet famine still increasing, whose affrounte
No courage though death-daring) can surmount,
And eight days food being only left to feed
The greedy Soldiers and the Burgers need;
The Spaniards grant a parle, our men agree
Enforced thereto by mere necessity:
Conditions to depart were such, as we
Could hardly look for from an Enemy:
With Seroan colors flying, matches light,
Bullets in mouth, our wagons Laden weight
With bag and baggage, and a safe conuoy
To safeguard our's from all hostile annoy.
Besides when as our Cohorts all dismarcht
From Breda'es ports, and through their quarters past
The courteous Genouese saluteth all,
But specially for Morgans self does call,
Imbraceth him, and honoring a foe
So worthy does himself thrice worthy show.
But though Breda be lost, reconquerd Goffe
By Lambarts valor has the chains shook off
Of Castiles thraldom, and the taken town
Mannd with a strong Orangian Garrison,
Makes all South Cleeue-lands Ceres-blessed shore,
Where Rhine against strong Grauenweert does roar,
Pay contribution even to that same land,
Where Iuliers on the Roars banks does stand.
This was that Lambart who with Heraugiere,
From Holland did that famous Turfe-boat steer,
When they five thousand, ours but seu'ntie were,
Who this unheard of enterprise did dare.
He waiting on the foes with Argian eyes,
Discouers by his subtle curious spies
That Goffes attempt was facill, for the moate
Was passable without the corked floate,
Without the Skiffe or Punt near to that place,
Which did the Western bulwarks platform face.
For this design he draws two thousand men,
From Arnham, Embricke, Rees, and Nimeghen,
Who coue'red with a silent Mooneshine night,
Arriud two hours before the dawning light
At their known Randeuouz, and from thence marched
To the Townedike, which being safely past,
They scaled all at once the Rampierd wall,
And from thence on the Spanish guards did fall.
The fight was bloody, for the vanquished foe
Five hundred of their Phalangiers could show,
Slain on the place, but of the Dutehmens side
Scarce two full squadrons in this combat dyed.
But that which did the victours triumph cross,
Was val^ant Lambarts still deplored loss,
Who ouerheated in this toilesome fight
Resigned within eight days his honored sprite
To mighty Jove: his Manes great Nassaw
Then whom this Ageno colder Fabius saw,
Pursued unto those blessed Elisian shades,
Whose everliving pleasure never Fades,
Where all true Patriots, which for freedom fight
Receive the Crown of their deserved right,
FINIS.
To my industrious friend Master W. C.
What sullen Prose in harshnes did rehearse,
Smiles through thy soul with a diffusiue light
Like the Promethean fire: for by thy verse
Are wakened from the Chaos of black night
The worthies of our time, that by thy pen
Rise from obliuions grave to life again.
And for their sakes Mars with a steely Train
Of his undaunted Sons presents thy brow,
The guerdon of thy sweet Poeticke vain
A Laurel of Mineruaes choicest bow:
Proceed in thy designs, and let thy praise
Out live the crooked carping age of days.
John Dowle Bristol.


