THE Estate of the Church, With the discourse of times, from the Apostles
until this present: Also of the lives of all the Emperors, Popes of Rome, and
Turks: As also of the Kings of France, England, Scotland, Spain, Portugal,
Denmark, etc.

With all the memorable accidents of their times.

Translated out of French into English by Simon Patrike, Gentleman.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir William Wray of Glentworth, in the County of
Lincoln Knight.
THis work (Right Worshipful) called the Estate of the Church, from the
beginning of the reign of the Emperor Augustus, to the first year of Rodolph
the second, now living; First written in French, by I. Crispinus, and lately
translated into our mother tongue by a Gentleman of desert: at the request of
my very friends, I have been entreated to propagate to this present time. For
him, although some hold, that translation is not capable of that elegance, as
is the original, because the one has full liberty of invention, the other is
by necessity tied to observation: yet in my opinion the Author hereof, for his
faithful and significant endeavor therein, has deserved to be ranked with the
choicest inventions. For my self in the continuation, as I have always in
matters of small consequence, showed the mighty perturbation of my mind,
fear; so in this labor of extraordinary moment, especially in presuming of
protection under your worships patronage, I am confounded, since the show of
my devotion is begun with so mean a sacrifice: for to this heap I have only
added an handful. In the whole discourse is set down at large, the original
of Papacy (that slaughterhouse of consciences) the advancing and increasing
thereof, the beginnings of all heresies, the persecutions of the faithful, the
change of religions, the decrees and Counsels of Bishops, the Canonie and
laws of the Church. The judicial knowledge whereof is a light, illuminating
the blindness of souls, and delivering them from the more then Cimerian
darkness of ignorance. This rectifieth the judgment of man, and teaches him
rightly to distinguish between true Religion and superstition, who both have
one ground, which is his soul. This prospectiue showing the spots and errors
of the Church of Rome, with the dark and sullen colors of hypocrisy and
heresy, (which two venomous worms like snakes do poison and infect the
flourishing estate of a settled Church,) will manifest the right Diaphonia and
concord thereof. But jealous of this ouer-boldnesse I take my leave: humbly
dedicating my poor labors to your Worships true-iudicial consideration,
desiring withal, your gentle hand of approbation to this essential testimony
of my most dutious love.

Your Worships humbly at command,

JOHN CRISPIN to the Church of Jesus Christ.
SVch as apply their spirits to collect Histories ought to look unto this
principal mark, The true end of histories.
to propose as in a glass, the power, wisdom, justice, and admirable bounty
of the living and eternal God, to the end he may less nothing among men, of
that which appertains unto him. As indeed he proposes and sets out
nothing in the world, be it in the person of kings or of such as be of base
condition, For what purposes changes do serve us.
wherein he means not to show that it is he which sets his hands to all
things, that men may learn to depend upon him, to hope for all good things at
his hands, and to honor and tremble under his judgments.

When we see an History, A glass for the comfort of such as be afflicted.
that some kingdom has bin established and brought into good estate, which
before was dissipated and divided: or else that some man has been delivered
from some great calamity, and has recovered some prosperity: behold here is
a glass to let them know which read such things, what good and happy issue
they may attend at Gods hands, after long and troublesome calamities, if they
trust in him. Again, if we encounter such an example, A glass for them of
Geneua.
that a Commonwealth, which otherwise was of no great force to resist many
enterprises attempted against it; yet it stands fast, only making it self
strong upon the succors it looked for at Gods hands: behold here a Painter to
represent unto us lively, with what wisdom God works, breaking the counsels
of the proud which abuse their power, to confound and oppress such in the
midst of which he has established his seat to be honored.

Moreover when such witnesses appear, as the greatness, force, magnificence,
the long spreading and stretching of great Monarchies, cannot often hinder, A
glass to co^template the incomprehensible judgments of God.
but all this has bin overthrown, or at the least comen to some decay; this
is an other portrait which should make us think upon the admirable judgments
of God reigning, who therein show evidently has strong and outstretched arm
from above: and would give men to know, that if he can reduce and bring to
nothing powers established in so apparent assurance, far more easily can he
overthrow every arrogant and proud head: to the end there may be no human
creature of what condition or estate soever it be, which trembles not in the
consideration of such wonderful judgments.

Moreover, so many chaunges and strange mutations which the discourse of time
brings us, do demonstrate unto us what may be the assurance and felicity of
all the frame of the world, and what may be the common condition of men. Things
here below subject to changes.
As indeed there is nothing so well governed under the Sun, be it never so
well ordained and established, which is not subject to diverse chaunges. We see
the Crowns of kings fall down to the earth: the scepters of Emperors
bruised, yea broken in pieces; the glory of Commonweals fade and decaie, but
ambition, The causes of changes and mutations.
proud ingratitude, insatiable avarice of such as were ordained to rule and
acknowledged not God, are the cause of such overthrows and mutations.

But since all men seek to find some firm estate wherein they may subsist
and stand the reading of such examples should bring them to behold their God
who is the firmitie and assurance of all things, and without whom, The alone
Church of God remains firm.
nothing can remain firm one minute of time. And as he has showed this
assurance in the midst of his Church against all tempests and storms, and
against all the assaults and machinations of Antichrists, as is clearly showed
in this present collection, so should this be the refuge of every one to find
out that he would seek for. The Church may well be shaken, The Church may be
shaken, but not overthrown.
but it can never be overthrown: for it leans upon the foundation of the
truth of God: It may be tossed by tempests, waves and storms, but her ancre
ascends even to heaven, and is sure held by the hand of him which cannot be
removed out of his place. The condition of the kingdoms of the world.
But contrary, men perceive not the storms and tempests which are to settle
and sink the great kingdoms of the world: yet it is so, that without being
shaken they fall and vanish away as of the^ selves. But the spiritual kingdom
of the son of God, which is his Church, ought not to be esteemed after the
dangers of this present life: for it is preserved in the midst of the
fiercest waves. As is said in Esaias 60. Thou shall have no more the Sun to
shine by day: neither shall the brightness of the Moon shine unto thee: For
the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and thy God thy glory, and thy Sun
shall never go down, neither shall thy Moon be hid: for the Lord shall be
thine everlasting light, and the days of thy sorrow shall be ended.

The assurance then of the Church ought not to be considered according nor in
regard of things present, The Church of God is subject to change
because it is established in God and fears no chaunges: For God is her
light: so that she has no need to borrow any brightness from either Sun or
Moon. And although the faithful be not deprived of the commodities of this
present life, but rather there is nothing either in heaven or earth which God
has not created for the love of them: seeing he has a particular care of
them: yet is there one thing much more excellent which the children of God do
enjoy; namely the heavenly light: which from all times has been cast on it. We
must then lift up our spirits unto God, who governs all both above and below,
The heavenly light peculiar to the children of God.

How examples written in histories are to be taken.


and not attribute any thing to Fortune, as profane men do: heereunto men
pretend to bring all the faithful.

Therefore hither men come not to feed the spirit of foolish curiosity, or
here to learn any thing to babble with vain ostentation, or to take pleasure
to hear a well adorned language: and as soon as the eyes are taken from off
the book, all fruit of that reading is lost: but there is neither fact, nor
chance, nor issue, Examples of prosperity.
which every man oght not to borrow for himself. If he find that some
virtuous and well living man has been well beloved of God and honored of men,
that virtue ought to be unto him as a flame to lighten his heart, that
following such a man he may come to a like felicity. Examples of adversity.
If contrary he encounter and light on one who for his vices fell into some
grievous inconveniences, it is an example to serve him for a bridle, that he
do not precipitate and throw himself headlong into the same ditch: and above
all, such as have great dignities and are called to do great things, so much
more as their ruin is dangerous, so much more also ought they to be careful
to look how faithfully they acquit themselves in their charge committed unto
them.

But well has one said, that The History is a treasure which should never
depart from the hands, The aduerti^^me^t that we h^u^ ^y like histories.
wherewith men being aided* may more commodiously handle their affairs like to
such as they find registered in histories: seeing that almost always alike
causes happen and come to pass This small advertisement may profit, if it
light not upon crooked and brutish spirits, unto whom this labor will not be
profitable, but only unto such as with an honest pleasure will join a good
desire to carry an humble reverence to all the works of God.

But then O Church of God, seeing all things come and are done for the love of
thee, it is good reason that thy little estate (or rather glass of thy
condition and of that thou have endured since the coming of thy espouse) be
dedicated and consecrated unto thee. On the one side thou shall know the
heretics, schismatikes, mockers and contemners, with the tyrants and violent
oppressors which have done unto thee a thousand evils: but on the other side
thou shall see Jesus Christ the stronger: who has not declared himself thy
head for a world or two: but for ever a protector of thine. And now is there
any understanding that can comprehend, and less tongue to express what he
has done for thee in these last days: when from thy renting and treading
under foot we see so many children each where of so fruitful a mother. O
admirable bounty! O indicible joy and consolation, to see the meruailes of the
Lord in these last times: Let us pray that he will continue that he has
begun and advanced, to his glory and honor. So be it.

Thine in the Lord, John Crispin.

The order of the Bishops and Pope of Rome, after this Book.
SAint Peter upon false tokens called the first in number of the Bishops of
Rome. Linus. Cletus. Clement. Anacletus. Euaristus. Alexander. Sixtus or
Xistus. Telesphorus. Higinus. Pius. 1. Auicetus. Soter. Eleutherius. Victor.
Zephirin or Seuerin. Calistus. Vrbain. Pontian. Antherus. Fabian. Cornelius.
Lucius. Stephanus. Zistus. 2. Denis Felix. Eutichien. Caius. Marcellin. Marcel.
Eusebius. Melchiades. Siluester. Marcus Julius Liberius. Felix. Damasus.
Siricius. Anastasius. 1. Innocentius 1. Zozimus. Boniface. 1. Celestinus 1.
Sixtus 3. Leo 1. Hilarious Simplicius. Felix 3. Gelatius Anastasius 2. Simmachus
Hormisda. John 1. Felix 4. Boniface 2. John 2. Agapetus. Siluerius. Vigilins
Pelagius 1. John 3. Benit 1. Pelagius 2. Gregory 1. Sauian or Sabinian.
Boniface 3. Boniface 4 Deus dedit Boniface 5 Honorius Seuerin John 4 Theodorus
1 Martin 1 Eugenius 1 Vitalian Adeodatus Donus Agathon Leo 2 Benit 2 John 5
Conon Sergius John 6 John 7 Sisinius Constantine 1 Gregory 2 Gregory 3
Zachary Stephen 2 Paulus 1 Constantine 2 Stephen 3 Adrian 1 Leo 3 Stephen 4
Paschal Eugenius 2 Valentine 2 Gregory 4 Sergius 2 Leo 4 John 8 Benit 3
Nicholas 1 Adrian 2 John 9 Martin 2 Adrian 3 Stephen 5 Formosus Boniface 6
Stephen 6 Roman Theodorus 2 John 10 Benit 4 Leo 5 Christopher Sergius 3
Anastasius 3 Lando John 11 Leo 6 Stephen 7 John 12 Leo 7 Stephen 8 Martin 3
Agapetus 2 John 13 Benit 5 Leo 8 John 14 Benit 6 Donus 2 Boniface 7. Benit 7
John 16 John 17 Gregory 5 John 18 Siluester 2 John 19 John 20 Sergius 4 Benit
8 John 21 Benit 9 Siluester 3 Gregory 6 Clement 2 Damasus 2 Leo 9 Victor 2
Stephen 9 Benit 10 Nicholas 2 Alexander 2 Gregory 7 Victor 3 Vrbaine 2 Pascall
2 Gelasius 2 Calixtus 2 Honorius 2 Innocent 2 Celestine 2 Lucius 2 Eugenius 3
Anastasius 4 Adrian 4 Alexander 3 Lucius 3 Vrbain 3 Gregory 8 Clement 3
Celestine 3 Innocent 3 Honorius 3 Gregory 9 Celestine 4 Innocent 4 Alexander 4
Vrbain 4 Clement 4 Gregory 10 Innocent 5 Adrian 5 John 22 Nicholas 3 Martin 4
Honorius 4 Nicholas 4 Celestine 5 Boniface 8 Benit 11 Clement 5 John 23 Benit
12 Clement 6 Innocent 6 Vrbain 5 Gregory 11 Vrbain 6 Clement 7 Boniface 9
Benit 13 Innocent 7 Gregory 12 Alexander 5 John 24. Martin. 5. Eugenius 4.
Felix 5. Nicholas 5. Calixtus 3. Pius 2. Paul 2. Sixtus 4. Innocent 8.
Alexander 6. Pius 3. Julius 2. Leo 10. Adrian 6. Clement 7. Paul 3. Julius 3.
Marcel. 2. Paul 4. Pius 5. Gregory 13.
FINIS.
A Table of the Roman Emperors, with the declaration of the years which
every one reigned.
AVgustus reigned 56. years, that is to say, 12. with Antonius and Lepidus,
and 44. alone.

The year 42. of his Empire, was our Savior Jesus borne.

years. months. Tiberius 23. The 18. year of his Empire, was Christ
crucified. Caligula 3. 10. Claudius 13. Nero 14. 7. Galba 14 7 Otto 3 Vitellius
8 Vespasian 9. or 10. Titus 2 Domitian 15 Nerua 1 Traian 19 6 Adrian 22 or 20
Antonius Pius 23 Marc Antonin 18 Commodus 13 or 12 Pertinax 6 Julian 4 or 3
Seuerus 18 Antonius Caracalla. 6 Macrin 1 Heliogabalus 4 Alexander 13 Maximin
and his son. 3 Gordian 6 Phillip 6. or 5. During the reign of this Emperor
one 1000. years is accounted since the building of Rome. Decius 2 Gallus and
his son 2 Eucilian of some is not accounted Valerian 6 Gallien 9 Egnatius says
he reigned 15 years, namely 8. alone, and 7. with his father Valerian.
Claudius 2 Aurelian 5. and a half. Tacitus 6 Florian 2 Probus 6 4 Carus with
his two sons, Carin and Numeran Diocletian and Maximini, or Maximinian 15
These two freely resigned the Empire. Constans and Maximin 2 Maxencius 2.
alone, and with Licinius and Constantin 16. Constantine the great alone 13.
years. Constantine, Constant, and Constans, his 3. sons, divided the Empire.
The first reigned 3 The second 13 The third 24 Julian the Apostate 1 7 Iouinian
or Iouian 7 Valentinian 11 with Valence his brother 3 Gratian with his father,
Valentinian 8 with Valens his uncle 3 Theodosius 4 or 6 Theodosius alone 11
Arcadus and Honorus his brother. Theodosius 2 26 Valentinian 5 Martian 7 Leo 1
18 Leo the young. 1 Zeno 17 Anastatius 27 Justin 9 Justinian 38 Justin 2 11
Tiberius 2 7 Mauricius 20 Phocas 8 Heraclius 29. or 31 after some. Constantine
4 Heraclenas 2 Constans 28 Constantine the bearded. Justinian after some 10.
Leoncius 3 Absimarus, or Tiberius 7. Phillippicus 1 5 Anastasius 3. after some
one year and 3. months. Theodosius 1 Leo Isaurian 24 Constantine Coproninius
35. Leo 4. 5. after some one year. Constantine 10 His mother Himene alone 3.
years. Charlemaigne made Emperor.

We account from Augustus till Charlemaigne was crowned Emperor, about 843.
years. From the building of Rome, 1550. or as some say, 1530.

The names of the Emperors of Constantinople, after Charlamaigne.
NIcephorus, and Stauracius his son. 9 years. Michael Curopleus. 11 years.
Leo Armenian. 7 years. Michael le Begne. 8 years. Theophilus. 12 years.
Michael his son. 14 years. Basile. 20 years. Leo the Philosopher. 25
years. Alexander. 1 years. Constantine. 39 years. Roman Lecapen. 26
years. Romain Leon. 13 years. Nicephorus. 6 years. John Zimiscus. 6 years.
Basile and Constantine. 53 years. Romain Argiropilus. 5 years. Michael de
Paphlagonia. 7 years. Constantine Monomache. 12 years. Theodora the sister of
Zoe. 2 years. Michael. 1 years. Isaac. 2 years. Constantine Ducas. 7 years.
Romain Diogeues Michael, Constantius son. 6 years. Nicephorus Botoniate. 3
years. Alexius Commene. 27 years. Calcian. 25 years. Manuel. 38 years.
Alexie. 3 years. Andronice. 2 years. Isacie Angel Alexie Alexie the younger.
Baldwin Earl of Flanders.. 6 years. Henry. 11 years. Peter of Auxerre Robert
his son Balwin. Michael Paleologus. 11 years. Andronicus Andronicus the
younger John Paleologus Manuel John Constantine.


The rest of the Roman Emperors after Charlamaigne.
LEwis the gentle his son, reigned 26. years. Lotharie 15 years. Lewis 2 19
years. Charles the bald 2 years. Lewis the stutter 2 years. Charles the
gross 10 years. Arnulphe 12 years. Lewis 3 12 years. Conrade 7 years.
Henry 1 17 years. Otthon 1 37 years. Otthon 2 10 years. Othon 3 18 years.
Henry 2 24 years. Conrade 2 15 years. Henry 3 10 years. Henry 4 1 years.
Henry 5 20 years. Lothaire or Luder 13 years. Conrade 3 16 years. Frederic
Barberosse 37 years. Henry 6 8 years. Phillip 8 years. Othon 4 4 years.
Frederic 2 44 years. Some say 33. years, others 37. years. A Schism in the
Empire 23. years as some say: others say 28. years. William of Holland 2
years. Rodolph 1 18 years. Adolphe 1 6 years. Albert 1 10 or thereabouts.
years. Henry 7 5 years. Lewis 6 33 as some say. years. Charles 4 33 years.
Wencelaus 22 years. We pass over Iosse and Robert, because of the schism in
the Empire. Sigismond 29 years. Albert 2 2 years. Frederic 3 53 years.
Maximilian 1 25 years. Charles 5 29 years. Ferdenand 1 years. Maximilian 2
14 years. Rodolphe 2. at this present reigning. years.


FINIS.
THE ESTATE OF THE Church, with the discourse of times, since the Nativity of
our Lord Jesus Christ, until this present year, 1601. Augustus.

IT was foretold by Daniell that the Messiah should be borne under the fourth
Monarchy, which Julius Caesar constituted about 47. years before the
Nativity of our Lord: after he had brought the Roman Empire under his
subjection. Pompey before took by force and pilled the Town of Jerusalem: and
then the Scepter and politic government of the Jews began to stoop. See
Josephus in the 14. book of Antiq. Chap. 2. This came in the year of the
world, 3903. and threescore years before Christ.

Augustus the son of Julius Caesar's Sister, succeeded his Uncle being
adopted of him. Under whose Empire the eternal son of God was borne, taking
flesh of the Virgin Mary in Bethelem, a Town of Jury, the year of the worlds
creation, 3963.

This is the seed which burst the Serpents head, and delivered us from the
mortal sting thereof. This is the sovereign head of the Church, without which
the body thereof can have no form. He takes a particular care thereof, and
causes his presence to be there felt with efficacy: And in the midst
thereof will be inuocated, served, honored and glorified. The state whereof is
to be deducted in this discourse.

So soon as Christ the true anointed of God was borne and manifested in the
world, Herod stirred great persecution. The occasion thereof was by the wise
men which came from the East, which brought news of the Messiah to them of
Jerusalem. He caused all the children in the coasts of Bethelem to be slain,
which were two years old and under.

This Herod who obtained of Augustus the title and dignity of King in Judea,
was the son of Antipater the Idumeen, son of an other Herod which was a
Secretary in the Temple of Apollo, in the Town of Ascalon. Philo the Jew
rehearses, that in the 13. year of his kingdom, he killed the ordinary
Judges of the house of David, and substituted others in their places. He was
brought into such a rage, that he made sley his own son, which he had of a
wife of the line of Judah. Macrobius recites, that when Augustus heard it
rehearsed he said. It were better to be Herod's Swine then his Son.

Behold the judgment of God.
His execrable deeds remained not long unpunished, and it is profitable we
should know the issue worthy of such a Tyrant. Josephus in the 8. book of
Antiq. Chap. 17. describes it thus. The kings malady increased, and God
showed openly that he would punish his impiety. For he was burned with a slow
heat, yet without, none could perceive it, only he felt it within, because it
grated and wasted his entralles. He was so hungry that he took no leisure to
chawe his meat, but devoured all that entered into his mouth: and so still some
must cast meat into his mouth. His entralls were wounded and vlcerated, and he
was tormented with collicke passions. His feet were swelled with flegmaticke
humors, through which you might see the day. His shamefaste parts were rotted
and full of worms: his breath was stinking that none durst approach unto him.
And in the 21. Chap. of the first book of the Jews wars, the same
Historiographer writes thus. All his body was taken with a disease, and he
was tormented with diverse dolours. He had a burning and intolerable heat in
him. The Chollick tormented him incessantly: his feet were swelled betwixt the
skin and the flesh: he sought to advance his own death; and calling for a
knife lifted up his right hand, but Archilaus his cosen-germane perceiving it,
Tiberius.
ran to him and held his hand: he died 5. days after he made his son
Antipater die, having enjoyed the kingdom the space of 34. years after he had
caused Antigonus to die, and 37. years after he was declared King by the
Romans. In all other things he was happy, yea if ever King were; for a man of
so base condition to acquire that Kingdom and keep it so long a time, and at
last leave it to his children. But concerning his domesticke affairs, none
could be more unlucky, etc. Hitherto Josephus.

This History is worthy of memory, that all that read such a vengeance of
God, may learn to fear his judgments.

After the death of this Herod, the Jews not being able to support the ruling
of a stranger, sought to raise up seditions, but they were repressed by
Archilaus. Archilaus Herodes successor, of whom there is spoken. Math. 2.
But whilst Archilaus and Herod Antipas pleaded one against an other in Rome,
again other troubles arose in Iewrie; In so much as Augustus divided Herod's
kingdom.

He constituted Archilaus the Tetrarch of Idumea, Judea, and Samaria, and the
reuenew of those Regions amounted yearly to six hundredth Talents. A division
of the kingdom of Judea.
He divided the other part into two Tetrarches. He gave also to Herod Antipas,
Galilie and Perea, out of which Regions he had yearly 200. Talents. And to
Philippes he gave Bathania, Traconite, Aucanite, and Calcide, of which places
the reuenew came by year to an hundredth Talents. This Archilaus was chased
from Judea, and finally banished to Vienne, which is in Gaul nigh to Lions,
where he dyed.

At this time the administration of the Kingdom was again changed in Judea.
The Romans placed Governors there, one after an other, as Coponius, Marcus,
Anius, Rufus, Valerius, Gracchus, Poncius Pilate.

Tiberius succeeded Augustus his father in law, and reigned 33. years. He
gave himself to Idleness and drunkenness, so that in mockery he was called
Claudius Biberius Nero, in place of Claudius Tiberius Nero. See Suetonius and
Cor. Tacitus, Historiograph.

John Baptist began to preach the presence of the Redeemer, showing with his
finger the Lord Jesus: he reprehended the false services invented by men, so
that persecutions began to arise. The most enraged persecutors were the
Pharisees, I mean such as were great in the Church of Jerusalem. These crimes
they laid against him: namely that he usurped the Ministry to teach without
the will of such as had charge in the Church. That he brought a new doctrine,
diverse from the use of the Sinagogues. That he showed a Messiah, who had no
appearance of a King, but abject and poor. That he used hard and sharp
words, and affirmed that the government of Moses was come to an end, and that
they must have a new Religion. That he foretold the reiection and ruin of the
Jews, and the vocation of the Gentiles. Mat. 3. Luke 3. John. 3.

But because the people came every day in great multitudes to him, and was held
for an excellent Prophet, his enemies were brideled.

But he endured an other persecution of Herodes Antipas (the first king Herod's
son) the Tetrark of Galilie, who took Herodias, his brother Philip Herod's
wife, and made him die, to please the appetite of that Herodias and her
daughter Salome, after she had daunced at a banquet. As it is Mark. 6.

Three Sects in Jerusalem.
There were amongst the Jews at this time three Sects; namely Pharisees,
Saduces, and Esses, as appears.

Touching the Temple.
All the Nation of the Jews had but that only Temple which was in Jerusalem,
called the Temple of God. Mat. 21. It was 46. years in edifying. Ioh. 2.
Nabuchodonoser pilled and burned the stately Temple of Solomon, and rased it by
Nabuzardam General of his Army, when the rest of the people were carried into
Babylon.

Cyrus the first of that name King of the Persians, at the persuasion of
Daniel, gave leave to reedifie it. And the second year of Cyrus reign, the
Jews began to build it, but they had great hindrances. The death of Cyrus
followed. Cambises followed him, a man full of impiety and cruelty, he
caused the building to cease. Darius Hislaspes succeeded after him, who made an
end of the Temple. And this was the cause it was so long in building.

This Temple was situated in an imminent and high place, therein was great
magnificence, and great gifts were given for ornaments thereof, as may be
gathered in the 24. of S. Math. Mark. 14. Luke 21. See Joseph. in his last
chap. of the 15. book of Antiquit.

The Ecclesiastical government of the Jews was this. The Ecclesiastical
government which was then.
They which held the pre-eminence in the Church of the Jews were called
principal high Priests.

It was ordained of God that there should be one high Priest, Sovereign high
Priest.
who might remain in that office until the end of his life, and after his
death an other was substituted, Exodus 29. Nomb. 20. When Christ came, all was
confused, all was sold for money, or by deceit and stealth. As John. 11. It is
said that Cayphas was chief Priest that year.

After the high Priest, Priests.
there was a great troop of other Priests, which were distinct amongst
themselves. For David distributed the successors of Aaron into 24. orders.
Therefore it is said, Luke 1. that Zachary was a Priest of the Family of Abia,
which had the eight Lot. 1. Chro. 24.

There were after Levites, whereof is spoken, Levites.
John. 1. and 10. Chap. There were also Scribes, which were Doctors of the
Law. Luke 5. There was the Master of the Sinagogue, who was the principal
Doctor. Mark. 5. Luke 13.

There were they which were called Rabbi or Master, Masters.
which was an estate or office of teaching. John. 3. Art thou a Master in
Israel and know not these things?

The Elders of the people, Ancients.
were they which they chose from among the people, having charge of things
which belonged to the Temple, to Justice, and the government of the Church.
When Jesus had chased from the Temple the buyers and sellers, the next morning
the high Priests and Elders of the people came to him, asking by what
authority he did those things. Math. 21.

About the 20. year of Christ, and the fifth of Tiberius, as Eusebius says in
his Chronicle, Caligula.
thirteen Towns of Asia were overthrown by an Earthquake: namely, Ephesus,
Sardis, Mesthenes, Megechiere, Cesarea, Magnesia, Philadelphia, Hincel, Tenus,
Cume, Mirthina, Apollonia, Diahyrcania.

Such judgments of God ought to serve for aduertisements and instructions unto
us.

Our Lord Jesus Christ exercised his Ministry and office the space of three
years, three months, and ten days: and the beginning is taken from his
thirtieth year, because in S. Luke, it is said, that Jesus began to be about
thirty years of age.

He suffered death and passion the year 34. according to the supputation of
many authors.

Caius Caligula was an horrible Monster, who by his wicked life despited heaven
and earth, uttering his fury through all the jurisdictions of the Roman
Empire, and by his Edicts would needs make himself a God. But finally he was
taken with a strange death. Josephus makes a singular recital thereof in the
1. Chapter of the 20. book of Antiquities. Chareas, Sabinus, Aquila and
others, which of long time had conspired his death, slew him cruelly after he
had reigned three years, ten months, and eight days. His body as
Suetonius rehearses, was secretly carried to the Gardens of Lamius: and being
half burnt, was covered with a little earth. He was of the age of 24. years.

Such a Tirant who had provoked both God and men against him, could no
otherwise end his days.

Caligula banished Herod the Tetrarch (who went to Rome at the persuasion of
Herodias, the year 40.) into the Town of Lions in Gaul, where he died in
poverty with the said Herodias his harlot.

The same year the Jews endured great afflictions. One was at Alexandria upon
this occasion. Caligula had ordained that through all the Jurisdiction of the
Romans, there should be builded unto him Temples and Aultars, where they
should worship him as God. The Jews alone resisted his impiety. Then were
there many Grecians in Alexandria who wished death unto the Jews, therefore
then they took occasion to make them odious unto the Emperor except they
obeyed his ordinance. When it came to proof, the Jews resisted it strongly,
and the sedition about it was such, that many were slain on both sides. The
cause was finally debated at Rome: and Caligula a perverse man made chase away
Philo the Jew, who pleaded the Jews cause. Who then said. Naucle.
It behooves us whom the Emperor hates to take courage. For it is necessary
that God should help, when humane succors fails. Caligula used to say;
Would to God the Roman people had but one Head.

The Jews also were greatly afflicted in Babylon of the Chaldeans, and in
Seleucia of Siria. Two brethren Jews.
There were two brethren Jews of base condition: the one named Asniens, and
the other Anileus: the which being Robbers and Thieves, they gathered together
a great number of Rake-hells and disordered persons. Artanabus seeing this
evil increase, thought good to remedy it. But it was too late. And finally
moved with the prowess of these two young men, received them into amity, and
gave them the government of the Kingdom of Babylon. See Joseph. in the 18.
Book and last Chapter.

Jesus Christ ascended visibly into Heaven to confirm his Resurrection the
better, and the glory of his Kingdom, 40. days after his Resurrection. His
Disciples yet dreamed of an earthly kingdom of Messiah, and asked of him if he
would not begin it. But Jesus Christ after he had spoken of the eternal
Kingdom and had blessed them, was lifted up aloft, and a bright Cloud
received him into Heaven, where he sits at the right hand and power of God.

Now then we must consider what aduancements and increase the Primitive Church
made by the Apostles and their Disciples; that all the faithful may know that
Jesus Christ the King of glory remains not Idle in Heaven: but by an
admirable manner maintained, governs, and aydeth his, that his Gospel may be
sown through the world.

But as God showed that honor to the Land of Canaan, as to give it the
promises touching the Redeemer, so there also by his death he obtained
salvation unto mankind. Churches in Asia the less.
Above all Countries Asia the less had at that time the most flourishing
Churches. After the Ascension of Christ, there was an excellent Church in
Jerusalem. In the first of the Acts it is recited that there were about six
score persons at the beginning.

The holy scripture calls Churches the public assemblies of many faithful.

Ten days after the Ascension, was the Feast of Pentecost. The Lord Jesus
then reigning in Heaven at the right hand of his Father, powered visibly and
sensibly the holy Ghost upon the Apostles which then were assembled at
Jerusalem.

The word of the Lord took his course, and the number of the faithful by
little and little increased in Jerusalem, by the preaching and miracles of the
Apostles. Behold the book of the Acts, for the first preachings and the
persecutions which came after the death of our Lord.

Steven stoned.
The 34. year after the Nativity of Christ, and the 19. of the Kingdom of
Tiberius, after the death of S. Steven, the high Priests of Jerusalem stirred
more and more grievous persecutions against the Church.

Saul (which is also Paul) was chosen to persecute the faithful: for before
his conversion he burnt with false zeal, espying into each house, and drawing
into prison all he could catch. S. Jerome recites that S. Paul his parents
dwelt in Sischal a Town of Judah, but when the Romans took the Country they
went into Tharsis, which is in Cilicia, where Paul was borne. His father was a
Jew of the Tribe of Benjamin, and a Burgess of Rome. Act. Chap. 22.

Many then were Martired, others were constrained to retire themselves into
Countries adjacent, which occasioned the Gospel to be further spread abroad.

About the year forty and five after the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and twelve years after his Resurrection, the third year of Caligula, a great
persecution was stirred by Herod Agrippa against the Christians, wherein James
the brother of John was beheaded. Peter put in prison, but the Angel of the
Lord drew them out most miraculously.

Soon after the Lord revenged the death of his. For it happened that this
Herod went to Cesarea. The cause was for that he had enterprised a war
against the Tyrrians and Sidonians, which they prevented by gaining the
Chamberlain Blastus, and demanding of a peace. One day Herod sumptuously
adorned sat down in Throne and spoke to them, and the people made an
acclamation as if GOD himself had spoken unto them. But Herod was
incontinently strooken by the Angel of the Lord, and was consumed with
vermin and died miserably, because he yielded no glory unto God, and so the
persecution ceased.

Here is a second mirror of Gods judgment against such as oppress the
Church.

Saint Paul after his conversion returned five times to Jerusalem. At his last
being there, he recited the History of his Ministry in the assembly of the
Elders of the Church.

His preachings were greatly spread abroad, neither ceased he to plant the
Gospel wheresoever he went, as it appears in the Acts. He preached at Rome
by the space of two years, although he was a prisoner. Where before there was
an assembly of the faithful as the Epistle to the Romans witnesses.

Philippe the Apostle preached in Samaria, where there was a Church: which
retired thither after the death of Saint Steven. In Azote the Church assembled;
from thence it went into the Maritine Towns.

Peter the Apostle also preached the Gospel in many Towns, as is at large
seen in the History of the Acts. Origin in his Tome upon Genesis says, it
seems that Peter preached in Pontus, Galatia, Asia, Bithinia, and Cappadocia,
to the dispearced Jews.

There was also a Church in Babylon, as he himself witnesses in the fist of
his first Epistle. In Phinicia and Siria, in Tire, Sidon, Serentia, Silicia,
Pamphilia, Pisidia, Attalia, Lycaonia. Also in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, Bithinia, Misia, and Phrigia. Unto these did S. Peter write.

The seven Churches of Asia are named in the Apocalips: namely, Ephesus,
Smirna, Pergamus, Thyatirus, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicia.

Above all, the Church of Antioche was most famous, where the Disciples were
first called Christians. Some say this was the thirty and eight year after
Christ: others forty. Paul and Barnabas remained there one whole year. Acts.
11. and 13.

Saint John the Apostle and Evangelist, after he had preached the Gospel
through all Asia, he finally retired into the Town of Ephesus, where he
remained many years. From thence the Church might easily spread it self into
Europe, which was nigh thereunto.

Now we see the beginning of the Kingdom of Christ, and as it were a renewment
of the world.

Pilate. For after the Jews had accused him of too great cruelty, Lord
Vitellius then Governor of Siria, commanded him to go to Rome, to answer
the accusations that were to be laid against him. But as he was in the way
he died. Tiberius as Josephus recites in the eighteenth of Antiquities,
Chapter five. Eutropius in his seventh book says, that Pilate was nipped and
pinched with so great anguishes, because Caligula troubled him, that striking
and beating himself with his own hands, he sought to destroy himself.
Claudius*
See Eusebius in his 2. book, Chap. 7.

This same year it is held that Saint Matthew writ his Gospel in Judea. The
same year the Tetrach ship of Herodes was delivered to Agrippa, and a great
discomfiture now the second time was made of the Jews in Babylon. See Josephus
in the last Chapter of his Antiquities.

Claudius the fifth Emperor was chosen to the Imperial dignity the aforesaid
year, and reigned fourteen years and nine months.

Herodes Agrippa the year 15. and the third of Claudius, held the Kingdom of
Judea, of the gift of Caligula and Claudius. Being departed from Rome to come
to Jerusalem, he thought good to make a show to the Jews that he loved their
Religion, and after to gratify the high Priests, he put to death certain of
the faithful.

At this time Churches were governed by the Apostles which were instructed in
the school of the son of God, and therefore there is no government to be
compared to this.

Yet in this time the dwell had his instruments in Churches government; that is
to say, false Apostles and false brethren. Even already wrought he the secret
of Iniquity by his Antichrist. 2. Thessa. 2. and 1. John 2. and 4.

There were Heretics, Titus 3. Dogs, Philip. 3. Wolves and men speaking
perverse things. Acts 20. People which were neither hot nor cold. Apoca. 3.

If at this time Satan had such license, how bold think we will he be now
that they are gone?

Amongst them which now governed the Church, Difference of degrees in the
government of the Primative Church.
some were given Apostles to visit Churches. Their charge was to sow the
Gospel throughout the world. They had no place assigned. Besides the twelve,
Paul and Barnabas are called Apostles. Acts 14. Epaphroditus is called the
Apostle of the Philippians. Philippians 2. Andronicus and Iunia, are called
notable amongst the Apostle. Romans. sixteen.

Prophets are they which had the gift not only to Interpret scripture, but
also to apply it to the true use. S. Paul prefers Prophecy before all other
gifts.

Evangelists had an office which came nigh unto the Apostleship. The
difference was only in the degree of dignity. 1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 4.
Of this estate was Timothy, and his like, which succored the Apostles. 2.
Timoth. 4.5. Philip is called an Evangelist. Act. 21. b. 8.

Doctors were for the conservation of the purity of Religion, that the holy
doctrine might be kept and published. Saint Luke joins Prophets with
Doctors. Acts. 13. a. 1.

Priest signifies Ancient; not for that they were of an age, but because age
commonly has with it more wisdom, experience, and gravity. Under this name,
are comprehended as well Pastors, as such as were ordained for the Regiment of
the Church. 1. Pet. 5.
S. Peter calls himself Priest, showing thereby, that it was a common name.

Deacons is a general name of service, but is taken for such as had the charge
to dispense the Almesses. Acts. 19. a. 22.

Ministers or servants are called Adioints, or such as accompanied the Apostles
in their viands. Timothy and Erastus ministered to S. Paul. Act. 19. a. 22.

Bishop and Priest was then one same name and office. Saint Hierome in his
Epistle to Euagoras witnesses it. But afterward whilst Schisms endured, one
was chosen from amongst the Priests and set in the most principal place, and
called Bishop, or Superintendent. And therefore the office of Bishop was
after held to be higher then the Priests.

Saint Paul commanded Titus to place in every Town Priests or Bishops.
Titus. 1. a. 5.6.7. See Acts 20. f. 28.

With the good seed which was all over as is said dispersed, there began
also heresies to be cast into the Lords field. Heresies at this time.
The first and most pernicious were the Simoniaques. The original whereof was
Simon Magus, borne in a Town of Samaria, which Justin calls Triton, and
Eusebius Gitton; a man exercised in Letters, who by his Arts enchaunted many in
Samaria before Philip had converted them. As is recited in the Acts. Chap. 8.

After S. Peter had discovered his wicked Hypocrisy, he went away in such
despite, that making a mingle-mangle of the dreams of Philosophers and Painims
with the religions of the Jews, and that which he learned of the Gospel he
corrupted, and transferred to his own person, that which was spoken of Jesus
Christ, of the holy Ghost, and of the salvation of man. And as the light of the
Gospel got above his mysts and clouds, he came to Rome in the time of
Claudius the Emperor, leading with him an whore called Selene or Helena, which
he had drawn out of the common Stews of Tire in Phinicia, he called her the
first conception of his understanding, and the mother of all, by whom from the
beginning he had conceived to make Angels and Archangels. He attributed also
unto her, almost all things which the holy Scripture yields, unto the
eternal word of God, in the creation. He said also of himself, that he was
the sovereign God which descended, and was transfigured to correct things
which had been evil administered by the Angels. And although he appeared in an
humane form yet was he not man, and although men thought he suffered in Judea,
yet he suffered not. So promised he salvation to all them which would trust in
him and in his Selene, and full liberty to do whatsoever their appetite
desired. For men should be saved by his grace and not by their own good
works. For such works were not after his nature but from his Angels, which by
his permission had made the world, and had imposed such works upon men to
draw them into bondage. Behold here the doctrine of this Master, who
afterward brought out the like fruit, as pailliardizes, adulteries, thefts,
drunkenness, blasphemies against the true God, and other the like fruits.
Briefly Ireneus calls him the fountain and father of all Heretics, in the
Preface of his third book of Heresies. Of his manner of death, Epiphanius
accords not with Theodoretus.

Menander the Disciple of this Simon, was also a Magician.

The year forty four as many think, Saint Peter came to Rome, and governed
that Church twenty and five years: but hardly can they show that he was at
any time there, nor at what time, nor under what Emperor. For first, if Saint
Peter were at Rome, he came not to Rome at the time they say: namely in the
year forty four, after the Nativity of our Lord Jesus, and that which they
say, that he ruled the Church twenty and five years, has no likelihood. For
it may easily be gathered from the Epistle to the Galath. that he was in
Jerusalem the year 51. where the Apostles great Council was held. Let the
years be numbered. The year thirty and five S. Paul was converted, to which
add seuenteen, even until that Council, and it comes to fifty and two. How
could he then before seven years be at Rome? If he were there he returned
soon. But S. Luke then would not have concealed it if it had been so: neither
is it found in any History of credit, that after Saint Peter was entered Rome,
he left that place to return into the Town of Jerusalem. Moreover it is
certain he was not at Rome the year fifty eight, and three score. And that
it is so, when Saint Paul was led thither prisoner, he remained there in an
hired house two years. Hereof Saint Luke makes no mention of Saint Peter. And
by the second Epistle to Timothy, it may be plainly known that Saint Peter
was not at Rome at the time that S. Paul's death was so nie. For then S. Paul
having occasion to make mention of all that was with him, would not have
forgotten Saint Peter if he had been there.

Many wise and good men have handled this matter at large, unto which I refer
you.

The same year Herod the brother of Agrippa, was made King of Calcide.

The year 45. S. Mark the Disciple of Saint Peter Egypt, and Euodius was
first ordained Bishop of Antioche. And there was James the brother of John
beheaded, and Peter delivered from prison by the Angel.

The year 46. which was about the ninth and tenth Claudius the Emperor, there
was a great Famine through all Greece, at Rome, and in other parts of the
earth, and this Famine was foretold in Antioche by the Prophet Agabus. Who
being moved with that he heard say of the Churches prosperity of Antioche,
departed from Jerusalem to come thither with other faithful. Dion and Eusebius
make mention of this Famine.

At this time Helena Queen of the Adiabenians, and the King Isares were
accounted to serve God faithfully. Josephus speaks amply thereof in his
Antiquities, Lib. 15. Chapter 2.3. and 5.

The same year Agrippa who was called Herodes, Agrippa called God, is straight
punished. Act. 12.
died after a strange manner. In an assembly at plays he suffered the people
to call him God, and therefore the Angel struck him, for that he gave not
glory unto God, and he was consumed with Lice. Josephus recites it at large:
and hereunto agrees the holy scripture. But it is worthy to be noted, The
death of Heod Agrippa. Lib. 9. cap. 17.
that when he felt the horrible pangs of death, beholding his friends he said.
Look upon your God: I am now constrained to change my life. And the
necessity imposed upon me redargueth Josephus recites these things more at
length in his Antiquities. His Kingdom was changed into a Province, and
Cuspins Fadus was made Governor of the Jews.

The year forty and seven, Abbarus reigned over the Arabians, and Cassius
Longinus was made Governor of Siria.

The year 48. Marie our Lords mother died after the common opinion of the age
of forty nine years. Nancle. See also Epiphanius, Lib. 3. of heresies. If we
will believe some dreams, she was in body carried up to Heaven, but that tale
is so frivolous, as he that cannot see it is more then blind.

Upon such foundations Papists began by little and little to build the Articles
of their faith: namely upon tales and dreams.

The Council of Jerusalem, recited in the 15. of the Acts, was about this
year, and the 6. of the Kingdom of Claudius, and the 14. year after the
conversion of S. Paul, as appears by that which is rehearsed in the Galath. 2.

The same year during the said famine, Tiberius Alexander was made Governor
of the Jews.

Claudius, there was so great a sedition in Jerusalem upon Easter day, that
twenty thousand men were stifled betwixt the gates, as Josephus says, but as
others, thirty thousand. The same year Cumanus was Governor of Judea, and
Quadratus of Siria.

Rome, and there were found three skore and four hundredth thousand, an
hundredth three and forty. The same year Herod the brother of Agrippa dyed,
and his Kingdom was given to Agrippa the younger. This was he that gave
audience to S. Paul. Act. 25.

Oros. chapter 6.
The same year were seen three Suns, which by little and little joined
themselves together. There was also an horrible Famine in Greece, and the Jews
were chased from Rome by Claudius.

Paul did that which is contained in the 21.17. and 18. Chap. of the Acts. This
year he came first to Corinthe, Act. 18.
where he remained a year and six months. At this time the Emperor
appeased the seditions which were betwixt the Jews and the Samaritanes.

Claudius took the Kingdom of Chalcide from Agrippa, which he had held four
years, and gave him the Tetrarchie of Philip, with Traconite, Nero.
Bathane, and Abele: Felix.
and constituted Felix Governor of the Jews.

Judea was maruellously afflicted about this time by intestine Jerusalem.
Jonathan the high Priest had admonished the Governor Felix, to acknowledge the
true God. But Felix was so grieved hereat, that he ordained an other high
Priest, namely Joseph, who was a familiar friend of the said Jonathan. Joseph
assembled together a band of thieves and slew Jonathan. These thieves which
remained unpunished for this, in an assembly of people fell upon all they
thought good, neither carrying reverence to any persons nor places, how holy
soever. And the true cause of all this mischief was, that some false Prophets
and seducers joined themselves with these thieves. But so soon as they were
come unto them, Felix made them die as seditious persons. Amongst them was a
renowned Egiptian, of whom Josephus makes mention in his Antiquities. This
deceiuer persuaded the common people to ascend with him into the Mount Oliuet;
saying that from thence he would show himself to them, and that by his
commandment the walls of Jerusalem should fall: Act. 4.21. toward the end.
lib. 1. 2. Chap. 29. of the Jews wars. Eusebius.
and promised them that thereby they might enter. Felix hereof advertised, made
arm certain people, and with a great number of horsemen rushed upon that
disguised band, which was of thirty thousand, and slew about 400. of them,
and took 500. alive. In the mean while this abuser escaped and was never
after seen. Those thieves again persuaded the people to make war against
the Romans, and no more to yield them obedience. They burnt and pilled such
Villages as resisted them.

The year 56. S. Paul went to Jerusalem, Act. 19.20.21.22.23. and 24.
where he was Felix.

Domitius Nero succeeded in the Empire, and reigned fourteen years, two
months, and certain days. He was as very cruel man, and insatiable in
whooredome and Homicide, even in sleying his own mother, his sister, his
brother, Church.
his wife Octauia, and an other wife called Pompeia, whom he slew with a blow
of his foot. He killed also his Schoolemaister Seneca, and a Roman Consul,
named Atticus, the better to enjoy his wife called Statilia.

Aziarius, King of the Emesicians, Chap. 2. of the Iudaik war.
his brother succeeded him. See Josephus. And Nero gave the principallitie of
the less Armenia, to Aristobulus the Son of Herod King of Calcyde: and the
Kingdom of Agrippa the younger, was thereby greatly increased.

Felix was departed from Judea, there was a great sedition in Cesaria, which is
in Palestine, where a great number of Jews were slain. The same year S. Paul
was sent prisoner to Rome. There was a sedition also in the other Cesaria. Act.
27. Festus.
And Festus succeeded Felix in the government of Judea.

The year 59. in the Town of Thoulouze which is in Gaul, there was a very
renowned Rethorician called Statius Surculus. The same year the Town of
Magunce was repaired by the Romans.

Chro. Eus.
The year 60. In Rome was a great earthquake, and an Nero exercised his
Parracides and whooredomes.

Italy, in the time of Fonteius and Vispanus Consuls, Julius. Solinus. Chap. 6.
did run forty thousand paces, from noone till the evening. The same year
there was an Eclipse of the Sun the last day of April.

Albinus was made Governor of Judea.

Hist. Eccle. Lib. 2. Chap. 23.
The year 63. James the brother of the Lord Jesus, which was called Just,
accounted Bishop of Jerusalem, was slain by the Jews. The high Priest Ananias
thinking to recover liberty, caused him to be called into judgment, and
accused him as a corrupter of Moses Law. Some say he was cast down from the
top of the Temple, and as he prayed for them which put him to death, he was
strooken with a Fullers Bow on the head, whereof he dyed. Then did Albinus
govern Judea, succeeding Festus.

The year 64. a Thunderbolte fell before Nero his Table. The same year Saint
Mark the Evangelist died, Osnald. Mic.
which was the eight year of the reign of Nero, he was burnt for the Gospel
in Alexandria which is in Egypt, where he preached. At this time Agrippa
augmented the Town of Cesaria Phillippe, and called it Neronia.

The year 65. after S. Mark his death, Hist. Eccle. Lib. 2. chapter 23
Annianus was ordained the first bishop of Alexandria, and governed the
Church 22. years.

The year 66. began the first persecution, which was Nero, and endured till
his death. By the commandment of this tyrant, Crime imposed upon the
Christians.
fire was lightened in the Town of Rome, and that none should say it was his
act, he laid the fault upon the Christians, and made them die of many kinds
of deaths. They that called themselves Christians (which name was as odious
unto all men as if they had been enemies of mankind) and they also which were
accused by the prisoners besides all other evils done unto them, endured also
this opprobry, The first persecution against the Christians.
that being covered with Beasts skins, they were with dogs torn in
pieces; Some were fastened to Crosses and Gallows. Others burnt with fire, in
so much that of them they made fires to clear and lighten the night. Cor.
Tacitus rehearses this.

After Festus under Nero, succeeded in the government of Judea, Albinus, and
after Florus, under whom the Jews began to fall into such rebellions and
dissentions, that neither menaces nor torments, exactions, nor occasions, could
repress them.

In Asia three Towns perished by an Earthquake: namely Laodicea, Hierapolis,
and Colossa. All Towns which had received the Gospel whilst S. Paul Linus.
lived, who had instructed them partly by writings, partly by his Disciples, as
by Epaphras.

A mirror of Gods judgment, who cannot endure the despising of his word.

Jerusalem, as it was assembled was divinely admonished and transferred into
the Town of Pella, which is beyond Iordaine. This same year Vespasian was
ordained by Nero to set an order in the Country of Judea: who did many things
worthy of memory.

Florus, because of his great cruelty, whereof Josephus makes mention, Lib. 2.
Chap. 13. and Egesippus, Lib. 3. Chap. 4.



Linus succeeded S. Peter. S. Hierome, Nicephorus. Euthalius Deacon and others
say, that S. Peter was crucified the 14. year of Nero, which was the last of
his reign, and the 27. year after the conversion of S. Paul. How then could
this be, that Linus should succeed him in the Apostolic Sea as they say,
seeing Linus was Martired a year before S. Peter? For so is it rehearsed by a
certain Monk restorer of the Papaltie, who made two great books of Counsel
in the Town of Colongne. Hereby may we see how assured the foundation of
Popery is. If Linus were the high Priest or sovereign Bishop of Rome in the
time of Nero, it is certain S. Peter was not there. But to prove the
Institution of Popish ceremonies by the example of the Elders, they say that
Linus ordained that women should not enter into the Church unless their heads
were covered: yet that was not an ordinance of Linus, 1. Cor. 11.
but of S. Paul.

There is a great diversity in the Romish Catalogues of Bishops, that hardly
can the writers thereof be agreed in their differences, which is a great
argument that the Papaltie of Rome leanes upon uncertain arguments. Galba.
You may also see this in Cletus.

This year Vespasian war sent by Nero against the Jews.

Nero hated of all, and searched to be slain, killed himself, of the age of
thirty and two years, and the year of his Empire fourteen.

Galba Sergius succeeded, of the age of 43. years, and reigned seven months.
He became cruel, Auaricious, a Glutton, and a Sodomite.

He was slain of his soldiers by his successor Otho, in the place where men
pleaded causes. His head was presented to the soldiers, and exposed for a
derision and mockery.

Otho the eight Emperor, like in all vices to Nero. Otho.
He reigned three months. He slew himself with a stroke of his Poinard in
his left Pap, after the battle he lost against Vitellius.

Vitellius Spinter the ninth Emperor, Vitellius Spinter.
reigned about seven or eight months. He was a great whooremoonger, cruel,
bloody, and a Glutton. It is rehearsed of him, that at one supper he was
served at his Table with two thousand sundry sorts of Fishes, and seven
thousand sorts of flying Foul, he was so excessive.

He was miserably slain and drawn naked through the streets. And after he
had been launced and pierced with many Darts, was cast into Tiber. He was of
the age of 57. years.

The year 71. Ignatius was ordained the second Bishop Antioche. And in this
time all Mathematicians were driven out of Italy. Fabius Quintilianus was
drawn from Spain by the Emperor Galba, and brought to Rome.

Vespasian the tenth Emperor of Rome reigned nine years: Vespasian.
a man wise, prudent, loyal and affable, modest and patient: one only vice
brought dishonor unto him, namely Avarice, Covetousness or inordinate desire.
and covetousness of silver, yea even to impose tribute upon urine, saying.
That of all things the smell of gain is good. As he died he said; that an
Emperor should die sitting.

Vespasian.
The year 72. the City of Jerusalem was besieged by Suetonius.
There has been no Nation (that we can gather by any History) that has been
so much tormented as that of the Jews. So much the more familiarly the Lord
declared his mercies toward this ingrate and hard hearted people, so much the
more was it needful he should visibly show horrible signs of his anger upon
it. No woe nor trouble could be imagined, whereof God gave not some proof unto
this miserable Natition. The recital whereof may serve us for a glass to
show us what end such may attend as are obstinate and mockers of the grace of
God, such also as enharde^ themselves against his bounty. After their revolt
which was the 12. year of Nero, the Romans ceased not by the space almost of
six years to power horrible evils upon the Country of Judea. Although a man
speak not of the waste of the country, who can possibly esteem as belongs
thereunto the only miseries of that Town? For before it was besieged by the
Romans, it was horribly afflicted by domesticke enemies, with so many factions
of audatious Thieves which fought one against an other which of the^ should
commit most rapines, Three bands in Jerusalem.
murders, oppressions: And not one of al those bands (which were divided into
three principal: that is to say Zelators, 1. such as followed Ilion, and
thirdly them of Simon the Gadarean, and of his son Eleazar) thought he
maintained his place well, but in surmounting one an other in all manner of
wickedness. And finally, their rage was so overflowed, that there needed no more
but only to have an opinion of modesty and true religion, for to be put to
death. They sought one with an other who should be the first to sley the Rich,
to rob them of their goods. To sley the common people, such as were poor and
of base condition, was but to take away such as were unprofitable, and such as
were like to be but a charge to the Town already threatened with a siege, and
to prepare the Town to sustain a longer siege. To give to know by any one
word, or to show any countenance of grief at such unbridled license to all
evils which were then, this was called treason, and to complot with the
Romans. When any lamented his parent or friend wrongfully slain, he was
straight brought to some grievous torment. To pollute the Sanctuary by
slaughters and murders, this was to combat for the conservation of the Temple
and the Countries Religion. To take away the sacred money out of the Temple and
dispend it upon dissolute villains, was to borrow their necessaries for the
defense of the Ceremonies ordained of God. It was held a crime worthy of
death, to seek to withdraw himself out of the midst of these euilles. And
they which remained in the Town besides other miseries and public griefs,
were constrained to see before their eyes, their wives, their children, and
their goods, to serve the appetite of all sorts of villains. Finally, this
miserable people needed not fear any new oppression of the Romans, wherewith
before they had not been tormented even by themselves, which called themselves
their defenders. But after the Town was besieged by the Romans, Horrible
famine.
there was so horrible a famine that during the siege eleven hundred thousand
men dyed. Besides such as were slain by the enemies at assaults, and such as
were slain when the Town was taken: and during that war, there was about
97. thousand taken. Some part of them were sold, others were carried to great
Towns to serve for Princes pastimes, in exposing them to beasts to be torn
in pieces: Others were put into some paled park, where they fought till they
slew one an other: Others were led into ^ands, there to spend their lives. The
14. day of April of the foresaid year, Titus laid siege before Jerusalem,
during the feast or Easter, the year of Christ Bezeth. The 12. day of the said
month the second wall was again taken, with the base part of the town, The
taking of Jerusalem.
from whence the Romans had before been chased. The 21. of the said month
having gotten 2. parts of the town, he gently invited the^ to require peace,
but seeing they would not, he caused his platformes to be set up against the
fort called Antonia, nie the 3. wall which the Jews burnt: but a new wall was
made by ye Romans, environed all the Town to hinder the jews from flying and
seeking victuals. The first day of July Titus moved with compassion for the
people which suffered and endured so much by the hard obstinacy of some,
began to beat Antonia and the third wall. The sixth day fell one part of the
wall of the Fortress, on that side where the Jews had a conueyance out of the
Town. The eight day of the month of August, the Jews repressed by great
outrages and blows of arrows, Heralds were sent by Titus to make them harken
unto peace, that the Temple might have been spared. The temple was taken by
force, and against the Edict and defense of Titus, it was burnt. The 20. day he
began to batter the high Town, which is called the City of David, after the
Jews had again refused peace. The seventh day of September this high Town
was taken, whereof the Temple was the Fortress, as Antonia was the defense of
the Temple. The eight day of the said month, all the Town was put to fire and
blood.

The 24. day of October, Titus celebrated the day of his brother Domitian his
Nativity, in a Taritine Town of Cesaria: and there he made pastimes of diverse
sorts, wherein were brought about three thousand Jews Captives. Some were
dispatched by beasts, others were set in order of battle to sley one an
other. The like was done in Berith, a Town of Siria, the 27. of November.
Where Titus celebrated the Nativity of his Father Vespasian.

When we hear this Summarie recital (which is not the tenth part of the evils
and fearful calamities that this miserable Nation endured, Romans 10.
) let us not stray into foolish imaginations, but think with our selves, if
God spared not the natural branches, what shall become of us. Let us behold
the benignity and severity of God. His severity upon them that are fallen:
his benignity upon us, which are planted in the place of the Jews.

This same year Vespasian caused them to be sought which were of the family of
David: for that there was a great persecution against the Jews.

Cesennius Governor of Siria, chased Antiochus King of Comageniens out of his
kingdom, and sent him captive to Rome. Titus.


In this time Lucilius Bassus was sent Ambassador into Judea.

There happened a sedition in Alexandria, wherein many Jews were slain.

Achaia, Licia, Rhodes, Bizantum, Samathrachia, Cilicia, and Comagene, which
before were free and under the jurisdiction of Kings, friends, and confederates
of the Romans, were made servants and reduced into Provinces.

Ascanius Pedianus an Historiographer flourished at this time, who in the 73.
year of his age became blind, and lived yet 12. years in great honor.

An Earthquake overthrew three Towns in Ciprus.

Titus the eleventh Emperor Vespasians son, reigned

Linus Bishop of Rome by the commandment of the Consul Saturnine was beheaded
upon false accusation for Art Magic. Linus. Naucler.


The 2. year of Titus, horrible things happened in Campania (which is now
called Terra Dilauoro, the Land of labor.) The mount Vesnue which looks
toward the Sea on Naples Coast, and has coming out of it as it were great
springs of fire, burst in sunder at the top, and cast out so great flames that
it burnt the Towns adjacent, with the men therein.

There came also at Rome a little time after when all men were ignorant of that
which happened in Campania, great and horrible calamites, in so much that many
were of opinion that all things would be overthrown and the Sun would fall
on the earth, for the multitude of ashes and smoke which were dispearsed in
the air.

The year following Titus went to see the calamity which was come, and in the
mean while many things were burnt at Rome, and the fire came out of the earth.
For the Bathes of Agrippa, the Temple of Serapis and Ifis, the Theater of
Balbus, Cletus.
the Pantheon, the Parkes and many other places were altogether consumed with
fire, whereby may be coniectured of others which perished by the same fire.
Dion recites all this at large.

Chro. Eusebius.
The Amphitheatre was now builded at Rome by Titus.

These things are recited, to the end that by the knowledge of such judgments
of God, we may learn to fear him.

Cletus a Roman Bishop of Rome, governed a 11. years. Peter, saying that such
visitation was much better then a fasting two years. This was the first Bishop
that put in his Letters Salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem.

There are none of the Elders which make mention of this Cletus, neither do
they sufficiently expound, if Cletus and Anacletus were two, or both one. Only
Damasus speaks, but yet so confusedly, that there can be no agreement of the
time.

Titus the Emperor, of the age of 42. years, nigh to his death lamented sore;
Saying, must I die and never deserved it? He was deified by the authority of
the Senate after his death.

There you may see how the Panim Gods came, created, and forged by the wills of
men.

Josephus an Historiographer and a Jew, flourished at this time. He was Duke
of the Hebrews Host, and being Titus his prisoner, was set at liberty: which
he used, in composing seven books of the Iewdaicall History, which he
presented to Vespasian and Titus, who set up an Image of him at Rome.

The 72. year, which was the second year of the reign of Titus, Linus having
governed the Church of Rome 12. years, Anacletus, who was the second Bishop of
Rome. Ireneus and Eusebius do witness this, without making any mention of
Cletus, Anacletus.
which some say was the successor of Linus.

Domitian the 12. Emperor, reigned 15. years and six months. This man was
exceeding wicked, cruel, adulterous, chollericke, a coward, proud, a rauener.
Domitian.
He committed Incest with his brothers daughter, whom he ravished and took out
of her husbands hands.

Three Virgin Vestalls were buried alive for whoordome. Eusebius.


Domitian having by public Edicts commanded that he should be called Lord and
God, caused Images of himself of gold and silver to be erected.

He cast out of Rome all Philosophers: Fasc. Tem.
he sent into exile many Senators and Nobles, and some he slew. He builded the
Pantheon at Rome.

He stirred the second persecution against the Christians, The second
persecution against the Christians.
and caused all such to be put to death as he found to be of the stock of
David. For he feared the coming of Christ. Afterward he caused the persecution
to cease.

S. Denis, Rusticus, and Eleutherus, preached the Gospel in France.

The year 87. Albilius was constituted the second Bishop Alexandria, and was
Bishop 12. years.

The year 88. Domitian by the conduction of Fuscus passed over Danaw, and
led his Army against Dorpaneus, King of the Goths or of the Dares. The
Goths overcame the Romans, and Fuscus was slain, and the Camp pilled or
spoiled.

Clement a Roman the fourth Bishop of Rome, ruled nine Notaries and
pronotaries,
their constancy and patience, for example and perpetual remembrance.

Domitian of the age of 45. years was slain in his Palace by the coniuration
of his familiar friends, and consent of his wife. He was buried without any
honor, and all his Images cast down.

The Senate disanulled all his ordinances, and called again

S. John the Evangelist from his exile of Pathmos (which is an I Will in the sea
Egea: which is betwixt Asia the great, The death of S. John the Evangelist.
and the less) returned into Ephesus, where he died of the age of an hundredth
years or there abouts, and was there buried.

Nerua Cocceius now old, was made the 13. Emperor, The Chron. of the Emper.
and reigned one year, 4. months. He died at the age of 71. years. Clement.
Being Emperor, he pronounced al Christians absolved, whether accused or
banished, and called them back. He was wont to say that men must rather
respect a man's virtue then his race or country. He was by the Senate deified.

Now rose there many heresies in the Church after the death of the Apostles.

Traian a Spaniard the 13. Emperor, reigned 19. years, 6. months, and 15.
days.

He was greatly praised of Historiographers as a debonaire and gentle Prince,
yet he persecuted the Christians. Under him was Clement martyred.

Eusebius.
Four Towns perished in Asia, and two in Greece, with Earthquakes.

The third persecution. Suppl. Chro.
The third persecution made against the Christians in the time of Traian. He
feared some hurt should have come to the Roman Empire by the increase of
Religion.

There were each day a great number of Martyrs slain. In so much that Pliny
the younger having then the administration of a Province, namely Bithinia, and
seeing the great number of men which then dyed, writ to the Emperor how each
day many thousands of persons were put to death, yet was there not found that
they committed any fault, neither did any thing against their Roman laws: but
only for that they sung certain Hymns and Psalms before day, Singing of
Psalms ancient.
to a certain God they called Christ. And finally, that Adulteries, Homicides,
Thefts, and other crimes, were prohibited them, and did keep themselves from
such faults, living carefully according to common Laws. Whereunto the Emperor
gave answer and commandment to make no more any Inquisition against
Christians. Yet was not thereby the occasion taken away from them, which had a
will to show cruelty against Christians.

Fasci. temp.
Timotheus a Martyr in this time.

Anacletus 5. Bishop of Rome borne in Greece, an Athenian, ruled two months
and ten days.

We now enter into the times which were incontinent after the Apostles, and
take their beginning in the kingdom of Traian.

Anacletus ordained that no Clarke should wear a beard, Anacletus
Naucle, Now none but the Priest communicates.

Suppl. Chro.


and commanded all the faithful that were at the administration of the Lords
Supper, either to communicate or to be driven out of the Temple.

Eusebius places Anacletus in the place of Cletus, after Linus; and after
Clement, immediately he makes mention of Euaristus, which is the cause of the
discord that is found amongst Historians in this place.

Anacletus ordained that the Clergy two times in the year should have
Sinodes or Congregations, Sinode.
for the affairs of the Church.

In his writings amongst other things he admonishes the people to carry
honor and reverence to their Ministers, and to support them. He that speaks
evil of a Minister says he, In the first volume of Council.
speaks evil of Christ; and he judges him to be separate from Christ. He
was put to death under Traian.

Heresies at this time grieved the Church within, Heretics.
and public persecutions without.

1. Cerinthus the Heretic, Suppl. Chron.
held that Moses law must be kept alone.

Also that Christ was not risen again, S. Aug.
but that he should rise again.

He made the Kingdom of Christ carnal. Eusebi, Sup. Chapter


2. Ebion held Christ to be a pure man, engendered as others: And he called S.
Paul, the Apostle of the Law.

3. Menander, a Nigromancian, etc.

4. Basilides, Eusebi.
these did infinitely spread their imaginations touching the procreation of
their Gods and Angels. And to yield the more astonishment, they used disguised
and barbarous words.

5. The Nicholaites would women to be common. Histo. Ecclec. Lib. 3. cap. 26.


6. Saturnin following Simon Magus, said also that men might use women
indifferently, as the Nicholaites.

Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, Policarpus Bishop of Smirna, Ignatius Bishop of
Antioche, good and Catholic Pastors, Disciples of S. John the Evangelist.
Euaristus.


See how God destituted not his Church of true Pastors to withstand Heretics.

Anno. Christ. 121.
Euaristus the 6. Roman Bishop ruled 8. or nine years.

He ordained that seven Deacons should be chosen in every City, Eusebius.
which should mark and keep by the Bishop as he preached and taught the
people. He appointed them also for witnesses of the word of God, Fasci. Temp.
that none might impose that he had preached evil against the truth.

He ordained that marriages should be publicly solemnized in Churches.
marriage pub. like.


That the Church should obey his Bishop, and that the Bishop should not leave
his Church during his life, no more then the woman her husband.

There be two Epistles found of him. In the first he makes that Apostolic
seat head of the Church: whereunto he wills that all doubtful affairs should
be brought: yet in his second Epistle he contradicts it.

In Gallatia three Cities perished with an Earthquake. Eusebius.

Euaristus was Martired the last year of the Empire of Traian.

The Pantheon of Rome burnt with lightning.

Eusebius. Lucian.
Lucian the Apostate and Atheist composed his dialogues under Traian.

The town of Antioch was so shaken, that even the Mountains nigh did shake
and quake, yea even the Mount Cassius, the highest in Siria, the Floods there
dried up, and the earth sounded in a strange manner. Tiles falling clattered in
such sort, and the cries of men overthrown were so fearful, and with dust
the obscurity was so thick, that there was never seen or heard speak of so
strange things. The Emperor Traian was then there, and likewise people of all
Nations of the Roman Empire.

Dion writes this horrible confusion, Alexander
and the calamities which proceeded this Earthquake which happened at Antioch.

Ignacius Bishop of Antioch was led prisoner to Rome to be cast unto beasts,
and so to be aspectacle unto the people. Eusebius.
As he went from Siria to Rome, and passed through the Country of Asia, in all
places where he came he preached to the people and Churches the Christian
faith, exhorting them to persevere and keep themselves from the infection of
Heretics which then began to spring, in carefully keeping the doctrine
received of the Apostles.

The cause was, that in Antioch having reprehended the Idolatry of Traian, he
was apprehended as one seditious and guilty of treason, and was given in
charge to 10. soldiers, or rather tormenters, to be led to Rome and be put to
Lions: whereof Ignacius himself says. I have had to fight with beasts from
Siria to Rome, by sea, by land, night and day amongst 10. Leopards, etc.
Ireneus in his fifth book speaking of Ignacius, being condemned to beasts, he
said (says he) I am the wheat of Jesus Christ, and shall be grinded with the
teeth of beasts, to the end I may be made the bread of God.

Alexander the 7. Bishop of Rome, was a Roman, and governed 10. years; namely
from the 12. year of Traian, til the third of Adrian.

Many things are spoken of the integrity of his life, whereby many of the
Roman Senators were drawn to the Christian faith, seeing in him virtues truly
Episcopal: De cense. did. 2. cap. in Sacramento. Did. 10.102. to. Si quib.
10, Did. cap. Relatum.
yet it is attributed unto him, that he should first bring in new ceremonies of
the Church, as the holy water so keep in houses and Churches against the
devil, and for remission of sins: Also to mingle wine and water together at
the Lords supper: Also the Asperges upon the people: Also that Bread should be
without Leaven, and not common bread as before. They make him the first, which
by decree excommunicated them who resisted Apostolic messengers. The first
addition to the Lords Supper.
He ordained that no Clarke should be accused and drawn before a secular
Judge: he is said to be the first which added to the Lords supper (Caena pridie
quam pateretur,) and made that ouerture to his successors to add thereunto:
Adrian.
which have not since ceased until the whole Supper of the Lord was corrupted
and changed. 2. Tess. 2. de conse. did. 2. cap. Sufficit.
Also he ordained to celebrate but once a day.

The Popes afterward forged their decretalls.
Note here generally for the Bishops which were first at Rome, that many
Epistles have been attributed unto them, which mention greater number of
Ceremonies then there is in other Churches, and such as were unknown to them
which writ in that time, which made them then suspected. For the Popes which
came after, have made those first Bishops their buckler for authors of their
lies and dreams.

Alexander received the Crown of Martyrdom under the Emperor Adrian, by the
command of his Governor Aurelian, who demanded of Alexander why he held his
peace when the fire was lightened about him to burn him. He answered that he
was speaking to God (signifying that he prayed) and therefore it was not
lawful for him to speak unto men. Honorius and Nauclerus Dion rehearses of
the Emperor Traian, that before he died his members were retracted, and al his
body senseless. His senses also were dulled, and after that, he became to be
full of the dropsy, and greatly swelled. He finally died in Selinion, a Town
of Cicile. Some say his body was brought to Rome and deified by the Senate
after his death, after the manner of the Romans.

Although this Prince had great politic virtues, yet is he to be placed in
the third rank of the cruel enemies and persecutors of the Church of God.

Anno Christ. 101.
Adrian the 16. Emperor, reigned 22. years, gentle, and cunning in all
knowledges. He persecuted the Christians. But when he knew the truth of their
life, he caused the persecution to cease.

Suppl. Chro.
Quadratus Bishop of Athens, the Apostles Disciple, presented an Apologeticke
book to the said Adrian, in defense of the Christian Faith.

Aristides a Philosopher of Athens, a faithful man, made a like Book:
whereupon Adrian sent to Minutius Fundanus, Sixtus.
Proconsul of Asia, that he should no more persecute the Christians. But if
they did any thing against laws, he would that he should therein deal
according to the quality of the crime. And if any slaunderoufly accused them,
he commanded such should be chastised for their malice.

Nicomedia and Nice were ruinated by an Earthquake, and afterward restored by
the liberality of Adrian. Eusebius. Chro.

All evils which came to men were laid upon the Christians, saying they came
all for their cause, whether they were Earthquakes, war, or other calamities.

Sixtus or Xistus a Roman, 8. Bishop of Rome, ruled about 10. years. Not to
touch Challices.
He decreed that none should touch the consecrated ornaments, Vessels,
Challices, etc. unless they were Churchmen.

He added to the Communion of the Eucharist. Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus
Deus Sabbath.

He granted this privilege to Clerks, that they might appeal from their
Bishop to the Apostolic Sea.

In his Decretalls he is called Archbishop of the Roman Church. Item
universal Bishop of the Apostolic Church.

About this time, those words Archbishop, Metropolitan, and Clergy, began
to be used in Epistles.

He appointed certain punishments for Priests or Ministers that were negligent
in baptizing Children before their deaths.

At this time the Supper of the Lord was called Eucharist: The words Sacrifice
or Mass were not yet brought in. And although Ireneus sometimes called the
Eucharist, Oblation, he declares his meaning therein in his 4. Book and 34.
Chapter. The word Oblation.
We make unto him an Oblation says he: not as to him which stands in need
thereof; but as giving him thanks for the good he has done unto us. And
again he wills also that we give offerings at the Altar: and often, and
without ceasing. But the Altar is in heaven (says he) and thither must we
address our prayers and Oblations.

It may well be that then this word Oblation was in common use, because the
custom then was to offer Loaves of bread in great abundance for the use of the
Supper: wherewith the Ministers lived, and the poor were nourished.

The last destruction of the Jews.
The Jews surprised with a new rage, began again to take arms against the
Romans. Dion says the occasion thereof was for that Adrian had builded there
a Temple to Jupiter, and placed there Idols of the Gentiles. The Jews chose
for their Captain, Barrochabas the Jew.
Barrochabas, who named himself the son of the Star. This man exercised
great cruelty against Christians, because they would not join with the
Jews: But Adrian repressed those seditious people, and famished them, and
took away their waters, and finally discomfited them nigh to Bethera, a little
Town by Jerusalem, and in one only battle he slew fifty eight thousand
men. After Nicephorus Ancelme, speaks of fifty thousand Jews slain, fifty
holds taken, and nine hundred eighty five Villages destroyed, as well by
famine, as by fire and blood, and all the rest of the Jews miserably driven
from Jerusalem into far Countries, and sold over all the world.

The Emperor Adrian would not that the City of Jerusalem should any more
retain his ancient name, but having again made it, he called it by his own
name Aelia Capitolina. Honorius and Eusebius say that he made Edicts be
published, whereby it was not lawful for the Jews, no not so much as to
regard a far off their Country of Judea.

The first so terrible a destruction might have sufficiently taught them that
the kingdom was taken from them as the Prophets had foretold. But God would
that a second time they should feel a punishment almost as horrible as the
first.

The Christians after dwelt in Palestine with some assurance, and there had
Churches.

Sixtus sent many to preach the faith in France, he was afterward martyred
under Adrian. Telesphorus.


Pernicious heresies now did spring, Saturnin, Basilides, Heresies in the
Church.
Carpocrates, Valentia, and Tatien, tore in pieces the doctrine of God, forging
many Gods, and denying the humanity of Christ.

Valentine and Martian forged that Christ brought from heaven his humane flesh.

Martian said there was two beginnings, the one good, and the other evil.

Montanus denied the Divinity of Christ, and affirmed of himself that he was
the holy Ghost.

They admitted and allowed whoredoms and villainous filthiness against
marriage. Epiphanius.


Many were turned from the true doctrine by these heresies and blasphemies
which proceeded from those horrible monsters, Instruments of Satan.

Telesphorus 9. Bishop of Rome a Grecian, ruled sixteen years of the time of
Adrian and Antonine. It is attributed unto him that he should enjoin
Churchmen to abstain from flesh 7. weeks before Easter. The Decretall
likewise attributed unto him, makes mention of Clerks, but not of lay people;
yet after by succession of time, Lent became observed of all. He instituted
three celebratio^s of Christ's nativity, one at midnight, an other at the point
of day, and the last at three. He added Gloria in excelsis Deo etc. Some say it
was S. Hillary others Symmacus. This hymn seems to have bin written against
the Arrians, as shall be said hereafter. And the fourth Council of Toledo,
Chap. 12. makes mention that this Cauticke was made by the Ecclesiastical
Doctors. Henry Bullinger Lib. 2. of the beginning of his Decad. Chap. 7.

He ordained also that none should presume to celebrate in the morning before
3. a clock. In this Decretall he is called Archbishop of Rome.

Carpocrates an heretic, was the inuentor of a Sect and manner of people
called Gnostici: Gnostiques.
For he taught them secrets of Magic, and dreams of love, which came by
diuellishillusio^. Many hereby were deceived and led to destruction. They which
were not yet instructed, seeing the execrable life of those villains which
called themselves Christians, would therefore abolish the Christian faith as if
all were alike. Adrian.
And all the slanders wherewith they charged the Christians, namely that they
were cruel, and that they meddled with all women carnally without any regard of
blood or parentage, yea that they did eat little children, came not but from
those pernicious heretics.

So it falls out at this day: For the errors of Anabaptists and Libertines are
without difference attributed unto such as follow the Gospel, and with a
common name they are wrongfully called Lutherans.

Adrian builded a Temple and a Sepulcher unto Antinous, whom he had wickedly
abused in his life, and ordained that men should every year celebrate the
plays and pastimes called with his name Antinoens. He also founded a City of
the said Antinous name, A Buggerer, worshipped as God.
which he called Antinoe. Where for fear of the Emperor, Antinous is
worshipped as God, although men knew what a man he was.

Adrian died very miserably; There came unto him a great flux of blood: he
was also taken with great pain and fell to the dropsy: he assayed by Arts
Magic to draw that water out of his body: but nothing helped him, neither
ceased the bloody Flux. Sopartianus recites, that he called of his Physician
for poison, and seeing he would not give it him, he demanded a knife,
promising great things to him that would deliver him one. The death of Adrian.
He dyed of the age of 62. years, having no member in his body which was not
vexed with torments. Aurelius Victor.

He was punished with blood, for the blood he shead.

The persecutions in Asia were exceeding great. See Euse. Lib. 5. Chap. 15.
where at length he describes the Martyrdom of Policarpus. Lib. 4. Chap. 23.
The Athenians offended at so great persecutions wherein they had lost Publius
their Bishop, almost revolted from the faith.

Torments and cruelties against Christains.
There was no torment nor punishment that the Instruments of the devil could
devise, whereof the Christians were not judged worthy: Pius.
for they were espied in and without their houses. They cried against them in
all public places. They whipped them, trailed them, stoned them, pilled their
goods, imprisoned them, plates of iron were applied to their naked flesh: They
locked them in an Instrument of Torture even to the fifth point, they were put
in obscure and low places in prison: Some strangled them, some exposed them to
beasts, and other infinite torments. The dead bodies in prison, after they were
cast into the fields, they set Dogs there to keep them that they might not
be buried.

In these hard torments Christians gave courage one to another, and were very
careful to take such order as none should fall from their profession, either
by infirmity, or for want of ability to endure the torments.

The number of Martyrs of this time were too great to be recited in this little
Treatise. But Iustine, Eusebius, Basile the great, and other ancient Doctors,
have carefully set them down in writing.

These examples ought to encourage us constantly to maintain the truth of the
Gospel.

Antonius Pius a Gentile, An. Christi. 123.

In the book he writ to Strapula.


Emperor 16. reigned 23. years or thereabout, a man benign and modest. He
said often that he had rather save a Citizen, then to sley a thousand of his
enemies.

Tertullian witnesses that he was not altogether gentle toward the
Christians, and especially in the beginning of his reign: When Arrius Antonius
(says he) ceased not to persecute in Asia, the Christians assembling in a
company, presented themselves before the Judicial seat. And after he had
sent some few of them to the Iibbet, he said to the rest, O miserable men, If
you have an affection to die, have you not cords to hang yourselues? or high
places to cast your selves down?

Higinius an Athenian, a Philosophers son, Higinius.
governed the Church of Rome 4. years.

He ordained that Churches should be dedicated by solemn ceremony. Item that
the number of Temples should neither be augmented nor diminished without the
consent of the Metropolitan. See the Decretall. De conse. did. pri. ca. Omnes
Bacilicae. Pope.
This was the first who entitled himself Pope, in his second Decretall.

De conse. did. 1. ca. Lignae.
He for bad that Summers, Sparres, Tyles, and other matter of Temples, should
be after applied to any profane use, but burnt or given to other poor
Churches and Monasteries, and not to the uses of Lay men.

He instituted that at Catechism, Baptism, and confirmation, there should be
a Godfather or Godmother. De conse. did. 4. ca. In cat.

36. Hom, 10. cap. 1. Si qua nud.
He ordained that if any woman came to the second marriage by whom she had
issue, that that issue could not be married to the consanguinitie of the first
husband until the fourth degree.

Item, that no Metropolitan except the Pope, shall condemn any of his
Clergy, Priest, Suffragane or Bishop of his Province, unless first the cause
be handled and known in the Council of other provincial Bishops, otherwise
the sentence not to be vailable. 8. q. 3. c. Salus in omnibus.

Galen the Physician flourished at this time.

Valentine the heretic a Platonician, denied the resurrection of the flesh.

S. August.
He affirmed that Christ took no humane flesh off the Virgins womb, but that
he passed through it as through a conduit.

Cerdon the Stoike, said at Rome that the holy Ghost descended not upon the
Apostles, but upon himself.

Note here the saying of Tertullian, namely, that the Philosophers are
Patriarchs of heretics.

Martian the Stoike a follower of Menander, made two contrary principles.

This Pope (seeing he named himself so) was a learned man, Anicetus.
Supp. Chro.
and made a book entitled De Trinitate and vnitate Dei.

Pius first of that name 11. Pope of Rome, an Italian of Aquilia, ruled at Rome
a 11. years.

Some say he ordained that Easter should be celebrated upon the Sunday, by the
persuasion of Hermes, Easter celebrated upon a revelation made to Hermes.
who said it had been revealed unto him by an Angel, in likeness of a
shepherd. And this ordinance was after confirmed by many Pope.

That he decreed punishments for Ecclesiastical persons which administered the
Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ negligently. That is to say, that he
that by imprudency and negligently, let fall upon the earth any of the blood of
Christ (so speaks he) should do penance 40. days. If it fell upon the Altar,
3. days. If upon the Chalice cloth, 4. days. If on any other cloth, 9. days.
And that the said blood so fallen, should be licked, scraped or washed, and
after all burnt, and kept for the Sacristeres.

By little and little then the Roman seat began to forge ordinances.

Also that Virgins or Nuns should not take upon them the veil before the age
of 25. years.

Item, Swearing and blaspheming.
that if any Ecclesiastical person did swear or blaspheme he should be
deposed, and every Lay person excommunicated.

Anicetus 12. Pope a Sirian, ruled 10. or a 11. years, wise, and of good life.

Some attribute unto him that he ordained the Crown for Priests. Priests
Crown.


He was martyred under Marcus Aurelius.

In his time Egesippus an Hebrew came to Rome, and dwelt there until
Eleutherius.

Justinius a Christian Philosopher, writ a book in defense of Faith and
Religion, to the Emperor Antonius Pius, who also was much inclined to
maintain it.

He writ against Martian.

Marcus Aurelius.
Policarpus Bishop of Smyrna in Ionia, which is in Asia the less above
Ephesus, came to great age. Ireneus says that he was ordained Bishop by the
Apostles, and it is likely that he began his ministry the 2. or 3. of Traian.
S. Jerome in his Catalogue says he was placed there by S. John the Evangelist,
who dyed the year 68. after the passion of Jesus Christ as most say. Ireneus
recites of him, that one day as Marcian encountered him and said unto him; Take
knowledge with us. Policarp. answered him: I know thee for the first son of
Satan. And Ireneus says further: There are some have heard him say that John
the Disciple of Jesus went into Bathes to wash himself, and seeing Cerinthus
the heretic there, The company of heretics dangerous.
he went out, and washing himself saying: Let us fly from hence least this
house fall upon us, where Cerinthus enemy of the truth washes.

Note how the Disciples of the Apostles had this rule, not to communicate with
them which falsify the truth of the Gospel.

Whilst Policarpus was at Rome, he withdrew many from their heresies.

Marcus Aurelius, Antoninus Verus the brother of Antonius Pius, obtained the
Empire 18. years.

Lucius Verus his son in law, gave himself to dice, and to haunt the
Stews. Therefore was he sent into Siria, by Marcus Aurelius, Chro. of Emper.
and at last as some say poisoned. After some, he dyed of an Apoplexe. So
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus reigned alone.

The fourth persecution after Nero was stirred against the Christians by Marcus
Aurelius. The fourth persecution.
And as Eusebius says, many evils happened in Italy: great pestilence, war,
earthquakes, Inundations of waters, and a multitude of Grasshoppers.

In the mean while by the persecutions as it were continual, the Christians
affairs increased from day to day by the doctrine of the Apostles Disciples.
Whereof yet many then did live: that the Christian Religion took strong root
being thus bedeawed with the blood of Martyrs.

We must not here forget the sentence of Iustine spoken in a colloquie with
Trypheus. He says thus; Soter.
Men may each day perceive that we which believe in Christ cannot be astonished
nor turned back. Let them cut off our heads; Let them crucify us: Let them
expose us to beasts, to fires, or other torments: and so much more as men
torment us, so much more do the number of Christians increase. Even as when a
Vine is cut, it is but to make it more fertile: So the Vine which God has
planted and the Savior Jesus, that is his people, cannot but multiply by
torments, etc.

Melito Bishop of Sardis, writ to the Emperor for the Faith and Christian
Religion.

Apollinaris Bishop of Hierapolis, was at this time.

Theophilus Bishop of Antioche, writ against Martian.

Denis Bishop of Corinthe.

Iustus Bishop of Vienne, a Martyr for the Faith. Attalus, Blandina, Photin
Bishop of Lions, a Martyr also for the Faith.

Persecution in Asia.

The end of the life of Policarpus was at this time.

Marcus Antonius Verus, and the chief Governors of the Empire, caused such a
persecution that it came even to the Christians which dwelt in the Town of
Smyrna, whereof Policarpus was Bishop, and had been a long time, and was
there burnt, having served the Church of God about three score and ten
years, which was the seventh of this Emperor. Some say he was of the age of
four score and six years.

The Prayer of Policarpus before his death, is in the Eccleciast. History,
Book 4.

His bones taken out of the fire were laid in a Sepulcher.

Pionius Martyr.

Soter an Italian, 13. Pope, Anno Dom. 169.
held the seat about ten years. He endured many adversities, and in the
end was Martyred.

Montanus.
He ordained that none should celebrate without two men present.

That Nuns should carry Vailes on their heads.

Not to touch Chalices.
That they might not touch sacred Ornaments, as Chalices, Corporalles, and that
they should not Incense in the Temple, nor about Aultars.

In his second Decretall he calls himself Pope.

7.9.1. ca. Illud Diuini.
He instituted that each Priest doing his Office should have with him an other
Priest: If there chanced some sudden necessity to happen.

22. q. 4. ca. 51 quid.
He said that an oath made imprudenly which redounded to an evil end ought
not to be kept. For it were better says he to periure himself, then for
keeping his oath to fall into a greater crime.

At this time Peregrine a Philosopher, did publickely at Pise cast himself
into the fire upon vainglory.

Cataphryges
At this time began the Cataphryges heretics by Montanus with Priscilla, and
Maximilla.

S. Augustine.
They used in their Sacrifices a Childs blood, which they mingled with Flower
or with Bread. If the Child whose blood was drawn out dyed, they held him
for a Martyr. If he lived, for a great Priest.

Montanus was of Phrygia, of a Town called Ardaba.

He called himself the Paraclet. He forbadde marriage, and invented and
instituted Fastes.

Against those Heretics writ Apollinaris Hierapolitaine, and before him
Milciades and Apollonius.

Appelles the Disciple of Marcian, (whom Theodotius, called the great
Heretic) put a beginning to God. Also that Christ appeared in a fantastic
body.

Tatianus and his followers, Encratites and Seuerians, in this time.

These abstained from all kinds of flesh, and drunk no wine.

They blamed Marriage as well as fornication. They cast off the Epistles both
of S. Paul and S. Peter.

The Doctrine of Christian liberty began at this time to be greatly
obscured, and by little and little the error took increase.

For although yet there was no forbidding to use the good things or God, The
use of things indifferent.
yet the History of Alcibiades recited in Eusebius, Book 5. Chap. 3. shows
that by little and little men began to place a certain Religion in services
forged at pleasure.

This Alcibiades was one of the Martyrs which suffered death in Gaul, under
Marcus Antonius Verus the Emperor. Alcibiades.
He used to live so austerely as he did eat only bread, and drunk water.
In so much that being in prison he would use no other diet.

Attalus a Roman (a man renowned amongst the Martyrs) being also imprisoned,
showed Alcibiades a better way, and brought him to this point, that after he
used indifferently the creatures of God, without scruple and with thanksgiving.

Eleutherius borne in Greece at Nicopolis, Anno Domi. 179.
ruled at Rome 15. years and more.

He made a commandment against the heresy of the Seuerans which then
reigned, that no Christian for any ceremony should reject any sort of meats
whereof there is an accustomed use.

Also that none should be dismissed of his Office, unless first he be accused
and convinced of crime. That Bishops should finish nothing in an accusation
intended against a Bishop, without knowledge of the Pope: but they might
determine by Sentences the causes of other Church people.

That a Clarke may not be drawn into any cause but before his Bishop, from
whom (if there were cause of suspicion) he might appeal.

Christian Religion then greatly augmented, and came into far greater suertie
then before. Commodus


Lucius. Naucle.
Lucius King of England and his Country, received the Faith.

Many Nobles of Rome with their wives and children were converted and Baptized.

The said Lucius left his Kingdom, and went to preach the Faith first in
France, after in Almaine, where he was martyred.

Chroni. Eusebius.
Smyrna in Asia, whereof Policarpus was Bishop, was overthrown by Earthquake:
and for the repair of it, tributes and tallages were laid.

Naucler. Chron. of the Empe.
Commodus the 18. Emperor, reigned 13. years, cruel, luxurious, incestuous of
his own Neeses: he held in his Pallaice three hundredth Concubines, and three
hundredth buggering boys.

In a wicked rage he slew Lucilla his sister. Being at the hot houses, and but
pricked with a Flea, he cast the master of the house into the Furnace.

Ireneus Bishop of Lions, flourished.

The Temple of Serapis burnt in Alexandria.

The Capitol at Rome, and the Library, burnt by lightning.

Chro. Euse. Sup. Chro.
Apollonius a Senator of Rome, accused to be a Christian, presented to the
Senate a book, containing a defense of the Christians. He was beheaded,
because the Imperial law had so ordained it.

Hereby appears that Popes or Bishops of Rome were not as at this present
they are. Apollonius a man of authority could not shun the sentence of
death: only because he was a Christian, having so many friends at Rome.

Edict Imperial.
The Imperial Law then was, that such as were in Judgment convicted to be
Christians, should be punished with death.

Persecution.
Commodus made die many Noble persons.

It is recited in the History of the Martyrs of Gaul, Pertmax.
that the Painims solicited, and by torments constrained the servants of
Christians to confess of their masters things impossible once to be imagined.
Namely, that they did eat the flesh of little children: that they committed
paldiardizes and whoredoms, such as is unlawful to name. In so much as they
which before had used some moderation in Christians causes, gave themselves
greater license to exercise cruelty against them. This happened at Lions, and
at Vienne. Eusebius recites it in his Epistle of the faithful of Lions, and
of Vienne, in Chap. 1. of the 5. book.

At Rome the Palace and the Temple of Vesta, and of

Commodus the 13. year of his Empire was strangled, of Martia his chief
Concubine, who favored the Christians and other her friends which he had
condemned to death, because they showed him certain his insolences, but they
by this means prevented him: and little there wanted that the body of this
Tyrant was not drawn into Tyber by the common people.

Aelius Pertmax the ninteenth Emperor, held the Empire by the space of six
months. His covetousness caused his death for retaining his soldiers wages.
He was of the age of seventy years.

Didius Inhanus of Millaine, 20. Emperor, reigned four, Didius.
or seven, or two months as some say. Having slain his predecessor, he was
slain of his Successor of the age of 56. years. For his avarice he was hated
of all. Some say he was slain by a soldier of little estimation within his
Pallaice.

Victor Bishop of Rome, borne in Affricke, ruled ten years.

He ordained, Reconciliatio^
that such as would not reconcile themselves should be deprived of the Table of
the Lord.

He instituted, that unless it were in cases of necessity, Catholic
Baptism should be celebrated in the time of the feast of Easter. As we may see
in the first Decretall Epistle attributed unto him. Seuerus.


It were incredible (if all Historians did not witness it) that for the day of
celebratio^ of the feast of Easter, so great a schism should happen in the
Church, that of a dissension and question thereof, so terrible a war should
come, and all by this Victors means, who would needs have the feast of Easter
celebrated on the Sunday, because of the mystery of the resurrection: and
would not have the Fastes broken but on that day. Victor writ to Policrates,
who was a Ruler amongst the Bishops of Asia, and gave commandment in his
Letters, whereat all the Bishops of Asia were greatly offended.

Seuerus.
Septimus Seuerus Pertinax borne in Africa, 21. Emperor, reigned 18. years,
and dyed of the age of 70. years in England.

Many Sinodes were held in diverse Provinces touching the Feast of Easter, upon
what day it should be celebrated: and by common accord it was agreed that the
said Feast of Easter should be celebrated upon the Lords day, on which was
his Resurrection, and on no other day.

But the Bishops of the Country of Asia were of a contrary opinion: saying
that they should keep the customs of of their Ancestors touching that.

Which Victor seeing, would needs have deprived generally all the Churches of
Asia, and the nigh Provinces thereof, of the Churches communion and society,
and sent out Letters to declare them excommunicated: Ireneus Bishop of Lions.
whereof he was greatly blamed and reprehended. And especially of Ireneus
Bishop of Lions, by Letters which he sent unto him. That there was great folly
for the difference of a Ceremony to break the peace and union of Churches,
and to stir up Schism therein. Alleging to his purpose that the diversity
of Fastes never broke the union of Churches, and so no more should they in
this. Eusebius in the Ecclesi. Hist. Lib. 5. Chap. 5.

With this war the tranquililtie of Churches are troubled, and the doctrine
of Christian liberty obscured. The Romans ceased not to molest them of Asia
to subscribe to their opinion, and they became so outrageous therein, that they
which observed the Feast of Easter the fourteenth of the Moon, were called
Quatorzian Heretics, Quatorzians.
condemned as Nicepho. recites. Lib. 4. Chap. 39.

This Schism gave Montanus and other heretics occasion and ouerture to lift
up themselves at this time in Phrygia. They published certain laws touching
Fasts. Also to break marriages. Affirming that the holy Ghost had not taught
all to the Apostles, and that he had in himself the gift to confer the
graces of the holy Ghost. And other such blasphemies whereby he looked to come
unto some Primacie.

The Roman Bishops now became more audacious to forge new Ceremonies, yea
and that to force them upon other Churches.

The authority to excommunicate, converted into abuse, and so became despised,
because of not observing certain human traditions.

The dissension touching the observation of Easter, caused six principal
Counsels to be assembled. Eusebius. Lib. 5. Chap. 23.

Victor in his second Decretall calls himself Archbishop of the Roman and
universal Church. In the volume of Counsels. Of Tertullian


Tertullian a Priest of Carthage, who otherwise did well serve the Christian
Church, finally reuoulted, and drew him self unto the enraged Prophecy of
Montanus.

Saint Hierome alleges this the occasion: That Tertullian being led with
envy and hatred of the Church of Rome, could not at the last endure the
arrogancy thereof.

He held one error touching the Kingdom of Christ, and the voluptuous life of
the faithful in this world before the consummation of all things.

He maintained the superstitious and ridiculous Fastes of Montanus, calling
him in many places the Comforter.

He brought in extreme unction after Baptism, the sign of the Cross,
offering for the dead, and for feasts of Natiuities, and other the like dreams
of the Montanists. His writings witness that he was very desirous of
Martyrdom, and that a Christian man ought not only to bear it constantly, but
to purchase and seek it also.

Ammonius the Philosopher, Origens Schoole-maister, persuaded in the Christian
faith even until death. Although Porphirius say of him that he revolted.

Victor with good cause deprived of the communion of the Church, an heretic
called Theodotus, who was a blasphemer and prince of the heresy, which
afterward Antemon followed, and Paul Samosathonus revived. For he was the
first that durst say publicly at Rome that Jesus Christ was but pure man, of
man's seed procreated as well as others. See Nice. Lib. 4. chap. 21.

A Schism by the occasion of Montanus.
An other Schism or diversity of judgments touching the heresy of Montanus
and his companions, and also of Prisca and Maximilla Prophitesses, which
Montanus had filled with his fury. Some said they were taken with a Spirit of
Prophecy, and that, that they said were Oracles. Others maintained that
contrary to the custom of true Prophets, they were transported and carried
away in their minds, and taken with fury and ecstasy; they were also given to
covetousness and ambition, contrary to the scripture, which forbids Prophets
to take gold or silver. The faithful of Asia assembled many times to examine
those doctrines, and so newly forged Prophecies. The faithful of Gaul writ
their opinion touching the furious errors of Montanus, and sent Ireneus into
Asia with Letters. See Eusebius. Lib. 5. Chap. 4.

This Schism as it was to the condemnation of Montanus and his accomplices: so
the true Church was advertised more nearly to try spirits whether they were of
God or no.

Whatsoever heavy chastisements the Jews before had, the Lord forgot not his
mercy, but gave sufficient witness that he calls his enemies to repentance.

He preserved Doctors and Pastors, and a little number of faithfuls in
Jerusalem, which honored the true God. From the sacking or destruction that
Titus made, until that of Adrian, The Bishops of Jerusalem. The Church of the
Gentiles in Jerusalem.
the Church of Jerusalem had successively 15. chief or high Bishops. Eusebius.
numbreth them. Lib. 3. Chap. 5. After the destruction made by Adrian the
Emperor, there was no more any Church gathered of the Jews at Jerusalem, but
only of the Gentiles, and of them were there Bishops ordained. All the Jews
were driven away (as it is said) by Adrian. Marcus then issued of Gentiles, was
chosen the 16. Bishop, the 10. year of the Emperor Antoninus, after Cassianus
the 17. Publius the 18. Maximus the 19. Julian the 20. Gaian the 21. Symmachus
the 22. Caius the 23. Julian 2. the 24. Capita the 25. Thus does Eusebius
rehearse it. Lib. 5 Chap 12.

And in this time wherein we now are (that is under the Emperor Commodus,
Maximus the 2. was the 26. Antoninus 27. Valens 28. Dolichian 29. Narcissus 30.
Elius 31. Garmanian 32. Gordius 33. Narcissus. 2.34. or rather Narcissus the
first returning from the Desert, whither he withdrew himself (for that his
enemies had accused him to live vnchastely) of whom Eusebius says, that he had
the gift to work miracles, and that his false accusers were punished according
to the Imprecations which every one made. As for the time of all these
Bishops, Eusebius. says that he could not well discern, namely in what time
every one of them governed the Church.

Seeing then the Church of the Gentiles had already their habitation in this
place, the Lord would declare that the true Messiah was come, and so we need
look for no other.

This numeration here made of the Bishops of Jerusalem, shows that other
Churches may well number their Bishops, as that of Rome glorifieth her self in
the continuation of hers.

After the fifth persecution raised by Seuerus against the Christians, came
civil wars amongst the Romans. The fifth persecution.


Ireneus had lived long enough in the midst of so many persecutions. Zephyrim.
The greatest renown that he had was under the Emperor Commodus. As for the
contention concerning the feast of Easter, the time in the which it was most
lighted, was the 4. year of the Empire of Seuerus. He then bore the Office of
a Minister 23. years. The error of the Chiliastes was attributed unto him,
yet it is not expressly seen in his writings we have at this day. The death of
Ireneus.
The manner of his death is uncertain. They which have written of the Martyrs
say that he and a great multitude of his sheep were finally slain for the
confession of the name of Christ, under Seuerus.

Leonides the father of Origenes, martyred for the Faith: unto who^ Origenes
his son being but of the age of eighteen years said; O good father take
heed that for us you change not your purpose. This Origin after his fathers
goods were confiscated for the Faith, he nourished his mother and 6. brethren
by being a School master.

Zephyrim a Roman, the 14. Bishop of Rome, ruled seventeen years as Eusebius
says.

In the first Tome of Counsels we find two of his Decretall Epistles, one
unto the Bishops of Cicilie, the other to them of Egypt, which represent unto
us no other form of government then that we see described almost in all the
Epistles attributed unto the Bishops of Rome. In the first he makes mention
of judgments, which ought to be constituted by 12. Judges, in causes of
Patriarchs and Primates.

Not to admit indifferently all such as accuse Priests. He sought to establish
the Supremacy, and that men should appeal unto the Apostolic seat of Rome:
And therefore he called himself Archbishop.

In the second he establishes certain ceremonies in Priests orders, to elect
such as were wise and approved, and in the presence of all.

Damasus attributed unto him the decree to use in the Eucharist Cups of
Glass or Tin, and not of wood. Also to receive the Eucharist once at the
least in the year, from the age of 12. and above.

It shall afterward be showed what estimation men ought to make of those
things, and of the Epistles called Decretalls, Bassianus.
which are attributed unto the Roman Bishops.

He excommunicated Natalius the Confessor for joining with Heretics; over
whom he suffered himself to be made Bishop. Zephyrim would not receive him to
his repentance, unless openly he showed good tokens thereof.

Bassianus Antoninus surnamed Caracalla, the 22. Emperor Rome, Execrable
Incest.
reigned six or seven years (after some) Incestuous and cruel, he took his
mother in law to wife, called Iulia: and slew his brother Geta, and his Uncle.
Of his Cousin called Saeuis or Seua, or Semyamira, or Seulasyra, he engendered
Heliagabalus, who was after Emperor.

He was slain of the age of 43. years by the Ambush of Macrinus his successor
as he descended from his horse, and drew aside to make water.

Papinianus a Lawier was slain by the Emperor, because he allowed not the
murder committed against his brother Geta.

Macrin Optius the 23. Emperor borne at Marusia, Macrin.
shameless in words, impudent, sacralegious, and bloody: he was slain with
Diadumenus his son, of the age of 50. years and more.

Heliogabalus called Varius Heliogabalus the 24. Emperor, Heliogabalus.
reigned four years. He was rather a Monster then a Prince, as given to al
uncleanness and filthiness, a contemner of all Religion, except he reverenced
the Sun, whose high Priest he had been, and therefore called himself
Heliogabalus. He died of a death worthy his life, slain by a military tumult
with his mother, and their bodies were drawn through the streets, and after
cast into Tiber.

He reigned two years, eight months, and adopted Alexander Seuerus.

He builded a City called Oresta, where he commanded to sacrifice humane
Hosts and reasonable creatures. Calixtus.


Calixtus or after Eusebius, Calistus a Roman, the 15. Bishop of Rome, ruled
six or seven years.

The Epistles attributed unto him, show the form of his government. One unto
Benit the Bishop, and the other unto the Bishops of Gaul. There is attributed
unto him an Edict common to all Bishops, that no accusation should be received
against Clerks: and commanded that each one should take heed they made no
conspiration against Bishops.

It is credible, in the time wherein persecutions were continually kindled,
that such an Edict should be commanded the faithful, which scant durst show
themselves.

Item that none might communicate with such as were excommunicated. And that
marriages of Cousin-germaine should not be admitted, and if they were made, to
break them.

A place of S. Paul evil Interpreted.
In one of his Epistles there is an evil exposition; that the wife of a Bishop
is interpreted a Church or a Parish, of which it is not lawful during his life
to dispose any thing without his will, nor to enjoy the company; that is to
say, ordination of an other.

The first decretall, instituteth the Fast of the four times and seasons of
the year.

Damasus says that he ordained a Fast of three times, because of Corn, Wine,
and Oil. And further: That Calixtus made three times orders in December, and
ordained sixteen Priests, four Deacons, and eight Bishops in diverse places,
and finally, that he suffered Martyrdom under Alexander the Emperor.

It is uncertain whether it was this Calixt that made the ordinance for the
single life of Priests. For concerning this, the two Decretalls attributed unto
him, make no mention thereof, neither is it found in the first volume of
Counsels. Again in the Council of Nice, there is nothing alleged of the
said ordinance: yea and that more is; Alexander.
there was made there a statute to the contrary, at the exhortation of
Pathuntius, as shall be said after. Alexander Seuerus the son of Mamea, the
25. Emperor, Origin: he was slain with his mother of the age of 19. years by
treason, by Thieves which in the time of Heliogabalus having been in honor,
had been cast out from their dignities and offices.

He caused to be published this law, to be inuiolably kept. Do to an other no
other thing, then thou would should be done unto thy self.

Porphirius of Cicile a Philosopher, left the Faith, Porphirius.
and was an Apostate in despite of the Christians, of whom he said he had been
iniuried.

Vlpianus a Lawier in this time.

Urban a Roman, Bishop of Rome, ruled eight or nine Damasus says he, was of
an holy life. So that he drew certain Gentlemen, as Tiburcius, and Valerian,
S. Cecile her husband, to the Christian faith.

Some attribute unto him a Decretall Epistle to all Bishops speaking of a
common life, such as was in the time of the Apostles, but he speaks not as it
was. Some attributes unto him Edicts to assure the Gods of the Church, as they
call them. And he speaks a little of the vow of such as promise to possess
nothing of their own. He Instituted the confirmation after Baptism by
imposition of the Bishops hands to obtain the holy Ghost, and that they are
made full Christians, etc.

There is none but he may see herein not only a Sacrilege but also an
execrable blaspemie forged in the shop of this slavish Decretists.

Damasus attributes unto him the ordinance, that the Communion Cups should
be no more of Glass, but either of Silver or at the least of Pewter. Maximin.
Whereupon Boniface Bishop of Magunce said. In old time golden Priests used
wodden Chalices, Wodden Priests.
but now wodden Priests use Golden Chalices.

That Confirmation ought to be with Cream.

That the four times Fast ought to be observed.

That Churches should have lands, meadows, and possessions, and their goods
should be common, and distributed to nourish Ministers, Notaries, and
Protonotaries.
the poor, and Notaries called Protonotaries which writ the Acts of the
Martyrs.

Origines the tenth year of the Empire of Alexander, fled from Alexandria into
Cesaria of Palestine, for a popular sedition there.

Some say he was marteried under Alexander. For although Alexander favored
the Christians, yet were many martyred by his Officers. For he made no Edict to
provide for the affairs of the Christians. Pontian.


Pontian a Roman, Bishop of Rome, ruled 6. years, or nine, after Damasus.

Two Decretall Epistles are attributed unto him, which have this common
argument with many others, not to molest nor accuse Priests. By Damasus it is
attributed unto him, that he should ordain six Priests, 5. Deacons, and 6.
Bishops.

Martian the Scottish Historiographer says, that Pontian was sent into exile
into Sardinia, the first year of Maximin.

At this time at Rome were 36. Priests, Cardinals (that is to say, The
beginning of the Cardinals.
eminent and principal amongst others) which especially had care of the
salvation of souls. Of which they say Marcellius ordained 15. to bury the dead
and to baptize Children.

Our Cardinals of this time would here take their original. But indeed they
began in the time of Innocent the fourth, about the year of Christ, 1244.

Julius Maximin, borne in Thrace, 26. Emperor, without authority of the
Senate, but by the Soldiers: because he was of 60. years, with his son of
the age of 19. years, and their bodies cast into the River.

He raised the sixth persecution against the Christians, The sixth persecution.
and especially against the Doctors of the Church, for hatred to Manea the
mother of Alexander his Predecessor, of whose death he was culpable, and with
his own hands murdered the household servants of the said Alexander.

The Roman Senate for hatred it bare unto Maximin, chose new Emperors to
maintain the Commonwealth, namely, Pupian, Balbin and Gordian. The two first
were slain in the Palace at Rome by a sedition of warriors, and Gordian
remained alone Emperor.

In this time some Historiographers of small authority, say that Syriacke was
the successor of Pontian as Fasciculus tempo. Henry de Hereford, Bergomensis
and Naucler: yet is there not one approved Author or Historiographer which
makes any mention of this Siriake.

They say that he occupied the state a year, three months and 13. days; and
that after he went to Almaigne into Colongue, with a great number of Virgins,
and that there he was Martired with them.

And the reason why he was raced out of the Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome;
they say it was because that willingly he forsook his dignity, against the
will of the Clergy.

Let every one judge what faith such Historians merit, or such authors or
forgers of Decretall Epistles attributed to Roman Bishops.

Celsire an Epicurian Philosopher, Celsus the Heretic.
writ then a book which he Entitled, The Truth: wherein he pursued the
Christians with villainies and lies. Origin writ eight books against him.

Anter Damasus says, that by Nation he was a Grecian. Isnarda Rome, because
Pontian going away substituted him. There is great difference in the
supputation of the time of his government. Eusebius. gives him a month. Damasus
12. years and a month.

Fabian.
A Decrerall Epistle is attributed unto him, unto the Bishops of Betique and
Toledo, wherein he pronounces it lawful for Bishops to remove from one place
to an other if necessity require it, and the profit of the Church: he was
Martired under Maximin.

Fabian Bishop of Rome after Anter. a Roman, governed 13. or 14. years. His
election is described too miraculous; namely by a Dove. See Eusebius. 51.6.
Chap. 19. Three Decretall Epistles are attributed unto him, that the
Constitutions of the seven Subdeacons, which ought always to be with the
Notaries which gather together the deeds of the Martyrs.

He was Martired and his wife Darfosa under Decius, unto whom he was married
before his being Bishop.

Gordian.
Gordian chosen by the Senate, was a Prince of a noble heart: we find not
that he made any cruel Edicts against the Christians. After he had reigned
six years he was subtly slain by Phillippes, which succeeded him.

Proclus an heretic.
Many heresies which rose up in former times renewed at this time. At Rome
Proclus maintained the heresy of the Cataphrygians.

Berillus who otherwise was an excellent Doctor in Arabia, fell into the
heresy of Artemon, which denied Christ to have been before his Incarnation.
Origines disputed against him.

Under Gordian there was so great an Ecclips, that the daylight seemed an
obscurity as dark as the night. There was also so terrible an Earthquake that
some whole Towns were swallowed with the ouerturne of the earth.

Sapor King of the Persians.
Gordian obtained many victories against the Persians, and chased Sapor King of
the Persians even to Antioch, which then was held of the Persians. He recovered
both Cares and Nisible, and by this means came it to pass that the East was
brought subject unto the Roman Empire, Julius Capitolin rehearses it in
Gordians life.

The Council of Philadelphia
To confute Berillus, a Council was held under Gordian at Philadelphia in
Arabia, where Origenes was, who overcame him and brought him into a good way.
Phillip.


M. Julius Phillippus an Arabian, with his son also called Phillip, succeeded
Gordian in the Empire. The first Christian Emperors.
They were Christians converted unto the Faith by Pontian or Pontius a Roman
Senator, and baptized by Fabian. He, his mother Seuera, and his son Philip,
desirous to resort into the company of the Christians, Fabian would admit them
unto the last Vigiles of Easter, although he had great desire to persist in the
congregation and prayers of Christians until he had confessed his sin (which
was a murder as is thought) and joined himself with them of whose sins
Inquest was made, and so placed amongst the Repentants. Eusebius. Lib. 6. Chap.
34. This Philip refused not to do, but accomplished whatsoever was enjoined him
by the Bishop.

In the reign of this Philip there were Heretics in Arabia, which maintained
that the souls die with the bodies, and that together they shall rise at the
day of Judgment. Origines went toward them being sent thither, and
confounded them.

There are at this day certain Anabaptists which say that when man dies, his
soul sleeps until the day of judgment, which is an execrable heresy.

There were other Heretics called Helchescites, Helchesites Heretics.
as Eusebius says, Lib. 6. Chap. 38. or Elsecians after Epiphanius and Saint
Augustine, which dwelt in Arabia in the Region of the Moobites; They rejected
the Epistles of Saint Paul, and maintained that in the time of persecution it
was no sin to renounce the Faith with the mouth, if so be the heart remained
faithful. This Heresy was before sown by Basilides, and confounded by
Agrippa Castor, an excellent Doctor.

O what great hurt this wicked heresy has brought to the Church in
persecution.

Phillip and his Courtiers received the doctrine of the Gospel, and renounced
all Painim Idolatries. But this felicity endured not long for the Church. The
death of Phillip.
For as Phillip did to his predecessor, so was done unto him by his successor
Decius: yea and to his son who was slain at Rome, and the Father at Verone.
This was their end after they had reigned 7. years.

Decius Phillip Decius borne at Bubalie a Town of base Panonia, was chosen
after Phillip. He was a Prince worthy praise, but that he stirred the
seventh persecution against the Christians, because of the evil will he bare
to his predecessor Phillip. Eusebius. Lib. 6. Cap. 39. This hatred as Sabellicus
and Bergomensis say, proceeded hereof, that the two Phillips being in peril of
death, gave their treasures to Fabian. Saint Ciprian rehearses other more
urgent causes. And these be his words in his fourth book and fourth Epistle.
The cause of this seventh persecution under Decius.
We must needs confess that this waste which has pilled our Flock, and the
theft yet at this day practiced, comes because of our sins: for that we hold
not the way of the Lord, but give our selves to gain, to pride, to enuies and
dissentions, etc.

Of this persecution Nicephorus says in Lib. 5. Cap. 29. that it was as
possible to number them that suffered in this persecution, as to account the
sand of the sea.

Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem.
Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem honored for his piety, once was drawn before
the Governors seat in Cesaria, and after he had made a confession of his
faith he died in prison. Babilus Bishop of Nichomedie, Asclepiades of Antioche,
Germany, Theophile, Cesarius, Vital, Polychronius Bishop of Babylon, Serapion,
Apollonia a Virgin, and infinite others, were martyred in this horrible
persecution.

Above all other Towns Alexandria then was as a scaffolde when the faithful
mustered. See Eusebius Lib. 6. Chap. 40.

The torments of the Martyrs.
Diverse kinds of torments were used against the Martyrs, as Eusebius says. As
sharp needles against the face and eyes, bursting betwixt stones, burning,
pearsing the entralles, casting down from high places to lower, tearing in
pieces by cards of Iron, plates being applied to their sides, the rage of
savage beasts, condemnation to dig mettalls, etc.

Saint Ciprian being in exile, writ very consolatorie Letters to them which
suffered such euilles. And as Tertullian, in his time defended the Christians
against Scapula: So also did Saint Ciprian the like against Demetrian a Painim
Governor, showing thereby that the calamities of the world are fully imputed
unto the Christians.

Denis of Alexandria writ, that after the publication of Decius Edict
confirmatiue of this horrible persecution, many of the most excellent showed
themselves so fearful, that of their own motion they made abiurations and
sacrificed unto Idols. Ciprian made a Sermon of such as fell, namely of such as
perseuered not in the confession of Jesus Christ. There he sets down examples
of Gods punishment of such as abiured; he affirms that many of them were
tormented with evil spirits. He says one became dumb incontinent after he
had renounced. An other also after his renouncing, coming to take the Supper
with others, found in stead of bread, ashes. Also a maid taken with a devil,
bitte off her tongue with her teeth.

Many things are attributed to Fabian contained in Gratians decree, which are
not worth rehearsing, and as unworthy that Bishop.

Beda and Eusebius write, that Fabian suffered Martyrdom at the beginning of
Decius reign. For he bare him evil will, because Phillip gave him his
treasures.

Eusebius in his Chronicle says that Fabian governed the Roman Church, 13.
years. Damasus and Marian the Scot say, 14.

Origene writ to Fabian touching the purity of doctrine, as Eusebius. Lib. 6.
Chap. 6.

Decius died miserably before he had reigned two whole years. Pomponius
writes, The death of Decius.
that in a war against the Goths he was swallowed up of a Gulphe, into
the which he cast himself, Gallus.
that he might not fall into his enemies hands.

Hereupon note the saying of S. Cyprian.

Cyprian in his book against Demetrian touches it saying: Certain we are
that all that we endure shall not long be unpunished: And so much more as the
outrage of persecution shall be great, so much the greater shall the vengeance
be for that persecution, and so much the more manifest. Although we keep not
in memory things of old, yet the doctrines of things newly happening do
suffice, that in very little time and so suddenly, so horrible a vengeance has
followed, etc.

Gallus and Volucian his Son, jointly succeeded in the Empire. He was
otherwise called C. Verus Trebonian of Gaul.

This persecution counted the eight. The death of Gallus.
He was happy enough at the beginning as Denis writes, but continuing the
persecution which fell into his hands by his predecessors, he prospered not.
For before two years were passed, he and his son Volusian were miserably
slain in a war against Emilian, The Romans tributaries.
having before gotten an opprobry unto the Roman people to make the^ tributary
unto the Scythians by an alliance he made with them, as Eutropius and Pomponius
Laetus write.

Cornelius a Roman, was three years Bishop of Rome. By the Epistle of the
Roman Clergy written to Saint Cyprian, we may know that the Roman seat
was vacant certain time, and that Cornelius succeeded the Bishop Fabian, at
the beginning of the reign of Gallus and Volusian.

Saint Cyprian defended his election against the calumniations of Nouatus the
heretic, saying in his fourth book and Epistle to Antonian, that he occupied
not his Bishoppricke by bribes, nor of his own desire, neither by violence, as
many do, which are swelled with their own pride: but that he came thither by
the will of God, then, when the Tyrant envenomed with mortal hatred against
Priests the servants of God, uttered horrible menacies.

The things then attributed unto Cornelius in his Decretall Epistles: how can
they agree with so excellent a Doctor, Lucius.
Decretalls examined.
who always was at the combat? As that which is written in his first Epistle;
that at the request of a noble woman he caused to be transported the body (or
rather the rotten bones) of S. Peter and S. Paul, which long time had been kept
in a Sepulcher.

The second Epistle is to Ruffinus a Bishop of the East, touching the manners of
Priests.

Eusebius and Saint Hierome who most diligently writ of this holy person, make
no mention of those Epistles, but they mention his determination to have a
Council held at Rome against Nouatus.

Damasus and others have written that Cornelius was banished, and finally
Martired under Decius: but S. Hierome transferreth his administration to the
time of the Emperors Gallus and Volucian, whose authority we have followed.

Eusebius 51.7. cap. 2. writes that Cornelius governed the Church of Rome
three years: yet in his Chronicle he gives him but two.

Lucius succeeded Cornelius, he was a Roman. Eusebius Nauclerus, Platina and
Sabellicus gives him 3. years and more.

Gratian attributes unto him this decree; that Priests, Decretalls attributed
unto Lucius.
Deacons, and other Ministers of the Altar, ought to be chosen such, as they
can keep themselves without marrying, and that no Clarke should frequent the
company of women.

There is attributed unto him an Epistle written to the Bishops of Spain and
France: wherein is proposed a kind of government, which seems not to agree
with the time of Lucius. Therein is ordained that in all places there should be
two Priests, and three Deacons, with a Bishop, to keep him company wheresoever
he went, as witnesses of his life.

As if then there had been so great tranquillity, as a Bishop might go take
his pleasure or show himself with great companies.

Noetus and Sabellius after Theodoret, Noetus and Sabellius.
got a passage, although before it had been debated in Affrike by Praxeas and
Hermogenes. They said that God the Father suffered, and therefore S. Augustine
says, they were called Patripassians.

Many Histories make mention of an horrible pestilence in the time of Gallus;
the infection whereof came into Aethiope, and after it had consumed the
Southern people it came into the East, and there laid hold on the other parts
of the world, so that many places were left desolate. And this wound endured so
long time, that scant it finished before the end of ten years.

Of this so terrible and extraordinary an evil, S. Ciprian took an argument
to make his book, Entitled Of the cruelty.

Emilian succeeded Gallus and Volusian after he had slain them. He was a man
of base condition, issuing from Mauritaine, and was Emperor but three months.

Valerian Licinius Valerianus chosen Emperor, a man of noble race, excellent
in knowledge and honesty, an examplarie of a true Censor and Senator in all
his life. But in him all these virtues were defaced. First for that he joined
with him in the Empire his son Galien, who was a monster in all abhominarion.

Item by the persecution that he stirred against the Christians.

Of all the Emperors there was not one before him which at the beginning had
been so soft and mild toward Christians, yea familiar, in so much as his
Court was full of them. But after he gave himself to Deuines and Egyptian
Enchaunters, he was persuaded to put to death the servants of GOD, The Art
Magic overthrew Valerian.
as they which hindered those wicked Enchaunters; to kill poor children, and
to offer up the sons and daughters of their miserable parents.

battle he was taken alive. Lucian.
The misery of Valerian.
Sapor King of the Persians used such cruelty toward Valerian, who was of the
age of seventy years, that when he mounted on horseback, he served
himself with Valerians back to get up. Eutropius, Pollio, Aurelius Victor,
Sabellicus and Laetus, do recite this, and say he used his age in this
miserable servitude, Eusebius in the Oration which he made hereof to the
whole congregation of the faithful, says that Sapor commanded that Valerian
should be scorched and salted.

Gallienus reigned then alone and gave himself to Idleness, dissolution, and
whoordome.

In his time there was no place in all the Roman Jurisdiction, except Italy
alone, wherein there were not seditions and rebellions. Trebellius an
Historiographer, accounts thirty, all which at one time were named
Emperors; some in one Region, and some in others.

Cilicia, Cappadocia, and Syria, were pilled and wasted by the Persians, under
Sapor.

The Almaines after they had tormented the Gauls, entered by force into Italy.

The Goths pilled Pontus, Asia, Macedonia, and Greece. See the Roman
Histories.

Under his rule monstrous things came to pass, horrible ouertures and
Earthquakes, whereof many there were which died of excessive fear. Rome was
shaken, Libia trembled.

Aurelius Victor says, that Gallien was slain with his son at Millaine, or
with his brother Valerian, as Eutropius says.

They which have set down in writing the Roman affairs, were of opinion that
these mischiefs happening to the Roman Empire, came by the wicked government
of the Princes. But we think that the judgment and vengeance of God provoked
by the former persecutions, as well of others as of himself, fell upon them.

Lucius.
Ed. 9. The death of Saint Ciprian.
S. Ciprian having been sent into exile under Valerian and Gallien, by Paternus
governor of Affrike, and under Maximus, who succeeded him in the government,
was finally beheaded in the time of Lucius after Sabellicus.

Marianus Scotus says, that Lucius Bishop of Rome was banished for the
confession of Christ in the persecution of Valerian and Gallien, The death of
Lucius.
and that afterward he was permitted to return unto his Ministry; and that
finally he was beheaded, and so might he be Bishop the space of three years
and more.

Athenodorus Gregor, of Neocesaria.
Theodorus and Athenodorus, Bishops of Pontus in this time.

Theodorus was after called Gregory, as Eusebius says, Lib. 6. Cap. 30. These
two hearing the great renown of the learning of Origin, came to Cesaria,
where Origin read publicly, having forsaken Alexandria, and were persuaded by
Origin to let go their Philosophy, and to apply themselves unto the holy
scriptures.

The heresy of Sabellius buried.
Basile the great said, that the heresy of Sabellius was extinguished by this
Gregory the great.

If Nicephorus deserve credit, Theodorus or Gregory lived very long, namely
unto the time of Dioclesian. Yet Basile in his 62. Epistle, which is to the
Neocesarians, writes that he was not very old when he died.

Paul Samosatane.
Paul called Samosatenus of the Town of Samosate, which is in Mesopotania of
Siria upon the flood Enphrates, was ordained Antioch after Demetrius, the
thirteenth year of Galien.

The Bishops which assisted the Council of Antioch to refute his wicked
doctrine and blasphemies against God and the Lord Jesus, have sufficiently
witnessed of him.

The end of Origenes.
We may not here let pass the History of Origines end: that is, that after the
year wherein Demetrius ordained him in the office of Catechist, until the time
he died, it seems he traveled fifty two years and more, and the most part
of that time he employed in teaching, writing, busy in the affairs of the
Church, and refuting of heresies; In so much that Athanasius says of him, that
he was admirable of great labor. Finally, Stephen.
Suidas. counts this of Origin and Nicephorus after him.
after he had constantly endured many grievous torments, he was led before an
Altar, unto which they had brought a wicked Ethiopian, and there was proposed
unto him two things, the one, either to offer up sacrifice unto the Idol, or
else abandon his body to the villainous Ethiopian. Origin made a sign that
he had rather offer sacrifice. The fall of Origenes.
Then they thrust a Sensor into his hand. For which Impiety he was after
excommunicated out of the Church of Alexandria, from whence he retired into
Judea, and being come to Jerusalem, the Priests and Elders requested and after
constrained him to speak in the congregation of the faithful, because he was
a Priest. Origin rose up as if he should make a Sermon, but he only recited
his Theme of the 50. Psalm. And God said to the Preacher; Wherefore preachest
thou my Iustifications? And wherefore take thou my Testament in thy mouth?
etc. And inco^tinently shut the book, then sat he down sheading tears, and
lamenting with great cry being not able to speak, and all that were present
wept with him. Suidas adds, that he was buried in the Town of Tire. Euse.
Lib. 7. cap. 1. says it was under the Emperor Gallus, 255. or thereabouts:
and then was it betwixt the year 50. of his age, or 69. after Nicephorus. And
as it may be thought he dyed in great poverty and misery, if not in despair.

S. Jerome although he sometimes handled him rudely, yet he admireth him, and
praises him, because of his great knowledge, in the Epistle to Pammathus and
Ocean. He praises his spirit, but not his faith.

This should make us walk in fear and care in our vocation.

Stephen borne at Rome, was Bishop of Rome, and the successor of Lucius.

The greatest pain that he had in his government was that he opposed himself
forcibly against S. Cyprian and all the Council of Affricke, The difference of
rebaptizing heretics.
touching the difference that then was moved to rebaptise heretics, as it is
recited by Eusebius. Lib. 7. ca. 2. and 3.

The contents of the two Decretall Epistles attributed unto him deserve no
credit. The one to Hilarie Bishop, and the other to all the Bishops of the
Provinces touching accusations made against Priests. For it seems not that the
Roman Church was in such prosperity then, that Stephen Bishop thereof, had
no other thing to do and ordain, but with what reverence a man must handle the
Chalice and holy garments, or (as Isidore and Polydore witness of him) that he
was the first Inuentor of the Couerings of the Altar.

Damasus attributes unto him two ordinances, in which six Priests, five
Deacons, and six Bishops were ordained: and says that after he had governed
seven years and five months he was martyred. But Eusebius. Lib. 7. cap. 5.
shows that he was but two years in his office.

S. Cyprian writ unto him certain Epistles which are in his works.

The death of Denis Bishop of Alexandria.
Denis Bishop of Alexandria, excellent in doctrine, although he suffered not
martyrdom but watched in the midst of the Church, therefore God preserved him
from Martyrdom as Niceph. speaks. Li. 15. ca. 28. Notwithstanding he endured
terrible afflictions and diverse banishments in two violent persecutions under
Decius, and after under Valerian. He died very old, and it happened at what time
the two Counsels were held against Paul. Samosaten. An. 12. of Gallien, and of
Christ, 288. having governed the state of Alexandria 16. years, and the Church
17.

About this time many Nations cast themselves upon the marches of the Romans.
The Country of Denmark was taken out of their hands. Likewise the Almaines
came eue^ to Rauenna, putting all to fire and blood.

This was the first waining and decreasing of the Roman Empire: For the
Country was never after recovered. Egypt revolted, France was lost: Macedonia,
Pontus, Asia, wasted by the Goths: Pannonia by the Sarmates. Zenobia Queen of
the Persians ruled in the East. To understand all this diminution and fall of
this Empire, See Trebellio Pollia, a Roman Historiographer.

Phillip Bishop of Alexandria martyred, and his daughter Eugenia at Rome.

The great Temple of Diana in Ephesus, Sixtus.
was pilled and burnt by the Goths.

A second Cerinthus heretic, Chiliastes renewed.
promised in the kingdom to come, great store of meats and women, and that
after a thousand years should be the resurrection, and the kingdom of Christ
should be on earth.

Xistus or Sixtus, the second of that name, succeeded Stephen, he was of
Athens. He was ordained Bishop of Rome by the election of the Clergy coming
from Spain where he was preaching. There are attributed unto him two
Decretals, the one to Gayus Bishop, the other to the brothers of Spain: the
which contain nothing but the form of the common government which they make
us believe was the^. Item touching the vows of Priests. But we may easily see
that all is forged at pleasure. Damasus after his manner recites that he made
orders twice, ordeining, Priests, Deacons, and Bishops.

Bergomensis and Sabellicus recite, that Xistus traveled much to take away the
heresies of the Sabellians, Cerinthians, and Nepotians. Finally, that he was
accused by them before Gallien: and upon his commandment beheaded, and with
him 6. Deacons. S. Ambrose in his Offices li. 1. cap. 41. recites, that as he
went to death, Laurence a Deacon of Rome.
it is said that one Laurence a Deacon spoke to him in this sort. Father will thou go without thy son? And Xistus answered him. My son I shall not leave
thee. There are greacombattes for the Faith prepared for thee: thou shall
follow me three days after. In the mean while if thou have any thing in thy
treasure distribute it to the poor.

This Laurence was the chief of the seven Deacons of the Church of Rome, which
had the handling of the goods deputed for alms.

The Governor of Rome being hungry of silver, and persuaded that the Church
had gold, silver, and moueables, The history of Laurence.
as Candlesticks, Chalices, and such like things, would needs have forced
Laurence to have told him where those treasures were. Laurence to do this
having taken the term of three days, distributed it all to the poor
whatsoever he had.

Then having gathered together on an heap all the poor, lame and diseased,
which were maintained of alms, At the day assigned, Denis.
he prayed the Governor to go with him to that place, and showing him al
those poor and diseased people he said. Behold the vessels of silver, yea the
Talents in order, receive them, and thou shall adorn the City of Rome, and
enrich the Reuenewe of the Emperor and thine own. The Governor seeing
himself mocked, commanded he should be stretched on an Iron grate red hot,
and soon after the tormentors laid him on it, who with great courage endured
that cruel and long torment, and finally prayed and inuocated the Lord, and so
yielded his happy soul. Prudencius a Christian Poet in his book of Crowns
describes this martyrdom.

Denis succeeded Xistus, and as Damasus says of a Monk, was made Bishop. But
it appears rather by that which Eusebius Lib. 7. Ca. 7. and S. Hierome, say,
that he was a Priest of the Church of Rome, the year of our Lord 266. and the
10. year of Gallien.

Two Decretall Epistles are attributed unto him. In the first he exhorts
Vrbain to follow the true Religion. The second distributeth and makes
partitions of Churches into Parishes and Diocesses.

Item that two several times he held orders.

But Eusebius says, Lib. 7. Cap. 30. that Denis died without martyrdom,
having governed 9. years. Others say six years, and six months.

The Council of Antioche.
The Council of Antioche against Paul Samosetaine was celebrated in his time,
wherein the said Paul was condemned, and cast out of the communion of the
universal Church, and Donus a man accomplished with virtues was ordained in
his place. He was the son of Demetrian, who had ruled in that Church without
reproach. Hist. Eccle. Lib. 7. Chap. 17.

Married Bishops. Hist. Eccle. Lib. 5. cap. 15.
Note how the Son succeeded the Father in their Bishoprics. And so in
Victors time Polictates a Bishop of Asia, said that he himself was the 8.
Bishop of his Ancestors.

Some say that Galien seeing the long and horrible servitude of his Father
under Sapor King of Persia (as is said) caused to cease the persecution by
public Edicts, Claudus.
permitting every one to live after his own law.

He was so given to his pleasures, that when it was told him that many
Countries were revolted from him, he did but laugh. In so much that his
soldiers slew him at Millaine, at the age of 50. years, having reigned 15.
years: that is to say, seven with his Father, and eight alone.

Thirty Tyrants rose up which sore afflicted the Roman Commonwealth.
Ignatius says it.

Claudus the Emperor reigned almost two years. Trebellius says that in his
kingdom the Goths and diverse other people of Scythia, pilled the Roman
Provinces, and that there were three hundredth thousand men of barbarous
Nations, which by force entered into the Roman Territories, against which
people as well by sea as by land, the Emperor Claudus obtained victory the
first year of his kingdom, and finally chased them away.

After him Quintilius his brother was chosen of the Roman Senators, and
reigned but seventeen days, Quintilius.
and was slain: or as some say, he caused his own foot to bleed in water,
having understood that Aurelian was chosen Emperor.

Aurelian the Emperor, Aurelian.
is rather to be numbered amongst necessary Princes then good: for so much
praise as his military Art deserves, so much his domesticke cruelty takes
from him, which he exercised even against his sisters son.

Vopiscus witnesses, that the Emperor Aurelian the first year of his
kingdom recovered Gaul, after he had vanquished Tetrike who before occupied
it: this was in the year of Christ, 274. after Eusebius.

He also delivered from the Barbarians the Inhabitants of Auspourge, which were
besieged by the said Barbarians. After this he tryumphed over Zenobia, and the
Persians, having vanquished them.

Some say he founded Orleans and Geneua, renowned Towns.

Eusebius says of him, that he was toward Christians very peaceable at the
beginning, but soon after he changed his good opinion at the persuasion of
wicked people: Aurelian.
Insomuch that he determined to persecute the Churches: and letters of his
Edict were written, and wanted but his signet and hand for to send them unto
the Provinces: but God by his Aurelian and such as followed him, even when he
began to persecute the Christians, and that soon after he was flaine by one of
his household and familiars, as he was going the second time to war upon the
Therikes.

Herein would God give his to know, that his chosen are not executed at the
pleasure of men, but when it pleases him.

The ninth persecution.
This was the ninth persecution against the Christians, which endured not long
for the death of the said Tyrant.

It should also be noted, that even whilst Aurelian the Emperor reigned,
four Tyrants invaded the Empire, namely Firmian, Saturnin, Bonosus, and
Proculus. As Vopiscus says.

After the death of Aurelian, the Empire was void seven months.

Tacitus.
And after him Tacitus was chosen Emperor, a wise and grave man, but he was
slain the sixth month of his Empire.

Florian.
Florian his brother took from him his Empire, not by the Senates authority
but of his own will, thinking it belonged unto him by hereditary right; yet
notwithstanding a while after he was slain nigh Tharsus, having reigned 60.
days. Some say he caused his own veins to be opened.

Probus.
Probus issued from Dalmatia, was declared Emperor, a man excellent both in
peace and war, he reigned 6. years Gaul, which the Barbarians and Almaines
had again occupied, and brought them under the first obedience of the Romans.
He reduced all Germany into a Province. He took away old Tyrants and brought
peace into the world: So that he said there should be no more any need of
soldiers, which caused them so to malice him, that they conspired to sley him.

Manes the heretic at this time composed many books, Felix.
and almongst others, one he Entitled, The Mysteries of Maniche. He was a
Persian by Nation. And seeing many abhorred his lies and blasphemies, sought
all means to give authority to his doctrine. He made the King of Persia
believe that he would heal his son, who was grievously sick. But after the
Kings son was taken from the Physicians and put into the hands of Manes, he
died. The King of Persia caused him to be apprehended, and made him to be
broyled alive upon an hot Iron. Suidas and Epipha. recite it.

He was a great Magician, and S. Augustine says, that the books of the
Maniches are full of fables of Astronomy. S. Ierom in the preface of the
Dialogues against the Pelagians says, that the Manicheans affirmed that when
they are come to the highest degree of perfection, they can no more sin, no
not in thought, nor by ignorance.

Felix borne at Rome was ordained Bishop after Denis, the Eusebius, and the
first year of the reign of Probus.

The last Authors attribute unto him two Epistles Decretals, without authority
of the Elders. The first is written to Paternus Bishop. The 2. to all the
Bishops of France: wherein he declares that he had determined in a Council
that Messes should be celebrated upon the memory of Martyrs, least it might be
quenched.

The word Mess, does manifestly enough show the deceit and forging of those
decretals. For it was not yet used, neither are there found any Authors of that
time which have written thereof.

Felix finally suffered martirdom after he had bin bishop of Rome 5. years:
after Euse. But after Dama. 4. years, 3. months and 5. days

Eutichian a Tusca^ of the town of Lunes, succeeded him, the ye reign of the
Emp. Probus.

Two decretal Epistles are attributed unto him: the 1. to them of Boetia,
co^taining certain doctrines of ye Incarnation of Christ, of his body, of his
Cross, of his death, of hell, and of our salvation.

Damasus attributes unto him, a ceremony touching the oblation of Gummes and
fruits, as Beans, Pease, Raisons, and such like.

Probus.
The same Damasus says of him (if we must needs believe him) that with his own
hands he buried 342. Martyrs, and that he ordained that none should bury any
Martyr without a Damaltike or a Sacerdoll coat, and without fire.

Whosoever understands the horror of the persecutions of this time, way easily
conjecture the lies of such ceremonies.

Gratian the great Forger, recites that Eutichian made many constitutions:
That Abbesses and Nuns should not put vailes upon widows or maidens which
should be Nuns.

Item that such as came to Counsels about deliberation of the Churches
affairs, ought to take oaths: and after he recites others:

He suffered Martyrdom after he had governed the Roman Church almost ten
months, as Eusebius witnesses, Lib. 7. cap. 32. Damasus and Platina say one
year and a month. Volareran, 8. years.

Many things are recited of the conquests of Probus the Emperor, which the
Roman Historiographers describe.

Carus succeeded him the year of Christ, 284. and associated his two sons in
the Empire, Numerian and Carinus.

He began new war against the Persians, which Probus had left imperfect. He
sent Carinus to the Gauls, to maintain them, and led with him Numerian. He
recovered in that war Mesopotamia, and having wasted all the Region of the
Parthians, he got all the kingdom of the Persians. See Vopiscus. Carus
strooken with lightning dyed suddenly. Numerian was of great modesty, given to
study, especially of Poesy. His Father in law having laid ambushes, Numerian
slain. Carinus.
slew him as he was in his Coach. His brother Carinus a man given to all
wickedness, defiled himself with the blood of the faithful, having the Empire
alone. These three then reigned not long. For all their times endured not three
whole years, as Eutropius Victor and Latus recite.

The government of those aforesaid Emperors brought some release to the
Christians, and so things happened favorable unto them: Dioclesian.
Insomuch that some of them were advanced to Offices and government until the
reign of Dioclesian, and shall be seen in his place.

Caius Bishop of Rome was of Dalmatia, of the family of Dioclesian the Emperor
after Damasus. Eusebius says he was ordained Bishop the same year that
Eutichian was, who with much adoo remained but ten months Bishop.

There is attributed unto him a decretall Epistle, wherein he speaks but
meanly of Christ the Mediator, and of Justification. He after says, that to
ascend unto the dignity of a Bishop, men must go by degrees, and by
Ecclesiastical orders, as first he must be Portier, then Lector, etc.

Damasus witnesses, that he lived during the time of Dioclesian the Emperors
persecutions, from which he hid himself and dwelt under vaultes; yet finally
he was drawn to death the 12. year of the said Dioclesian, after he had
governed the Church 15. years after Eusebius, or eleven and four months
after Damasus.

The Lord (as has been said) gave some release to his Church, until the
kingdom of Dioclesian, as Eusebius. Lib. 8. Cap. 1.

Dioclesian Emperor, borne at Dalmatia, the second year of his kingdom,
associated to the Empire, Maximiam Herculean, in which year he brought under
the Empire the Gauls, which had been occupied by the Rustikes, which were
called Bagaricles, from thence he went into Affrike, and vanquished the
Gentians.

These two seeing the affairs of the Empire might be better decided by many,
named two Cesars to govern under the^, namely Galerian, and Constantinus, who
was Father unto Constantine the great. Every of them were employed in
conquering that which was lost; and above all to recover Egypt, which Achillas
had gotten. And this was the year of Christ, 298. The East Narsus had gotten.
They brought under the yoke five Provinces beyond the flood Tigris, which
revolted from the Romans since Traians time. Also Britain (which is now
England) ten years after her revolt, and after having chased away Garesius or
Cranssius, Marcelline.
who had made himself King. Eusebius. and Pomp. Laetus.

Dioclesians pride.
After that things were thus ordered, in the place to acknowledge this good of
the Lord, Dioclesian caused himself to be worshipped as GOD. Laetus in his
Abridgement of Roman Histories says; Whereas the first Emperors contented
themselves to be called Consuls, and to be saluted of the people by that name,
this man was the first that would be adored, naming himself brother of the
Sun and of the Moon. Before Emperors gave to kiss their hands to Nobles,
Kissing of shoes.
and their knees to the common people. But Dioclesian made an Edict that all
men without difference of whatsoever race, should kiss his feet: upon which
also he placed certain marks of adoration, and had his shoes garnished with
gold and precious stones, which also Caligula had done as is said.

The Popes and Antichrists of Rome have bent Imitators hereof, and have well
held this ordinance of Dioclesian to conserve their dignity.

The tenth persecution.
The tenth persecution raised against the Christians, endured ten years in
the West Countries. This was the greatest and cruellest persecution of all. For
in less then thirty days, through diverse Provinces were martyred about 18.
or 20. thousand persons, as well men as women.

Marcelline borne at Rome, succeeded Caius in the government of the Roman
Church, his Father was called Proiectus. During this persecution he was very
grievously pressed by the Tormentors, under Dioclesian and Maximian Emperors,
wherein being taken, with fear of torments and punishments, he offered a
grain of Incence in the honor of Idols, but afterward he acknowledged his
fault in a full Synod assembled at Sinnesse, and did penance: and after came
even to reprove Dioclesian, and voluntarily presented himself to death. He
was martyred with Claudius Cyrinus and Antonius, after he had governed the
Roman Church nine years after Damisen, eight after Marianus, and four after
Vrsperge. This was the year of Christ 303.

There are attributed unto Marcelline as to others, two decretall Epistles. The
first written to a Bishop called Solomon. Dioclesian.
And the other unto the Western Bishops.

Dioclesian was of opinion that there was no mean more mere to pacify the
world, and to bring the Roman Empire into the face and brightness of his
ancient majesty, the^ to abolish all new religions. His determination then
was to begin to take away from the midst of the people the dissimilitude of
the Christian Religion: and many Sophisters and Philosophers drew him on
hereunto. As for the faithful, Eusebius. in his 8. Book, Chap. 1. says, that
the too great peace and liberty of the Church made them degenerate, and
brought debates and questions about words, so that at last they came to flames,
and there could not be found a more singular mean to extinguish and bring it
to nothing then this persecution.

Dioclesian might have been numbered amongst the Princes worthy of praise, if he
had not contaminated and obscured the virtues he had, with the Christians blood
he shead. His companion in the Empire, was Maximian Herculeus, a man meet to
exercise all cruelties.

The chief seat of the Eastern Emperors was then at Nichomedia in Bithinia;
wherein the Imperial Palace was consumed by fire. This being imputed to the
Christians, he sent commandments all over to persecute them, yea and to burn
the books of holy scripture, and to take from the place of Magistracy with
ignominy all them that were Christians.

Dioclesian persecuted the East, and Maximian the West. Cruelty was sharp in
Syria, and it began at the Bishops. See Eusebius. lib 8 cap. 6. This fury spread
into Mesopotamia, Cilicia, Pontus, Phrigia, Armenia, Egypt, yea even to the
Isles of Lesbos, as witnesses Sabellicus, Enne. 7. lib. 8.

Arithimus Bishop of Nichomedia, after he had made a confession of his Faith,
he was beheaded with a great troop of Martyrs.

Serena, Dioclesians wife, endured constantly martyrdom. The Empress Martyred.
This persecution was so cruel that none were spared. Hermanus Gigas.

In Europe, at Rome above all places was there greatest number of Martyrs. The
Provost Rictiouarus in Gaul, made a great massacre, especially at Cullaine, at
Treuers, and toward Moselle. Beda writes, that this persecution came even
into England, and then that Saint Alban, a man very renowned, received the
crown of Martyrdom. From this time they began to find out diverse kinds of
torments, but how much the more horrible they were, so much more exquisite
appeared the constancy of Martyrs. Eusebius says he beheld the persecution
made at Thebaida; and says that the glaues, axes and swords of Tormentors
were blunted and turned again with so great slaughter, and were altogether
tired, when the Christians with joy of heart singing Psalms presented them
selves to death. Sulpitius in the holy history, li. 2. says that Christians
then more ardently desired martyrdom, then the ambition of the Clergy
afterward demanded Bishopprickes. Beda de temptat. and Orosius lib. 7. cap. 25.

Dioclesian crooked with age, after he had assaied all cruelties that could be
devised to extirpate the Christians, willingly dismissed himself of the charge
of the Empire, and went to Nichomedia, and being tossed with rage and fury led
a private life. Maximian his companion, who obeyed him, as the lesser the
greater, deposed himself at the same time in the Town of Milaine. Dioclesian
at Solone passed his time as a Gardener. This change was made after they had
reigned together the space of twenty years. What deaths they had shall be told
hereafter.

Marcel borne at Rome, one Benets son, was chosen Bishop, about the 20. year
of Dioclesian, after the Chronicle of Henry the first. He was a true Pastor of
the Lords Church. In the book of Counsels there is attributed unto him two
Epistles. The one to them of Antioch, wherein he exhorts to follow the Roman
Church, and that without authority thereof no Sinode can be called. But any
body may see it is but a counterfeyt, and not agreeing with the time which
then was. The other written to Maxentius, is altogether impertinent: wherein
after he has commended Christian charity, he recites things which are as
pertinent so the time of that Church, as convenient to have been written to a
Tyrant who afterward was named Emperor. Co^stantius.


Such Epistles do sufficiently show that they wore forged by them which after
thrust themselves into the sheep-folde of the Lord, not to feed, but to rule.

He confirmed in the faith, Maurice, as he came from Syria to go into Gaul,
with the Legion which was called of Thebes.

Constantius Chlorus and Galerius Maximin, or Maximian, were made Augustes to
go through with the wars which their predecessors Dioclesian and Maximian
Herculeus left. Eutropius the Father of Constantius a Roman knight, of a noble
house was descended from Aeneas. The Empire as thus parted, that Constantius
governed Gaul, Spain, Italy, and Affrike: and Galerius, which Dioclesian had
adopted (giving him his daughter Valeria) the rest, namely Slauonia, Greece,
and the East. Yet Constantius who was neither ambitious nor covetous, refused
Affrike and Italy, co^tenting himself with Spain and Gaul, which he governed
well and peaceably, was well beloved of his subjects, and no enemy of the
Christian faith. He had two wives: the first Helena, which was of base
condition, of whom he had Constantine the great: which wife he was constrained
to leave, and take Theodora, the daughter of the wife of Maximian Herculeus. He
died of a mallady in England, two years after Dioclesian had deposed himself
from the Empire: for long time before had he been made Caesar, and adopted by
Dioclesian. Some attribute unto him those two years of reigning, beginning
from the nativity of our Lord, 505. See Pomp. Laet. During his reign there
was stirs of war. He was called Chlorus, for the color of his bright
shining face. Ignat. Lib. 1.

He had of his wife Theodora, Constantius, who was father of Gallus and Julian.

Maximian Herculian solicited Dioclesian to take again the Empire: Some say
Dioclesian answered, if he once understood the pleasure of Gardens he would
never think of reigning. The Historiographers write that Dioclesian dyed in a
rage and fury, feeling an infection in all his members. The death of Dioclesian.
See Nicepho. lib. 7. cap. 20.

Some say he poisoned himself ten years after he deposed himself from the
Empire, fearing Constantine and Licinius who bitterly reprehended him as a
favorer of Maxentius. See Eutrop. lib. 9. and Bapt. Igna. lib. 1.

Seuerus was adopted and made Caesar by Galerius, when Constantinus had left the
administration of Italy and of Affrike, and to Seuerus was given the charge of
the said Countries. But at Rome Maxentius was made Emperor by the Pretorian
soldiers, and without contradiction of the Senate, Seuerus not thinking
himself strong enough to resist Maxentius, thought to retire into Slauonia to
Maximin, but he was entrapped and overcome at Rauenna. Pompon. Laet.

Maxentius son of Maximian Herculian, being chosen Emperor by the Pretorian
soldiers in a tumult, and having gotten the victory upon Seuerus, waxed proud,
and gave himself unto pleasures and cruelties. Then Maximin or Maximian the
sisters son of Galerius, who also by him was made Caesar with Seuerus, and had
once the charge of the East, adopted Licinius which he left in Slauonia, after
coming to make war upon Maxentius was told of the treason of his people,
and so retired. See Pomp. Laet. in the life of Constantine and Galerius.

Galerius then having made Licinius Caesar as is said, a little time after fell
into a terrible disease which fretted his entralles, whereof he died. This was
because of his exceeding great lechery toward all, and horrible cruelty
toward Christians. For an ulcer he had in his bladder did eat his privy
members, and as all that part of his body rotted, worms came out, and no
remedy could be found for it. So the Physicians abandoned him: For the stench
was so intolerable, that neither Physician nor other durst approach unto him.
Wherefore in the end he dyed of a death worthy such a man, The end of
Galerius.
after he had reigned two years alone, and with the Cesars and companions of
his Empire the space of 16. years.

In the persecution moved by Maxentius, Marcel Pastor of the Church of Rome was
apprehended to sacrifice unto Idols, and to renownce his office, but he
despised all threatenings, and smiled, which the Tyrant Maxentius seeing,
commanded he should be beaten and chased out of the Town. He retired into an
house of a widow named Lucine, and there secretly maintained a Church. Which
the Tyrant hearing, made a stable of it for horses and other beasts of the
house, and there locked up Marcel. Being thus condemned, he left not to do the
office of a true Pastor, by Epistles which he writ to many. But finally being
tormented by the filthiness and stench of the place, in the end he yielded his
spirit to God, the year 308.

Eusebius a Gretian by Nation, a Physicians son, after Damasus succeeded in
the government of the Roman Church, in the great persecutions in the time of
Maxentius the horrible Tyrant. The Authors of the Ecclesiastical history make
no mention of this Eusebius.

The book of Counsels attribute to him three Decretall Epistles. The first to
the Bishops of Gaul. The second to the Egiptians. The third to the Bishops
of Tuscane, and Campania. His ordinances contained in those Epistles are these
in effect. That sheep shall not draw their Shepherd or Bishop into Law,
unless he deny the Faith. That a maid which shall be espowsed only by words
of the present time, may enter into Religion. That the Sacrifice of the Altar
be consecrated, not in cloth of silk, but in linen cloth, and such like
bables which the infamous favorers of the seat of Popes, have not been
ashamed to assign to those good and faithful Ministers of the Lord, to
disfigure and defile with their orders this honest face of the primitive Church
(which follow his head Jesus Christ in continual persecutions) to establish
their seat of perdition, and to pollute the blood of those holy Martyrs.

But contrary Eusebius travailed much in the harvest of the Lords word, as well
at Rome as other where in the time of persecutions under Maxentius, until that
(as Christianus Mattoens says) he finished his life by martyrdom, the year
of the Lord 309. But amongst Histogoriographers, there is great diversity for
the number of years.

Licinius born in Dare, was made Augustus, and companion of the Empire with
Maximin Galari, after the death of Seuerus, the year of our Lord, Constantin
the great.
308. He was a warlike man, and Slauonia was first given him to govern after
the East: he was noble, although he came of a pesant: he showed himself cruel
toward the children of Galerius, his ally. He was an enemy unto letters, as
having no knowledge, no not to write his own name. And he called the liberal
Arts a public poison and pestilence. Eusebius. lib. 4. ca. 13. He deserved
praise, in that he repressed abuses, the boldness and insolences of the
brauest of his Court, which he called the Moathes and Rattes of his Palace. He
reigned 14 years, lived 60. See Pomp. Laet.

Constantine the great, son of the Emperor Constantius and Helena, S.
Ambrose in his funeral Oration of Theodosius says, that he was a servant in
a stable, and was borne in England. He was instructed in the Military Art
under Galerius. He tamed the Sermates a fearce Nation and barbarous, brought
their Duke captive to Galerius, who conceived envy at the glory of this young
Prince, whereof being advertised, he retired from Rome toward his Father into
England, who dyed soon after. By the favor of Princes he was declared
Emperor, the year 309. The Senate writ unto him Letters to advertise him of
the evil government Maxentius, for the great cruelties he exercised at Rome,
whereupon he marched toward Rome, and pursued Maxentius, who retiring into the
Town, made cover Tyber with Boats, nigh the bridge Miluius, which by subtle
deceit (as he thought) he made join together to deceive Constantine, and to
have drowned him when he followed him. But he himself as furious first coming
out to fly, and not remembering his own stratageme that he practiced for an
other, entered on horseback with a few people upon the bridge, The death of
Maxentius.
where he was drowned in Tyber, the 6. year of his Empire. For this happy
deliverance, honors were given to Constantius, so he acquitted Italy and
Affrike. For his Father had only left him the Gaulois and Spain, and would so
have contented himself, had it not been for the war that Licinius raised,
making himself Caesar, and was established in the East.

The issue of Maximinian
Maximian (as we have said) with his great grief had forsaken the Empire,
being grieved so long to lead a private life, did his best by the means of
Maxentius his son chosen Emperor, to return to the Empire, but because he
succeeded therein not well, he retired toward his son in law Constantine,
unto whom he had given his daughter Fausta, and sought by ambushes to cast him
out of the Empire. Which Fausta perceiving well, revealed to her husband,
preferring him before her father. Wherefore the son in law besieged him at
Marcellis, Maximian chose his own death.
took him alive, and bad him choose whatsoever kind of death he would. He
strangled himself with a cord or girdle. And so this wicked and bloody man
which had shead so much Christian blood, unluckily finished his life: of his
age sixty.

Licinius at the first had some great familiarity with Constantine, and to
please him made a show to love the Christians, in so much that he married
Constance the sister of Constantine, and by a mutual consent together, caused
to publish laws for the Christians, but afterward coming again to his
nature, and forgetting the honor that Constantine had done him, began to
conspire against him, because Constantine so favored Christians, whose enemy
he declared himself, alleging this cause, that in their assemblies they
prayed for Constantine, and not for him. Licinius then began the persecution
by his own house; after he stretched it far by Laws and Edicts, into the
Provinces of the East, forbidding, especially Bishops to make assemblies and
Sinodes. Secondly, that men and women to avoid scandalles and offense, not to
assemble at prayers. Thirdly, that such as were appointed prisoners, as
transgressors of Edicts, should not be visited nor succored, in pain to
incur the like condemnation, etc. He then set himself against the Bishops,
not openly for fear of Constantine, but made them die secretly by his
Committees. Eusebius. Lib. 10. Chap. 8.

In the Town of Sebasta, Losias killed in a poole forty soldiers, whose
Martyrdom, Basile the great described, and other Martirs which were cruelly
murdered.

Licinius increased more and more his cruelty: but the Lord sent Constantine
to repress him, who experimented against him the Forces of the Gauls and
Italy, having overthrown him in Hungary, and pursued him into Macedonia,
where he repaired his forces. He was chased into Asia, and in the end yielded
himself, seeing he was vanquished by sea and by land, and was sent into
Thessalonica to live privately, yet could he not so escape the true vengeance
of his boldness, cruelty, and infidelity: For he was slain by Constantines
soldiers, about the year of our Lord three hundred twenty and four, after
some writers.

Melchiades the thirtith Bishop, succeeded in the Church of Rome, and was of
Affrike, after Damasus: A man of great piety, and a true servant in the holy
Ministry of the Gospel, and in the affairs of the truth of God, until he
was put to death under Maximin Galerius, the year of the Lord, 314. Read
hereupon the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius, where he recites diverse
cruel kinds of death wherewith the Saints of that time were persecuted.

Carsulan, Platina, Stella, and other of the Popes flatterers, attribute
wrongfully to these holy Martyrs of the Lord Jesus, whole Chariots full of lying
decrees; to the end the devilish ordinances of their ceremonies or rather
blasphemies might be approved by their authority.

They attribute unto him the forbidding of Fastes on the Sundays or
Thursdayes, because on them the Painims celebrated the solemnities of their God
Saturn. Item a decretall touching Baptism and the Confirmation. De
consecratione distinct. 5. cap. Spirit. sanct. and cap. De his etc.

Note this for the Bishops of the Roman Church, until Siluester the first.

But what man would think that poor and simple Ministers of the word and
Pastors of the Church, such as then were the Bishops of Rome, inhabiting in
ditches and caves, attending nothing under those Tyrants from day to day, but
only death, could have thought upon this pride and arrogance, which after those
Popes used in buildings and other ordinances, seeing they had neither Temples
nor houses whether they might retire? Peace was not yet given to the Church.
They yet enjoyed not that unprofitable Idleness, nor the sovereign delights
of this world: nor that whore which by little and little rose up, had not yet
her bed ready, yet such have been the inventions of false Prophets, to set
out the whoores body: and so is the Popes Sinagogue founded upon so evident
lies, as nothing more.

Assuredly it were great folly to give faith to such ridiculous dreams of
Satan, forged for the gain and profits of Priests. Better therefore it is in
this case to prove the spirits; namely, whether they be of God or not, as it
is said, 1. John. Chapter 4. seeing many false Prophets are come into this
world.

Until this time Pastors were as Stars in the Firmament of the Church,
shining as well in doctrine as in good example: they were also guarded by the
right hand of him that walked in the midst of the seven Candlestickes.
Apocal. 1. li 16
Hitherto men esteemed them as Angels, preaching the word of the Almighty God,
without fiction, yea that more is, Apo. 1.2.
hitherto they were figured by the white horse: because in the ministry they
carried the victorious Jesus Christ, as well in their hearts as in their
bodies, and as well in mouth as work.

Ceremonies in the celebration of the Supper.
The memory of the Lords Supper was not performed but in public assemblies,
and therefore the Synod of Gangre under the Emperor Constans, condemned
Eustace Bishop of Seluste in Armenia, because contrary to the order of the use
of the Church, he permitted some which disdained to come into the Church to
Communicate in particular houses. Socrat. Lib. 2. Cap. 43. Neither was it
lawful to celebrate the Supper in a profane place, as appears by Athanasius
in the Epistle to them of Antioche. Hierome against Iouinian reprehendeth the
manner of doing in other Christians at Rome, which Communicated in houses.
Wherefore said he entered they not into Churches? etc.

Deacons distributed the Supper of the Lord, Priests being present, with one
dividing the Eucharist, and this was after the Canon of the Council of Nice.

Epist. ad Rusticu^. Momacu^.
The Priests distributed the Cup of the blood of the Lord; Doctors of this time
often call it Cup or Mistike vessel. S. Hierome writing of vessels to
distribute the Lords Supper in, says of a Bishop of Tholouze called Exuperius;
There was nothing so rich as that which carried the body of our Lord in an
Osier basket, and the blood in a Glass.

By the first book of Eusebius. of the Euang. 92. Demonst. Chap. 10. One may
easily know that Christians daily celebrated the memory of the body and blood
of Jesus Christ. And S. Ambrose in his fifth book of Sacraments, Chapter. 4.
reprehendeth the Eastern Churches, because they communicated but once a year.

Vigills.
In the Churches of Affrike, they which should communicate, passed the night in
watchings and prayers. As Athanasius recites in the Apology of his flight:
adding, that all mutually ought before to be reconciled together. And in the
Western Churches, al communicated except the Catechumenistes, and such as did
penance: as appears by Hierome upon the 7. Chapter of the 2. to the
Corinthians.

About this time water was given with wine, as appears by S. Ambrose first
Chapter of his fist book of Sacraments. They put says he into the Cup wine
and then water, etc. which being mingled, was consecrated with the wine.

The manner of the Churches was, to give the Eucharist in the hand of him that
took it, as appears by the words of S. Ambrose to the Emperor Theodosius.
Reachest thou out thy hands which yet are bloody, and which yet distill the
blood by thee shead, to take the holy body of the Lord? Dare thou apply to
thy mouth the precious blood of the Lord? etc.

The Priest as he distributed the bread, said. Take the body of the Lord: and
in distributing the wine; Take the blood of Christ: and at both, the
Communicant answered, Amen. Ambrose in the 4. book of Sacraments, Chap. 5.

The Eucharist given to sick persons.
To such as were nigh their deaths they brought the Eucharist. Horatius a Priest
of the Church of Verseil, carried it to Ambrose nigh his death. Paulinus in the
life of S. Ambrose recites it.

May abuses began in this time to arise. Such as made any great voyage either
by sea or land carried the Eucharist, Abuses of the Supper.
as appears in the Oration of Saint Ambrose upon the death of Satyrius.

Touching the ceremonies used in administering the Sacrament, Denis has left by
writing that which follows. Ceremonies in administrating the Supper.
The Bishop having ended the prayers before the Altar, began to perfume and
compass all the place, after returning to the Altar, he began to sing
Psalms, and all followed. This done, the Ministers in order read something of
the holy scripture. That read, they caused the Catechumenistes with the
Enenguinians to go out, and such as were admitted to penance. One part of the
Ministers kept themselves before the portall of the Temple shut, the others did
such things as belonged to their charge; Such as are elected to minister with
the Priests, presented the bread before the Altar, and the Cup of blessing.

Whilst all the Churchmen sung praises and Himnes to the Lord, the Bishop
which said the prayers pronounced peace to all. And after every one had saluted
one an other, the Priests and the Bishop washed their hands with water. After
the Bishop in the midst of the Altar, environed with Priests and
Ministers, began to praise and magnify the works of the world, and propose to
the people the signs of the Supper, and to declare them unto them, and inuit
them to the participation thereof, which finally ended in thanksgiving, etc.

The word Mess was not found amongst the writers of this time. The word Mess
unused.
And as for the two preparatiue prayers of the Priest meaning to say Mass,
which are shufled into the works of Ambros; Erasmus himselfelfe judges them
not to be S. Ambroses. They contain also errors contrary to the doctrine of
him: As the adoration of the Sacrament, the Invocation of Saints, and chiefly
of the Virgin Marie.

The Emperor Constantine having overcome all these tyrants, namely, Maxentius,
Maximian, and Licinius, the Lord gave rest to his Church, which was almost
ruinated and trodden under feet; and gave a gentle spirit to Constantine to
repair by a Monarchy, the great dissipation and discord which the
misgouernment of many had brought.

Constantine was long ere he could unwrap himself out of his ancient and
Ethnicke superstitions, his wife Fausta maintaining him therein; but after he
saw himself peaceable in his Empire, there was courage given unto him to
apply his power unto the matters of the Church.

True it is, as for Baptism, that he deferred it a long time, because he
always determined to go against the Persians, and upon devotion without
knowledge to be baptized in Iordain. Eusebius recites it in his life: yet
after all, he honored it, and authorized it by Edicts and Laws which he
caused to be published.

He had a burning heart to the Faith, and was marvelous careful to help the
necessities of the Church: he was of nature soft and benign, and delighted in
all good works: and not only revoked the tyrannicke and cruel laws that were
before made against Christians, but gave to Churches great privileges. It was
not enough for him to account Ministers equal to himself, but he honored
and preferred them before him, as representing the divine Majesty. And by such
means he was both loved, honored and cherished, not as an Emperor, but as a
Father. Eusebius.

Siluester a Roman, was constituted Bishop of Rome after Melchiades, and
governed the Church a long time.

Being ordained Bishop, he exercised not only the office of a Pastor in
teaching, but also in reprehending the vices of the Clergy.

There are attributed unto him certain miracles, by which he drew many to the
Christian faith.

When Maxentius reigned at Rome, to shun his cruelty, Siluester retired out
of Rome, and remained a certain time at the Mount Soracte: and returned under
Constantine, after the death of the said Tyrant.

Constantine established many laws. First that Christ should be worshipped of
all, as the true God.

Item that whosoever should do injury to any Christian, the half of his
goods should be confiscated.

He permitted all such as were under his Empire, not only to be Christians,
but also to found and build Temples.

The word Martyr, was used in the time of Constantine, Martyr.
then when in remembrance of the Martirs men builded Temples, and about the
thirtieth year of Constantine, a Temple called Martirium Magnum, was builded
in Jerusalem, Temple.
in the place called Cranium. See Sozom, Ich. 2. Cap. 26.

Constantine caused to be made a Tabernacle in form of a Temple, which he
commanded to be carried when he went to the wars, wherein he held the
assemblies of the Christians. Sozom. Lib. 1. Chap. 8.

Touching the Donation attributed unto him: Donation of Constantine.
that is to say, that he gave Rome, Italy, and other Western Provinces to
Siluester, as the Roman Bishops pretend, it is a matter invented, or at least
doubtful: and even the Popes own decrees are against it.

The two last Chapters make no mention of other Provinces, but only of the
Town of Rome, 96. Did. c. Co^stantinus. c. Fundamenta. De. electio. Lib. 6
12. q. 1. c. Futuram.
no nor in the ancient volumes of decrees, is there any mention, nor any thing
found in any Author of that time, as Antonine says in his Chronicles. See
Naucler.

Of this matter see Laurencius Valla, and John le Maire in his Treatise of the
difference of Schisms and Counsels of the Church.

Constantine determined to build a Town of his name, and elected Bizantium for
it, which he compassed with ditches, and the Town builded in the midst he
called Constantinople of his name, there establishing the Emperial seat of his
Empire.

Bizanzium was an ancient Town, Bizantium Constantinople.
which a little before was destroyed by Gallien and Pertinax, but Constantine
restored it, and adorned it with rich ornaments, brought from all the parts of
the world: in so much the Hierome writes that Constantine stripped naked as it
were all the Towns of the world to embellish this new Rome. For he transported
from the Castle which was at Ilion, the chief Town of Troy the Palladium, and
from Troas the Image of Apollo, which was of Brass, and of a marvelous
greatness. From Rome a pillar of Porphire called Coclis, which he environed
with diverse mettalls, and placed it in the market place paued with stones.

Before we come to the successors of Siluester, we will briefly touch the
estate of the Church at that time. And first;

Of the Ecclesiastical degrees.
Bishops Priests.
There were of old three Ecclesiastical degrees; namely, the Bishop, the
Priest, and the Deacon, with the Ministers and company of the faithful.
Ambrose in his book of the Sacerdotall dignity. Hierome to Nepotian says,
that Bishops and Priests were all one, saving that the Bishop was a name of
dignity, and Priest was a name of age: but in respect of schisms and
necessities happening in the Church, there was made a distinction. Ambrose in
the aforesaid book witnesses, that the ordination is alike; for both are
Priests: but the Bishop is the chief Priest. Other names, as Subdeacons,
Acolites, and Exorcists, came after.

Clergy.
The name of Clergy was received in this time, to signify all Ecclesiastical
offices and dignities. Eusebius. Lib. 10. Chap. 2. Hierome to Nepotian yields
this reason of the name. Cleros says he in Greek, signifies Lot in Latin;
therefore are Clerks named, Clerks.
because they are of the lot and of the inheritance of the Lord; or for that
the Lord is their Lot, that is to say, their part and heritage. Afterward men
called Clerks such as every Church nourished at the own charge, to serve
after for the ministry of the Church.

Metropolitanes.
Metropolitanes were so called by reason of the principal and chief Towns
whereof they were Bishops, and so Zozomen. Lib. 3. Cap. 16. He calls Basile
Metropolitan of Cappadocea. And the same in Lib. 2. Chap. 8. says the like of
an Archbishops name.

Patriarch was named the Bishop of all the Province, Socrates Lib. 5. Chap. 8.
Patriarch.


The office of a Bishop was to teach the people, The office of a Bishop.
as also the Priests. But in the Church of Alexandria, after the poison of
Arrius, the Bishop alone had that charge. Socrates lib. 5. chap. 22.

The ordination of Ministers appertained to the Bishop, Ministers.
which is all the right of pre-eminence that they had above Priests, as S.
Jerome says to Euagrius.

Vicars of Bishops are found in the Canons of the Council of Ancyra,
Neocesaria and Antioch, Chorepiscopi, Vicars or Bishops particulers.
and Basile uses that name in the Epistle fifty and four. Amongst the
general Epistles, there is one found under the name of Damasus to Prosper,
wherein Damasus being asked, answers, that Vicars called Chorepiscopi, were
no more but Priests, and that they could not consecrate Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons, nor Virgins, nor Aultars; neither dedicate Churches, or like
things contained in the Epistle, whereof let each man judge, considering that
time wherein Damasus was.

To Priests or Lords it appertained also to take up debates and controversies.
It appears by Epiphanius, Lib. 2. Tom. 2. Heresy 69. that they were also
sent Ambassadors to Counsels to accuse Heretics, The custody of
Ecclesiastical goods belonged unto them. Sozomen, Lib. 5. Chap. 8. says, that
Theodoretus a Priest of Antioche, was Guardian of the precious vessels.

Deacons administered only, and executed Ecclesiastical charges. They were
carried unto public disputations to play the Notaries, and gather together the
Acts. As appears in the example of Athanasius, who came with his Bishop
Alexander then an old man, to the Council of Nice, and did greatly help and
aid Alexander to discover and confute the fallacies of heretics. Rufin. lib.
1. chap. 14.

The constitutions of Siluester (as is contained in the 1. Tome of Counsels,
makes those degrees. Deacons. New degrees
A commandment of Subdeacons to obey Deacons and Acolites, Subdeacons,
Exorcistes to obey Acolites: Lectors, Exorcistes: Porters, Lectors: and to
Porters, the Abbot: and to the Abbot, the Monks. Exorcists after Epiphanius,
were such as interpreted one tongue by an other, either at Lectors, or at
Colloquies.

Diaconesses.
In the Code of Theodosius there are certain constitutions which make also
mention of Diaconesses, which was a ministry of women, for the visitation and
inspection of bodies.

Each Town had his Bishop. Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 6. says, that in the 10.
Canon of the Council of Nice, it was forbidden that in any Cities should be
two Bishops: to the end that the order of Ecclesiastical government (as
proceeding from one head) might be distributed into diverse actions to Priests
and Deaco^s, whereof the number was indifferent, although ordinarily it was of
seven, according to the 14. Canon of the Council of Neocesaria.

The Eccclesiasticall administration.
Diverse sorts of Auditors.
Basile divides the Auditors of Gods word into two companies: the one, of such
as were rude: and the other, of such as had made some progress therein. Ambrose
distinguishes them into Laymen and Clerks, in his book of the Sacerdotall
dignity. chap. 2. Hierome upon the exposition of the 7 chap of the 2. to the
Cor. divides them into 3. that is, Catechumenes, faithful, and penitent.

Prayers.
Prayers were ordinarily made for all things necessary; for the prosperity of
the Empire, for the health of the Church, for public tranquillity, for
enemies, and for such as were not yet converted. See Socrates, lib. 2. cap. 37.

Confession taken from the common people.
Nectarius first took away in the Church of Constantinople the ceremony
ordained for penance and confession; wherein a Priest particularly applied
absolution, and ordained that each one after the witness of his conscience,
should approach the communion. The occasion of this defense came of a woman of
a noble house, who having confessed to a Priest that she had had the company
of a Deacon in the Church: the Priest revealed this scandal to the said Bishop,
and the ceremony of confession was abolished. Socrates lib. 5. chap. 9.

Ceremonies invented.
In the time of Constantine, many ceremonies unnecessary and evil agreeing with
the word of God, were brought in; as candles lighted in the day time; which
this Costantine instituted in Temples, newly by him builded, and consecrated
worthy ornaments and other things altogether superfluous and superstitious,
which other Churches then took up.

Bishops also at this time denounced to their people Feast-dayes. As Basile
rehearses of himself, Feasts.
that he denounced in a Sermon the feast day of a Martyr Iulitta.

One new thing not used in times past, The Immunitie of Clerks began.
was now brought in. The Emperor Constantine gave power to Clerks, to appeal
from civil Magistrates to Bishops: which thing was the first that gave
occasion to Antichrist to change and transform the kingdom of Jesus Christ
into a polliticke kingdom, and by little and little to lift himself up above
Magistrates, and of Ministers and Doctors, to become Dictators and Kings,
leaving the charge of souls.

A new thing also of this time, Building of Temples.
the care to build Temples was committed to Bishops. As Constantine committed
to Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem the building of a Temple, which he willed
should be builded in the place where the Sepulcher was, Sozomene in his 4.
book and 13. chap, rehearses, that Basile builded the Temple of the Town of
Ancyra in Gallatia.

A new charge also was given to Bishops of this time, to consecrate Temples, to
seek out and transport from place to place, relics of Saints. As we may see
in the 85. Epistle of S. Ambrose.

Such graunts perverted the true office of a Bishop, which is to teach and feed
the flock with the pure word of God.

Of the goods of the Church.
The Church of this time began to be enriched by gifts, largitions and
munifice^ces of Princes. Maximin feeling himself taken with a grievous disease
made an Edict for the Christians, Edicts for the Christians.
that the houses, lands and possessions taken away in times of persecutions
should be restored to the true possessors, Eusebius. li. 9. ch 10.

The Emperor Co^stantin, not only caused that which had bin taken from the
Christians to be again restored, but also caused to be sold for the commodity
of the poor of the Church, all the most precious Images of the Heathens.
Sozomene, lib. 2. chap. 5. Revenues assigned to the Church.
Moreover he withdrew from the Revenues of every Town a certain Impost, and
ordained it for the profit of the Church and clergy thereof, commanding by
Edict that that gift should pass to them successively for ever. The same
Sozomene li. 1. chap. 3. and li. 5. chap. 5. He commanded further, to bring to
the treasury of the Church their goods who had been martyred, which left no
children nor kinsfolks their heirs. As Eusebius recites in the life of
Constantine, li. 2. He willed also that men should distribute Corn in common
to the poor. Basile in his Epistle 104. witnesses that many dedicated whole
houses to the profit of Churches: yea some of their own motion all their
substance unto Churches, which not being permitted daring the reign of other
Emperors, was permitted and lawful by the constitution of Constantine,
contained in the law Ei eod. De sacro. sanct. Eccles.

The use of the goods of the Church.
The use of the goods of the Church, was applied to sustain the poor
pilgrims. Yet Ambrose in his first book of Offices, chap. 56. excepteth such
as had any goods and revenues of their own to maintain them. And Hierome in
the Epistle to Damasus, admonishes that amongst Clarks there should be none
but such as were nourished at the charges of the Church, and that had no
patrimony, or that had no other means to sustain themselves.

Immunities.
Besides, the wages and oblations which Constantin gave, he also granted in all
places Immunities to Priests, which also the heirs of Constantine ratified.
See the Code, de epischo and cleris.

The poor.
After Ministers, the chief care was of the poor, whose Proctors the Deacons
were. Cyrillus Bishop of Jerusalem, is praised, because in a great dearth for
the succor and help of the poor, he caused the vessels, vailes, and other
precious things of the Temple to be sold, Sozomene lib. 4. cap. 25. And
Hierome ad Rusticum accuses Bishops which usurp and make proper that which is
common. If the liberality of Emperors failed, the Churches defrayed the
charges of Bishops and all others that went to Sinodes. Theodoret. lib. 2, cap.
16.

Libraries.
The books of the holy scripture, which for the most part were lost during the
persecutions at this time by the benificence of the Emperor Constantine, were
written in great dilidence, and with magnificence worthy of such an Emperor.
By the witness of Athanasius it is plain enough, that in the Chrians Temples
there were Libraries, Libraries.
and therein he accuses the impiety of the Arrians, which took out these
books and burnt them. Hierome against Rufin makes mention of the Library at
Cesaria. It appears by the Acts, Notaries at Rome.
of a Roman Sinode held under Siluister, that the Roman Church maintained
certain Notaries to write the acts of the Martirs.

Schools.
There were also Schools of two sorts. Ethnicks or Philosophical, and
Ecclesiastical. Nazianzenus in the death of his brother Cesarius, makes
mention of the Schools of Palestine, wherein he learned Rhethoricke.
Lactantius held that of Nicomedia. Ephiphanius a Sophister, kept that of
Laodicea. That of Cesaria in Cappadocia was renowned, because Constantius
caused Gallus and Julian his children to be taught there. But above al, that of
Alexandria was most famous, for blind Didimus, who ruled there. Rufin. Lib. 2.
Cap. 7. And Basilius calls it a goodly shape of all doctrine. In Europe that
of Athens because of letters, was of most acount: wherein Julian had for
condisciples, Basile and Gregory Nazianzenus, as the said Gregory witnesses
in his Inuectiue against Julian. Victorinus Affrican, taught at Rome
Rhethorike. Reward of profess.
See Hierome in his Treatife of Illustrious men. The Salarie or reward was to
professors paid after the law of Constantine, contained in the title de
profess. and med. in the Code.

At this time there was a man called Arrius, Arrius a professor*
a professor in the school of Alexandria in Egypt, whose Heresy did miserably
torment and distract the union of the Church. He was a man swelled with
ambition and presumption. One day having heard in the congregation of the
faithful, Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, subtly and learnedly disputing of
the divine essence, after he had showed that the unity thereof was in a
priuitie, Arrius Logician, rather then a Theologian, began to dispute and vomit
out the p^ison he had long time gathered. Epip. Lib. 2. Tome 2. Necesie. 69.
rehearses, that Arrius was now found in an error: that Melitius a Bishop in
Thebaide accused before Alexander his Bishop, who after that, looked to him
more narrowly, and took heed to his subtilties.

Such a care had Bishops at this time one of an other, that no evil should go
forward.

Arrius.
Arrius maintained the Son of God to be a creature, and the holy Ghost
created of him. But with what arguments and babble of words he used to confirm
his error, it should be superfluous to rehearse. There are long Epistles of
Arrius to Alexander, and of Alexander to all Churches, by which one may more at
large know the spring of all this infection. Alexander at the beginning sought
to stop this evil by silence. But seeing that Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia
took upon him the cause of Arrius in hatred of the Church of Alexandria,
Alexander not only published the Apostasy of Arrius, but also excommunicated
him and his adherents as Heretics and Schismatickes, which would maintain
that God was sometimes without being Father, and that the Son was a creature
and made, who knew not perfectly and exactly the Father.

It is strange how so cursed an error should in so little time subvert so many
Bishops, yea the most learned, not only of the East Church, but of the West
also. Epiph. says, that Arrius being chased away, went into Palestine. But
Alexander hasted Letters every where to the number of seventy, to advertise
the Bishops of Arrius his doings, who was received of his Protector Eusebius.
Arrius in the mean time sent Letters to Alexandria, naming him Pope and his
Bishop.

The great Council of Nice. Anno domini. 320.
These debates and contentions brought great dolor and care unto the good
Emperor Constantine, and incontinent to give order therefore, seeing this
evil from day to day got the upper hand, sent Hosius Bishop of Corduba in
Spain to Alexander, a man of great piety and authority, with his Letters
Patents to the Church, to find means to extinguish this fire whose flames
were blown all over. Eusebius recites the Tenure of Constantines Letters full
of all piety, in the life of the said Emperor. Lib. 2.

Hosius furnished with these Letters came into Egypt, and did all that he could
to agree Alexander and Arrius, but in vain. Whereof the Emperor being
advertised, was more grieved then before, at the request of the Bishops, and
instance of Alexander, as witnesses Rufin. lib. 1. cap. 1. ordained at his
own charge an universal Sinode at Nice, a town of Bithinia, the year of
Christ. 320. after some, and the year of his Empire 17. At which Sinode, from
all the parts of the earth came Bishops, and the number was 250. after
Socrates. li. 1. ca. 8. besides Priests, Deacons, A colites, and other
multitudes. Theodoret. li. 1. ca. 7. says 318. Bishops; and this is about the
number whereof the most part of the Elders agree, that have written thereof.

Some say, that the Emperor before he assembled this general Sinode, had
caused Arrius to come unto him, and in the presence of some Bishops having
enquired of his heresy, Arrius with an oath answered that he bred no heresies,
then straight the Emperor in the presence of all said: If thou have sworn
with a good conscience, and that thy oath be made with a full faith, then
departest thou an Innocent. But if falsely thou call God to witness, let him
whom thou have offended take vengeance. So many spoke for him which he before
had gained. Notwithstanding the Emperor writ large Letters that men should
take heed of Arrius that they builded not their Faithes upon his heresies.
These letters began with these words. Constantine the great Augustus, etc.
The place for the Sinode was in the Emperors Palace, wherein he had placed
seats couenable and convenient for each state and degree. The Emperors seat
was in the first rank, and it was covered with Gold, as Eusebius says in
his life. Liber. 3. He himself made the first exhortation to enter into the
matter, whereunto by consent of all, Eustachius Bishop of Antioche had charge
to answer. The Emperor the better to agree with them, proposed the great
cruelty and tirannie of the persecutions passed: that now peace was open unto
them, and that it should be a strange thing, the outward enemies being
vanquished, to stir up wars within. Theodoret. Lib. 1. Cap. 7.

Amongst the Bishops which were there assembled against Arrius was Macarius
Bishop of Jerusalem, Eustachius Bishop of Antioche, Hist. Eccle. Li. 10. Chap.
4.
Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spain, Pathuntius of Egypt, and Maximus, (these
two had their eyes put out for the Faith) and many other persons which had
suffered persecution under the aforesaid Titants. Spiridian.
There was also Spiridian, Bishop of Tremythe in Cyprus, and Nicholas Bishop of
Mirme in Licia, a very grave man. Also Athanasius then a Deacon of the Church
of Alexandria, Theophilus Bishop of the Goths, and Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, etc. Spiridian was he that in Lent presented flesh to a Pilgrim as
he passed by, and did eat himself, and caused him also to eat, saying that
to pure Christians all things are pure. Hist. tripart. lib. 1. Chap. 10.

After that license was granted to the two parties, Eusebius Bishop of
Nichomedia, the Patron of Arrius, presented a Libell full of blasphemies,
containing briefly that which has been before said. That God who is for ever,
was not always the Father. And seeing all things were created of God, the
son also must be a work made, and many other blaspemies. This Libell was
recited and read with great sorrow of most part of them which were there,
because of the blasphemies contained therein, and was torn in pieces, to the
great confusion of the Author. There followed a very sharp contention of both
parts, which the Emperor harkened unto with great patience. But finally
Eusebius and his consorts fearing to be banished, made a countenance to
renounce their errors, and to subscribe to the determination of the Fathers,
except Secundus and Theon, as Athanasius recites in the decrees of the Sinode
of Nice. But the Bishops after they knew their fraud, and how they disguised
the truth with words, began to use the word Essence and Homousios, that is to
say, of one same substance. Then the Eusebians abhorred these words, Homousios
and Essential, as strange and unused in the holy scripture. The Fathers
declared, that necessarily they were constrained to use these words, to
signify that the Son was engendered of the substance of the Father,
according to which, be was consubstantiall to the Father, that is to say, of
one same substance and essence.

A Philosopher who by no Arguments could be surmounted, was finally converted
by a simple Bishop, who said unto him: Harken Philosopher, there is one God
which made all things in the power of his word, and by the sanctification of
his holy spirit confirmed them. This word which we call the Son of God, has
redeemed mankind, which was in the bottomless pit of hell, by his death and
resurrection. Torment nor trouble thy self too much with thine own arguments
and demonstrations in this matter which must be apprehended by faith, and that
Jesus Christ himself and his Apostles has taught us. Answer me, do thou
believe it is so? The Philosopher astonished said unto him, I believe, and
confess to be vanquished, and after exhorted others of his profession, with
him to believe the doctrine.

At the said Council, Constantine having received diffamatorie Libels,
accusations, debates, and particular quarells of Bishops one against an other,
caused them all to be cast into the fire, that none might understand their
debates or errors. God has ordained you Bishops (says he) and has given you
power to judge of your selves, by means whereof we yield our selves to your
judgment. Men may not judge you but God alone, unto whom we refer the
deciding and determination of your controversies.

This humility of Constantine, afterward brought great damage to his
Successors.

The said Council would have forbidden Priests and Deacons to dwell with their
wives: Pathuntius.
but Pathuntius whom Constantine had in such reverence, that he often caused
him to come into his Palace, and embraced, yea kissed the place from whence
his eye was plucked out, rising up, confessed that marriage was honorable
amongst all men and the bed undefiled: and said that the company of the husband
with the wife was chastity, and persuaded the Council not to set out such
Laws which might give occasion of fornication both to them and their wives.
The Council approved his opinion, and so dealt nothing upon that matter, but
left to every one liberty to marry or not: according as to every one should
seem expedient: wherefore as before, so now also was it lawful for Priests to
retain their wives and to marry. But after Siritius and Gregory the seventh,
forbad such marriage, and commanded continency: which notwithstanding the
Eastern Priests never received.

It is not then true which some write, that Calixus who was before this
Council, commanded continency: For then there would have been some mention of
him in the said Council and of his decree. Eusebius.

Extract out of the Acts of the Council of Nice.
Hist. Eccle. Lib. 10. cha. b.
We believe in God the Father Almighty, Creator of all things, as well visible
as invisible, and in our Lord Jesus Christ, the only son of God, borne and
engendered of him, that is to say, of his proper substance, and therefore God
of God, borne and not made, of the same substance of the Father: by which son
all things were made, as well in heaven as in earth: who also for the love of
us men and for our salvation descended from heaven and took our human flesh
and was made man. He suffered death and passion, and after rose again the third
day, then he ascended into heaven, and finally must come to judge the quick
and the dead. We also believe in the holy Ghost.

All such as say that there was a time that the son was not, and that before
be was borne in the earth he was not, and that he was created of nothing, or of
other substance then of the father, or that he is the son of God, but
co^uertible and mutable, the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church,
excommunicateth and anematizeth them.

It was also amongst other things ordained in this Council, that no Bishop
ought to receive any of them which an other Bishop has excommunicated or
thrust from his Church, were he Clarke or Lay man. But if we unjustly, for
hatred or anger were excommunicated or chased away, It was ordained that in
each Province the Prelates there should assemble every year twice, to hold
their provincial Council, Provincial Councels each year.
to know and judge of such matters: to the end that if any man had done any
thing unjustly it might be retracted by others, and that if he had done well,
it might be approved.

That in Alexandria and Rome, the ancient custom should be kept; namely that
the Bishop of Alexandria should have care of the Churches of Egypt, and that
of Rome, of such Churches as are about Rome.

That if two or three Bishops strive or do not agree to consecrate one elected
for some dissension: In this case they must hold themselves to the
determination of others of the province, and especially of the Metropolitan.

That the prerogative which before times has been given to the Bishop of
Jerusalem, shall be kept for him, without prejudice notwithstanding of the
Metropolitans dignity.

That the Cathares heretics called Nouatians, if they would repent themselves
and come again to the Church and confess the faith according to the belief of
the church, should be received into the order thereof. And if their Bishop come
with ours let the^ sit with our Priests: And let the name of a Bishop remain
only to the^ which have always held the catholic faith and to no others.

That in one City there be but one Bishop.

That if any of them which indiscreetly have been ordained Bishops, being
accused of crime, do confess it, or be by others convicted, let them be
deposed; and likewise such as have erred in the faith, and by error have bin
promoted, if after they be known.

That such as in time of persecution have received the faith, and with a good
heart repent themselves, do 5. years make their penance with the Catechumenes,
(that is to say, such as learn the faith) to communicate with the^ in prayers
only: after which term they may be received to ye Sacraments of ye Church.

That such as for the Faith have renounced the Camp, and after return thither
again, do there penance 13. year, and after to be received to the Sacraments
if a true repentance might be seen in them. And notwithstanding that it should
be in the faculty and power of the Bishop to abridge the term, if he see their
penance to be fruitful and hearty.

That if that foresaid penitents come to peril of death before their penance be
ended, that then the Sacraments should be administered unto them: yet if they
escaped, they should be bound to end their penance.

Catechumenes.
That the Catechumenes which had likewise erred, should be three years
separated from others, and do their penance apart, and after be received with
them.

That no Bishop nor Clarke presume to clime up from a little Church to a
greater.

That the Clarke which shall leave his Church without lawful cause, going
vagarant and running here and there, be not received to other Churches to the
Communion.

That no Bishop ordain any who is not of his own Dioces without leave of his
Diocesan.

Unlawful gain.
That none take any usury, nor gain or advantage, upon Wine or Corn, as
customably men do, giving new for old, or taking the sixth part of the gain, or
the tenth half, and if he do it, let him be driven away as one that takes
unlawful gain.

That Deacons be not preferred before Priests, nor sit in their rank, nor in
their presence do distribute the Sacraments but only minister unto them, and
assist when they do distribute: but when there are no Priests there, in that
case they may depart them.

That the Diaconesses because they are not consecrated, be accounted amongst
Laie-people.

There were many Canons made and discerned in that Council and forms of
confessions of Faith touching the divine essence really distinguished, truly
and eternally into three persons, the Father, the son, and the holy Ghost,
which are one only God, alone eternal, infinite, and all perfect in himself.
Which persons are coessentiall and coeternall, without confusion of properties
and relation, and without any inequality, etc. But here it should be too long
to recite the said confessions, which many good Bishops presented in this
Council. And for the most part they are found in the books they have left unto
their posterity. The Fathers then united in the true doctrine touching the
person of the son of God, concluded this Article as is above said. The
Emperor Constantine also gave out a decree and ordinance thereof: And even as
Porphirius an enemy to Christian religion, in times past received the salarie
and reward of confusion for his impiety. So Arrius and his accomplices, true
Porphirians, were to all an horror, and abomination. He added further, and
denounced the pain of death to all such as hid the writings of Arrius, without
discrying them and burning them in the fire.

As for the other occasion and cause for which this Sinode was assembled:
namely touching the celebration of Easter, Ordinances against Arrius.
the Emperor being grieved that the inequality of the observation thereof
troubled so many Churches, proposed to the Fathers, that the decision thereof
was made, that all men should celebrate it on one same day. It seemed unto him
unfit that so sacred a feast as that should be celebrated after the immitation
of the Jewish nation, the enemies of Jesus Christ. So having made these
remo^stra^ces unto the Council, he asked of Acesius Bishop, what he thought
thereof: but Acesius durst not say contrary to him. This question then was
decided after they had ordained of things Ecclesiastical, and it was agreed
thereupon that the celebration of Easter should be observed on one same day
throughout all the world.

The difference also which was betwixt Miletius Bishop of Licia, a Town in
Thebaide, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria, was agreed. Epipha. says: Lib. 2.
Tom. 2. Here Is. 68. that the aforesaid Peter held that they which in time of
persecution were fallen into renouncement, returning to the Church and
confessing their fault, if they demanded pardon, that they ought not to be
suspended from the communion. Miletius maintained that we may not receive them
until the persecution cease, least others by too great facility of pardoning
offenders, should be offended, or elfe thereby might be provoked or induced to
fall into like infirmity. Socrates says, that for many other causes Meletius
had bin deposed by Peter of Alexandria, and that for this ignominy, he always
after bare evil will unto Peter and his successors, Achilles and Alexander:
which Theodorus also recites. Lib. 1. Chap. 8.

This is briefly that which may be said in this history of the Council of
Nice, which although it was as a thunderbolt to confound that wicked Arrian
heresy, yet was it not so destroyed, but after it lifted up the head again.
And that more is, it was never more pernicious to all the Church, the^ after
the death of Constantine, when especially it had gotten for the defense some of
the Emperors which lifted up her head; notwithstanding that which Athanasius
in his Epistle to Epictetus, Bishop of Corinth says is true: The faith which
the Fathers have expounded by the holy scripture in that Sinode, is sufficient
to confound all impiety, etc.

Eusebius in his chap. 27. lib. 3. recites that the machinations and ambushes
laid by the sectaries of Arrius and Eusebius against Athanasius, gave occasion
to the Emperor to conuocate in his time many Counsels and assemblies of
Sinodes.

There was a Priest who got favor of Constantia, widow of the Tyrant Licinius
and the sister of Constantine: whom this Priest made believe that great wrong
was done unto Arrius at the Council of Nice, and that his faith was not
repugnant from that of the said Council. A little after, the said Constantia,
taken with a mortal disease, sent for her brother Constantine, and gave
witness of the innocence of Arrius, whereby this Priest having gotten access
to the Emperor by the means of Constantia, he himself then persuaded
touching Arrius, namely, that he thought no otherwise then the Council did.

Constantine then sent Letters to call again Arrius, who came to
Constantinople with Euzoius a Deacon, Arrius gives in his confession.
who also had been deposed by Alexander. They by the Emperors commandment
gave in a disguised and covert confession, the beginning whereof was.

We believe in God the Father almighty, and in our Lord Jesus Christ his
son, begotten of the Father before all worlds. God and Word, by which all
things were created, as well in heaven as in earth, who came down and took
humane flesh, and suffered death, was raised again and ascended into heaven,
and should come again to judge the quick and the dead, etc. The rest is in
Sozomen. lib. 2. chap. 27.

After Constantine had seen this confession, he asked them if with a good heart
they thought as they spoke? Arrius affirmed yea: Constantine mistrusting his
own judgment, sent Arrius with his adherents to an assembly of Bishops which
then was at Jerusalem, commanding them diligently to examine the confession of
Arrius: that is, if he had revoked his error, and if Alexander did him wrong or
no. Sinode of Jerusalem.
The Sinode of Jerusalem advertised of the Emperors will, sent Letters to the
Bishops of Egypt, Thebaid, and Libia, exhorting them, that according to the
witness of the Emperor, Arrius might be received into the Communion. The
Arrians strengthened with these witnesses, came again into Alexandria, and
thrusting themselves into company, Athanasius who then had the charge of
Alexandria, would not admit them. Arrius returned to Constantinople to make his
complaints against Athanasius: there likewise he sought to bring himself by
force into that Church: but Alexander who had the government thereof opposed
himself against him, saying: that the author of such an heresy, A tumult of
the Arrians.
and a perturber of so many Churches ought not to be received. This came to a
great contention, the Eusebians threatening they would cause Alexander to be
banished.

Certain days following, the Arrians concluded to introduce Arrius by force
into the Church. But Alexander placing his force in the Armor of piety,
entered over night into the Temple, accompanied with two of his household, and
with tears passed all the night in Orisons and prayers to the Lord, that he
would not suffer that rauishing wolf lately covered with a Lambs skin, to
thrust into his flock.

Some say that he added these words in his prayer: O Lord if it be thy will,
and that by thy just judgment (which is inuestigable) this wolf be admitted
into thy Church, deliver me thy poor servant from this present life. The next
morning of this determination, Arrius environed with a great multitude of
Eusebians, was led to be brought into the Temple as in a triumph: but when
they were come to the place called the Market place of Constantinople, Arrius
was suddenly taken with a fear and an astonishment within him, which caused a
pain in his belly, so that leaving the company, he was constrained to go into
a secret place to purge his belly: the company which should accompany him to
the Temple, attended him in the mean while: but seeing him tarry long, some
went to the easing place and found Arrius dead upon the siege, his entrails
being come out at his fundament. This was the end of Arrius, which greatly
feared his companions; who to cover so foul and infamous a death, said he was
suddenly suffocated and choked with a disease of the stomach. Others, that he
was poisoned. Some said, that too great joy had stifled him; yet none could
say, but this was a just judgment of God upon him. Athanasius, Lib. I. against
the Arrians, and the Epist. to Serapion. Sedulius a Christian Poet recites it
in his Verses.

The names of days.
Siluester called the days otherwise then before, for the day of the Sun, le
Dimanche: the other days, Feries, 2.3.4.5.6. and Samedi for the day of Saturn.

Antonie being in Egypt in the wilderness, Constantine writ unto him,
Donatist. 3.
to pray to God for him, and for his children. Victorinus of Affrike an Orator,
was also of this time, and Donatus, of whom came the Donatist heretics,
against which S. Augustine writes.

The constitutions attributed to Siluester touching the consecrattion and use
of cream, to mark such as were baptized, and annoint such as were nigh death,
and such other inventions, are in the book of Councels: whereof Luitprandus,
Platina, and Sabellicus make mention in their books, and speak of them after
their own judgment.

Counsels in diverse places.
After the Council of Nice, Siluester at the commandment of Constantine,
made assemble a Sinode at Rome of 277. Bishops: wherein there was condemned
Arrius, Photinus, Sabellius, with one Calixtus, as the book of Councels
shows. And again by a Sinode following, the decrees of the Council of Nice
were confirmed, and the solemnity of Easter established to be observed on the
Sunday from the 14. of the Moon, until the 21.

The multitude of Councels and Sinodes, multiplied traditions upon traditions,
and brought in great errors, and the good and holy constitutions of Nice were
soon after by such means contradicted.

1. At Neocesaria in Pontus Polemoniake, betwixt Paphlagonia and Armenia, was
instituted, that none should be a priest before the age of 30. years.

2. At Elebert in Spain, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, were
commanded to abstain from their wives, and not to have children, otherwise
that they should be deposed.

That there should be no Images in the Temples of Christians. If any broke an
Image and were murdered: Images chap. 60,
because it is not written in the Gospel; neither is there read that it has
been done by any of the Apostles, it pleased the Council that such a one be
not admitted nor received into the number of Martyrs.

3. At Rome it was ordained for Churchmen, that none should accuse them, nor
draw them into law.

4. At Arles the first, counsel was given to young people by no means to
marry again, if by chance for adultery they be separated from their wives.

5. At Gangia in Paphalagonia, they excommunicated and his ministry because
of his marriage: and likewise such as abstained from their ministry.

At this time under the shadow of chastity and virginity, men began to
despise marriage; as appears by the first, ninth, tenth, fourteenth, and
fifteenth Chapter of the said Council: where all such as blame marriage and
leave their children, or the wife her husband, or the husband his wife, to live
in continency, are excommunicated.

Arles the second, was ordained the contrary, that none should be admitted into
the Ecclesiastical estate, unless he promised to renounce the bonds of
marriage.

The Iberians were converted to the faith (they are of Asia, under the climate
of Pontus) namely, the King, the Queen, the Nobility, and all the people, by
the preaching of a woman, a captive there.

Paul the Hermit the younger, having taken his wife in adultry, left her and
went into the Desert, and said to the adulterer: keep her for thy self. Hist.
trip.

Siluester died without martyrdom, having 7. times made orders, at which he
created 25. Priests, 36. Deacons, and 45. Bishops. He governed the Church 23.
years: or after Marianus, 24. Others give him but 19.

Marcus succeeded him, and governed the Roman Church 2. years, or 8. months
after Jerome: Damasus says he was a Roman. His father was called Priscus.

Some say he gave to the Bishop of Ostia that privilege above all others to
consecrate the Bishop of Rome, and the right of the Archipiscopall pall, called
Pallium. And would that the Creed which was made at the Council of Nice, should
be sung by the Clergy and people, after the reading of the Gospel. Platina,
Bergomensis, and Polidorus.

If he builded Temples and adorned them with diverse gifts and presents, let
their faith be examined which have written thereof.

Sinodes for the cause of Athanasius.
The Emperor Constantine considering the number of the accusers of Athanasius,
and the crimes wherewith he was charged, published a Sinode at Cesaria in
Palestine, whereat Athanasius not appearing, there was doubted if was for fear
of the Bishop of that place, or of the Eusebians; and for that cause he caused
a Council of the Nations to be assembled at Tire, calling Athanasius to it by
Letters full of indignation. Socrat. li 1. chap. 28. Theodoret. lib. 1. chap.
27. Sozom. lib. 1. chap. 25. and Athanasius himself in his second Apology.

At the said Sinode were found 60. Bishops, the most part Orientalls.
Athanasius called to the Sinode.
Athanasius came thither accompanied with Timotheus a Priest. The Eusebians to
begin their wicked part, brought in a woman of dishonest life, whom they had
suborned, who faining to have vowed chastity, maintained that Athanasius in
the night would have ravished her: being then pressed to answer to that
accusation, he spoke not a word. Timothius perceiving why Athanasius held his
peace, turned himself toward the woman and said unto her. Had I ever
acquaintance with thee? Did I ever lodge nigh thee? The woman cried more then
before. And poynting at the said Timothius with her finger, she said. It was
thou and no other which by force have violated me. This calumniation being
thus made known to the great confusion of them that invented it:
notwithstanding, the Judges which governed and sufficiently knew Timothius and
Athanasius, let the said woman go, saving the good right of Athanasius, who
maintained that at the least she should have named them of whom she was hired.

An other impudent accusation was again attempted against him. The adversaries
brought forth the hand of one who was named Arsenius, whom they maintained to
have been murdered by Athanasius. He demanded if any amongst them knew
Arsenius: to which question, many answered that they knew him very well.
Arsenius was then brought before their presence. Being again asked if it were
that Arsenius whose hand was cut off, they confessed all that it was he.
Hereupon Athanasius discovering his cloak, showed he was whole of both hands
which God had given him.

This so lively a refutation made the adversaries infamous: but their refuge
was, to trouble the Sinode by tumult and sedition. Theodoret. li. 1. cap. 29.
One of the said adversaries called Achab, or John, got from the Judicial
seat, and escaped in this tumult. Socrat. lib. 1. chap. 30.

Athanasius seeing that the tumult fell to great sedition, withdrew himself.
The Sinode in his absence condemned him, and deposed him from his Bishopprick.
He then got him to Constantinople, and showed the Emperor the injuries that
this Sinode had done unto him: And be sought him that he himself would take
the knowledge of the cause. The Emperor then by his Letters Patents called
again all the Bishops of the Sinode of Tire to Constantinople, that they might
yield a reason of the sentence given against Athanasius. And as Sozomene. Lib.
2. Chap. 28. says, that Eusebius. Theognes, and other heretics arriving at
Constantinople, did assuredly affirm to the Emperor, all that they had
devised against Athanasuis, and hired witnesses which deposed that all that
which was brought against Athanasius was true.

The Emperor moved rather with a desire to pacify the Churches, the^ with
the accusation of his adversaries, banished Athanasius into Gaul, into the
City of Herers. But the Emperor by certain Letters written to the people of
the Catholic Church of Alexandria, witnesses himself to have confined him
thither only to the end his bloody enemies should not grieve nor touch the
sacred head of such a person (these be his words.) And in the mean while all
things necessary were sent to Athanasius.

Julius the first of that name was ordained Bishop after Marc. the 25. year of
Constantine. After the Chronicle of Hierome, he governed the Church about 16.
years. He was the son of one Rustike; who had great combats to maintain the
quarrels of Athanasius, and of other faithful Doctors against the Arrians. The
tripartite history says, that the Council of Nice was in the time of Julius.
And is it possible that he was there as being Bishop of some other place?
Howsoever it is, it is plain enough that the last age of the Emperor
Constantine, is reported by Jerome to be in the time of this Julius.

The ordinance is attributed unto him, that a Priest should plead no where but
before a Judge Ecclesiastical. That he reprehended the Bishops of the East,
that they assembled councels without his authority. There is an Epistle
gratulatory of this Julius, for the restitution of Athanasius. Socrates
recites it, Lib. 2. Chap. 23. and Sozo. lib. 3. cap. 20.

The beginning of Pilgrimages.
Under Constantine the land of Palestine being purged of Ethnicke Idolatries,
began to be in devotion for the memory of the great and memorable things done
in it. Constantine caused an Oratory to be builded in the place where the
Sepulcher of the Lord had bin. Helena his mother went thither upon devotion to
worship, and having found the Cross, Temples builed in Palestine.
caused to be built two Temples, the one where the Lord was borne, the other
where he ascended into Heaven. Ruffin. Lib. 1. Chap. 7. After that,
Constantine caused to be builded in the place called (Cranium) a Temple, with
solemnity and authority of a Sinode assemble at Tire, This gave the first
occasion of Pilgrimages, and anuuersatie solemnities. And it came to a
superstition to have seen the holy land and the holy places, as appears by
the Epistle of Gregory Nyssene, wherein he learnedly refuteth that superstition.

The Roman and imperial Eagle took the two heads, when Constantine after he
had established the Townne of Constantinople the new Rome, made it the seat of
the Empire, and the chief of al people which acknowledged the Roman Empire,
and inhabited the parts Oriental, Northern and Southern, and toward the
Mediterranean sea. Sozomene lib. 2. chap. 3. Nicepho. lib. 8. cap. 4. says
that the Town was dedicated by him the year of his Empire 28. and as he had
taken the Empire, divided; and united it in his person: so he divided it again
as a paternall heritage, Constantin the second.
and made a partition thereof amongst his children: whom whilst he lived he
created Cesars, one after an other: that is to say, Constantine his eldest
son. Anno. 10. Constantius the second, Anno. 20. and Constans the youngger,
Anno. 30. Whose Empires were very turbulent, and endured but 24. years, 5.
months, and 12. days: according to the Chronicle of Hierome. The death of
Constantine the great.
Constantine the Father died at Nicomicha, after he had lived 66. years, and
reigned 31. years. Pompon. Laet.

Licinius the son of Constantia, sister of Constantine the great, and Crispus
son of the said Constantine the great, with his said son Constantine the
eldest, were created Caesar's the year of the Lord, 316. But the wickedness of
Fausta, the wife of Constantine the great, caused the death of Licinius and
Crispus, and many other noble personages. See Aure. Victor and Pompo. Laet.
Crispus was instructed by Lactantius.

Constantine the eldest son of Constantine the great, was Emperor, with his
two brethren, after the father the year of our Lord, 338. The Empire was thus
parted, namely, that Constantine should enjoy Gaul, Spain, and England.
Constance should have Italy, with Slauonia and Greece. And Constantius should
hold Constantinople, with the East. This partition contented not Consantine:
he raised war against his brother Constance, being proud of his Army of
Gaul, but warring more couetously then warily, was overthrown by an ambush
nigh to Aquilea: and being wounded in diverse places, dyed there, having reigned
but three whole years, and lived 25. See Bapt. Egnat. and Pomp. Laet.

Constance after he had vanquished his elder brother, passing the Alps, came
to make war in Gaul, and in two years with great difficulty conquered the
Country which his brother had in partition. He at the beginning governed well,
but after gave himself to pleasures, and at last became odious to all men. So
that in the end they conspired against him as he was at hunting, and was slain
by the device and treason of Magnentius who usurped his Empire, yet he had
saved this Magnentius his life. Constance lived thirty years, and reigned
fourteen. See Pomp. Laet. Constance. Co^stantius.


Constantius had for his part the Empire of Constantinople, with the East. He
vanquished Vetranio who made himself Emperor in Hungary after the death of
Co^stance. Moreover, to revenge the death of his said brother Constance, he
made great war against Magnentius. In the first battle there were slain of
one part and the other, 53000. fighting men: 53000. slain.
Magnentius had the worst. And again making head, was overcome nigh Lions.
Constantius was suspected upon envy and ambition to have made away Dalmatius
his Cousin-germain, a virtuous man, who better resembled Constantine the great,
then his own father; and who was appointed for a copartner with the said
Constantius, when he had his partition. But Constantius lived not long after.
For as he was going the second time against the Persians, understanding that
Julian had made himself Augustus, he took a Fever and dyed, the year of his
age 40. and of his Kingdom 24. See Eutrop. Aurel. Vict. Pompon. Laet. and
Bapt. Egn.

The Sinode of Sardis in her Sinodall Letters, calls Julius their friend and
companion. Theodoret. lib. 2. chap. 8.

It follows, that the Bishop or Archbishop of Rome had not the pretended
superiority.

It seems that Julius was dead, when Constantius having tamed the tyranny of
Magnentius and Syluanus, he was in Italy to appease the discordes of
Athanasius his cause.

Liberius borne in Rome, his father being called Augustus, succeeded Julius the
year of Christ after S. Hierome, 352. about Constance Empire: his confession
was agreeing unto the Catholic faith, and writ to Athanasius very Christianly
of God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, as may be seen in
his Epistle, which is affixed to the works of Athanasius.

Athanasius in the Epistle to them which lead solitary lives, rehearses how
Liberius was subverted.

The Emperor Constans sent to Rome one named Eusebius an Eunuke with Letters,
whereby he threatened him exile, and on the other side tempted him with presents
to induce him to consent with Arrius, and to subscribe to the condemnation of
Athanasius. Liberius despised both his menaces and gifts as a sacrifice of
blasphemy. Whereat the Emperor being exceedingly grieved, found means to get
him out of Rome: and being come to him, threatened him with death. But Liberius
manfully answered. The co^stancy of Liberius.
I am ready to endure all, rather then of Christians we should be accounted
Arrians. Why what art thou said the Emperor, that with one wicked man
troublest all the world? The word of Faith (said Liberius) depends not upon
multitude. He was then banished by this Emperor Constans into Berrea, which is
a Town in Thrace. Where after he had been two years, he was called home (as
says Theodoret) his restitution after some, was accorded by the Emperor, at
the request of many Romans, and of the Western Bishops. The same says
Athanasius in the before alleged Epistle. Also that Liberius after his two
years exile feared with threatenings and apprehension of death, sealed to the
condemnation of Athanasius. Ruffin says the same: and Hierome (as Baleus
says) writes that by ambition Liberius fell into the heresy of Arrius, being
once fallen from the integrity of faith.

We find some constitutions of Liberius, namely, not to make noises in fasting
time, that times of fasting and Lent be not polluted by the act of marriage:
that in time of famine and pestilence, men should appease the Lords anger by
fasting, alms, and prayers.

An advertisement.
The principal felicity and ornament of the Church of this time, was the
multitude of excellent Doctors, which by their doctrine sought so far as in
them lay, to conserve and multiply the purity of doctrine. But this felicity
was greatly obscured, partly by the multitude of heretics, and partly by the
rage of seditious people, and schismatickes: In so much, that since the time of
the Apostles, there was no Church that has endured more dissentions, combats
and divisions within it, then that of this world. Whereupon by good right,
Basile the great in a certain poem, writing of the judgment of God,
complains, saying. I have lived the age of a man, and I have seen great
concord amongst the Arts and Sciences. But in the Church of God alone, for
which Jesus Christ dyed, I have observed so many dissentions that it is
altogether dissipated and wasted. And coming to the cause; As I searched says
he the cause, I remembered the place of the book of Judges, where it is
written; That then every one did whatsoever he thought good in his own eyes.

Great persecutions were under Constantius after the death of Constans, against
the Catholic Doctors and Bishops, Heretics cruel.
by the Arrians. Many were put to death even within the Temples, others were
exiled, others put in prison, virgins imprisoned, and the houses of Christians
pilled and sacked.

S. Hilarie was sent into exile.

At this time for the great persecutions without, and heresies within, many
retired into the Deserts. Monks at this time.
They write of two which were called Amon. The one was the Father and chief of
three thousand Monks. The other Amon, with two hundredth and fifty Clerks and
Monks, was slain by the Arrians. Eusebius.

Sarmatha and Amathas Disciples of S. Anthony, were slain by the Painimes.
Macarus the Egyptian, an other Macarus of Alexandria, Hylarion the Disciple of
S. Paul, the Hermit Theodorus, Entichian, Pachomius, Moses, Benjamin, Helias.

Serapio^ was the father of 2000. Monks, whom he made work for the
necessity of their lives, and to help the needs of other poor, Paemen and
other infinite. Martin renounced his military estate. Hist. trip. lib. 8. chap.
1. John Cassian in the Collat of Fathers. Naucl,

A coniuration was made by the Arrians after the Council of Sardis, against two
Catholic Bishops, Eufrates and Vincentius. They caused an whore in the night
time to come into their chamber, and by Apostate people which suddenly went
after the said strumpet, and so proffered to accuse them to have been surprised
in whoordome. But the harlot disclosed the coniuration.

A Council was held at Millaine in favor of the Arrians against Athanasius,
the which resisted, Paulinus Bishop of Treners, Denis Bishop of Millaine,
Eusebius Bishop of Verceil, and Rhodamus: whereupon they were cast out of the
Church, and with them Liberius, Lucifer Metropolitan of the Isles of Sardine,
and Osius of Spain sent into exile, Anno Christi, 361.

The said Osius in his age by many torments, beatings and wounds, was forced to
consent to the exposition of the Arrians, and thereunto to subscribe in the
first volume of Councels. Tritenius says, that Osius being rich, fearing
either banishment or loss of his goods, consented to the Arrians, and being
about to depose a Catholic Bishop called Gregory, he fell down out of his
Chair, and so died.

Hereby are we aduertized, that it is nothing to begin well, unless we persevere
unto the end.

Under Constantius many Councels were held, namely in Tire, Sardis, and
Millaine, as is said in Arimine, in Syrmion of Pannonie, in Nicea, which is in
Tharse, in Seleucia, which is in Isauria, wherein the faith of the Fathers of
Nice was condemned.

Felix borne at Rome, son of one named Anastasis, having been the Deacon of
Liberius, was thrust into his place by the Arrians, hoping he would consent
with them in doctrine: but he became a true Catholic in the confession of
the Council of Nice, and gave no place either to the heretics, or to
Constance himself, declaring him an heretic, and was rebaptized by Eusebius
of Nicomedia. We find in the book of Councels, an Epistle of the Bishops of
Egypt to Felix, and Felix his answer to them, with certain constitutions:
namely, that none might accuse a Bishop before a civil Magistrate. Item, to
restore a Bishop who is cast out by force. Item, Liberius.
not to admit witness of profane people against religious persons. Item, that
Bishops should frequent Sinodes, or send thither if they could not go.

Some say, that Felix governed with Liberius a certain time: But Theodoret
says that Felix withdrew himself into an other Town. Socrat. lib. 2. chap.
37. says, that Felix was driven away by the Roman people in a sedition, and
that the Emperor thereby was constrained to send for Liberius thither. Others
say, that Felix was beheaded with many others, for that he proved the
Emperor.

Hilary Bishop of Poiters was revoked from exile: Hilarie Bishop of Poiters.
and Paul Treuers died in exile in the Country of Phrygia. Anno Christi. 363.
Lucius Bishop of Adrianople, dyed in prison.

Paulus Bishop of Constantinople sent into exile, was strangled by the way.

Nicomedia by an earthquake was wholly subverted, and the Towns nigh were also
afflicted.

After the death of Constance, Constantius again pursued Athanasius, and then
was the great persecution against the faithful.

Liberius returned from exile the year of Christ, 363.

About this time three Sects of Arrians rose up. That is to say, Macedonians,
Eunomians, and new Arrians.

1. The Arrians held the Son to be like unto the Father but by grace, not by
nature.

2. The Macedonians, that the Son is altogether like the Father, but not the
holy Ghost.

3. The Eunomians, that the Son is altogether unlike the Father.

Eusebius Bishop of Verceil endured great torments of the Arrians, Eusebius
Bishop of Verceil.
because in council at Millaine he tore in pieces a scedule, whereunto the
western Bishops had subscribed to the Arrians in the Council of Arimine.

Some say he was seven days without bread and water in a Cave, and afterward
was kept in a very straight place. But after the death of Constantius he was
delivered and returned to Verceil, Julian.
into his Bishopric under Iouinian. Finally, after the death of the said
Iouinian, under Valens, who was an Arrian, he was stoned by the Arrians the
year of Christ, 388.

Note Reader, that at this time in each Town there were both Catholic Dostors
and Arrians. Temples for the one, and Temples for the other: so the Church was
divided.

Achatius Bishop of Cesaria in Palestine an Arrian, was in great reputation
with Constantius.

Julian borne at Constantinople, the son of Constantius, brother of
Constantine the great, he was fair of face, subtle and of good spirit, given
both to Letters and Arms: he set France at liberty, which the Almaines had
wasted: he took the King an the first conflict, beyond the hope of all.
Colleine was taken of him when he was very young: of which prize he got great
renown, and rejoiced the hearts of the soldiers. In so much that they named
him Emperor in Paris. Whereof his Cousin Constantius being advertised, died in
dispite: about the age of 45. years, The death of Constantius.
as he prepared to make war upon him. Yet when he died, he made him his
heir. Anno Domini 363.

Athanasius returned into Alexandria. George who ruled in his absence, was
slain, and his body burnt.

A Sinode in Alexandria.
A Sinode was in Alexandria of good and Catholic Bishops, wherein they that
fell into heresy, were permitted not only to return into the union and
communion of the Church, but even into their offices and Bishoppricks.

There was also concluded and declared, that the holy Ghost is of one same
substance with the Father and the Son, and that in the Trinity there was
nothing created or less, or after an other. Essential.
Item that God has but one essential substance, Substance.
but real subsistence of three persons. This word (Substance) differs from
the word (Subsistence) when we speak of the persons of the Trinity. For
substance concerns the essential nature of a thing: after which, the three
persons of the Trinity are but one alone, substance and nature. But this word
(Subsistence) shows in one same divine substance three persons and different
proprieties, Subsistence.
not only in name (as the Sabellians say) but really.

Julian was instituted in his youth in piety, under Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia, as Laetus says: but after he had tasted the Schools of Philosophy
and Rhethoricke, under Libanius the Sophister, and Maximus the Philosopher,
(whom Valentinien the Emperor after caused to be executed, for exercising
Magical Arts) all that godliness which he had learned, Julian instituted in
piety.
was changed into Ethnike superstition: yea, Eutropius says, that Julian in
his youth was a Reader in the Church of Nicomedia. Moreover, he was a man
learned in humane Letters, and exercised in deeds of war, ambitious and
cruel: which he showed, having bin cause of the death of his brother Gallus.
Jerome in the Epistle to Nepotian says, that Julian denied Jesus Christ in
France.

Being then altogether revolted from Religion, Humane Letters prohibited
he was surnamed the Apostate. He first forbad Christians to keep no
schools of humane Letters, nor books of Philosophy or Poesy. For he had
often this word in his mouth. These Galleleans (so called he Christians) will
make war upon us with our own writings, if they be once armed.

He liked better to proceed against Christians by long torments and
insupportable griefs, then by great effusion of blood. For he knew well
enough, that the former persecutions were the cause of the multiplication and
glory of Christians. Socrat. lib. 3. chap. 13. Theodoret. lib. 3. chap. 8. The
chief persecution that he could devise, was to do the same in the Temples of
Painims, that the Christians did in their Churches at their ordinary assemblies
in Churches, Lectors, prayers releeuing of poor hospitalls, and such like
things which he opposed in the name of Painim Gods.

Valentinian entering one day into the Temple of Fortune with Julian, Holy water.
being angry at the casting of certain holy water upon him, (saying that it
rather defiled then cleansed him) struck him that cast it: But Julian would
have constrained him to sacrifice unto the Idols: but he chose rather to
forsake all, then to commit such a villainy. Julian then banished him the
Court, alleging this for a show, that he had negligently governed his
soldiers. For Julian the most that he could, dissembled that the cruelty he
exercised was for the Christian Religion.

He took from Christian Churches all their goods, Immunities, honors, and the
provision of revenues which Constantine had assigned the^. He destroyed their
churches and took away their treasures and vessels, and caused the Temples of
the Painims to be repaired, he suffered not them to dwell in towns but banished
them unto the extreme and outward parts of the Empire, and gave license to use
unto them all contumelies and shames. Wherefore in Ascolon and Gaza, towns in
Palestine, great outrages were done unto them. For Christians there were beaten
even to death. Extreme cruelties.
They of Gaza stoned many of the faithful, opened women, and filled their
bellies with barley, and then made them be eaten with swine. Theoret. li. 3.
cha. 7. The sacred virgins were exposed naked, and after they had showed unto
them all kinds of reproaches, they were cut in pieces, and then cast to beasts.
In some places the Christians were laid, and alive sacrificed upon the Aultars
of the Painims. It is recited by Nicephorus, li. 10. chap. 13. And when the
Christians by their ambassadors would have showed these injuries unto Julian,
to take order therefore, they had no audience allowed. And if at any time he
made a countenance that he would chastise them that did such outrages, by
countenance again, he rather incited then repressed them. Sozom, lib. 5. chap.
15. Yea he fell into such impiety and malice to vex the Christians, that the
fountains in Antioche by his commandments were dedicated unto Idols in
sacrifices and oblations: thinking thereby to pollute the Christians, and to
make them to be partakers of such abominations whenever they used these
fountain waters: yea the flesh that came to the Butchers stall, bread,
fruits, and other such like things which were necessary for life, he made
them be sacrificed to Idols by the Priests.

The Christians with great sorrow were constrained to see a detestable and
abominable profanation: yea and to use these fountains and viands thus
infected and polluted, being instructed by the doctrine of S. Paul to take
with a good conscience whatsoever came to the Butchery, 1. Cord. 10. fol. 25.
and that which is necessary to the common life. These were two excellent
Captains, Inuentius and Maximianus, who at a certain banquet, deploring this
profanation of the goods of God, applied the complaint of the captive children
in Babylon, to the time of Julian.

Lord thou have delivered us unto a wicked King, and we are made slaves upon
the earth, etc. Which thing being revealed unto the Emperor, he made them
come before him. They there declared their just complaint more at large then
before, seeing they had the mean given them to speak unto him. The Emperor
condemned them to grievous torments, not as Christians, but as injurious and
offering opprobry and shame to his Majesty: Iulians envy for the name of
Martyr.
for he greatly envied that word and honor of Martyr. And this envy made him
assay all means to torment them before he would come to execute them by
judgment.

Julian burnt with desire to go against the Persians who had cruelly afflicted
the East, and affected the name of Partrike. But before he enterprised that Act
which was his last, he promised his Gods, that at his return from this
expedition, he would yet commit more grievous things against the Christians
then before. Ruffin. Lib. 1. Chap. 36. Doret. Lib. 3. Chap. 21.

Of this evil will he showed sufficient witness; for in the midst and as it
were in the heat of this Persian war, he took leisure to vomit out seven
books against Jesus Christ, although before he contented himself to write
against Christians, as Eutropius says. And indeed being in this expedition, he
prepared a Skaffolde in the Town of Jerusalem, at his return to place there
the Bishops, Monks, and the faithful of these places, and to expose them unto
beasts. Basile and other good Doctors did all their duties to go hither and
thither to comfort and exhort Christians, both publicly and particularly, nor
did meddle nor pollute themselves with the abhominatio^s of the Gentiles,
Iouinian.
but to detest them, yea the gifts and honors which the Emperor proposed to
such as renounced Christianity.

Here we must not forget the Prophetike answer which a Schoolemaister in
Antioche made to Libanius a Sophister, when Julian went against the Persians.
Libanius demanded of him, mocking Christ; What think thou does the
Carpenters son at this time? The Schoolemaister answered: O Sophister, the
Creator of al things whom thou calledst the Carpenters son, makes a coffin to
enclose Julian. Soon after news came that Iulia was slain.

But behold what was the end of this cursed Apostate Julian. The horrible death
of Julian.
After he had passed the Sea Bosphore, he wintered in Antioche: As soon as the
Spring came, passing by Hierapolis, he went into Mesopotamia: and after he had
passed the flood he fought against the Persians, and received a mortal wound;
and casting a full handful of blood into the air, he uttered this blasphemy
against Jesus Christ. Thou have overcome o Gallelean. In the end thou art
vanquisher: and as he had lost much blood, being in a burning Fever, he
called for water about midnight, and drank it cold, and expired the year of
his age 31. having governed the Empire the space of a year and seven months.
Of the public joy they of Antioche made for his death, see the Tripartite
history. lib. 6. chap. 48.

Iouinian or Iuuian borne in Hungary, was created Emperor with great joy of
the Army, the next morning after the death of Julian. A Christian Emperor.
He was a Prince naturally liberal, and who under Julian had showed well, that
he loved better to loose all dignities then to obey one wicked commandment,
and against Christian religion.

Being importuned by the soldiers to accept the election, he said he was a
Christian, and that he would not be the Emperor of Ethnicks and Idollatrous
people. He accepted not the Empire, until all with a common voice had
protested they would be Christians. Eutropius Lib. 10. Socrat. Lib. 3. Chap.
22.

One called Lucius an Arrian, whom George Bishop of Alexandria had promoted,
accusing Athanasius when he returned from exile. Iouinian would not hear him,
Athanasius came from exile.
but knowing Athanasius, commanded silence to Lucius. Sozomen. li. 6. cap. 5.
He customably said to flatterers, that they rather worshipped purple then God.

The Church had rest under him, and he restored whatsoever Julian had taken
away.

There was a Council held at Antioche under him, Council at Antoiche.
to establish the faith of the Council of Nice, Sozom. lib. 6. chap. 4.

He made peace with the Persians to his great dishonor, Peace with the
Persians.
and to their great advantage: yielding them five Provinces beyond Tigris: also
he promised to give no succors unto the King Arsaces allied with the Romans.
He died soon after of an evil of the stomach as he was in his chamber,
wherein for cold he caused to be made a great fire of coals all the night. He
lived 23. years, and reigned seven months.

The original of Monks and Monasteries.
The Monastike life began first in Egypt, Antonius and Macarus were the first
and most renowned Authors of this manner of life, which incontinent was
disperced into Palestine, Armenia, and Paphlagonia. Sozomen. li. 3. chap. 14.
It is greatly to be marvelled at, how this world which in it had so many
excellent Doctors, did straight admit this manner of life, which was never
instituted of God: and not only allowed it, but even themselves instituted it,
and so made a new service of God by their own traditions.

It seems at the beginning there were two kinds of Monks, some in
sollititude, and others in Cities and companies: Two kinds of Monks.
Sozom. li. 3. chapter 16. Basilius at large writes the Oeconomie and laws of
this Monkish life: namely, that a Monk before all things ought to possess
nothing, to be peaceable: that he ought to have an honest habit, a moderate
voice, words well disposed, to take his refection peaceably, and with silence:
and that his glory ought to be patience in tribulation, humility and
simplicity of heart, watchings, tears in prayers, sobriety in his speech and
eating. Valentinia^.
Ambrose in his 82. Epistle of his book says, that Monasteries were shops of
virtue, abstinence, fasting, patience and labor. Out of which they drew
Bishops that were accustomed and trained in these virtues. Hierome ad Ruffinum
Monachum says that the Monasteries of the Egyptians received none without
doing some labor or work. And this was their rule, and as it were their
Simbole. He that trauelleth not, ought not to eat. The same in his Epistle ad
Eutychium, speaks of three sort of Monks in Egypt. Cenobites.
The first were called Cenobites, Sansos in that country language, as we might
say, living in common. The second Anacharites, Anachirites. Remoboth.
because they dwelt alone in the Deserts, far from me^. The third they called
Remoboth: these dwelt two with two, or three with three at the most, and lived
at their discretion and of that which they labored for; they nourished
themselves in common, but often had they debates amongst them.

Before the time of Hierome, it is not like there were any Monasteries in
Europe: but that Ambrose (in whose time began persecutions of virgins) makes
often mention of companies of sacred virgins: Europe had not yet received
Monks.
otherwise there is no Latin Author of this time in whose writings the name of
Monk is found. Certain it is, that Sozomen. lib. 3. chap. 14. affirms them
of Thrace, the Illirians and they of Europe had yet no Monastike assemblies.

Valentinian borne also in Hungary, was made Emperor by the soldiers in the
principal Town of Bithinia, Anno. 366. He and Valens were the sons of
Gratian, borne in Hungary, of a mean place: and in favor of him, Valentinian
was chosen to the Empire, which he refused, but after accepted and made his
brother Valens pertaker with him, who had the Country of the East, and made
his son Gratian Augustus. In their time Procopius who usurped the Empire, was
by them discomfited. After, Valentinian chased away the Goths and other
barbarous people of Thrace: The Saxons were brought to their duty and
obedience accustomed: Germany being tossed with continual troubles, was set
at rest and quietness by the happy success of Theodosius.

Valens then being chosen a consort of the Empire, was at Julian: but after he
was infected with the Arrian heresy, at the persuasion of his wife, and of
Eudoxius Bishop of Constantinople, an Arrian, of whom he was baptized.

During the life of Valentinian, the western Church was peaceable, and
agreeing to the decrees of the Council of Nice: But Valens did what he could
to advance the Arrianisme, against such as were called Homousiastes: that is to
say, the true Catholics: and stirred great and horrible persecutions, and
above all, in Antioche and Laodicea, his brother Valentinian reprehended him,
and admonished him by Letters to desist, as Zonoras writes: but hereby was he
stirred so much the more, and determined to chase away Basilius Bishop of
Cesaria, because at his commandment he would not communicate with Eudoxius:
but the Lord sent a disease to his only son (who knowing it be Gods
vengeance) turned him from his evil will, and certain days he was an auditor
of Basiles Sermons.

Athanasius after he had procured the good of the Church 46. years, and
sustained many persecutions in great constancy and patience, died about this
time.

After his death, persecution in Egypt and Alexandria was moved by Valens,
Hist. Trip. lib. 8. chap. 7.

Damasus a Spaniard (some write him to be of Rome) the son of one called
Antonius, succeeded Liberius: his election Vrsin a Deacon of the Roman Church.

Hereby may you see a first fruit of the riches of the Church, and of the
pretended donation of Constantine.

Of the writings of Damasus, see Suidas and Hierome in his Epistle ad
Eustochium. Tome. 4. makes mention of Damasus. Of Virginity says he, read
the books of that Pope Damasus composed in verse and prose.

Valens.
He reverenced the Sinode of Nice, and condemned Auxentius Bishop of Millan an
Arrian. Theodor. lib. 4. chap. 30. says that with S. Ambrose he fought
strongly against the Arrian heretics, expressly condemning Sabellius, Arrius,
Eunomius, the Macedonians, Photin, Marcellius, and the heresy of Apollinaris.
Hierome writes unto him often, and in his Apology against Iouinian, he
calls Damasus a singular man, well instructed in the scriptures, and Doctor
of the Virgin Church. Athanasius in his Epistle to the Bishops of Affrike,
calls Damasus his dear companion, praising his diligence, that he assembled
a Sinode at Rome against the Arrians. He was charged to have committed
whoordome: whereof being accused by two of his Deacons, namely Concordius and
Calitxtus, he defended his cause in a full assembly of Bishops, and was
absolved, and his accusers proscripted. Sabelli. Enu. 7. Lib. 9.

Monks.
There were many virtuous Monks in this time, as Paulus, Pior, Isidorus,
Apsius, Pierius, Enagrius, Ammonius, etc. Hist. Trip. lib. 8. chap. 10. One of
the Monks said: that the Monk which labored with his hands, was like a
thief.

Some were cruelly slain by Valens, because they would not go to war.

A Prophetike Dream.
Anthony of the age of an hundredth and five years, died at this time. He
saw in a Dream as it were swine which destroyed and plucked down Aultars
with their feet: and when he awaked, he said that the Church should be once
dissipated and wasted by whoremongers, adulterers, and men disguised.

P. Melancton notes this Prophecy against the whoordome and voluptuos life of
Priests and Monks.

Heretics.
Amongst other heretics at this time, there was Photinus, Hebionite, Ennomius
an Arrian, and Priscilian a Bishop in Spain, who confounded the persons in the
Trinity. They which they called Donatists, said that Christ is less then the
Father, and the holy Ghost less then the Son, and rebaptized the
Catholics. The Luciferians and Apollinaries said that Christ received an
humane body without a reasonable soul. The divinity supplying the place
thereof.

Athalarike King of the Goths, persecuted greatly the Catholics against his
own people.

The Burgonions gathered themselves together in number 80000. toward Rhene,
which afterward received the faith. Paul. Diac.

In the Town of Arras in the County of Artois, the 4. year of Valentinian,
fell wool from Heaven with the rain. Hierome in his Chronicle. Paul. Diac.
and Orosius Lib. 7. Herman Gigas says that it was in the third year of
Valentinian.

For (Lana) some Historiographers have set down (Manna) wherefore yet at this
day they of Arras unluckily do worship it for the Manna of Heaven. Adolatrie at
Arras.


The Hungarians cast themselves upon the West Country

The Arrians made burn and drown many faithful and Catholic people. Hist.
Trip. lib. 8. chap. 2.

The Huns cast themselves upon the western parts, and drove away the Goths
which were constrained to give place and pass beyond Danubia, and came into
Thrace, and from thence into Pannonie.

Vulphilas a Bishop of the Goths in Sarmathia, Vulphilas Hist. Trip. lib. 8.
translated the Bible into the Gothike tongue for the use of his people. As
Jerome did into the Dalmatike for his people. And in Creatia, which is in the
lower Pannonie, the Churches there and the Bishops, used the scriptures
translated into their vulgar tongue.

Auxentius an Arrian Bishop deceasing at Milan, there fell a great sedition
betwixt the Arrians and the Catholics, for the election of their Bishop The
Proconsul his deputy then, was Ambrose a Citizen of Rome, who hearing such a
noise, The election of S. Ambrose.
by reason of his office, went hastily to the Church where the people were
assembled, and after he had made many reasons to reduce the people to concord,
suddenly rose there up a common and an agreeing voice, that Ambrose must needs
be baptized (who was yet a Catechumene) and after be consecrated Bishop,
whereunto he would not consent, but by the commandment of the Emperor
Valentinian who incited him thereunto, he accepted the office. And then the
Emperor gave thanks to God that he had called this person from the
government of the body, to the government of souls.

Counsels held at this time.
1. In Aquilege where S. Ambrose assisted against Palladius, and Secondianus,
Arrians.

2. In Valentia in Dalphine, wherein it was ordained that Bigami might not be
consecrated.

3. In Laodicea, whereof is before spoken, etc.

4. At Rome, against Apollinaris. Hist. Trip. lib. 9 chap. 16. Valentinian, of
the age of 55. years, died of a flux of blood of a vein breaking.

He reigned 17. years, 6. with Gratian, and 11. after, his body was carried to
be buried at Constantinople. S. Aurel. Vict. and Pomp. Before his death he
again declared his son Graiian Emperor.

Procopius the Tyrant vanquished by Valens, was taken, and having his two feet
bound unto two trees and let go, they tore him in pieces. Naucle.

Valens gave a blow unto the Governor of the Town of Edesse in Mesapotamia,
because he had not chased away the Christians which daily assembled in ths
Temple of S. Thomas. It grieved him to put the Emperors commandment in
execution, and to cause such a multitude to die: wherefore he secretly sent
the^ word that they would assemble no more there. But leaving his counsel, and
searing nothing the Emperors Edict, the next morning all assembled in the said
place, as they accustomed to do. So then as the Provost of the Town, with a
great company of soldiers, went to the said Temple to put in execution Valens
his command: he encountered a woman who ran with a little child of hers to
the assembly of the faithful; to whom he said, Whether runnest thou? Thither
said she whether all others haste to go. How said he? Gratian.
The constancy of the faithful.
have thou not heard that the Provost goes thither to sley all he finds
there? I understand it said she, and therefore do I make so much haste to be
with them. And whither leadest thou that little child? That he may also receive
the Crown of Martyrdom quoth she. When the said Provost understood these
things, and the courage of the Christians which ran thither, he returned
toward the Emperor Valens, and showed him this story, how they were ready to
endure death for their faith; and that he thought it very unreasonable to sley
so great a multitude of people. Upon these words Valens moderated his anger.
Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 18. Theo. lib. 4. cap. 17. Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 18.

Affrates a very old Monk, departed from Antioch, being sent into exile.
Valens seeing him from his Palace said to him; whither go thou? I go said
he, to pray for thine Empire. Thou should have done that in thy house said
Valens. Yea, answered Affrates if thou would permit it, and so did I when
Christ's sheep were in peace.

Valens in the end fought unluckily against the Goths, Viscoths, Huns, and
Scyths, who having passed Danubia, ran upon Hungaria, Epire, and Thessalia,
endammaging much the country, and burning certain Towns. He was overcome,
and flying, was wounded with a Dart, and so fell from his horse, and was put in
a little strawe-house to be healed. Alanus the Victor pursued him, and the house
whereinto he went was burnt, none knowing he was retired thither. This was the
reward of his tirannie and cruelty against the faithful. The death of Valens.
And this came to him three years after the death of his brother, having
reigned fourteen years.

This battle was the beginning of great war that the Roman Empire after
sustained.

Gratian son of Valentinian, reigned eight years, with his Valens three, and
with Theodosius 4. But his true Kingdom began after the death of Valens, the
year of our Lord, 380. He revoked from Exile the Catholic Bishops, and
put back the Arrians. He made Valentinian his little brother on the fathers
side, his companion of the Empire. Having called Theodosius out of Spain, he
gave him part of the East Empire, establishing him as a Ram-part against the
Goths and Huns, which occupied Thrace and Daceas as their hereditary
countries. Theodosius handled them hardly. At his coming he obtained a great
victory against the Almaines. But as he cherished too much some of those
barbarous Nations, which he caused to come with him hyring them with Gold: his
own soldiers bare him evil will; insomuch that Maximus was chosen Emperor
in England, and passing into France with the Roman Army, overcame Gratian at
Paris, who fled to Lions, where he was taken and killed traitorously by
Androgius. See Pomp. Laet. Aurel. Vict. Bapt. Egn. lib. 1. Paul. Diac. lib. 1.
and Oros. lib. 7. chap. 33.

Theodosius began his true Kingdom after the death of Gratian, the year 386.
He was of the line of Traian, who was also sent by the Emperor Nerua to help
the Commonwealth, Theodosius maintained and amplified the Empire: he put to
flight the Huns and Goths in diverse battles, which came very far into the
Empire: he also granted peace to the Persians.

Valentinian the second of that name, the brother of the aforesaid Gratian on
his fathers side, being chased from Italy by Maximus, with Justin his mother
Arrian which had wrought great troubles to Ambrose, fled into the East toward
Theodosius, who received him and gave him part of the Empire: after having
showed him his fault, and that because he rebelled against religion, and
persecuted the Catholics, he fell into this peril.

Valentinian was strangled seven years at Vienna in France by his
Chamberlaines, at the suggestion of Eugenius, and of Arbogastes: So that it
seemed he had strangled himself. Theodosius tarried not long before he
overcame Maximus usurper of the Gaulois, and Victor his son, and Androgius
their Coronell, which caused Gratian to die. Auenging the death of Valentinian:
he overcame Eugenius the Tyrant, and Arbogastes his companion in a notable
victory: Damasus.
For the time, the winds, the snow and hayle ranged themselves on his side,
who had few people in respect of the Army of Eugenius. Claudians Latin
verses with exclamation witness it saying: O well-beloved of God, who gave thee
a winter armed for thy successors, and made come to thy wages the Tempests and
the winds, etc.

The said Justin having drawn into her error Valentinian her son, sought
also to have deceived Ambrose, but in vain. One day she sent a sort of
soldiers to enuiron the Temple to make Ambrose come out: who spoke to them and
said: he would not so easily forsake his place, and that to wolves he would
not expose the sheepfolde, nor the Temple to blasphemers. And that if they
determined to sley him, let them do it within the temple, and so should death
please him. Theodo. li. 5. chap. 13.

Relics.
The beginning of adoration of Relics, may be reduced to this time. Ruffin
writes of Theodosius, before he enterprised war against Eugenius, the
tyrant himself went with the Priests visiting the Churches, and before the
Sepulchers of the Apostles made his Orisons and Prayers.

The contention betwixt Hierome and Vigilantius, pressed Bishop of Bercolne in
Spain, does sufficiently show that superstition was then come forward. By the
writings of Hierome (which are stuffed rather with injuries and outrages then
sound reasons out of the holy scriptures) we may know that Vigilantius had
reason to oppose himself to such Idolatry, rather then veneration of the
Martyrs. The words of Hierome writing to Riparius, are: Thou say that
Vigilantius opens again his stinking mouth, and spitteth his infection
against the relics of holy Martyrs, calling us (which receive them) Cendrier
Idolaters, which do reverence unto dead men's bones. And in the book which he
perticularly writ against Vigilantius, says: One Vigilantius is risen up,
which with an unclean spirit against the spirit of Christ, denies that we
must honor the Sepulchers of Martyrs, condemns Vigils, etc then adds: And
thou say in thy book, that as long as we live we may pray one for an other:
but after we be dead, that the prayers are not heard, and yet they pray for the
vengeance of their blood and cannot be heard. Apoc. 6 2.10.11.
In which thou proposest unto me an Apogrypha Book, which thou and the like
read under the name of Esdras, where it is written, that after death none
dare pray, etc. And thou dare out of the gulf of thy breast, vomit so filthy
a mockery, as to say the souls of Martyrs then love their own ashes, and fly
about them: for being absent they cannot hear a poor sinner, who by chance
resorteth thither, etc. Briefly he alleges for great meruailes whatsoever
Vigilantius said, but refuteth it not.

He adds also that Vigilantius heretic said, that Alleluia should not be
sung but at Easter. That continency of single life commanded, is heresy, and
the seed of whoordome: It is also reported unto me (says he) that against
the authority of Paul (unto whom Peter, John, and James, gave the right hands)
who commands to remember the poor, thou forbiddest that any should send any
comfort of money to Jerusalem for the use of the Saints, and maintainest that
they do better which use their own, and which by little and little distribute
fruits of their possessions, then they which having sold their possessions,
give all at once. He says yet: Thou fear and turnest away (viperous tongue)
Monks from their application and study, and say by way of argument; If all
men should shut themselves up, or go into solitude, who should celebrate
Churches, or who should gain and win seculer men? etc.

We may know by this rehearsal, that Vigilantius and other good Doctors of
this time, maintained that the adoration of Saints was drawn from the Ethnike
superstition of the Gods, into the Church of the Lord.

The abuse came first from the too great praise of Saints. It increased
afterward by the false persuasion of the intercession, confirmed by signs and
lying miracles. Theodosus


The same ceremonies which were at the burial of bodies, Translation and
elevation of the bodies of Saints.
were also in this age observed in the translation and elevation of holy
bodies. The Priests of Apollo heretofore made that Apostate Emperor Julian (as
he sacrificed in Antioche nie the fountain Daphne) believe that the sepulcher
of Babyla Martyr nigh unto the said place, was the cause that Apollo gave no
answer. Julian then commanded the Christians which he called Gallileans to
take away the said sepulcher: then all the Church came thither, young and old,
virgins and mothers, and with great joy drew out and conducted the Coffer of
the bones of Babila, singing as high as they could. Ruff. lib. 1. chap. 35. And
Toch. lib. 3. cap. 18. Ambrose in his 85. Epistle to his sister, shows how
this manner of taking up and translating of the Martyrs bodies, was observed in
the west Churches. The Relics says he of a Saint being found either
advisedly or by chance, first they are showed the people, and declared it is by
some, of what Martyr those relics are: after, having laid them in order they
are carried into some Temple, Vigils or watches of Saints.
and there vigils and watches are made all night, then the next day a Sermon is
made of the life of that Martyr. See what Ambrose says, who also witnesses
(if we must give faith unto him) that miracles were done there.

Behold how a new devotion transporteth not only the common people, but also
the Pastors and Bishops.

The doings of many Painims of this time.
As for the Gentiles of this time and their superstitions, we will here touch
one word, as we pass by. Certain it is that Idolatry drew after it all kind
of wickedness. From the Gods they have drawn out all that infection: of
Jupiter, adulterers, rauishments, and stuprations of children: of Venus, the
art of whoordome: of Rhea, all filthiness: of Mars, murders: and so of the
other bodies. It is then no marvel if their manner of doings be so strange.
In Phenicia women were prostituted before Idols. Athanasius recites it the
women before marriage, being delivered of proof to their husbands. Sozo. li.
1. chap. 8. They also accustomed to chastise adultry with an other whoordome
and public constupration. Socrat. lib. 5. chap. 18. The Indians had many
wives. Hierom. lib. 1. contra Iouinianum.

The schools of Magitians had certain prayers for the dead; whereunto they
attributed so great efficacy, that the powers of the air by them appeased, let
souls fly so into Heaven. Arnobius. Lib. 2.

From hence has Antichrist drawn the hunting of his indulgences to set up his
seat and enrich it.

Some Grecians on the days they call (Pandemi) that is to say Populary,
carried viands and wine to the Sepulchers of their dead. They burnt the meat,
and presented the wine, calling the dead by their names. Rise up (cried they)
and eat, and drink, and be merry. Epipha. in Ancorato.

And what other thing is this then the offertorie of the Mass for the quick
and the dead?

Many Nations had no marriage nor lawful conjunction, but rather brutall and
common.

And what is that single life which Antichrist would bring in, but a burning
fire breaking into all abominable whoordomes?

Observation of days.
In those days men superstitiously observed the days of the Moon, and
enterprised nothing the first day thereof. Ambrose Lib. 10. Epist. 83.

Observation of Letters.
When there was a question to know who should reign after Valens, Ianulicus,
and Libanius, Sophisters and true supporters of Satan, writ in dust the 24.
letters of the Greek Alphabet, and laid upon every one of them a grain of
wheat and barley. After they caused a Cock to come, and after the recital of
certain charms they let him go, to know by the Letters whereon he took the
grains, the name of the successor. The Cock took the grains upon the
Letters, (...). The Emperor Valens after he knew this, made many to be slain
whose names began with these Letters. Zonaras recites it.

They used violence against Christians, Three arguments against false religion.
with calumniations and slanders. The first defense of their superstition was,
that it had been of long time, and that their Elders had always maintained it
Arnol. lib. 8. against the Gentiles; and so did Simmachus argue against
Prudentius.

The second, that it had always been profitable to the Roman Commonwealth,
and that thereby the Empire of the world had been conquered, and therefore it
worshipped all the Gods which were adored in the world: yea the unknown Gods,
Arnob. Lib. 8. And so argues Maximinus in Eusebi. Lib. 9. Chap. 7.

The third, was of the discommodities that came by leaving the Religion of the
Idols. Maximinus the tyrant, in his Edicts impureth all public calamities to
the changing of sacrifices. Eusebius. Lib. 9. Chap. 7.

1. And contrary, they calumniated the Christian Religion, Slanders against
true doctoctrine.
that it was new, and that their predecessors were ignorant thereof. Sozom.
Lib. 1. Chap. 18.

2. That the Authors thereof were seditious and desperate persons. Arnob. lib.
1.

3. That the Christians were but heaps of poor Idiots, and women that used to
sly the light, and only loved night assemblies.

4. That by secret and hid marks they loved before they knew one an other,
and that to cover their whoordomes, they commonly called one an other brothers
and sisters.

5. That they are without Aultars, without Temples, and without Sepulchers. In
the said book, 8.

The Papists at this day, which shame not to change the truth with the same
slanders, what other thing do they else but either borrow or renew the old
Ethnikes arguments.

The Ethnickes also say of the Christian doctrine that which our mockers and
Epicures say at this day, that it is contrary to all reason. For to say that
God sees and makes inquiry not onty of out affairs, but also of our most
secret cogitations, Acco^modatio^
and that he is present every where: this is not only impertinent and evil
becoming God: but also it is to grieve and trouble him, and to say he is
curious and without rest. The same Author.

That to say, God loves not them who willingly come unto him, but his Elect
only. This say they, is to do injury to God, and to accuse him of injustice.

That Christians agree not in their doctrine.

This same did the Philosophers object in the Council of Nice against the
Fathers.

That the scripture is full of contradiction, and therefore uncertain.
Porphirius and Julian the Apostate used this slander. Socrat. 3. chap. 23.

That all sorts of calamities came upon them, and that God punished them
because they believed that man is God, and after he was crucified, to say he
lives and reigns. Arnob. Lib. 1.

Such Princes as opposed themselves against Paganism.
Many Princes and Magistrates of this time opposed themselves against these
Ethnike impieties. And after, Constantine the great and his son Iouinian,
caused to shut the Idol Temples which Julian had set open, and forbad
sacrifices. Socrat. lib. 3. chap. 24.

Valentinian in Europe took away the service of Idols. Theodoret. lib. 5.
cap. 20.

He forbad that none should learn the Magike Art by the law: Culpasimilis.
Cod. de maleficis and mathematicas. Finally the Lord ordained this Emperor
Theodosius as a second Josias, wholly to root up all the Idols Temples. Thod.
li. 5. chapter 20.

On the other side, the Doctors of the Church were exceeding careful to refute
all this false religion of the Painims and Ethnikes. Arnob. Lactantius,
Theodoret, and the most part of them which writ in that time; unto whose books
we send them that will know more at large.

Damasus builded certain Temples, and adorned them with gifts: he gave fields
and possessions, and bathes to the Clergy. He augmented certain strange
facions of serving of God. He approved S. Hieromes translation of the Bible. S.
Hieromes Translation.
The hearts of the Archbishops of Rome, began to be taken with too much
ambition. After this, Damasus as he could diligently calculate times, to the
end that in time to come, in the Roman seat might be placed Bishops of
renown, he drew briefly in writing the lives and statutes attributed to his
predecessors Bishops of Rome, yet this was not without manifest lies.

As for his faith and doctrine Theodoret gives great witness: he had a good
opinion of the Trinity, and by his Epistle to the Bishops, assembled at a
Sinode at Constantinople, exhorted them to maintain the holy doctrine of the
son of God.

But in his Epistles, although he call the Bishops unto whom he writ, his
brothers; yet he shows himself too much given to eleuate the dignity of the
Roman seat. For he thus begins his aforesaid Epistle to them of
Constantinople. In the reverence dear children which you owe to the Apostolic
seat, you do much for your selves, etc. Theod. Lib. 5. Chap. 9.

He had many combats to maintain the doctrine of the Council of Nice;
especially against Auxentius of Millan. He condemned many heretics, and
amongst others, the Apollinaries, at a Council of many Bishops at Rome.

He had firm amity with Hierome, who in his writings gave great witness of
him. Virgin, Doctor of the Virgin Church, in his Preface upon the four
Evangelists, calls him great Priest. Athanasius in his Epistle to the Bishops
of Affrike, calls Damasus his very dear companion in the Ministry, etc.
Gregory Nazianz* calls Damasus (happy) in his Epistle to Clidonius.

Damasus dyed of the age of 80. years, in the reign of Theodosius: Syricius.
witnesses Hierome and Suidas, after he had administered his Bishopric 18.
years, the year of Christ after Naucle, 385. but after Prosper, the year 387.

Advertisement.
From the time of Siluester the first and others after him, the Bishops or
Archbishops of Rome being enriched by gifts and munificences of many, began to
live at their ease, and to receive unused apparel, as Miters and other
pontifical ornaments, to make themselves to be accounted of, and to prepare
the seat for the great Antichrist by their traditions and canons: yet neither
Siluester nor his successors till Boniface the 9. (who was about the year,
1390. were Lords of Rome, much less did they hold the domination of the West.
For we have seen that Liberius was sent into exile by Constantius: The
successors of Siluester had not the rule of Rome.
that Julius implored the aid of Constantius for Athanasius against the fury
of the Arrians: and that Damasus by virtue of the Letters of Theodosius, called
the Eastern Bishop unto the Sinode of Rome.

The right of choosing and crowning the Emperors.
And as for the right to choose the Emperors to Crown them, and put on their
Imperial purple and such other solemnities requisite, it was partly done by
ordinary soldiers. And the Emperors Constantine the great, Julian, Iouinian,
Valentinian the first and second, were created Emperors and Cesars by the
Camp of soldiers: Constantine ordained his three sons. Valens was ordained
by his brother. Theodosius by Gratian. Arcadius, and Honorius by the Father. It
is not read in any approved Author of this time, that any Roman Bishop thrust
himself in, to choose or crown an Emperor. Theodo. lib. 5. chap. 6. says,
that Theodosius in a dream saw Meletius Bishop of Antioche, who gave unto him
the Mantle, and the Imperial Crown.

Syricius a Roman, the son of one Tiburtius, succeeded Damasus. There are
attributed unto him many ordinances. He put such as were Bigami, that is, such
as were married twice, from the mysteries of the Mass, and was the first that
admitted Monks to receive Ecclesiastical orders, because of their
continency: which before were not accounted, no not amongst Clerks.

Fastings and abstinencies.
The varieties and multiplications of Fastings certain days, at this time
engendered great disputations and contentions. Augustine in his Epistle to
Casulan, writes that some men fasted on the Wednesday, because Jesus Christ
was sold that day. And on the Friday, because he was then on the Cross. As
for fasting on Satterdayes, there was great strife. They of Millain and of the
East, maintained that none ought to fast on it, because Jesus Christ rested
that day in the Sepulcher. And contrary, the Romans and Affricanes and others
fasted it, because Christ was cast even to the ignominy of the Sepulcher. P.
Martyr.

Monicha S. Augustines mother, Monicha S. Augustines mother.
coming from Affrike to Millan, seeing none fast there on the Saturday,
marvelled greatly. Augustine her son being then not yet baptized, came to
Ambrose, and prayed him in the name of his mother to expound what were best to
be done therein. Do, answered Ambrose, as I do. Augustine by this answer
thought he should not fast upon Saturday, because Ambrose fasted not: but he
declared his meaning more plainly in these words. When I am at Rome, I fast on
the Saturday because there they fast: but when I am returned to Millan again,
I there fast not.

Men attribute to Melchiades Bishop of Rome, above mentioned, the ordinance not
to fast on the Sunday nor Thursday, because Christians fastes should be far
from the fastes of Ethnikes and heretics. Epiphan: also bringing the reason
wherefore we should fast on the Wednesday, says: The Papist hold that it was
upon Thursday.
because Christ that day ascended into heaven. And that it is written, when the
Spowse shall be taken away, that then the Apostles shall fast, etc. and this he
affirms to be a tradition of the Apostles.

I leave other Fastes of Angaria, that is to say, of torment, Fastes of Angaria.
when some calamity comes and other differences and abstinences and meats
which were after invented, Arcadius Honorius.
as these discourses in their place shall show.

Superstition has perverted the exercises of piety: despite or negligence
has caused them to be forgotten in the Church, which are two extremities that
all the faithful must shun.

Theodosius after he had established peace in the Church, and caused many
public Sinodes to be assembled, died at Millain, of the age of 50. years, and
reigned 17. that is to say, 6. with Gratian, and 11. after. The same year his
body was carried to be buried in Constantinople. See Aurel. Vict. Pomp. Laet.
Paul. Diac. lib. 12.

Ambrose lamented his death, and made a funeral oration, wherein amongst other
things he said: I loved this Prince who when his soul was ready to depart
from his body, had more care of the state of the Church, then of the dolours of
his death.

This care for Religion is a singular virtue, worthy of a Christian Prince.

Archadius and Honorius, the children of Theodosius, and of Placille his wife a
virtuous Lady, reigned after their mother the year 397. Arcadius was Emperor
of the East, and Honorius of the West. Their father ordained them Tutors before
he died: to Arcadius, Rufin; and to Honorius, Stillico; and Gildo was also
Instituted Governor of Affrike.

Honorius then ruled the Empire at Rome, his brother governing that of
Constantinople. Three years after this, Gildo Governor of Affrike carried
himself as Master and Lord, but afterward he was overcome by Mascezel his
brother, whose children he had slain.

Singing received into the Western Church.
The Western Church about this time received the fashion to sing. Augustine in
his Confessions, the 9. book says, it was by the means of Ambrose. For in
the time of the Arrian fury, this holy person being constrained by the people
to remain in the Temple, yea even in the night time, fearing it should have
been delivered to the Arrians, accustomed the people to sing Psalms and
Hymns, to put off griefs, and pass away the time. The East Church from the
beginning received singing, as appears by Pliny to the Emperor Traian, who
was at the time that John the Evangelist lived.

But Augustine in the same book confesses he failed therein, in that he gave
more attention to the Song then to the words that in it are passed, and accused
that sin, Singing received in assembly from the time of the Apostles.
for that the voice and the Song are made for the word; but not the word for
the So^g. In that place likewise he recites the manner of the Church of
Alexandria under Athanasius. See also Hierome upon the Epistle to the Ephesians.

Whenever you assemble as S. Paul says; if each one sing Psalms, or
Doctrine, or Revelation, or Language, or interpretation let all be done to
aedification. 1. Cor. 14. f. 26.

The appellation of the Mass.
The communion of the Eucharist at this time to be called Missa. It is twice
found in S. Augustine, namely, in his Sermon of Time, 237, wherein having
exhorted men to pardon injuries done to one another, says: You must come to
the Mass of the Catechumenes. There we pray: Pardon us our offenses, as we
pardon them which we have offended, etc. And in an other Sermon 91. he says;
In the history which is read at Masses, etc. Many doubt whether these Sermons
be S. Augustines. But Peter Martyr a Divine of Zurike says, In his Commentary
upon the Judges.
the style and sentences seem to be S. Augustines. I am of opinion says he,
that in that time of S. Augustine it began only to be usurped. For if it
had been usual, S. Augustine would have oftener made mention of it: seeing he
used to apply his Sermons after the common manner of speech.

John Cassian lived in this time under the Emperor Honorius. The heretics
chased him from the Church of Jerusalem: he came to Marcellis and lived there
a Monastike life.

Contenti somno qui a missa vigiliaru^ vsque ad lucem conceditur, ctc.
The word Mass is found in his writings, Lib. 3. Chap. 7. and 8. but in an
other signification then for the holy Communion; that is, for the
accomplishment and the end of the congregation of the faithful. For speaking
of the sleep of Monks, he says. Being contented with the time that is
permitted to them to sleep: that is, from the Mass of the Vigiles until the
light of the day, etc. understanding by these words, the time wherein they
ended the Vigiles.

Remissa peecatoru^, for remission of sins.
As for the deriuation of the name, even as the Latin Doctors which were before
this age, used the word (Remissa) for remission. Tertullian Lib. 4. against
Martion in the leaf 24. and Ciprian in his book of the good of patience, so
it seeemeth afterward they said Missa for Missio, or Demissio, that is, sending
away, when the Catechumenes went out of the Temple. For after the holy
scripture was read in the assembly, and that the Sermon was done, the Deacon
with a loud voice pronounced Go: or go out Cathechumenes. After this,
Euergumenes
the Cathechumenes went out with the Euergumenes; that is to say, they which
were handled with evil spirits: and thirdly such as did penance.

Dionisius in his Hierarchy makes mention of these orders, and so the Latin
Church called the celebration of the Eucharist Mess, because it was done after
the dimission or sending away of the Catechumenes and such as were not capable
to be admitted thereunto. And in this signification, Ambrose says Missas
facere, Missas facere, to let go.
for sending or letting go. This is the opinion of Peter Martyr in his
Commentaries upon the Judges.

Some have said that the word Missa was derived of the Hebrew word Mas, because
the gifts which the faithful offered, were said to be presents and sent. And
the occasion hereof came of the oblations which the Jews offered at their
feast of Pentecost.

If it were so, the Papists abused the word Mass: for they will not name it of
the alms and gifts which are given there: but of the oblation they make of the
body and blood of Christ for the quick and dead. P. Martyr.

Catechumenes, Catechumenes which were not yet baptized. Auditors Competitors.
signified such as were instructed in the faith and were not yet baptized. The
word is derived from the Greek word which signifies to teach, especially by
lively voice. Tertullian calls them sometimes Hearers or Auditors. Augustine
calls them Competitors. For before they were admitted to be baptized at
Easter, they gave up their names 40. days before. During which time, the
Pastors not only got information of their faith and doctrine, but also of
their life. P. Martyr.

The Papists, Apes of antiquity, had it in custom to send their children to
school in Lent.

Rufin before named, French by Nation, tempted with pride, sent presents and
silver to Alarike King of Goths, and stirred him to raise up war against
Archadius, persuading him that that young Prince affrighted would leave him the
Empire. His practice was dicouered, and Stilico pursued him. The soldiers cut
off his head and his right hand, and after carried them into Constantinople for
a show. See Pomp. Laet.

Deuastation of the fourth Monarchy.
The year of the Lord 405. the Goths entered into Italy with a great and
fearful company. But because there is often mention of them, we will briefly
touch the history of their original. The appellation of Goths does not only
comprehend one people, but many; that is to say Goths, Vandales, Rugians,
Hunnes, etc: but the Goths properly were they which from the I Will of Gothland
occupied a great part of Lifsland. Procopius an Historiographer says they were
Cymmerians and Greeks. Being come into Thrace and Hungary, the Roman
Emperors sought to drive them back but could not. The first and greatest
battle of the Romans against them, was under the Emperor Decius, wherein he
was slain. But after the Vandales and Huns coming from Scithia, did drive away
the Goths, and placed their seats in Hungaria.

The Goths then entered into Italy by the disloyalty of Rufin (which as it
is said fell upon his own head by the just judgment of God.) Stillico a
Vandall by Nation, hoping to lift up Euchere his son to be an Emperor,
raised up the Sueuians, Vandales, and Alenems, and other people, to the number
of 200000. conducted by their King Redegastus or Radagastus, Radagastus.
who afterward was discomfited in the strait of Appenin.

After Radagastus, a new Army of Goths came into Italy, having for their
Captain Alricus, or Alaricus, who was solicited by the Emperor Honorius to
leave the Country of Italy, and to descend into France, which then was so
occupied with French Burgonians and other Nations, that Honorius dispaired to
hold it. But as Alaricus prepared his departure, Stillico thought to have
surprised him on the sudden being upon Easter day, there being a truce betwixt
them not yet expired.

Alaricus the next morning came against Stillico, and to be revenged besieged
the Town of Rome, Honorius being at Rauenna.

The treason of Stillico being disclosed, he caused him to be beheaded; so
received he the reward of his infidelity. Then was there found no Captain
for the war to levy the siege before Rome, wherefore the Town was taken by
Alaricus after it had endured long time the siege. Rome taken by Alaricus.
This was about the fifteenth year of the Empire of Honorius, and of the Lords
Nativity, 412. and from the foundation of Rome, 1164. Alaricus neither burnt
nor wasted Rome, but gave commandment that they should be spared which fled
unto the Temples of the Christians. He died soon after. Adolphus succeeded him
and came to Rome, but by the means of Placidia the sister of Honorius, he
spared Rome, and took his way toward Gaul and Spain, and so the Goths left
Italy and occupied Spain, (which Alaricus before had invaded) and got the
domination thererof. The Kings of Spain disce^ded of the Goths.
In so much that the kings of Spain that came after, descended of them.

Diminution, or the Roman Empire.
From henceforward the fourth Monarchy received such calamities, that in place
to rule, and have strange people in subjection, it self was made a servant
unto barbarous Nations. The Town of Rome the seat of the said Monarchy, in
less then 139. years, was four times taken by the Goths, Vandales, and
other barbarous people. The first is that already recited by Alaricus. The 2.
by Gensericas the Vandall under Martinian, the year 456. The 3. by Totila King
of the Goths, which was the most grievous oppression that ever Rome endured.
For it was taken and burnt the year 21. of Justinian, and from the foundation
of Rome 1300. and of Christ, 548. The 4. it was sacked three years after the
other, namely, the year of Christ 551. as shall be seen in this History.

The Pope Siricius added the Anthems to the Psalms. Antiphonae Anhemes Orders.
He made a Law that orders (that is to say, the ceremonies and observations
which they use in the consecration of their Church-people) should be celebrated
and given by certain spaces of time betwixt one an other.

Ambrose Bishop of Millaine was his familiar, and writ unto him some Epistles
which are amongst his works. One in the number 49. and the other in the number
54. wherein he calls him his Father. He died about the year 399. having
occupied that seat 15. years, after Socrat. lib. 7. chap. 9. and Sozom. lib.
8. chap. 25.

Anastasius the first of that name borne at Rome, succeeded

He cast out of the Ministry such as wanted or were maimed in any of their
members, or subject to any disease.

He ordained that none beyond the Seas should be admitted to any
Ecclesiastical estate, without having a Testimonial sealed with five Bishops.
This was because of the Manechies which came from Affrike, to corrupt Churches.

John Chrysostom.
Chrysostom borne at Antioch, disciple of Libanius the Sophister, and an
Auditor of Andragatius a Philosopher, forsook the estate of an Advocate, and
followed Euagrius, with two other his companio^s, Theodorus and Maximus, which
after were Bishops, after they had well profited in holy scriptures in the
Monasteries. Monasteries.
For then Monasteries were public Schools, and Abbots, or Priors, which
governed them, did publicly teach the holy scriptures.

Innocent, the first of that name borne at Albe, preferred the seat at Rome
before all others, and ordained that it should not be subject to any other. He
commanded the faithful to fast on the Saturday, to the end that that day
they might with Mary Magdalen mourn for Jesus Christ being in his grave. He
ordained that the Pax should be given at Mass: and that a Temple which once
had been consecrated, should be so no more. He made certain laws concerning
the Jews, Painims, and Monks, and made the Sacrament of Unction of such as
were sick.

Chrysostom was often sick of a disease of the stomach: therefore he
abstained from eating in company. He was hardy and liberal in reprehension,
and above all in his public Sermons, and therefore was he hated of the
Clergy. He resisted Gaiuas an Arrian, who begged of the Emperor a Temple in
Constantinople for his people. See the Tripart. Hist. Chap. 6. Lib. 10.

Constantinople was divinely aided against Gaiuas, who sending soldiers in the
night to burn the Emperors Palace, a great multitude of armed men were seen
come against them three nights; which made them desist and leave off their
enterprise. Chrysostom was sent in embassage toward the said Gaiuas, (who had
wasted all the country of Thrace) who met the said Chrysostom, and commanded
his own children to kiss his knees, and he himself kissed his hand.

Certain Monks Egypt, Antropomorphites maintained that God had a body
whereabouts came many contentions amongst the Bishops: Insomuch that the
Arrians and Catholics in the night slew one an other.

There was an earthquake in Constantinople.

The silver Image of Eudoxia was placed nigh to the Temple of S. Saphie, and
plays celebrated in her honor. Chrysostom cries out against it, and in a
Sermon under the name of Herodias, taxes Eudoxia: whereof being angry, she
suborned people to sley Chrysostom: but the people guarded him both day and
night: he was afterward exiled into Pontus.

The Church of Constantinople so increased by the Chrysostonites, that many of
them were put to diverse torments. After his exile, there happened at
Constantinople in September a great hail, and four days after died Eudoxia.
See the forealleadged book. Chap. 15.16. and. 20.

The Pernicious error of Pelagius.
In the time of Innocent Pope of Rome, there was in the Country of England one
called Pelagius, Pelagius the heretic.
who began to teach that we are not justified by Gods mercy for Jesus Christ's
sake without Merit, but that through our own works and natural virtues, we
acquire true and perfect righteousness before God. Against this Pelagius, many
good Doctors of this time writ: but above all, Augustine has showed, that by
faith only we are Justified, because by it we embrace him that justifies us:
that is to say, Christ our Lord, with whom it unites and joins us. In such
sort, that we are made partakers of him and all the goods he has; and that
from thence good works should come; that is from Jesus who is within us, by
the force and free efficacy of whom we begin, to will that which is good,
Justification of faith.
and to employ our selves therein.

Zozimus a Grecian by Nation: he ordained that on the

The Pelagian heresy was condemned of the Bishops at the Counsels of Ephesus,
Carthage, and Mitiuitaine.

Arcadius Henorius.
Before Pelagius, England knew not what superstitious Monkery meant, neither
yet learned to prefer by vain and frivolous allegories, the righteousness of
works before the merit of Jesus Christ. But this Pelagius begun to broach this
pestilent heresy under Maximus King of England, the year of Christ. 390.

The Doctors which were before this Pelagius, used in their writings this word
Merit, in the signification to obtain or attain. Peter Martyr.

The beginning of the Kings of France.
THe Frenchmen are said to be issued of the Trojans, and as Histories say,
came after the destruction of Troy, with the Duke Francion, Francion.
to the pooles of Meotides, which at this day is called the Golfe de la Tana,
above and something far from Constantinople, as men draw toward the North:
near there they builded a Town which they inhabited until the time of
Valentinian the Emperor, son of Valentinian, and the brother of Gratian also
Emperors.

They were honored by the said Emperor, and made free of paying tribute for
10. years, in consideration that they reduced the Almanes under the obedience
of the Romans. But afterward when the tribute came again to be laid upon them,
and they unwilling to subject themselves, they forsook the Country, and came
with their Duke Marcomir into Franconia, which is betwixt Saxe and Almaine.

Pharamond the son of Marcomir, was chosen for their King, and began to
reign over them the year of the world 4383. and of Jesus Christ 420. under
whom first they used Laws, and appointed four Nobles which judged of causes
and differences betwixt men. Then was the Salike Law made which stood upon
many articles, amongst which there was one which took from daughters the right
to succeed in the Crown and Realm of France. He reigned 11. years. Paul.
Emil. the first book.

Boniface the first of that name a Roman, ruled at Rome 4. years. His Father
was a Priest called Iucundus.

The fourth schism was by a Priest called Enlalius, The fourth schism.
who was also ordained: whereof came great dissension and schism which endured
7. months, but finally Boniface was approved.

The sixth Council of Carthage after some, and the seventh.

S. Hierome died of the age of 91. years.

The Affricane Council was now, which is a confirmation Carthage. The titles
of the Canons are in the number 105.

Boniface renewed certain decrees attributed to his predecessors. Amongst
others, that none should be ordained a Priest before the age of 30. years, etc.

Also that no woman or Nun might touch or wash the Priests ornaments which
are holy.

The Hunnes a cruel and barbarous people which came out of Scithia, did great
hurt all over, and at their coming into Italy many fled toward the Adriatike
sea, and took place in those little Isles which were in great number, and lived
as they could of fishing.

After they began to make certain buildings in these Isles, and principally
in that which is called Miroalto, The beginning of Venice.
it being the chiefest of them.

There was at this time many Churches in Italy. Sozom. recites them, lib. 4.
cha. 24. where he makes mention of the faithful which retired into the places
where is now builded the Town of Venice, in the Adriatike Sea. There is also
hereof made mention in the Epistle of the Roman Sinode which was held under
Constantine. Theodor. Liber 2. Chapter twenty and two.

The Emperor Honorius being at Millan, and understanding the dissension for
the election of the Roman Bishops, deposed them both, and writ to Boniface
that when two were elected he would ordain that neither should be allowed,
notwithstanding for this time he allowed the election of Boniface.

Boniface by his Legate Faustin Bishop, a fierce and proud man, and Philip and
Esellus Priests, proposed to the sixth Council of Carthage, that it might be
granted that appellations of Bishops might be sent to Rome: and that no
Council should be allowed unless he send thither his Legate to do it; and
alleged for his speech the decree of Nice. The Bishops caused the books to be
searched, and the Registers of the Council if it were so. Also they caused to
come from Constantinople a Copy of the said Council: but finding it not to be
so as the said Boniface had alleged by his Legate, his request was rejected.
See the Epistle of the said Council of Affricke to Boniface, and to Celestine
in the first volume of the Counsels.

Note here by what means the Popes sought to obtain their primacie.

The introitus of the Mass.
Celestine first of that name a Roman, or of Campaine after some. He ordained
that the Introitus of the Mass should be of some Psalm David, yea and the
Graduall which they call the Offertorie, and added unto the the^ Prayers with
the song. Naucler.

Also that the Priest should say before the Introitum the 43. Psalm. Indica me
Deus. Supl. Chron.

Item that they should sing three Sanctus. Abb. Vsp.

This said year 426. the Emperor Honorius died.

The third general Council at Ephesus against Nestorius Bishop of
Constantinople, of 200. Bishops: It was there concluded that Jesus Christ is
one alone person in two natures, and that the Virgin Marie by good right is
called the mother of God. Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria assisted there.

Theodosius the younger, alone obtained the Empire, and reigned 26. years.

Celestine gave commandment to all Ecclesiastical persons to know and
observe the Canons.

He sent Palladius a Greek and Patricius, into Scotland and Ireland preach the
faith.

He sent into England Saint German Bishop of Anxerce, against the Pelagian
heresy. Valentinia^


He ordained that none should attempt any thing in an others parish.

Item that no Bishop should be ordained against the will of the people, but that
the consent of the Clergy and of the people was requisite.

The Church in that time was greatly troubled, and especially in Affrike: the
Ecclesiastical people were cast into exile, and martyred by Gensericus of the
Vandales.

Palladius composed the life of S. John Chrysostom.

S. Augustine Bishop of Hipone, of the age of seventy six years dyed, after
he had governed the said Church forty six years, the third month after his
Town was besieged by the Vandales, even when he writ against Julian a Pelagian
Bishop.

Possidonius writ his life.

Sedulius, Possidonius, Sozomenus, Socrates, and Theodoriretus, were Authors of
the Tripartite History, which afterward was brought into one by Cassiodorus.

Valentinian was made Emperor with Theodosius, and they

Clodio a Painim, King of France, reigned 18 years. He recovered from the
Romans Torney and Cambray, where he was buried.

Superstition was now far entered into the houses of great men: In so much as
Eudoxia the wife of Theodosius the younger went unto Jerusalem, and from thence
brought the chains wherewith S. Peter was bound by Herod, which were joined
with them of Nero, whereupon afterward was instituted the feast of S. Peter in
bonds.

Item the Relikes of S. Steven.

S. Hierome in his Epistle to Eustochius counts them otherwise. Abb. trip.
Naucler.


Sixtus the third of that name a Roman, governed the Rome, 8. years.

He was accused by a Priest of great credit called Bassus, to have committed
Incest, and to have violated a religious woman named Chrysogonus, and so did
Bassus understand of a servant of the said Sixtus called Peter. But in a full
Sinode of 55. Bishops, by Valentinian Augustus, liberty was left to Sixtus to
judge himself. For it is not lawful says he to judge nor give sentence
against the hie and great Bishop. He then took his oath that he was innocent
of the matter, and so was absolved by the Sinode, and Bassus banished, and all
his goods confiscate and given to the Church.

The beginning that the Pope should not be judged.
Sixtus then instituted the feast of S. Peter in bonds, the first day of
August, in place of an other Feast which was before made, for the victory of
Augustus Caesar which he obtained against Marcus Antonius and Cleopatra.

Suspicion or Idolatry changed but not abolished.
The Vandales which from the outward parts of Almaine under Gratian came into
France, and after into Spain, finally, under the conduction of Genserich, came
into Mauritania, and after sell upon Carthage, and there occupied Affricke more
then 77. years.

Victor Bishop of a Town in Numidia which is in Affricke, called in Latin
Cattena, made a book against the Arrians, and presented it to Genseric King of
the aforesaid Vandales an Arrian.

Polychronius Bishop of Jerusalem is chased away. He in the time of a famine
sold all his goods and gave it to the poor. For which chatitie and mercy he
was after restored again.

Sixtus ordained that none should be promoted in the Clergy into another
Diocese or Parish.

He also before his death gave all his goods to the poor.

Supp. Chro.
Hillarie Bishop of Arles, left all his goods and went into an hermitage, where
he composed the life of Saint Honorius. Abb. Tritem.

He had done better if he had preached constantly, and opposed himself
against the peoples vices.

Arcadius, Probus, Paschasius, and Eutichius, were in great estimation and
honor with Gensericus, but seeing he could not draw them unto Arrianisme,
after many evils, finally he martyred them with others: yea he cast certain
Bishops out of their places, and books of Religion and the Christian faith
were burnt.

The Council of Ephesus the second, was assembled by Theodosius, wherein
Eutiches the heretic was restored, and Flauianus a true Catholic condemned,
by a false accusation: For there was Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria President,
who was of the sect of the said Eutiches.

This Council was corrected by the Council following which was assembled
under Leo the Pope, first of that name, as follows.

The Town of Rhemes was taken by Attila, and put to fire and sword. Nicasius
Bishop of the said place a very ancient man was slain, and his sister
Eutropia put to death. Blund. lib. 2.


Leo a Tuscan first of that name, Naucler.
governed the Roman

He ordained, that whosoever irreverently should handle the Images of Saints,
should be separated and deprived of the communion of the faithful.

He added to the Mass, Orate pro me fratres, etc.

Also the Deo gratias is attributed unto him.

He added to the Canon, Sanctum sacrificium, immaculatam hostiam. Item, hanc
igitur oblationem, etc.

Attila sacked all Italy.

At the sacking of Aquilia, one of the honourablest women called Digna, cast
her self from an high Tower into the water, for fear to be ravished by the
Barbarians. For the fairest women were reserved from death, that they might be
forced of those barbarous people. Naucler.

Merouee the third King of France reigned ten years. He also was a Painim: and
was not the son of Clodio, but the master of his horsemen. Yet to him the
king Clodio recommended the government of his kingdom, of his wife, and of his
three children, trusting unto his loyalty, which he had sworn and promised
unto him in the presence of his Princes. But soon after the death of the said
Clodio, Merouee chased away his said three children, and caused himself to be
chosen King. When the three children came to age, they made war upon him, and
took from him all the Country of Austria, Lorraine, Brabant, Namure, and
Hainault.

Sureties.
Leo ordained that there should be but one Godfather or God mother at
Baptism, and at confirmation.

Some attribute unto him the ordinance that Alleluya and Gloria in excelsis Deo
should not be sung from Septuagesima until Easter.

Invention of Letanies.
Letanies were first in Constantinople, and after in the West by Lupus Bishop
of Troy received and approved. Item by Mamerus Bishop of Vienna, for an
Earthquake that happened and further to appease it; was sung the Sanctus Deus,
Sanctus Fortis, Sanctus immortalis miserere nobis.

From hence-forward thou shall see infinite superstitions, traditions, and
heaps of Counsels and Relikes.

He ordained fasting the three Rogation days.

The sea of histories.
Attila Captain of the Hunnes took Rome: before whom Leo came at the first
and obtained of him to touch nothing at Rome. And Attila being asked wherefore
so easily he agreed thereunto, answered that he saw the Angel of God with a
Paul. Diaconus.

The general Council of Calcedon of 630. Bishops against Eutiches Abbot of
Constantinople, under Martian.

In this Council 16. Chap. this decree is set down. If any Virgin vow and
dedicate her self to God, and likewise a Monk, it shall be no more lawful
for them to marry: but if they be found to marry, Valentinia^
then to remain excommunicated, yet we ordain that the Bishop of the place,
if he think good, may show the same humanity and favor.

The Narration or Fable of the 17. sleepers, named Malchus, Maximianus,
Martinianus, Dionisius, Ioannes, Serapion, and Constantinus, raised again as it
were 200. years after their death, and preaching the resurrection of the body
against certain heretics affirming the contrary, is forged about this time.

Long and great persecution was against the Christians in the Country of
Persia: In so much that Theodosius made peace with them that they would cease
the persecution. Abb. Vsp.

The Tripartite History, lib. 9. chap. 43. and others, make mention that S.
John Baptist revealed his head to two Monks which were hid nigh an house: and
after that, the said head was transported into Edissa, a City in Phinitia,
where he was honored.

Monks bear witness in their own cause. But how came this head from thence
unto Amiens in Picardie where he is adored? See John Calvin in his book of
Relikes.

Leo made many Epistles, even 66. in number.

Saint German Bishop of Anxerre, Seuerus Bishop of Treners, Lupus Bishop of
Troy* were again sent into England against the Pelagian heresy.

Many Councels were held at this time, after that of Chalcedone.

The first at Auranges, a Town in the Province of Narbone. The second at
Valens. The third Council of Carpentras. The fourth at Arles. The fifth at
Venice. The sixth at Tours.

In the Council of Tours the censure Ecclesiastical against Priests marriages
was moderated, 1. Volume of Councels.
which was to be excommunicated and deprived of the Communion, which was
permitted them only, upon condition they should not come to higher degree or
dignity, and that they should abstain from celebrating and administering to
the people.

Archephali heretics in this time, which cast off the Council of Chalcedone.

Martin.
Eucherius Bishop of Lions, in this time sent a book containing the praise of
Hermits lives, to S. Hilarie Bishop of Arles, who went into an Hermitage as is
said. Item an other book De contemptu mundi.

In this time the wisest gave themselves to write the praises of virginity,
and of a contemplative and monastike life.

The books of the Manicheans were burnt in Rome.

Theodosius dyed of the pestilence at Constantinople.

Abb. trip. Naucler.
Earthquakes, Comets, and other tokens were seen in heaven.

Anian Bishop of Orleans, Lupus Bishop of Troy, Nicasius Bishop of Rhemes, were
martyred.

Valentinian the Emperor, slain at Rome of his people, by the fraud of
Argobastus.

Martian chosen Emperor, reigned 7. years, he made alliance with the Vandales.

It was he which was wont to say that a Prince ought not to take arms as long
as it is lawful to live in peace.

Rome was taken again by Gensericke, toward whom also went Leo, and
entreated of him that the Town might not be put to fire and sword. Some say
he entreated nothing at this time.

The sea of Histories.
Orleans was besieged by Attila about this time, after he had wasted Almaine
and a great part of France: but before Orleans his people were discomfited by
Merouee King of France, and there was slain 180000. men.

That which is said of Geneuiesue virgin at Paris, is reported of this time.

This is now the great Diana of the Parisians.

Martian the Emperor was slain at Constanstinople, by the conspiracy of his
own men.

Childeric.
Childeric the fourth King of France, a Panim, reigned 26. Soisson, and Meion
of called Giles a Roman, Annualls of France.
succeeded in his place, and reigned eight years: but after Childeric was
restored.

After Childeric was called again, Leo, the first.
he gouernerned wisely vertuoufly, and valiantly: he put to flight his enemy
Giles, and sacked the Towns of Treuers and Coloigne, and he retired to
Treuers. After also he conquered Orleans, and all the Country along the River
of Loire until Angiers, and then brought all the Country of Angiou under his
subjection. He took also the City of Trect, and all the Country along the
River of Rhene, and greatly increased the Kingdom of France.

He used great ingratitude toward Basin King of Lorraine called Thoringe, who
had kindly entertained and maintained him, all the time he was deprived of his
kingdom. For he received the wife of the said Basin, and took her for his
own wife.

Leo Emperor, first of that name a Grecian, left for his successor Leo, who
was of Ariadne his daughter and of Zenon. He sent Basalike a warrior against
Gensericke King of the Vandales. Constantinople and a great part of Italy, was
as it were in perpetual trouble under this Emperor, who reigned about 17.
years.

Hilarie borne at Sardes, Bishop of Rome, ruled 7. years. Naucler. and Suppl.
Chronic.

That a Clarke should receive no Inuesture of a Lay person.

That none should be admitted unto orders if he were not learned, and having
all his members.

In a Sinode at Rome of fifty Bishops, it was ordained that the Decrees of
the Apostolic seat should be received and published universally.

There also it was ordained that the Bishop might correct that which his
predecessor had evil ordained.

This Pope confirmed the domination and principality of the Apostolic seat.
Suppl. Chro.


He made three Epistles.

He deprived a Bishop of his dignity called Ireneus, because by ambition he
had left his Church to go into an other, Leo.
which was by Canons forbidden.

Remy Bishop of Rhemes, and Patricius his brother, was Bishop of Soissons.

Simplicius Tiburtin succeeded Hilarie, and governed the Roman Church 15.
years, and more after some.

He declared (as his predecessor) that the Roman Church was the chief and
principal.

He builded many Temples and dedicated them.

He instituted that in the Church of Peter and Paul there should be seven
Priests to hear the penitents and to Baptize them. In the first volume of
Counsels.

Leo the younger was left a child, successor of the Empire, by his
Grandfather on the mothers side, and having governed a year, he was content
that his Father Zeno should reign for him. In so much that with his own hands
he placed the Diadem upon his Fathers head.

That which is said of king Arthur is of this time.

Zenon.
Zenon Isaurike Emperor, reigned 16. or 17. years. He was Arriadne.

The English men came far into France.

The Arrians exercised great cruelties.

Honorius an Arrian king of Vandals, persecuted greatly the Christians in
Affrike, and more then 4976. were exiled in diverse places, without sparing sex
or age, and afterward at diverse times and with diverse punishments were put to
death. Some had their hands cut off, some their tongues. Certain times after,
under the shadow of a Council, he made assemble all Bishops, Doctors, and
other Catholics, to the number of 324. after Paulus Diaconus, but after others
444. he sent into exile, and caused the Temples to be shut up against
Catholics, and gave them to the Arrians. One Bishop called Laetus was burnt,
to the end to fear others. The Bishop of Carthage Eugenius, with more the^
500. of the Clergy were banished. But 2. years after Honorius died miserably
of vermin. And Gonthamundus succeeded him. He revoked Eugenius from exile. At
the request also of whom, all the others were called home and the Churches
opened.

An horrible famine in Affrike. Naucler. Zenon.


It is a thing worthy of remembrance, the great constancy of a woman called
Denise, Denise.
and the exhortation she made to her son called Maioricus. Remember said she
my son, that we were baptized in the name of the Trinity: wherefore let us
not loose the garments of our salvation. Also an other called Victoria,
Victoria.
who neither by the solicitation of her husband, nor the tears of her children
could be persuaded, etc. Naucler.

Epiphanius Bishop of Pauie, a very grave man, brought into peace and concord
the people of Liguria, and brought from Burgonie many Captives, as well by his
Silver as his holy life, whereby he entreated the redemption of 6000.
Captives. Paul. Diaconus and Naucler. after him.

Seuerin an Abbot in Noric, was now of great renown. Odoacer King of the
Goths, as he passed by Noric into Italy, went unto him for his blessing.

Odoacer occupied Italy, and was made King thereof, and the Goths reigned
there by the space of 70. years.

The West Empire takes here an end after Augustulus had deposed himself, the
year of Christ. 472.

Sidonius Bishop of Auuerne a famous Poet in this time.

Clouis the fifth King of France, and the first Christian King, Childerike out
of his kingdom. Going to Soisons he took it by force, and drove away Siagre
the son of Giles the Roman, who occupied the kingdom against Childeric, as
has been said: And at his return took Melum, and chased away the Romans.

He amplified the kingdom of France, having subjected to it all the Cities and
Towns which the Romans held betwixt the Rivers Rhene and Seine, also all such
as were betwixt Seine and Loire.

The histories of France say, that in a certain battle against the Almaines,
being at a strait, he remembered the admonitions which Clotilde his wife had
often given him, to embrace the Christian faith and religion: In such sort,
that being pressed he lifted up his eyes to heaven and said; Lord God deliver
me from this peril wherein I am thus environed with mine enemies: and I will
believe in thy name, I and all my people. It came to pass not only that he was
delivered from peril, but also that he had victory upon his enemies;
wherefore he was baptized by Remy Bishop of Rhemes, his two sisters and more
then 3000. of the noblest of his people besides women and children.

The invention and fable of the holy Ampoule (as they call it) wherewith the
kings of France are anointed, is reported of this time.

Churches began to become rich.
Clouis for recompense, gave to the Church of Rhemes many great gifts, lands,
signories and rents.

S. Remy afterward had great authority, and was principal Counselor of king
Clouis.

Some say he builded the Church of Laon, and that having erected it a Bishops
place, gave unto it the land of Laon.

Patricius the brother of S. Remy, Earl of Soissons, was after Bishop of
Soissons, and also gave to the said Church the Earldom, which the Bishop
there holds at this day. For you must understand that S. Remy and his brother
were children of the Duke of Laon and of Soissons, of a noble and ancient race.

Visigots.
The Annals of France make mention that Alaric King of Visigots, then occupied
a great part of Gaul, namely all the country along the River of Loire, from
Orleans even to mount Pirenes, which do separate France and Spain. Item the
countries of Berry, Auuerne, Limosin, Quercy, Perignex, Angolmois, Agenois,
Languedoc, Prouence, and other nigh places; against which Clouis willing to
make war as he passed nie Tours, he sent to make his offerings to S. Martin,
to have his succors against the said Visegoths, and that after the victory he
himself came to Tours, and offered great gifts to the Temple of S. Martin.

If this be so for a first Christian king, he was partly instructed in the
Christian faith, and felt yet his Paganism, because in the place of his old
Gods, he reclaimed and called now upon Saints.

The fault may be imputed to the Bishops and Pastors, which then were more
superstitious then religious, and more foolishly devout, then well and divinely
instructed in the word of God. As S. Brice, Patrice, Fourcy, Medard, Gildard,
Vaast, Remy, Severin, Germany, Loupe, Nicaisius, Aguien, and other Saints of
like branne were canonized after their deaths.

Under Zenon there happened such a fire in Constantinople that the greatest
part of the Town was brought into ashes, and more then six score thousand
volumes were lost and consumed.

Clouis had in marriage Clotilde, the daughter of Chilperic, King of Burgonie,
who was slain by his own brother called Gondobaldus, and his wife mother of
the said Clotilde was drowned.

Felix the third of that name borne at Rome, governed the Rome 8. or 9. years,
his Father was a Priest called Felix.

The consecrations of Temples and their dedications, Dedication.
yearly are attributed unto him.

Germain Bishop of Capua in this time.

Vaast, Bishop of Arras, Vedastus in Latin.

Fulgence Bishop of Rupe in Affrike.

Auitus Bishop Vienne.

Solemus Bishop of Chartres, preached Christ, and Fourcy that came new from
Ireland.

The Council of Orleans the third at this time after John le Maire. In the
first Melanius was President. In the first volume of Counsels.


In the said Council which was under Clouis, it was agreed that the goods of
the Clergy should be employed for the mainteining of Priests, for the relief
of the poor, for the deliverance of prisoners, and for the repairing of
Churches.

In the Council of Tarrascon in Spain, Churchmen were enjoined not to buy
good cheap, with intent to sell the same thing dearer, for then they should be
deposed.

Mean cares occupied the assemblies of Bishops.

Anastatius the Emperor called Dicorus, Anastatius.
for the change of colors which appeared in his eyebrows succeeded Zeno,
and reigned 27. years: Anastatius
he commanded straightly to worship a quaternitie, Quaternitie.
that is to say four persons in the Divinity: which pernicious heresy was by
him maintained.

Gelatius of Affricke governed the Roman Church five years: his Father was a
Bishop named Valericus. Naucler.

The distinction of Autentike and Apocrypha books of the scripture are
attributed unto him.

He declared many books Apocryphaes, as the book called the Assumption of
the Virgin Mary. Item the Canons of the Apostles, and such like. In the 1
volume of the Councels.

The Manicheans again are condemned and exiled, and their books burnt.

He showed how Anastatius the Emperor might be excommunicated.

Naucler.
He is numbered amongst them which chiefly ordained the Canon, Te igitur
clementissime, etc.

Some attribute to him the ordinance of Bigamies, that is, of such as have bin
twice married, that they should not be promoted to orders, unless it were by
ordinance of the Apostolic sea.

That orders should be made four times a year, and on the Saturday only.

He made Hymns, Collects, Responds, Graduels, Prefaces of the Mass, and
brought all into order.

He added to the Mass Vere dignum and iustum est.

The Canons then was made at diverse times, and in diverse times; It is then no
marvel if it be evil sowed, and patched with rags and tatters, without any
certain Author.

He made 5. books against Nestorius and Eutiches. Item two against the
Arrians, and a Treatise of excommunication.

He restored Messenus Bishop, after the knowledge of his penance.

He excommunicated the Emperor Anastatius because he favored Acarius and
other heretics.

He excommunicated the king of Vandals, and all his people which the^ in
Affrike afflicted the true faithful in favor of the Arrias.

He commanded Priests that they should not communicate but in both kinds, and
not under one alone.

The Clergy greatly loved, waxed rich in this time and increased.

Gelatius in full Council at Rome, Gelasius.
Bread and wine of the Supper.
declared that in the Eucharist, neither the substance of the bread and wine,
nor their natures are changed, but that in them as in an Image, the flesh and
blood of the Lord are represented: and that in the Sacrament both are exhibited
to the faithful. He also declared them to be excommunicated which gave not
nor took the Sacrament of the Eucharist whole. In the first volume of the
Councels.

Gennaduis at this time was Bishop of Marceil.

Anastatius a Roman, second of that name Pope, governed the Church of Rome two
years.

This is the second Pope noted of heresy, whose beginning was reasonably good,
and excommunicated the Emperor Anastatitius, an Eutechian heretic: but
afterward he himself did all he could to revoke Acetius from exile, and stuck
unto him. He proved also very favorable unto the Nestorians, and communicated
with Photin, a Deacon of Thessalonica; wherefore many Clarks, Priests, and
Bishops, refused to communicate with him. See the Chap. Anastatius. distinct. 9.

In the month of September he created 12. Priests and 16. Bishops.

He died very miserably (as it is said) being upon the privy, where he
voyded all his bowels, as did Arrius. Naucler.

Acatius Bishop of Constantinople an heretic, was at this time murdered.
Sigeb.

Simmachus borne in the I Will of Sardiue, ruled in Rome 16. years.

The first schism in the Roman Church.

The election of Popes consecrated with blood.

When Simmachus was chosen, an other likewise called Lawrence was ordained:
Simmachus in the Temple of S. John de Latran, and Lawrence in the Church of S.
Mary the greater: for which election, there was great division in the Church:
In so much, as the people and the Roman Senate were divided. Wherefore a
Council was held at Rauenna, the King Theodoric being present, Simmachus
wherein the election of Symmachus was confirmed, and Laurence was recompensed
with the Bishopric of Nycerre by Symmachus: but by some of the Clergy of
Rome this same sedition began again about four years after. In so much that
Theodoric being grieved thereat, sent to Rome one Peter Altin Bishop of Rauenna
to be Pope the other two rejected. But Symmachus assembled the Council, and
there in the presence of all, 102. Bishops, made his Oration, and therein so
purged himself of all vices and crimes laid against him, that he was again
elected and approved of all, and Laurence and Peter Altin were rejected, yet
the noise at Rome was greater, and the sedition more enflamed then before. For
at every faction there was bloud-shead: Bloudshead.
As well Priests as Laymen slew one an other in the streets. Finally, Faustin
the Consul appeased the sedition, laying hand to Arms against such as were
chief Captains of so many evils.

See the fruits of the riches of the Roman Church.

Symmachus ordained that on Sundays and solemn days of Martirs, they should
sing Gloria in excelsis Deo, adding to the Cantic. the rest, which are more
then the words of the Angel.

Item, that whilst the Pope lives, none should hold talk of choosing a new
Pope, upon pain of excommunication.

Hospitalls.
He caused certain houses to be builded nigh the Church of S. Peter, for the
ease of the poor, and provided them of all things necessary for living.

Under Trasimundus King of Vandals, many Bishops of Affrike were put to exile
and sent into the I Will of Sardine: to the number of 202. Amongst the which was
Fulgentius: which this Symmachus helped with silver, and redeemed many Captives.

Olimpius Bishop of Carthage an Arrian, being at the Bathes and blaspheming
the Trinity, was suddenly burnt. Naucler.

Boethius a Poet of this time, Hormisda.
whose wife was named Elphe; was sent into exile by Theodorice King of the
Ostrogothes, and after sent to prison, where he made his books, De
Consolatione Philosophiae.

In this time Abbeys and Temples began to be founded in France, and to be
dedicated to the honor of Saints, and called by their names. Clouis founder of
Temples.
The King Clouis vowed to build a Church if he obtained victory against
Allaricus King of Visegothes.

He caused to be builded the Church of S. Geneurefue at Paris, then called
Saint Peter and Paul's, where he was buried.

He founded the great Temple of Strasbourge.

Gerard Bishop of Laon was married, and of his wife had a son, who succeeded
him in the Bishoppricke.

Symmachus cast out of Rome the Manecheans, and caused publicly their books
to be burnt. And made a book Entitled, The excess of Clerks.

He created 92. Priests, and 107. Bishops.

Many Sinodes were held at Rome, and one Council at Valence in Spain, whereby
they sought to force Ecclesiastical persons to leave their wives.

Childebert, the sixth King of France a cruel man, reigned

He founded the Abbay of S. Germain des prees, nigh Paris, where he was buried;
and the Abbay Du Mont at S. Michaels; the Church of S. Germain del; Auxerrois
at Paris. But the book called Le mer des histoires, says otherwise.

Hormisda Pope, borne at Fresselon, a City of Campania,

He ordained that Priests should address no Aultars without the license of
their Bishop.

That marriages should be made publicly and solemnly. Suppl. Chron.

That no Layman should be chosen to be Bishop.

A Council was at Rome against the Eutechians, wherein it was ordained that he
that had done his penance, Justin the old.
and made an honorable amends, should not be admitted into any Ecclesiastical
estate. Supp. Chro.

Many Monks corrupted with the Nestorian heresy, not leaving it by the
exhortations of Hormisda, but rather sowing diffametory speeches against him,
were banished from Rome, against the hypocrisy also of which, he writ.

He solicited by Letters and messengers, John Bishop of Constantinople,
companion of Acarius, and even the Emperor himself to leave the Eutechian
heresy: but not only Anastatius despised his admonitions, but iniuried his
four Ambassadors, saying that it belonged to an Emperor to command, and not
to a Pope.

Paulus Diaconus adds, that the Emperor Anastatius besides all this, caused
them to mount on the Sea to go into Italy in a light and worn ship,
forbidding them to take no land in Greece, The death of Anastatius.
but quickly pass away without taking any Port. Anastatius a little after died
with lightning: he was of the age of 88. years, the 25. year of his Empire.

Hormisda.
Hormisda was renowned for his great alms done to the poor, and for
condemning the Manichean heresy which sproong again, and for burning their
books.

Boethius was put to death by the commandment of Theodorike the Arrian.

Iustine of a swine-heard became an Emperor.
Iustine the ancient Emperor reigned nine years. In his youth he kept swine,
then he kept oxen; after he was a Carpenters man. About the age of 16. years
he began to follow the war, and by craft came to the Empire. For having
received a great sum of silver to buy the suffrages of Princes, Captains and
other, for an other, he subtly bought them for himself, and so was chosen,
but he caused all them to die for whom he had received the said silver.

A Council at Gerone in Spain at this time.

A Council at Satragosse. In the 7. Chapter of the said Council, it is said:
Whosoever receives the Eucharist and eats it not, let him be excommunicated
for ever. This is in the second volume of Counsels.

In the 16. Chapter. If any Clarke upon presumption of vanity, or by
dissolution make himself a Monk, let him be excommunicated.

Brigide a virgin in Scotland, dyed the year 524. of whom, many fabulous
things are invented.

Justin after his election sent Ambassadors unto Hormisda the Pope, to confirm
the Apostolic authority, and to bring peace to all Churches. He cast out of
Constantinople all the Eutechian Heretics and Arrians, and revoked from exile
all such as Anastatius the Emperor before had banished; and Temples were taken
from the Arrians, and given to the Catholics.

Theodorice much grieved that Justin should again drive away the Arrians, in
despite determined to torment the Town of Rome.

John, Pope, the first of that name a Tuscaine, John, Pope, first of that name.
governed the Church three years at Rome.

He with the Bishop of Rauenna, In the first volume of the Counsels.
and certain Senators and Counselors of Rome, were sent to Constantinople by
Theodorice King of Italy, to the end that the Emperor should restore to the
Arrian Bishops and Priests their Churches, otherwise he would put Rome and
Italy to fire and sword. As this company approached near the town, the
Emperor Justin with all his Clergy and all the people of the Town met them,
and the Emperor casting himself at the Popes feet, saluted him.

John then being received in such honor, expounded the cause of his coming,
and seeing he could not bring Justin to Theodorics will, began to weep, and
besought him to help the ruin of Italy, and of the Catholics. Then rose
there up a great lamentation on the Ambassadors side, and of the Auditors,
every one seeing Religion to be in so great hazard if the Arrians were
restored: and on the other side, the great dissolation of Rome and Italy.

Finally the request of the Ambassadors obtained, The faith put behind.
the opinion of which was, that for a time the cause of the faith might tarry
behind to procure the salvation of the Town, and of Italy. Justinian.
The Emperor consented to the restitution of the Arrians, suffering them to
live after their own laws and statutes: but for all this, the Pope John and
his companions got nothing hereby. For the honorable entertainment which the
Emperor gave them was suspected of Theodorice: He that endures not what he
should, must endure that he would not.
wherefore he put the Pope in prison at Rauenna, where he finally died in
great misery, poverty, and infection, and the other Ambassadors were likewise
with him.

This was a notable judgment of God, upon such as set behind, the cause of
Faith, for a temporal commodity.

Peace restored to the Catholics in Affrike by Hilderic King of Vandales; who
revoked from exile, all such as his father had banished: notwithstanding his
father on his deathbed had charged him that he should never give help nor
support unto Catholics.

Affrike was afflicted until this time, namely, about 74. years.

Some histories say, that the Town of Antioche was by an earthquake wholly
destroyed.

Justinian, the Emperor Iustins Nephew by his sister, reigned 38. years.

He set his study to repair the estate of the Commmonwealth by Bellisarius.

Felix the fourth Pope of that name, ruled four years. Supp. Chron.

He was great Grandfather of S. Gregory's father.

Eztreame Unction.
There is attributed unto him the ordinance of extreme Unction, grounding his
ordinance upon the words of S. James, the 5. Chapter.

He caused to be builded at Rome, the Temple of S. Cosme, and of S. Damian, and
repaired the church of S. Saturnin, which was burnt.

Dedication.
The Feast of the Dedication every year ought to be observed and celebrated.

In this time Cassiodorus compiled in one the History which is called
Tripartite.

Boniface ruled at Rome two years and more. There was Discorus, but he died
about a month after, and so ceased the division: wherefore having proved the
fear thereof, he ordained that three days after the Popes death if it were
possible there should be an other elected to shun sedition.

This was he which did separate the people from the Clergy as they were
hearing the divine Service as they called it.

John, the second of that name, called Mercurius, borne at Rome, governed the
Church three years.

The Vandales took end in Affrike, 96. years after it was occupied by
Gensericus the Tyrant, an Arrian. And Affrike was made tributary to the Roman
Emperor by Bellisarius.

Justinian sent the confession of his faith, with his own hand and seal, to
John the second. In the second volume of Councels.

Item he sent unto him a Cup of Gold, and two of Silver, and certain Challices.

Gregory Bishop of Langres, was married. Fascicul, Temp.

The Council of Toledo the second.

Agapetus a Roman, ruled one year. His father was a Gordian.

Justinian was seduced by Athemius the Eutychian, Bishop of Constantinople.

Agapetus was sent to Constantinople by Theodatus King of the Ostrogothes in
Italy, to appease the Emperor, The treason of Theodatus.
and to have pardon for the fault he had committed in putting to death Queen
Amalasontha, the wife of Theodorice, by whom he was admitted into the Kingdom.

Agapetus coming to Constantinople, contention arose between him and the
Emperor. And after many threatenings against Agapetus, Justinian finally left
his error, was quieted, and cast Anthemius out of his Bishopric, and there
appointed one Mennas in his place at the exhortation of Agapetus.

Unto Agapetus is attributed the ordinance of Processions on Sundays about the
Temples.

The Temple of S. Sophie was builded at Constantinople by Justinian.

German Bishop of Paris, excommunicated the King of France Herebert, because
he left his wife Iugebergne. Abb. Vrsp.

Eleutherius Bishop of Tornay. Medard Bishop of Noion. Gildard Bishop of Rouan
in this time.

Iordain a Monk, after came to be a Bishop of the Goths, a Chronicler of the
Ieastes of the Romans, and of the Goths. Abb. Trit.

Syluerius Pope, or Liberius, borne in Campania in Italy, the son of
Hormisda Bishop (who as is said was Pope of Rome) governed the Roman Church a
year, five month, and 12. days. Naucler.

He was by force promoted to his dignity by Theodatus King of Italy, who
corrupted by silver, constrained the Clergy to choose Syluerius, without the
consent of the Emperor.

Theodora the wife of the Emperor Justinian, at the instigation of Vigilius
Deacon, required Syluerius to call again from exile Anthemius, and to restore
him to the dignity from which he had been cast and deprived for his heresy,
and so to put out Mennas. Syluerius would not do this.

Bellisarius had commission to deprive him of the Popedom, and to appoint unto
it Vigilius, who subborned false witnesses, which affirmed that Syluerius had
intelligence with the Goths, and that he would have delivered them the Town
of Rome. Wherefore Syluerius was constrained to give place and go into exile.
In the second volume of Counsels.

At this time Italy was greatly afflicted with an extreme famine.

Maurus a Roman, and Faustus an Italian, Disciples of Saint Benet, were sent
into France to teach the Monastike life, Justinian. Vigilius.
and at the request of the French men, Monks first in France.
who sent messengers to S. Benet, to the Mount Cassim.

Amator a Bishop, sent some silver to Siluerius to maintain him in exile.

Syluerius gave sentence of excommunication against Vigilius.

The Feast of Purification was at that time instituted in Constantinople, to
appease a great pestilence. Abb. Vrsp.

This is Candlemas, which then was called Hypapanthy: that is to say, an
encounter or meeting: For then Simeon found Christ, whom he had so long
attended.

Liberius made five books of the Incarnation of out Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and a book against the Bishops of Affrike.

Justinian compiled the Roman laws: first the Code, The civil Law of
Justinian.
containing 12. books.

Secondly, the Digestes. Thirdly, the Institutes. Fourthly, an Epitome of Laws.

The war in Italy against the Ostrogothes by Bellisarius. Leonard Attelin.

Justinian in his new Constitutions, ordained that all Bishops and Priests
should celebrate the prayers of Baptism, and of the Lords Supper with an high
voice, and with words understood of all Christians, to the end that the spirits
of the Auditors might be lifted up with greater devotion to sing praises unto
the Lord.

Vigillius borne at Rome, governed the Roman Church Naucier. or 8. years 6.
months, and 26. days, after others: he entered wickedly into the papacy. It
was he also that ordained that the Mass should be said toward the East.

Rome was taken and burnt by Totila at this time.

The first universal Council was now held at Constantinople, of 165. Bishops,
by the commandment of Justinian the Emperor, and at the request of Vigilius,
against Anthemius, Seuerus, Peter of Antioche, Zona, and other heretics, who
said that the Virgin Marie brought forth Jesus Christ only Man, and not God
and man. There again it was agreed, that it is well said, Marie the mother of
God.

The year of Christ, 551. Rome was taken the second time of the Goths, by
Totila the scourge of God: before whom came Vigilius, or after Nauclerus,
Pelagius.

In this time besides the war and famine which was in Italy, there was also
a sore plague, in so much, that houses were inhabited by savage beasts.

Benet the younger was cast into a burning furnace by the commandment of
Totila. Herculien Bishop of Peruse, had his head sawne off, by the same.

2. Volume of Councels.
In this time were held the Councels of Orleance, the second and third: or
fourth and fifth after some. In the 10. Chapter of the second Council, it was
ordained that a Christian should not take a Jew to wife, nor that a Christian
woman should marry a Jew, and such communication was unlawful, and if they
were joined, they ought to be separated. In the third Council wherein
Honoratus Arch-bishoppe was President, Chapter 2. it was ordained that no
Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon, should have the company of his wife; otherwise,
that he should be deposed from his office and remitted into the communion of
Lay People.

In the 16. Chapter it was ordained that the Deacon before 25. and the Priest
before 30 years should not be ordained.

Priscillian heresy.
Many in this time were infected with the Priscillian heresy, abstaining from
eating flesh.

A Council held now at Auuerne.

Vigillius being come to the Popedom by the deceit and subtilties of the
Empress Theodora, she commanded him to come unto Constantinople and to
restore Athemius, as he had promised: but he refused to do it: saying, that
justly he was cast out by Agapetus and Syluerius, and that therefore he was not
bound to keep his promise which he made against all right and reason.

Theodora very angry hereat, sent an Embassage to Rome to draw Vigillius into
Law for the injury done by him, in casting Syluerius into exile. Item, for
the plot by him laid for the death of a young man of the chief Nobility,
called Asterius, and of one which was his Secretary.

Upon these matters the Ambassador arriving at Rome, was aided of the Romans,
and they took Vigilius and lead him to Constantinople, and as he embarked,
the people cast stones at him, with these Imprecations. A famine be with thee:
a mortality be with thee: thou have done a thousand mischiefs to the Romans:
evil enough may thou find where thou go. Do (said he) what you will
unto me, for I have well deserved it. And as he approached nigh unto
Constantinople, a great multitude of the Clergy met him and conducted him
into the Town. Theodora in the mean while ceased not to solicit Vigillius
of his promise, and to restore Anthemius. To whom Vigilius said, that he
would rather endure all things whatsoever, then do it. He was grievously
afflicted, iniuried, and outraged, and drawn out of the Temple of S. Sophie,
or Euphemie, Vigilius byeth the Popedom dear.
whereinto he was fled for safety and refuge. One put a rope or cord about
his neck, and led him all over the Town from morning till night. This done,
he was put in prison, fed with bread and water, and finally sent into exile
with the Clergy which accompanied him at his entry. After the death of
Theodora he was called again with all such as went with him, at the request
of the Captain Narses: but in the way he fell sick and died in Sicile, at the
City of Siracusa.

Denis Abbot, a Roman, made the great Pascall Cicle in this time. Item, a
book of the reason of the Feast of Easter. Abb. Trit.

Arator a Subdeacon at Rome, wrote the Acts of the Apostles in Hexamiter Verses.

Radegonde Queen of France, the wife of Clotharius, who was King of France,
Pelagius.
after the death of his brother Hildebert.

Pelagius a Roman, governed the seat 12. years: he was accused to have been
the principal cause of all Vigilius his evils: But in the presence of the
Clergy and people, and in the presence of Narses, he mounted the Chair, and
publicly swore that he never did any evil unto Vigilius, and so escaped and
was absolved

Punishment of heretics.
It is he who ordained that heretics and schismatikes should be punished with
sword, power, and temporal Justice. And that none should be admitted to
Ecclesiastical orders by ambition or gifts.

Canonical hours.
That Cleargie-men should each day, say or sing the seven Canonike hours.

Universal.
That no Patriarch should use this word Universal, but only the Bishop of Rome.

That none might ordain an Abbot, unless he were first chosen Canonically.

Memory of the dead.
He added to the Mass, the Commemoration of the dead.

In this time was the fourth Council of Orleance held, where it was ordained,
Lent.
that Lent should be universally kept through all Churches. In the second
volume.

The second Council of Tours in this time.

Each City should nourish his poor.
In the said Council, Chap. 5. it was ordained that every City should nourish
his poor and strangers, every one according to his power, that no poor might
go about from Town to Town.

In the third Chapter. That the Bishop should hold his wife as his sister, and
that he should govern as well his house and family as his Church, in such sort
as there might be no evil opinion of him.

In the 20. Chapter, because Priests were suspected to communicate with their
wives, it was there ordained that wheresoever they went, they should have for
adiacents some of the Clergy who might lie in their Chambers to witness
their chastity. In the twenty and seven Chapter. That Judges and rich men
which oppress the poor, John the 3
Oppressions of the poor.
after they have been advertised thereof by their Pastors not to do it, that
they should be excommunicated if they amended not.

The first Council of Paris was held in this time.

Clotaire, the seventh King of France, reigned five years; and being pressed
with necessity, he took the third part of the reuenew of the Church, against
which, the Arch-bishoppe of Tours and others opposed themselves.

Upon a Friday called S. he slew one Gualter Diuitot a Knight, in the
Temple: whose heir for satisfaction, was exempted from all service and homage,
as free as the King. Annals of France.

John, Pope, the third of that name a Roman, reigned 12. Phillip and S. James,
which Vigilius had begun. Supp. Chron.

Justinian the Emperor, after his falling into a frenzy, finally died, and
his Nephew succeeded him. Abb. Tri.

Iustine the younger Emperor, reigned 12. years. Iustine the younger.
He Sophie his wife governed long the Empire; but by her imprudencie, Italy
came into the hands of the Lombardes. Upon false reports she began to hate the
the Captain Narses, and said she would send that gelded merchant to spinne
with her maids. But Narses answered that he would spinne such a web, as she
should not undo all her life. Abb. Vrsp.

A great plague in Italy.

Here began the reign of the Lombardes in Italy, The kingdom of the Lombards.
whereof Albionus was the first King.

Sophorachus Bishop of Paris, was sent into a Monastery by the authority of a
Council at Paris.

Cherebert, or Aribeet, the eight King of France, reigned 9. years, he was
much given to women.

Armenia again received the faith.

Albinus King of the Lombards, Justin the younger. Benet 1.
was slain by his wife Rosimonde the daughter of Gondimanus King of Gepilles,
for that he made her drink in a dish or masor made of her fathers scalpe.

The beginning of Exarches.
Longin a Grecian, the first Exarche in Italia, after all Italy as it were was
occupied, reigned in Rauenna a 11. years, appointed by the Emperor Justin.
Exarches in Italy.
This office of Exarchate endured in Italy 124. years, and was a sovereign
Magistrate, as a Liefe-tenant General for the Emperor.

Chilperic the ninth King of France, reigned four years.

He was slain by his own wife called Fredegonde, as he returned from
hunting, because he had perceived her whoredom.

He before had strangled his wife Galfonde, the daughter of the King of
Spain, at the request of the said Fredegonde. See the Annals of France.

Benet Pope, the first of that name a Roman, ruled at Rome four years.

He helped the necessity of many in the great famine aforesaid, especially at
Rome, yea even to bring victuals from Egypt for the poor.

Gregory was sent by him to preach to the English men. Abb. Vrsperg.

Lombards took and occupied all Italy, at the instigation of Narses, whom the
Empress Sophie had angered, as is said, and they entered Millain.

Aman Bishop of Vtrect, or of Liege, and Maglorius Bishop of Dole, were in this
time. Abb. Vrsp.

Fortunatus an Italian, after Bishop of Poiters, made 77. Hymns, and the
miracles of S. Martin. Also he made the life of S. Hilarie Bishop of Poiters,
and the life of S. Mauril Bishop.

When Bishops are thus given to superstition, Tiberius 2.
what will the people be?

S. Vaast of Arras died in this time.

Tiberius, the second Emperor of that name, surnamed Constantine, reigned 7.
years. He was gentle and liberal toward the poor, even to lay out largely
the treasures of the Empire for their use.

Engippius an Abbot, writ the life of S. Seuerin a Monk, and a rule for his
Monks. Abb. Trit.

Sigebert King of Lorraine, the brother of Chilperike King of France, was
traitorously slain at Tornay, at the solicitation of Fredegonde. The sea of
Histories.

Pelagius Pope, second of that name a Roman, Pelagius 2.
ruled at Rome 10. years.

He was elected and ordained about the commandment of the Emperor, at the
time when the Lombards held the siege before Rome. But when the siege was
levied, Gregory (a Deacon who after succeeded Pelagius) was sent to
Constantinople toward the Emperor Maurice to excuse the Popes election: and
the Emperor seeing the willingness he had to come unto him, contented
himself.

This Pelagius ordained, that in all the Masses of the year there should be
but nine Prefaces, after the ancient order of the Romans: that is to say,
Easter, Christmas, of the Kings, An heap of superstitions.
Pentecost, of the Trinity, of the Ascension, of the Apostles, of S. Cross,
and of Lent Fast.

Yet this is nothing in respect of the abominations which by succession of
time came into the Mass.

In this time there was great Raines, in so much that men thought there would
have been a second deluge.

Great strifes and contentions arose for the Roman seat, against John Bishop
of Constantinople.

Pelagius transported the Patriarkship of Aquilea unto Grad. and constituted it
the Metrapolitane of all the Province of Venice, Mauricius.
which the Emperor Tiberius confirmed.

Mauricius Emperor, reigned 21. years. He was son in law to Tiberius
Cappidocian a magnanimous man; a good Catholic, and profitable to the
Commonwealth.

He made war upon the Armenians and Persians, and overcame them. The Huns
also were brought under him. Supp. Chro.

Clotaire, the second of that name, the 6. King of France, reigned 44 years.

At this time Antioche was founded and subverted for the most part.

The Council of Siuille: and at Toledo the 3. time.

In this Council it was ordained in the 2. Chapter, that in Churches the
Apostles Creed should be recited every Sunday with an high voice, that the
people might be better disposed to the Communion after they had made a
confession of their faith.

Visegothes converted.
The Visegothes converted to the Catholic faith, left the Arrian heresy, by
the means of their king Recaredus, or Richandus, and Leander Bishop of Siuile.
The confession of their faith was sent to the said Council of Toledo.

The Council of Mascon, first and second, wherein the oblations and offerings
of bread and wine are commanded for remission of sins.

This ordinance is wholly against the word of God, and the merit of Jesus
Christ, by whom alone comes remission of sins. And this is the beginning of
the establishment of merits.

Great abundance of waters were in Italy, and principally at Rome, wherewith
many were drowned, and of the corruption of the dead bodies, came a great
pestilence.

Pelagius died of the plague at Rome.

Pretextatus Bishop of Rouan, was called from exile.

Fredegonde was slain in the Church on Easter day, at the solicitation of
whom, this Bishop was exiled.

Gregory Pope, first of that name a Roman, Gregory the first Maurice.
ruled at Rome 14. years, or after some 13. years, ten months and six
days.

This man was called one of the four Doctors of the Church, with S. Augustine,
S. Hierome, and S. Ambrose.

His Father was a Senator of Rome, and of the estate of Seneshall or Captain.
The said Gregory was a Monk, after a Deacon, and finally the Roman Bishop.

In this time the Emperors confirmed the election of Popes and Churches.

There arose in this time a great contention for the premacie of the Church.
Combat for the premacie.
For John Bishop of Constantinople, was in a full Sinode of the Grecians
published and declared the universal Patriarch: and the Emperor Maurice
commanded the said Gregory to obey that Patriarch of Constantinople. But
Gregory could not endure that any Bishop should be universal over all
others: Servant of Servants.
whereupon it came that he called himself Servant of the Servants of God. See
Gregory in the 32. Epistle to Maurice, and 38. to John Patriarch. See John
Calvin in the Institution of Christian Religion.

Note here Reader, that after the persecutions before Siluester, and the
heresies before Gregory, now the Church lifts it self up by ambition of
pre-eminence, which engendered such a combat betwixt the East Church and the
West, that since that time that schism is not yet ended.

The Emperor Maurice was sharply reprehended by Gregory, for that he
constrained Ecclesiastical persons to go to the wars, the which Gregory
resisted greatly.

Gregory sent into England (after Naucler.) or Ireland, certain great
persons, to preach the Faith, and amongst others, one called Augustine: and
Melitus and other Monks, Instituted in the rule of S. Benet, to plant that
order there: and their labor proved so well, that from thence came great
troops of Monks into France and Almaine. Monks.
Of the number of these Irish Monks was Colomban, and his Disciple Gallus, who
after preached in diverse places of Almaine: and finally, he retired into a
sollitarie place which at this day is called S. Gaul in Suisse.

S. Gaul. The Monks of S. Benet privileged.
Great liberty and immunitie was granted unto Black Monks by the Pope
Gregory, at the Council of Lateran, by the consent of the assembly.

Images.
In this time reigned Seuerus Bishop of Marseil, who caused the Images of Saints
and of Christ to be broken, seeing the people worshipped them. Gregory
reprehended him for breaking them, but praised him that he forbad the
worshipping of them. See the Register or the book of his Epistle the 10. part,
Epistle 4. And Pollidorus Virgil. lib. 6. chap. 13.

The building of the Mass.
The ceremonies of the Church.
The greatest part of the ceremonies thereof came from this Gregory. For he
brought the office of the Church (as they call it) into a form. So that at
this day it is called the Gregorian Office. S. Gregory's Mass.
He brought all the Mass into certain laws, and almost such as it is at this
day. And therefore many say he was the Author thereof. And although he
constrained none to follow the Roman form, as he testifies to Augustine
Bishop of Canterbury, yet all Churches followed the manner to celebrate their
Masses after the Roman Church: the English men by the said Augustine, the
Spaniards, France, and after Almaine, by Boniface Bishop of Magunce, who was of
great renown.

He made the Antiphones and Introite of the Mass, of some verse of the
Psalms. Item the Kyrieleison should be sung nine times, the Alleluia, in the
end of the Offertorie of the Communion. At the beginnig of the Canonical
hours ( Deus in adiutorium; and in the end of every Psalm, Gloria patri and
filio, etc. Item that the Pater Noster should be sung with an hie voice over
the consecrate host.

He added to the Canon of the Mass, Diesque nostros in tua pace disponas, etc.
And made the Supper with his people in the language of his Country, which was
Latin, common and intelligible to all, as he witnesses in the preface upon
Ezechiel.

In the Register of his Epistles, in the 8. part and 7. Epistle he says, the
Canon (that is to say the prayer which the Priest says in secret over the
Eucharist) was made by one called Scolasticus. This word Mass was invented in
his time, The word Mess.
although as above, the Supper of our Lord be called Mess of the writers, who
called it with a common name of their time, as is said.

But you must here note, that so often and wheresoever the Church was assembled,
the Bishops preached to the people, and principally at Mass: And this custom
endured yet in Gregory's time, but after it was omitted by ignorant Bishops: a
multitude of ceremonies were brought in, in the place of preaching. Henry
Bullinger.

He instituted it Rome the great Letanies on S. Marks day against the
pestilence which was then, The stations at Rome.
with the Procession of order. The first contained all the Clergy. The 2. the
Abbots and Monks. The 3. the Nuns. The 4. the Children. The 5. Laie-men. The
6. Widows. The 7. married women. And caused there to be carried the Image of
the virgin Marie.

The people died neezing, whereof comes yet at this day, that when one neezeth,
they say God bless you.

He instituted a great part of the stations at Rome, and chiefly such as are
made to S. Peter.

He ordained for the great multitude of people which resorted to Rome to the
said stations and patrons, certain Priests to keep the Sepulchers of the
Apostles, and called Chamberlaines which afterward were deputed to keep the
Popes Chamber. And Leo the tenth made a College of them.

Briefly this Pope Gregory upon devotion (which was not Rome, Councels.
the four general Counsels were approved to be observed as the Gospel,
which is a sacrilege to compare humane ordinances with the eternal word of
the living God.

It was there also ordained that no Bigamus should be ordained Priest: and that
Priests accused of the people should have this authority, and that by oath
they might purge themselves, and approve their innocence.

By this means they would be all innocent.

Monks were forbidden to carry any to baptize, and women that they should not
enter into any Monastery of Monks.

In Italy after a great drought there came an innumerable multitude of
Grasshoppers which consumed all the grain and fruit, whereof came a great
famine in Italy, which endured two years. Chro. Eusebius.

Legends.
The Legends of Saints were forged at this time, of such lives as these Fathers
writ. Many Relikes were found out by the subtilties of Satan: As Christ's
Coat upon which the soldiers cast Lottes, is said to be found in a Coffer of
Marble, in the Town of Zapha, and from thence carried into the town of
Jerusalem. Abb. Vrsperge, and Naucler.

Such foul absurdities merit no recital, but that the greatest of the world
have been deceived with these inventions of Relikes: Argentuel nigh Paris, made
a Banner of this Coat.

Agilulsphus king of the Lombards, was 2. years before Rome, and the Arrabian
Sarrasins, entered into Sicilie, and by fire wasted it.

Mauricius otherwise a good Prince, who had many victories, especially against
the Persians, in the end became odious to his soldiers, because of his infinite
covetousness, which is a very detestable vice in a Prince. He by his avarice
dissembled rapines and murders, and paid not his soldiers: but not them
especially which served upon the Frontiers of Sarmatia. to resist the
fierceness of the Scithians. They remained in barraine places enduring great
necessities. For this cause the soldiers conspired against him, and Phocas was
designed Emperor. Maurice punished for his covetousness.
Who caused his M. Maurice his head to be cut off in Chalcedone, the heads also
of his wife and three Children, Theodorus, Tiberius, and Constantine: the
rehearsal thereof is worthy memory: that Maurice seeing his children
murdered by Phocas, and that he himself straightway must be put to death, he
often cried in this voice which is in 145. Psalm, Phocas.
and verse 12. Lord thou art just, and thy judgments are also. And so dyed of
the age of 63. years, and the 20. year of his Empire.

We may learn by the example of the Emperor who was not of the worst: in
great and cruel temptations in such sort to bridle our thoughts, that the
justice of God may always have his praise, and be unto us a buckler against
all temptations.

Colomban of Scotland, a very renowned Bishop, dyed the Abb. Trit.

The Lombards were converted to the Faith by S. Gregory, who writ his
Dialogues and presented them to Theodelinde the wife of Agilulphus their King.
Supplem. Chron.

Eutropius a Bishop at this time. Abb. Trit.

Phocas 42. in number, and the 19. of the Grecian Emperors Constantinople,
which ruled in the East from a Governor of Scythia, after he had wickedly
slain his master, was chosen by the unlucky Army whereof he had charge: a
very slave of covetousness, who handled secret matters with Courtiers after
the manner of the Persians, and sold the Offices of Magistrates and
Judgments, and dearly loved such as tormented the people by rapine and
extortion.

This is he who first ordained that Rome should first be the chief of all
Churches: yea though it were Constantinople.

Gregory the first, besides so many ceremonies and superstitions, made
certain ordinances, and gave permissions and lycences: Amongst others, he
suffered divorces for the long disease of a woman, which cannot yield her duty
to her husband, if he cannot contain: upon condition notwithstanding that he
help and succor his said wife in her disease. This is in the second Epistle
to Augustine the English man. And in the second volume of Counsels.

But why then did he not rather use moderation toward men and women which
were cast into Monasteries, when they cannot contain? wherefore constrain
they them not to marry? See the same Epistle.

Sauinian. Boniface 3.
He made many books: amongst many others the Dialogues of the miracles of
Saints in four books, which are full of Fables, whereby he pretends to
prove that the souls of the dead return again, and that we must pray for
them.

These Fables invented to pray for the dead, gave great authority to Masses,
which after came in great credit.

Sauinian, Pope, a Tuscane, after Gregory governed the Church of Rome two
years.

He is accounted the third Pope noted of abominable infamy, an insatiable
man, and a sworn enemy of his predecessor Gregory, even to cause his books
to be burnt. He being once admonished to follow the liberallitie of the said
Gregory toward the poor, he answered that he dissipated and wasted the goods
of the Church to get a good report, and the favor of the people.

He passed not his Popedom without inuenting and ordaining something, namely
that there should be burning Lamps kept continually in the Temple, Lamps.
Hours of the day distinguished.
and the hours of the day should be distinguished and rung in Churches. The
sea of Histories.

Boniface Pope, the third of that name a Roman, after Naucler. ruled in the
Church of Rome one year five months.

Election of the Pope.
In a Sinode at Rome of 72. Bishops, 30. Priests, and some Deacons, it was
ordained under pain of excommunication, that none should be elected Pope or
Bishop but three days after the death of his predecessor, and by the consent
of the Prince, or of the Lord of the place.

It was also ordained, that all such as by gifts and favor came to any
Episcopal dignity, should be excommunicated.

Then it follows that all their Bishops at this day are excommunicated.

This Pope ordained that the Altar should be covered with clean clothes.

That the corporal of the Altar should be kept clean.

This Phocas (as is said) the murderer of his M. the Emperor, ordained
Boniface Bishop of Rome, Phocas. Boniface 4.
The Roman Bishop made universal.
the sovereign Bishop of all Chistianitie, and the Roman Church chief of all
the Churches of the world. Abb. Vrsp.

The primacie then of the Roman Church was established by an homicide and a
traitor, who died miserably.

Cosroes King of the Persian, understanding his Father in law Maurice was put
to death by the ambushes of Phocas, detested so that treason that he rebelled
against the Empire: In such sort that he wasted Siria and took Jerusalem,
where there were nintie thousand men slain. And the Chronicles add that the
wood of the holy Cross was then taken and carried into Persia, and the Bishop
Zachary was also prisoner.

The East Empire began to decline.
The Hans likewise revolted against the Empire, Declination of the Empire
and with their great multitude they ouerranne the Roman Provinces.

The Persians occupied Mesopotamia and Assiria, and from Jerusalem ran even
to Cappadocia and Gallatia, and succored all the Country even to Chalcedone.

On the other side the Sarrazins wasted Egypt.

Boniface Pope, 4. of that name, borne of the Country of Marses, in the City
of Talleric, a Physicians son, governed the Roman Church the space of seven
years.

At the request of this Pope, the Emperor Phocas commanded that the old
Temple of Pantheon wherein were all the Gods and Goddesses of the Painims,
should be consecrated and dedicated to the honor of the virgin Mary, and of al
Saints. And then was insttiuted the Feast of All Saints in the Month of May,
The Feast of All Saints.
which after was brought to the first of November.

See how those Fathers rather changed then chased away superstitions.

Leontius Bishop of Naples, in the I Will of Cyprus, made a book of the life of
S. John the Alms giver, Bishop of Alexandria. Abb. Tris.

Heraclius.
After the death of Boniface the fourth, the seat was vacant 7. months, and
25. days, for the great discentions which were at Rome.

The year of Christ 612. Phocas was miserably slain by the soldiers of his
guard. Abb. Vrsperg. Others say that Heraclius and Priscus slew him, cutting
off his hands and feet. Others add that his privy member was cut off.
Finally after his head was cut off, his body was burnt.

See the end of this wicked Tyrant, who caused so many good people to die. All
his brethren and parents had like end, and his race was utterly extinct. The
Roman seat is worthy to have had such a monster to authorize his primatie
above all Churches.

Heraclius the son of Heraclien, succeeded Phocas. When his Father a Captain
in Africa marched from Affricke into Egypt and Asia, with a great Army, the
Persians being out of fear of him assailed Affricke, and brought it into their
subjection.

Corfrees King of the Persians, would never receive any conditions of peace,
unless they renounced Christian Religion.

The Bishop Didier of Vienna, was stoned at the command of Theodorus King of
Soissons.

Deus dedit.
Deus of dedit, or Dorothea a Roman, Pope, ruled three or

He ordained that no Christian should take in marriage his Gossip. Item, that
the son of a Gossip or Suertie should not take in marriage the daughter that
his Father had held at the Font: And ordained this so straightly, that if the
Father or Mother carried their child to Baptism, that they should be
separated: notwithstanding that the wise might receive her dowry, and that
after a year she might marry again in any other place.

There happened a great Earthquake at this time in the month of August, and
after a great mortality. The Council of Auxerre in this time, wherein it was
decreed that it was a thing unlawful, that the Estrenes should be given the
first day of the year, calling them devilish ceremonies, Boniface 5.
Heraclius.
because of the observation of the day.

In the 12. Chapter there was forbidden to give unto dead bodies the Eucharist
or the Paxe to kiss.

In the 21. Chapter, it is not lawful for a Priest to lie with his wife, nor
for Subdeacon, nor Deacon.

In the 24. and 25. Chapter, it is not lawful for Abbots nor Monks to go to
marriages, nor to have commothers, nor to present children to Baptism.

In the 31. Chap. it was forbidden to take his cousin German, or the issue of
cousin German in marriage.

In this time were Loup Archbishop of Sens, Amand, and Bauon in Flaunders. And
Priscian, after Abb. Trit, and Eloy Bishop of Noyon, after the Sea of Histories.

Cosroes King of the Persians, was vanquished by Heraclius: And Anastatius a
Persian Monk, was martyred for the faith, with 70. others. He was hanged three
hours by one hand, and after be headed. Abb. Vrsp.

Boniface Pope, 5. of that name, borne at Naples, governed

This was he who first ordained that offenders which saved themselves in
Churches, Privileges of Churches.
should have Immunities and privileges, and that from thence they should not
be delivered by force; but that such as committed Sacrilege in all places
should be excommunicated.

The waine and decaie of the Roman Empire.
The Roman Empire began to fall. For whilst Christians were at wars one
with an other, the Sarrasins occupied Egypt and Affrike, and do yet hold them.
And in the space of an 120. years all Asia was lost from the Christians. Asia
lost.
Also the best part of Europe was occupied because of the covetousness,
discention, and carelessness of the Emperors and Popes, which mused and
studied upon less matters, namely to forge naughty inventions, and ordinances
upon ordinances.

Cyrus Bishop of Alexandria, seeing the Sarrasins came into Egypt, and that
there was no succors on the part of the Emperor Heraclius a careless man,
yielded himself tributarie to the said Sarrasins at a certain annual sum,
Honorius. Heraclius.
upon which condition they returned back. He was after accused before the
Emperor, as he who transported the riches of Egypt to strangers. Wherefore he
was deposed, and Manuell of Armenia ordained in his place: who would not pay
the said tribute; whereupon the Sarrasins came again into Egypt and occupied
it. Which the Emperor understanding repented himself, and sent Cyrus in
Embassage toward the Sarrasins, to cause them to go out of Egypt, and they
should have their said annual tribute. But one of them answered in these
words: Can thou Cyrus (said he) pluck down this pillar? He answered no. As
impossible (said he) it is that we should leave Egypt.

By like pride many Countries have been lost. Many commonwealths by tributes
have been maintained in peace. Faith promised even to enemies must be kept.

The increase of the kingdom of France.
From the year of salvation 514. hitherto, the kingdom of France was divided
into certain kingdoms, because the kings of France had many heirs. One
kingdom was called Austrasia, Austrasia.
and comprehended Lorraine and Brabant: and that which is between Rhene and
Mense, from Culloine to the Country of Alsasia. The other called Neutria,
Neutria.
which comprehends the Regions which are betwixt Mense and Loire: and Paris was
the chief Town thereof. The third was called the kingdom of the Soisons.
Soisons.
In this division of Gaul, the kingdom of Arles took also his beginning,
which had under it Sauoy, the Country of the Switzes, Zepingen, Haspurge, and
Dauphine, but at this time those particular kingdoms returned into a
Monarchy. Car.

Gaul began to be called France.
Dagobert the 11. King of France, possessed first Austrasia, after he joined
unto it the kingdom of Burgoine, and finally was made Lord almost of all
France: and the name of France was then universal for all those kingdoms.
When Dagobert dwelt in Austrasia, his Palace was in Alsatze. And he builded a
Castle at Rufach called Eisenburge: he also builded many Monasteries of S.
Benet, whereunto he gave great revenues, and chiefly to that of Wittenburge,
within 8. leagues of Strasbourge Rhene: An other at Surbourge, two leagues from
Wittenburge. Item an other at Haselach, hard by Strasburge in the West
mountain. He also brought the church of Strasburge to a Bishoppricke, and
enriched it with great revenues.

Hereby note that France was then augmented when the Roman Empire in the East
diminished: So the Lord gives vicissitude, courses and chaunges to the things
of this world.

The Histories of France say that the bodies of S. Denis, S. Rhut, and S.
Pleutherius, were found at this time by the means of an Heart, hunted by
Dagobert.

It is no great marvel if the Kings of France be given to superstitions,
seeing sauadge Beasts teach them, where holy bodies are.

Honorius Pope, born in Campania, ruled in Rome 13. years. Peter to be adorned
withal precious things, and enriched it with goodly Tables, covering them
richly. He ordained processions on the Saturday with Letanies.

Pyrrhus Patriarche of Constantinople, a Monothelite heretic, was sent into
exile into the Country of Affrike. The Emperor Heraclius was seduced by him:
Heraclius seduced.
and so gave himself to believe diuinations and enchauntments: and took his
Niece to wife, his brothers daughter, making a law that it should be so
lawful for all persons.

Yet even in this time was the Church greatly divided by the Artian Sect: The
Artians yet.
In such sort that almost each Town had two Bishops, the one an Arrian, the
other a Catholic: and during those dissipations came Mahomet in the Eastern
parts.

Mahomet an Arrabian, of a Merchant became a false Prophet, and finally a
Captain of Thieves and Robbers: with a Monk called Sergius, who was an Arrian
and Nestorian, and with one John of Antioch an heretic, and a Necromantian
Jew, he compiled the Alcoran, unto which the Sarrasins and Turks show
obedience.

The Sect of the Mahometists.
In the said Alcoran is contained that they of his Sect shall be circumcised,
that they shall abstain from Swines flesh, that they shall drink no wine, and
that certain whole months they shall fast. They take as many wives as they can
maintain, and if they keep company with others they die for it. Friday is
their Sunday. No woman goes in public, unless she have her face covered.
They hold Christ for a true and great Prophet, and make Moses and Mahomet
Christ's companions. Vadianus.

Their Paradise.
The Alcoran promises to his followers a Paradise, where there are sweet waters
and of all sorts of fruits, and goodly and fine women, also floods of wine and
honey; yea briefly all that sensuality can wish; and there they shall enjoy
all good things eternally. Azoara. 2. and Naucler.

They confess the Resurrection of the dead.

By Testament they leave and do great Alms.

The Alcoran forbids to take silver or victuals for aduocating or pleading
in Judgment. They like to take no wives of an other Religion then their own:
neither to give their daughters to men of diverse Religions, unless they convert
unto theirs. Azoara. 3. And although by their Alcoran they be commanded to
root out all such as contradict their law, yet they constrain no man to renie
his Religion. Women must nourish and give suck to their own children, and
that by the space of 2. years. They are also commanded to defend their
religion by Arms and strong hand. Azoara. 5. chap. 5. And by force of Arms to
force the Christians and Jews to agree. Azoara 18. Every one may take and sley
him whom he knows to be incredulous and an heretic in their law. Azoara. 10.

Reproach to Christians.
They reproach Christians because they worship others then one only God, as the
virgin Mary. and Images of Saints. Azoara. 13. In the 18. cha. he brings in
God speaking to his prophet Mahomet, and promising him ye 20. of their me^ shall
resist against 200. and ye 100. of theirs, Infamous ceremonies.
shall overthrow a 1000. of others. They are also commanded to wash themselves,
yea the privy places after they have done their natural necessities, and
after they have lain with their wives: and this must they ever do before they
pray unto God. Pilgrimages.
Upon commandment they go on pilgrimage into certain places. Azoa. 2. They
have Saints unto whom they commend themselves and their beasts. See their
Alcoran which recites great miracles. Their Priests and Religious men.
They have Priests and Religious men. Some Recluses and contemplatiues which do
nothing but pray and meditate, and these are most esteemed.

According to their four Sects, they have also four opinions touching the
salvation of souls. Diverse opininions of salvation.
1. Their Priests are of opinion that none are saved but in the law of
Mahomet. 2. Some of their Religious are of opinion that the law profits
nothing: but that every man shall be saved by the grace of God, which alone is
sufficient to salvation, without the law and merits. 3. The Spiritualls and
Speculatiues are of opinion, that every one shall be saved by his own works
and merits, with grace and the law. 4. There are others amongst them, which
say that every one shall be saved in his own law.

Where Jesus Christ is not known, all Religion is vain and uncertain.

Touching Jesus Christ they hold him to be the son of a virgin. What they
hold of Christ.
In the 5. Chap. There they make mention of the virgin Marie, and of her
parents. Of S. John Baptist, and of his Father Zachary. In the 3. chap. at the
beginning God is brought in speaking and calling Jesus Christ, his soul
conferring his force and virtue upon him. In the 11. chap. he calls him Sent
of God, the Spirit of God, and the word divinely sent to Mary, etc. They fast
every year one whole month, Fasting.
and one week very straightly without eating or drinking in the day time: but
after the Sun set, they eat and drink even till the day following. On the
Friday they assemble all together, Friday.
and observe it as carefully as the Jews do the Saturday, or others the
Sunday: and in each Town there is a principal Temple which they called
(Meschat) into which they come that day after noone, as well Kings and Princes
as the common people, and attentively pray unto God. They which come not to
this Church, or pray not when they come, are condemned in a certain sum of
silver when they are accused by the Guardes which they commit for that
business. See the Alcoran.

As they pray, they torment themselves pitiously in the continual agitation of
their bodies, and cries without ceasing.

The Pope and Mahomet.
Two Horns.
Antichrist his two horns are there set up one after an other, namely that of
the Pope and of Mahomet: It were easy to confer one of them with an other,
both in doctrine and domination.

Heraclius had victory against the Persians, and brought again Zacharias
Patriarch of Jerusalem and the holy Cross, first to Jerusalem, and then to
Constantinople: whereupon the feast of the exaltatio^ of the cross was
ordained and celebrated.

Counsels were about this time at Siuil and Toledo. 4.5. and 6.

At the Council of Toledo. 4. it was ordained that all the Churches of Spain
should follow the form of the Roman Church touching prayer, the Sacraments,
and Mass.

One manner of singing Mass all over after the manner of Rome.
See Bullenger of the spring of errors. Lib. 2. chap. 8.
In the 16. chap. of the said Council, it is ordained that the Apocalips
should be accounted Canonical.

In the said Council Priests were reprehended, because after the Lords
prayer, they communicated and blessed the people: That Priests might not
communicate apart.
wherefore in the 17. Chap. they are forbidden to communicate alone, but with
all the assembly, after the ordinance of Jesus Christ. It was also ordained
that after the Lords prayer the blessing should follow. And then only they
should receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ in this order:
that is, the Priests and the Deacons should make the Communion before the
Altar, the Clerks in the hearts, and the people out of the heart.

The Mass yet was not as is at this day, wherein Priests communicate alone.

In the Council of Bracare 1. and 2. held in Spain, it was ordained that if
any did not confess the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, three persons
to be one same substance, virtue and power, as the Apostolic and Catholic
Church teaches, should be excommunicated and accursed.

In the 19. chap. If any believe souls and bodies to be subject to the Stars
as the Painims say, and the Priscillianists maintain, let them be
excommunicated and accursed.

In the 36. chap. that they should bury no dead bodies in Churches, but
without. Burialls.


The Council of Bracare, 2. in the 14. chap. All they are anathematized which
abstain from eating flesh upon superstition.

The same was ordained in the Council of Toledo. 13.

Note by this which is said, that the Spaniards more then any other, resisted
the forbidding of meats and of single life.

Dagobert King of France, reigned 14. years, and during Denis in France, and
placed there the three aforesaid bodies, of S. Denis, Eleutherius, and
Rusticus, in Tombs covered with fine gold, and enriched with precious stones.
And it would hardly be believed the great riches of gold, silver, and precious
stones, the Towns and other goods which he gave to the said Church and Abbey
of S. Denis, which they yet possess at this day.

He founded also the Abbey of S. Amande, nigh Tournay, and endowed it with
great revenues. All his study was to gather, and wheresoever he went to take
Relickes to enrich the Abbey of S. Denis. In so much that for that cause he
was called the Thief of Relikes: Thief of Relikes.
And as Clouis the first of that name had his trust in S. Martine of Tours, so
this had in the body of S. Hilarie of Poitiers; In so much that having taken
and rased the said Town and destroyed the Temples, yea that of S. Hilarie, he
caused to carry the Coffin with other Relickes to S. Denis in France. The cause
of this sacking and spoil was, because the Poitiers had given succors, of
people and silver to the Gascoignes which rebelled against him.

Moreover Dagobert was a man so given to women, that he Instituted a College,
A College of fair women.
whither he caused to resort the fairest women, and apparelled them like
Queens: for which thing being reprehended of S. Amand, he sent him to exile.
But Gaguin says he was after revoked.

Seuerin Pope, ruled at Rome two years. His study was to repair Churches, to
endowe them with many ornaments, and increase the revenues thereof. Supp.
Chron. and Fasc. Temp.

His election was ratified by Isacheus exarche. For the^ the election of Popes
was nothing, unless it were authorized by the Emperor or his Lieftenant.
Naucler.

The treasures of the Church of S. John de Lateran, were pilled by Maurice
Governor of Rome, and Isacheus exarche of Italy: one part of the booty was
sent to Constantinople to Heraclius. This was the year that the said Heraclius
endured that great wound of the Sarrasins. Naucler.

Mahumet, the year 637. and after began to be worshipped of his followers.
Mahumet signifies Fury or Indignation.

Aman Bishop of Traict baptized Sigebert, the son of Dagobert King of France.
Chron.

John Pope 4.
John Pope, 4. of that name, borne in Dalmatia, ruled at Rome about two years.
He ordained that whosoever should Naucler.

First Lent in England.
The year 640. Lent began to be kept in England. Chro. Sigeb.

Rotharis King of Lombards was an Arrian, and all his people after his example.
In so much that there was almost no City nor Town which had not two Bishops,
the one a Catholic, and the other an Arrian. Suppl. Chron.

Theodorus.
Theodorus a Grecian, the son of Theodorus Bishop of Jerusalem, governed the
Roman Church 6. years, 5. months, and 18. days. Supp. Chron.

Dagobert gave to the Abbey of S. Denis a Fair and Market, Le Lendy.
called Le Lendy, betwixt Paris and S. Denis.

The Emperor Heraclius being aged, Theodorus. Constantin.
gave trust to Diuinations, and Enchauntments of devils. This is the first
Emperor that ruled in the East since the Empire was transferred thither, who
has had that infamy to have lost the Empire of Asia, and to have been of
the heresy of the Monothelites and Eutechians. After he had thus polluted
himself by these arts, heresies, and incest of his niece, The strange death
of Heraclius.
he died of a new and strange disease; namely, that the purses of his
testicles turned vpside down, with the privy member always stiff. Insomuch
that whenever he uttered his urine, it sprinkled his face, if a table had not
been placed about his navel to drive it back. Egnatius and others recite the
same.

Constantine his son of his first wife Eudoxia, succeeded in Martine, caused
him to be poisoned before he had reigned a year, and so she reigned with her
son Heracleonas about two years.

Nauclerus rehearses that the said Martine committed that fact, by the
Council of Pirrhus Bishop of Constantinople an heretic, who returned from his
exile of Affrike, after the death of the said Heraclius. The Senate of
Constantinople made the tongue of the said Empress to be cut out, and the nose
of the said Heraclionas, and cast them both into exile. They also caused
Pyrrhus to be most shamefully put to death, whom Paul succeeded, as wicked an
heretic as his former predecessor.

The Pope Theodorus in the Church of S. Peter, the Clergy and the Church
being present, excommunicated and declared the above named Paul Patriarch of
Constantinople, an heretic, and his adherents: and having mingled wine with
Ink in a Challice, he writ with his own hand the excommunication, to signify
that it was inviolable, as if Jesus Christ had writ it with his own blood.

Consider here how much the Church then, although it was wholly given to
superstitions, did abhor such as confounded the two natures in Christ.

Constance.
The Searge at Easter.
This Theodorus instituted the blessing of the Sierge on Easter Saturday.

Constance Emperor, son of the said Constantine and of Gregory his wife,
(called otherwise by some, Constantine the 3.) reigned 28. years. He was a
tyrant and an heretic and persecuted the Catholics. He favored the heresy
of Paul, Bishop of Constantinople, and tirannized over the faithful, by
imprisonment, exile, and other torments. Naucl. Chron. Abb. Vrsp, and Fascic.
temp.

At this time were Vincent Bishop of Beanuais, and Foursy the King of Ireland
his son, who came into France with two of his brethren. Aubert Bishop of
Cambray, Gertrude and others, all which after their deaths were called Saints.

Relics sold to give to the poor.
Clouis the 12. King of France, reigned 17. years. This King in a time of
famine took all the gold and silver wherewith his father Dagobert had adorned
the Chapels of Martyrs, yea, and one of the Arms of S. Denis, to give to the
poor to relieve them.

For that cause the Monks devised, that he became a fool, and out of his
wits in the end of his days. Chron. de Regib. Fr.

Martin Pope, first of that name, an Italian, ruled at Rome six years and
more. At the beginning of his Popedom he sent Messengers to Constantinople to
Paul the Patriarch, to reduce him from his heresy: but so much wanted therein
his amendment, that even abusing the authority of the Emperor (an heretic like
himself) he caused the said messengers to be thrown out: A Council
against the Monothelite heretics.
whereat the Pope Martin being moved, assembled a Council at Rome, of 150.
Bishops, and condemned Paul the heretic, agreeing with the condemnation of
Pyrrhus, Cyrus, Sergius, and others. Then the Emperor Constance sent Olimpus
Exarke into Italy, and commanded him to make haste, either to sley Pope
Martin, or to take him and bring him. Again, Constance sent to Rome Theodorus
Calliopa, who by subtlety took the Pope, and having bound him in chains
brought him to Constantinople, and from thence was he banished and sent into a
City of Pontus, where he finished his days after many and great miseries,
Eugenius.
The death of Pope Martin. Collation of benifices. Profession and habits for
Nuns invented.
and the seat was vacant three months. Supp. Chron.

In this time were held the Council of Toledo, 8.9. and 10. In the 10. there
was an ordinance against Bishops which gave Monasteries and benefices
Ecclesiastical to their parents, which was now made of no valewe. In the 4.
Chap. it was ordained that Nuns should make a profession and vow of
chastity, and that they should be apparelled in an other sort from others, to
be known.

Jerusalem was taken by the Mahometists; Jerusalem taken
Some (as Nauclerus) say that it was in the time of Agathon Pope, and of the
Emperor Constantine the son of this Constance.

Rhodes taken by the Sarrasins; The Isles Ciclades were wasted by them, and
Sicile forraged. Naucl.

At Rome there appeared great signs: fire fell from heaven, and great thunder,
lightnings, and inundations of waters: whereof great pestilence followed.
Fasci. Temp. and Nauclerus.

Eugenius Pope, the first of that name, a Roman, ruled at Rome about three
years. He ordained that Bishops should have prisons to punish crimes and
faults of Clerks. That Priests houses should be situate, and builded nigh
Churches. Prisons Ecclesiastical.
Supp. Chron. That none be kept in Monasteries against their wills.

One named Peter succeeded Paul the heretic at Constantinople, and was of the
same heresy. His Letters were recited at Rome: and the Pope was hindered by
the people from celebrating, until he had cast them away: because they denied
two natures in Christ. Naucler.

Claudus Archbishop of Besancon, S. Claud.
afterward Abbot of the Abbey of S. Eugenius, was renowned about this time
through Burgoine. Fasci. temp. And after his death, they made that abominable
Idol which is at S. Claud. in the County of Burgoine.

The children of Arikert King of the Lombards, whilst they strove one with an
other, the one was slain, and the other a fugitive: first into Bauiere, after
into France. Naucl.

Constantin. Vitalian.
At the Council of Calibone, in the Province of Narbone, held in this time.
Theodoric Bishop of Arles, was accused to have done somewhat against the
Ecclesiastical statutes and Canons, and because he appeared not, he was
suspended out of his Bishoppricke until the next Council.

Vitalian Pope, an Italian, ruled at Rome 14. years, and more.

It was he who first ordained singing in the Roman Church, and agreed it with
Organes by the consent of Rodoaldus, King of the Lombards, The King of Hungary
slain in adultery.
who being taken in adultery with a wife of Lombardie, was slain by her
husband.

It is not found that hitherto the Roman Church had full domination in the
Town of Rome, other goodly things it pretends since the death of Constantine
the great, unless it were under certain too soft Emperors, Rome hitherto was
not in the rule of Popes.
and yet then not much. But to this Vitalian, the Emperor by singular grace
confirmed the privileges of the Church, which notwithstanding he after brake,
and made them of no force, Fasci. temp. and Naucler.

Constant the Emperor, caused to be assembled a Sinode, and abiured his
heresy, and after came to Rome with a great company with Cierges in their
hands, and so entered into the Temple, but he showed well it was not upon
devotion, but to see where the Treasures were, to take and carry them away.
He was there to visit it five days. Afterward he took away all that was
delicate in his eyes. He took away more ornaments and riches, he alone in 7.
days, then the Barbarians had done in 258. years. Naucl. and Supp. Chron.

He was greatly hated at Constantinople for his cruelties, and for causing to
die in exile Pope Martin in such misery, and for cutting the tongue and hand
from Maximin: Wherefore he sought again to bring the Imperial seat to Rome,
and kept his Court six years in Sicilie, Abb. Vrsperg. where he did many
great evils, as is recited by Paulus Diaconus.

He was slain in Sicilie being in the Bathes, this year, 669. and of his
Empire, 27.

Mizizius otherwise called Mitius, or Missessius, Constantin the fourth.
Adeonatus.
was constituted Emperor, and reigned about six months.

Constantine the fourth son of Constant, Pogonatus.
commonly called Le Barbu, the bearded, came against him and caused him to die,
and all such as had been of the conspiracy against his father. After these
things were done, he reigned from the beginning with his brethren, Tiberius and
Heraclius. Abb. Vrsp. But after, according to Naucler. alleging Blundus and
Pius his abbreuiator, he caused their noses to be cut off, least they should
after come to the Empire: so that his son Justinian might reign.

The Council of Toledo, 11. in this time.

Dado Bishop of Ruoan, writ three books of the life of S. Eloy Bishop of
Noyon. Abb. Trit.

Clotaire, the third of that name, and the 13 king of France,

Note Reader, touching the Kings of France which follow, that from this
Clotaire until Pipin and Charlemaine, they did nothing worthy of any great
memory, but became unprofitable and full of cowardice, so that they had not
like authority, as either their predecessors or successors.

They had as it were nothing but the bare names and titles of Kings. For the
Majors or Prouostes of the Palace, which then were as it were the Constables,
or great Masters, had the administration of all matters of the Kingdom, as
well those of war, as of peace; and all was done by their commandment and
ordinance.

Childeric second of that name, the 14. King of France, reigned two years. He
was by treason slain for his cruelty; Annalls of France.

Adeonatus or Deodatus Pope, borne at Rome, ruled there four years and more.
His father was a Monk called Iouian Iouinian. He amplified the Monastery of
Saint Erasmus, in the Mount Coelius, wherein he was a Monk. He instituted
against Thunders and Tempests (which then happened) many Supplications and
Letanies. Constantin the fourth Agathon.
Supp. Chron.

Donus Pope, a Roman, ruled at Rome three years. After Peter's Court to be
paued with Marble, and so dedicated the Church of the Apostles, and of S.
Euphemia, and greatly augmented the honor and dignities of the Clergy.

The sixth Council of Constantinople, was called under this Pope, began under
Agathon, and ended under Leon the second.

Here the Church of Rauenna agreed not with the Roman Church, being not
subject unto her, but called chief of it self, did willingly subject her
self for the integrity of this Pope, and that with the consent of Reparatus,
then Bishop of Rauenna. Rauenna subject to the Roman sea by force.
In the second volume of Councels. But their successors afterward would have
recovered this liberty and ancient freedom again. Wherefore there was a
great and long contention betwixt the said Churches of Rome and Rauenna.
Finally the Chuch of Rauenna was made subject by violence. For Justinian the
second, inducted and invited by the Pope, besieged the Town, and their goods
were pilled, many banished, and their Bishop which then was, called Felix, had
his eyes put out with an hot Iron, and was after sent into exile into the I Will
of Pontus. Some say this happened in Agathons time.

Theodorike the fifteenth King of France, reigned fourteen years: he was
drawn out of the Monastery of Saint Denis, where he had been a Monk. He
founded the Abbey of S. Vaast at Arras, and was buried there, as shall be said.

Agathon Pope, a Sicilian, a Monk before, ruled at Rome two years and an
half, or four years after Naucler. It was he that ordained that the decree
of the Roman sea should be served as proceeding from the mouth of S. Peter,
Did. 19. Chap. Sic omnes.

The beginning if leaden seals.
In this time the Roman Church increased much, and the Letters of that sea were
sealed yet with wax, but after with lead.

The sixth general Council held at Constantinople, Constantin the fourth
Adeonatus.
was of 289. Bishops against the Monothelites, which denied two wills and
natures in Christ.

Gregory or George, Bishop of Constantinople, left his heresy* but Machirus
Bishop of Antioche, left it not. Wherefore he was cast out of his
Bishoppricke. The Pope Agathon sent to the Council, John Bishop Portuensis,
and John Deacon. And the dissension that then was betwixt the East church and
the West, was appeased. In this Council, The approbation of the Mass in Latin
Marriage permitted to some, and forbidden to others.
John Bishop Portuensis, celebrated the first Mass in Latin, and the use and
order thereof was allowed of the said Council. There also the Priests of
Greece were permitted to live in marriage, and to have lawful wives; but not
the Priests of the West Churches.

The Author of the book called Fasciculus temp. yields a reason thereof;
saying that willingly he had already vowed chastity under Gregory. But what
should they do if they had not the gift of continency? And moreover, could
they vow for others that came after them? Lastly, they vowed upon constraint
and authority of Counsels, as appears above.

It was there also ordained, Who ought to carry children to Baptism.
that none should bear a child to be baptized, unless he knew the Lords
prayer, and the belief of the faithful.

In the second volume of Counsels. Item, not to vow not to marry, and that
Priests which separate themselves from their wives because of their sacred
orders, should be excluded from the Communion. Peter Viret in the Dialogue to
them of Orb.

A Brief of the six general Counsels.
Hitherto there has been held six general Concells. The first at Nicene was
of 318. Bishops, against Arrius, under Siluester and Constantine the great.
The second at Constantinople, of 150. Bishops, under Gratian and Theodosius
Emperors, Constantin the fourth. Agathon.
and Damasus, against Macedonius Bishop of Constantinople, and Eudoxius, who
denied the spirit of God. The third was in Ephesus, One person in Christ.
of 200. Bishops, under Celestine, Sixtus, and Theodosius the great, against
Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, who called the virgin Mary the mother of
Christ, man, but not God. The fourth in Calcedon, of 360. Bishops under Leo the
Pope, and Martine the Emperor, against Eutiches Abbot of Constantinople, who
denied two natures in Christ. The fifth was under Justinian the Emperor, Two
natures in christ, divine, and humane. The virgin Marie the mother of God.
and Vigilius Pope, against Theodorus and other heretics; who said that the
virgin Marie did only bring forth a man, and not God and man. There it was
ordained that justly and truly the virgin Marie is called the mother of God.
The sixth Council was at Constantinople against Gregory or George, and
Machairus, and Cirus, Sergius, Two wills in Christ.
Honorius, Pirrhus, Paulus, Petus, Bishops which denied two wills, as it is
said, Abb. Trit.

Theodorus Archbishop of Rauenna, was a great Almesgiuer, and very desirous to
keep the Clergy in good order: for the which he was hated. In so much, that
on a Christmas day as he was going to celebrate Mass, he was left of all,
whereat being much grieved, he went toward Agathon and willingly subjected
his Church to the Romans. Nauclerus.

Ledger Bishop of Anthun was in this time.

Persecution in France.
Ebroine Prince of the Palace of France under Theoderic, caused Legier his
eyes to be plucked out, the soles of his feet taken away, and his tongue and
lips cut off, and at last cut off his head, and his brother Guerin was stoned
to death. This Ebroine cast Lambert out of the Bishoppricke of Vtrich. Ame
Bishop of Sens was banished by Ebroine. Chron. 519. In this time there was a
great pestilence at Rome, whereof Agathon died, and the Sea was vacant a year,
seven months, and five days.

Leo the 2.
Leo Pope, the second of that name a Sicilian, reigned two years, or
thereabouts. Abb. Vrsp.

After his death the Sea was vacant 11. months. Supp. Chron.

This Pope was cunning in Greek and Latin, Constant. 4.
and made many Epistles and Homilies. He ordained that after the Agnus Dei of
the Mass, they should give the Paxe to kiss unto the Assistants. Supp. Chron.
Fasci. Temp.

He permitted to baptize at all times in case of necessity.

He ordained by the authority of the Emperor, that the election of the Bishop
of Rauenna should not be good, if the Roman Pope did not approve it: but that
the Archbishop should pay nothing for his Inuesture; The use of the Mantle.
for many mischiefs came of this largition. Supp. Chron. and Fasci. Temp.

The Council of Toledo 12. and 13. in this time, Such as forbad eating of
flesh are excommunicated.
wherein such were anathematized as forbad eating of flesh. P. Virel.

This is meant as it was ordained in the 14. Chapter of the Council of Bracar.
2. See above.

Benet Pope, second of that name, a Roman, Benet. 2.
ruled at Rome 10 months. He was humble and soft. Naucler.

He restored at his great charges, the Churches of S. Peter and S. Laurence: of
S. Valentin, and S. Marie: aux Martyrs. Supp. Chron. and gave to the said
Churches, many Vessels of Gold and Silver, and many vestments and ornaments.

The election of the Pope taken from the Emperor.
The Emperor Constantine moved with the Popes sanctetie, The election of the
Pope.
ordained that the election of the Pope from thence forward made of the
Clergy and Roman people, should be stable and sure without any more
attending the authority of the Emperor, or of his Lief-tenant Exarche of
Italy; without whose authority before it was not ratified. Naucl. and Supp.
Chron.

John Pope, fifth of that name, of Antioche in Siria, John. 5.
governed the Roman Church a year: a man moderate, and subject to diseases.

Leo the second) by three Bishops, An other ceremony of consecrating the Pope.
of Ostia, Portensis, and Veliterus. And this manner was always after observed.
The Bishop of Ostia as he sung Mass put the Crown on his head.

Before he was only led to the Chair of S. Peter, and being there set, he
was holden the true Pope, without other ceremony.

The Emperor Constantine died at Constantinople, having reigned 17. years.

Conon Pope, borne at Rome, governed the Church of Rome one year. Conon.
Fasci. temp.

After the death of Pope John the fifth, there was great contention about the
Popes election: for the people (or the Clergy) elected one called Peter,
Archbishop. The Roman Gendarmie corrupted by silver, did choose Theodorus a
Priest, a pernicious man: After long strife betwixt these two, Conon by all
their agreements was confirmed.

He fell sick incontinently after his election: whereupon he died. Some said
he would never occupy himself in secular matters.

Justinian, or Justin. 2.
Justinian, or Justin, Emperor, second of that name, son of Constantine the
fourth, began to reign of the age of 16. years. He governed himself so ill,
that after ten years of his reign he was banished. See the Sea of
Histories.

A second Herodias.
Quilian, an holy Scottishman, preached in Franconia. He converted Gosbertaine
Duke of the same Country, who kept Ceilam, (Sillam or Gelana) his brothers
wife. And for that he preached that he ought to leave her, she made him
secretly be slain. Fasci. temp. and Sigeb.

Beda the Venerable in this time, made many books, and wrote the lives of many
Saints, Abb. Trit.

Sergius Pope, a Sirian, ruled at Rome ten years; Justinian.
after Chron. Eusebius. a noble restorer of Churches.

There was a great contention and debate for the election of the Pope after the
death of Conon. Sergius Pope.
Some had chosen Theodorus, a very rich man. Others, Pascall Archdeacon, who
had promised a great sum of money to John Platina, Exarche, if he were
chosen. Each of them maintained his election ambitiously. But the Clergy and
Roman people seeing that this sedition would cause effusion of blood, took
counsel to remedy it. Wherefore they chose Sergius, rejecting the two others.

The said Sergius was carried into the Church of Laterane, and having broken
the gates, they cast out the factious, and constrained Theodorus and Pascall to
salute Sergius Pope, and approve his election. Pascal accused and convicted of
Art Magic, was sent to a Monastery, and there died obstinate Naucler.

It is attributed unto him, to have founded a good part of the holy Cross,
which every year they worship at Rome. Nauclerus.

Believe this who list. For in the time of Heraclius the Emperor, it was
carried to Constantinople.

The Church of Aquilea not wholly approouing the first, after Naucler. Chron.
Segeb. Paul. Diac. or sixth, after (Fasci. Temp.) Council of Constantinople,
was reduced by Sergius.

In this time the Saxons, yet Painims, Saxons.
received the Christian Faith by the means of this Sergius. After Suppl. Chron.

The year 688. Ebroine a French Tyrant was slain in his bed.

Theodoricke the King of Franc, was buried in the Abbey of S. Vaast of Arras,
whereof he was founded, with his wife, called in her Epitaph, Doda.

Clouis, third of that name, King of France, 16. reigned 14. years.

The Frisons converted to the faith.
Sergius sent Vmbred to the Frisons to convert them to the faith. Rabed their
Duke would not accord thereunto: alleging that it were more meet to follow
many then few. But afterward being vanquished in war by Pippin Grandmaister
of France, the Frisons received the Faith, being instructed by Willibrot
Bishop, or Clement after some.

The Emperor Justinian broke his faith given to the Sarrasins, and fought
against them, wherein he was not happy. And after without necessity brake the
peace which his father had made with the Bulgarians, and entered Misia, where
he put all to fire and sword: Justinian Disloyal and cruel.
but the Bulgarians ceazed upon the passages and straights, and shut them in
so well, that they constrained them to do what they would. He being returned
to Constantinople, did so many evils to the Christians that every one hated
him, so that they conspired against him, and chased him away.

Leontius usurped the Empire, took Justinian, and cut his nosthrills, Leontius.
and sent him into exile into Pontus, and reigned three years. Some call him
Leond second. Emperor. 68.

The Sarrasins seeing such troubles among the Christians, came into Africa.

Childebert, second of that name, 17. King of France, reigned 18. years. He
founded the Abbey of S. Albane in Angiers.

Lambert Bishop of Liege, was revoked from exile, but because he reprehended
the adultery of Pippin, he was cruelly slain by Dodon, brother of the
Adulteress. The said Dodon and his accomplices perished miserably within a
year. Hubert succeeded the Bishop of Liege. The Histories of France.

Absimarus
Absimarus, otherwise called Tiberius, borne at Constantinople, was chosen
Emperor by the Soldiers for the negligence which they saw in Leontius, John
6.
that no aid was sent unto them for the guard of Affrike, which they had
recovered of the Sarrasins. Absimarus then came from Constantinople and took
Leontius, and cut off his nose, and imprisoned him in a Monastery. He reigned
seven years. Naucler. Abb. Vrsp.

John Pope, sixth of that name, a Grecian, ruled at Rome 3. The devotion of
Popes.
he was very curious to repair Churches, to adorn Aultars, and redeem
captives with the papal treasure. Some write him a Martyr, under the kings of
Lombardie, for defending the rights of the church. Fasci. temp.

The Venetians at this time began to have a Duke to hinder quarells and
disorders of such as governed, The first Duke of Venice.
and the envy which the Lombards bare to their liberty: but after, as it were
repenting themselves, they caused many of their first Dukes to die. Moreover,
the Dukes ornaments differed not from those of a King, and all the Senates
Letters, the publication of them were in the Dukes name: yet he had not the
bridle loose for a full authority.

Westfalia after some, was converted to the faith about this time.

John Pope, 7. of that name, ruled at Rome two or three

This is from henceforth the chiefest studio of Popes and Papists.

Justinian having had succors from Bulgaria and Turkey, came to
Constantinople, and again obtained the Empire and reigned six years. He
caused to be set out of prison, Leontius and Tiberius being bound with
chains, which he made to be tied to the tails of horses, and being so drawn
through the streets, were brought again and trodden under feet, and finally
caused them to be beheaded. All their partners were put to diverse torments, and
great vengeance used toward them. He put out the eyes of Gallinicus Patriarch
of Constantinople, and sent him to Rome into exile, Justinian.
and in his place appointed Cyrus Abbot, who had assisted him when he was in
exile, and foretold him his restitution.

Sarrasins in Graneda.
The Sarrasins understanding the debates betwixt the Emperors, occupied again
Affrike and Libbia, and a part of the kingdom of Spain, and the kingdom of
Graneda. Supp. Chrn. and Naucl.

The faith began almost to be clean extinct in the East, because of the Law
of Mahomet.

Beda the Venerable, writ then to the Christians Princes, to drive the
Sarrasins out of Spain, but he spoke to the deaf.

Sisinnius Pope, otherwise Sosinus a Sirian, ruled only 20. days. Sisinnius.
For being tormented with the Gout both in feet and hands, and not being able
to eat, he died suddenly.

Schism the seventh.
The 7. schism was betwixt him and Dioscorus, and a great combat for the
Papacy. The said schism continued long time by his successors.

A Famine at Rome by the space of three years, sharp and rude.

Constantine Pope, a Sirian, ruled at Rome seven years, greatly beloved of
every one; Constantine.
for he helped the people much during this famine.

Justinian. kisseth the Popes feet.
Justinian commanded him to come to him to Constantinople, which he did, and
being arrived the Emperor embraced him, and falling on the earth kissed his
feet, and demanded pardon of him for all his faults, and that he would pray
to God for him: and after received the Eucharist of him, and then were renewed
and confirmed the privileges of the the Roman Church. Supp. Chron. Abb. Vrsp.

Justinian changed nothing his life passed, but that he bare himself
otherwise toward the Roman Sea then he was wont to do, and maintained it.
For understanding that Felix Archbishop of Rauenna, would not yield accustomed
obedience to the Pope, that was, to send a certain breuiat, wherein he should
acknowledge his obedience due, and a certain sum of money: the Emperor sent
a Captain to Rauenna called Theodorus, who reprehended Felix, and sent him
bound to Constantinople; who was afterward sent into exile into Pontus, and
after, both his eyes were put out. Many Citizens also of Rauenna were exiled
with him, and others put to death, and their goods confiscate, and the Town
taken by force, as it is above said. Naucl.

Constantine admonished Justinian to attempt nothing against Phillippicus who
was exiled into Pontus; whereunto notwithstanding, after he obeyed not, but
sent against him: but his people followed the part of Phillippicus, and they
came to Constantinople, whom Justinian met.

Phillippicus Bardanius, Captain of the war, had the victory Justinian,
Phillippicus.
and caused his and his sons head to be cut off, and reigned Emperor a year
and five months. He was of the Sect of the Monothelites, and sent Cyrus a
Catholic Bishop into exile into Pontus: or as Paul Diaconus says, into his
Abbey, and appointed Archbishop in his place, one John, a Monk of his Sect.
Supp. Chron.

The beginning of the contention for the Images of Saints.
Phillippicus made an Edict, Against Images.
that all the Images of Saints should be taken from Churches, and that by the
consent of John, Patriarch of Constantinople; for which cause Constantine Pope
excommunicated them, and declared them heretics in a Sinode at Rome: he
likewise ordained that the Image of the said Emperor should not be received,
nor engraven in Gold, Silver, Brass, or Lead; no not his name nor his figure
should not be received, nor mention made of him in the prayers of their Mass.
Abb. Vrsp.

Idolatry finds the Pope his Defender. But it is no marvel: Seeing the
second Commandment, Thou shall make thee no graven Image, etc. is omitted in
the Commandments which the Roman Church approoueth, which is a sacrilege
against the word of God.

Anastatius Theodosius the 3. Leo the 3.
Note that from henceforward the Romanists condemn for heretics such as agree
not to their opinions.

Phillipicus after he had dined, as he was about to repose himself, was taken
and bound, and his eyes put out. Vrsp.

Anastatius, or Arthemius, was chosen Emperor, and reigned three years.

He having sent an Army into Egypt against the Sarrasins, the soldiers
created an other Emperor called Theodosius, who coming to the Empire, caused
Anastatius to be made a Priest, to the end he might no more think of the
Empire. Yet after, thinking to return thither by the help of the Bulgarians,
he was drawn out.

Dagobert, second of that name, the 18. King of France, reigned 14. years.

Gregory Pope, second of that name, a Roman, ruled 16. years and 8. months.
Naucler.

He sent Boniface (otherwise called Wenefride) an English Monk, into Frisia
to preach the faith, where he was martyred, and where before one called
Vuillibrordus had preached in the time of Pope Sergius. Nauclerus.

Tiber ouerflowing his banks at Rome, destroyed the country. Gregory over
all the Town made often supplications and processions.

Theodosius, third of that name, borne at Constantinople, obtained victory
against Anastatius, and constrained him to leave the Empire, and make himself
a Monk, and reigned one year. Paulus. Diacon.

He caused again Images to be restored unto Temples, which Phillippicus had
taken away, and therefore he was held for a good Catholic.

He is the 37. Emperor.
Leon, an Isaurian by Nation, third of that name, chief of the Army which was
in the East against the Sarrasins, deprived Theodosius of his Empire, and
reigned 24. years. Gregory. 2. Leo 3.
He was called Iconomachus, that is to say, an Impugner of Images.

Constantinople was besieged three years by the Sarrasins and Arabians, but
they which besieged them bare as much evil, The Sarrasins besieged
Constantinople.
as the besieged, because of famine and pestilence. There was also a great
famine in the Town: In so much that some write that there dyed 30000. persons.
After the siege was levied, Images taken away.
Leon went into Sicilia and Italy, and began to cast Images out of their
Churches. This was the 10. year of his Empire.

The Emperor Leon made an Edict to take away and burn all the Images,
Gregory opposed himself against it, Sedition at Rauenna for Images.
and gave commandment to all Christians not to obey the said Edict: In so
much that they of Rauenna and the Venetians, rebelled, wherein the Exarche and
his son were slain. Supp. Chro. Rome and as it were all Italy, withdrew
their obedience from the Emperor, and would pay him no taxes nor tributes.
Leo notwithstanding caused to be published again; That all Images and statues
of gold, silver or brass, marble and wood, should be brought into the Market
place, and incontinently burnt, ordeining the pain of death to the gainsaiers.
He deprived German Patriarch of Constantinople of his dignity.

Here begin Popes to lift up their horns against Emperors, and to oppose
themselves against them. For this Pope durst excommunicate the Emperor Leo the
third, in full Sinode, because he desired to abolish the adoration of Images.

The office of Exerchate ceased then in Italy, The end of the Patriarkeship in
Italy.
which had endured 164. years or thereabouts, and was occupied of the
Lombards. Supp. Chron. and Naucler.

Touching the Kings of France.
Because of the great troubles which at this time were in the kingdom of
France, the greatest part of the kings of France was created after the appetite
of him who was master of the Palace. Leo. 3. Gregory. 2.
The kings had but the title and their pleasures to build Monasteries and
Temples as they thought good. This Master of the Palace had the Gendarmie in
his power, The great Master of the Palace.
as the Guardian and Protector of the dignity royal. This endured until these
Pippin le Court, which is the 22. king of France, the son of Charles Marteil,
Master of the Palace, bastard son of Pippin le Gros Duke of Austrasia, a
valiant man, and an excellent warrior.

Theodoricke Cala, the 20. king of France, had the title and dignity of a
king, and reigned 15. years.

The Sarrasins of Spain (which they had occupied) came into France, being
called by Erido king of Aquitane, who felt himself too weak to resist Charles
Martel: These Sarrazins descended in number 400000. with their wives, children,
and servants, as meaning to occupy all France: wasting and destroying all
places where they came. Endo who was their host to inuit them thither, seeing
so great a multitude, made an agreement and retired on the side of France: And
Charles Martel met these Sarrasins in Tourrain, and made an incredible
slaughter of them: So that their king Abdirama was there slain: and on the
side of France there were no more slain but 1500.

It should be an incredible thing, if besides the Historiographers of France,
strange writers had not witnessed the same, this so miraculous a deliverance
from so barbarous and horrible a multitude, being so autenticke and so
generally known.

The Eccleciastical people of France durst make the world believe (with lie and
all) that this Charles Martel was damned, because he exacted certain tenths
of the goods of the Church, to help the charges of this so dangerous a war.

Can there any Ingratitude or Covetousness be greater then is in this Papal
Priesthood?

Eucherius Bishop of Lion, of great authority, a little after the death of
Charles Martel, namely the year 742. says, he saw in a vision Charles
Martel in the pains of hell: Leo. 3.
because he had usurped the goods of the Church, and had not restored them as
he promised. Fasci. temp. And others recite it.

A lie which is for the profit of the Priests kitchen, Incontinently finds his
witnesses, yea by horrible absurdities.

John Damascene was in this time. Eutrop. and maintained the Popes quarrels
touching Images.

Gregory Pope, third of that name, a Sirian, governed at Rome 10. years and
more. Gregory. 3.


This Pope was cause that all Italy departed from the domination of the
Empire, because Leon the Empeour would that in Churches there should be no
Images of Saints. And therefore the Pope made a Council at Rome to be held,
where were assembled as many Bishops as he could get: And there it was
decreed, that we may lawfully honor Images. And a general sentence was
pronounced against all violators and gainsaiers of their Canonike conclusion
and they excommunicated the Emperor, and deprived him of his dignity.

Emperors here may take a good example, that they suffer not themselves to be
led by Popes, least finally they loose their Empires.

Gregory restored many Monasteries, and builded new, adding great lands and
revenues unto them, for the Monks living.

He commanded Priests to make a commemoration of the dead, and to pray for
them: Praying and offering for the dead.
and writ to Boniface Archbishop of Magunce, that Christians might offer for
their Parents which died faithfully. Naucler. Some attribute this to Gregory.
the 2. in the 2. volume of the Counsels.

He added to the service of the Mass ( Quorum solemnitas hodie in conspectu
tuae maiestatis celebratur, etc. Domine Deus noster in toto orb terrarum.
Chron. Sigeb.

Some Monasteries were richly founded in Almaigne, at Fulden, Leo 3. Gregory 3.
at Herfelden, and other places. Fasci. Temp.

Rome was besieged by Luitprandus, King of Lombardes: Gregory sent to Charles
Martel, King Pippins Father, the keys of the holy Sepulcher, and S. Peter's
bands, with other goodly gifts, to the end it would please him to deliver and
take the Roman Church from the servitude of the Lombards. Charles Martel writ
to Luitprandus, and entreated that which the Pope desired, Naucler.

Before when the City of Rome endured any violence by other Princes, she used
to demand help of the Emperor of Constantinople; but Gregory the third
would not do this. So that the tutorship of the Roman Church was transported
from the Emperor of Constantinople to other Princes; and by that mean came it
to pass that Rome is retired and exempted from the obedience of the Emperor
of Constantinople. Naucler.

The Mass began to be sung.
Paulus Diaconus, lib. 6. chap. 17. says, that Luitprandus king of Lombards,
was the first of those kings which out of Singers did elect Priests and Clerks
to sing Mass, which fashion afterward was augmented in the time of Gregory
the fifth, by the invention of Robert Bishop of Chartres, whereupon the Song was
called of the said Gregory, Gregoriall Song.

Note that Singing came into the Church by the Lombards, which Gregory the
first of that name had renounced. Hen. Bullenger.

Lieuen an English Priest, preached in the Country of West-falia. Fasci. temp.

They of the Town of Gaunt in Flaunders use great Idolatries unto him.

The Popes come now as into their chief force.
Childeric third of that name, 21. King of France, having reigned nine years
was chased away, Zachary.
and constrained to make himself a Monk.

So from Pharamond unto Pippin we account 331. years: From Merouee 302. From
Clouis the first, made a Christian, 252.

Zachary Pope, borne in Greece, ruled at Rome 10. or a 11. years, an Inuentor
of Cappes and other ornaments tissued of Gold and stones.

He assigned certain rents and lands to Priests to live on, and for Lamps in
Churches.

He forbad the Venetians under pain of excommunication, Christians slaves.
that they should no more sell Christians as slaves to the Sarrasins, as they
accustomed to do.

Pippin, surnamed le Court, of a Master of the Palace, The ambition of Pippin.
became by ambition the 22. King of France, and besought the Pope, that by his
authority he would confirm the kingdom unto him.

Chilperic then King of France, The King of France deposed and made a Monk.
after he had reigned nine years became a Monk, by the advice and authority
of Pope Zachary, and his wife, was put into a Monastery: and in his place the
said Pippin son of Charles Martel, and Father of Charlemaigne was made King,
and consecrated at Soisons by Boniface, Archbishop of Magunce, by the election
of all the Barons of France, and by the consent and Council of Pope Zachary,
being thereunto required: Who not only commanded and confirmed the said
election, but also absolved Pippin of the oath which he had made to the King
and to the Crown of France. Abb. Vrsp.

This Pope did as much with the King of Lombards called Lachis. Lachis King of
Lombards deposed.
For he found means that he left his kingdom and made himself a Monk, and
his children and wife, and his brother Astulfe, succeeded him. In the 2. volume
of Councels.

Carloman, Pippins brother, was also shaven and made a Monk at Rome, by the
persuasion of Zachary, and remained in the Abbey of the mount S^rap in
Lombardie, and after in the mount Cassin.

Constantine the fifth of that name, Constantine the fifth.
Emperor 74. son of Leon, Constantine the fifth.
reigned 35. years.

This as he was baptized made water in the Font, and therefore was he called in
Greek Copronymos.

What necessity was there to hold a naked Child over the Font?

This gave a forewarning that he should be an evil Christian. Naucler. And
indeed many crimes were imposed upon him, because he constantly maintained his
Fathers opinion against the Pope, touching Images: and from thence came also
that they say he dyed desperate, when he said I am delivered from the fire
eternal. Fasc. temp. Chron. Sigeb. and others.

They which consent not to the Popes Decrees are Judged damned.

Sinode in France under Pippin.
Under Pippin a Sinode was held in France, by Boniface Archbishop of Magunce,
Bucardus, Guntarius, and other Bishops, which had not been in 80. years
before: In so much that men said that Religion in France was dissipated and
laid under feet. Naucler.

Sinodes each year.
It was then ordained that each year there should be a Sinode in France. That
no Churchman should bear Arms. That none of them should use hunting, nor
keep Dogs nor Birds of pray.

That every Priest and Bishop should hold himself in his Parish, and do their
diligence to root out ancient heresies: that is to say, Paganism.
Paganism, and errors of the sacrifices of the dead: diuinations,
enchauntments, and other Immolations which are yet done after the manner of
Painims nigh Churches, under the name of Martyrs and Confessors. Naucler.

Paganism of the Gods, was persecuted in France: but true Religion was not
therefore established.

In this time the Hunnes called Hungarians, occupiped Pannonia. They were
divided into seven bands: every band builded a Castle, which yet at this day
are called Septem Castra in Latin, which is a strong place against the Turks.
Seven Castles


Edward King of England, who otherwise was reputed an upright man, left his
wife, and entertained Nuns, who was admonished by Letters from Boniface, to
leave off that vice. Naucler.

These be the fruits and enticements of that cursed single life.

Pippin le Court dyed at Paris, after he had reigned 17. or Charlemaigne in
Soisonnois, and Carloman at Noyon.

Stephen Pope, second of that name a Roman, ruled at Rome six years.
Stephen. 2.
He was carried upon men's shoulders unto the Church of S. Lateran: and thereof
it comes that at this day Popes cause themselves to be carried.

The Emperor Constantine, the 14. year of his Empire, Constantinople of 330.
Bishops, A Council at Constantinople against Images.
where it was commanded that all Images of Saints should be taken and burnt.
Also he caused all his subjects to swear, no more to honor any Image of God,
nor of Saints, but condemned to die all such as called to the Virgin Mary for
help, and that had in their houses any Relikes of Saints.

They commanded Monks to Marry, To marry.
and Nuns to follow the estate of marriage. Sigeb.

After this the Emperor sent the defruition of this Council to the Pope,
commanding him to cast Images out of Churches.

Sabin King of Bulgaria, throughout his Kingdom caused all Images to be taken
away, after the example of Constantine, whereby he came in grace with the
Emperor. Naucler.

Stephen went into France toward King Pippin, demanding aid and succors
against Astulphus King of the Lombardes. This King Pippin went and met the
Pope, and descended from his horse, took the bridle of the Popes horse in his
hand, and so led him to the Palace. Suppl. Chron.

Stephen.
Stephen consecrated him and his two sons, Charlemaigne, and Carloman, in the
Church of S. Denis in France, and confirmed them in such manner as he and his
posterity should hold the kingdom of France in heritage for ever, and
excommunicated all such which should set themselves against it. Fasci. temp.

Also he transported the Empire of Constantinople into France: which afterward
Pope Leo approved, ratified, and put in execution. And therefore the Empire was
parted into East and West. Supp. Chron. Fasci. temp. and Naucler.

From whence came this authority to bestow kingdoms of the world, but from
the devil, who is called the prince thereof?

Pippin went into Italy to the Popes succors, and obtained victory against
the Lombards. Astulphe was constrained to agree to the Popes will. Sigeb.

The Exarchate given to the Pope.
The Exarchate which was occupied by the Lombards, and appertained to the
Emperor, is given to the Pope by Pippin without any right. For the estate of
such as held that dignity Rauenna, Imola, Boulonge, Mutina, Rhegin, Parma,
Placentia, etc.

At this time happened an horrible thing in the Abbey of S. Martin at Tours.
For all the Monks which were given to pleasures and wickedness, dyed suffocated
and choked, except one. Fasci. temp.

The Parliament Instituted in France.

Constantine the Emperor sent gifts to Pippin, praying him to render unto him
the Exarchate. Pippin answered, that he came not the second time into Italy
for any temporal profit, but in duty to guard the Church against the
Lombards, and to take from them Rauenna, and the Exarchate and other goods of
Italy, to give them unto the Pope. Naucler. Abb. Vrsp.

Thassido Duke of Bauier, did homage to the King of France.

Paul.
Paul brother of the former Pope 94. governed 10. or a 11. years: In whose
election there was great debate. For some had chosen one called Theophilactus.

Buggandus Bishop of Metes, at this time was very affectionate toward holy
bodies and heaped up Relikes. He transported from Rome into France the bodies
of S. Gorgon, and Saint Nazare, and of many others.

Rome which before was the butchery of Martyrs, now selles bodies and bones.

Constantine seeing the foolish superstition of Christians at the Sepulchers of
Saints, Saints bones taken out of their graves and cast into the sea.
kissing and worshipping their Relikes, caused their bones to be taken out of
their graves and to be cast into the Sea.

At this time it was that Sigebert recites, that in Berithe a City of Siria,
was found an Image of Jesus Christ, whereunto the Jews did many outrages,
pearcing his feet, hands, and side, from whence blood came, wherewith many
maladies were healed. This thing being declared to the Bishop of the said
place, he made that blood to be preciously kept, and showed it, and carried it
hither and thither: And thereupon ordained each year a feast, called the
Passion of the Lords Image, the eight of November.

Of this blood there was brought to Mantoua. Supp. Chron.

Who sees not that this Fable was invented, to the end that under the shadow of
miracles, the service of Saints and Images might be set forward against the
Grecians and Emperors. When men have no authority from the holy scripture,
they cry, Miracle, Miracle.

Note hereby the refuge of Papists.

There was a Sinode held in France against the Grecians touching Images, by the
authority of King Pippin. Abb. Vrsp.

In this time Saints lives were forged on all sides.

Verus Biship of Siuil, wrote the life of S. Eutropius Bishop. Abb. Trit.

Wibaldus composed the life of S. Boniface his master, Bishop of Magunce.
Tritem.

Constantine Pope, second of that name a Roman, governed Rome one year.
Co^stantin. 2.


By ambition and force he occupied the Papacice. And from the estate of a
Laie-man being made Priest, he was chosen Pope by store of money and Arms,
but after was taken and cast into a Monastery, and his eyes put out.

Philippicus an Antepope.
In this time likewise there was an Antepope called Phillippicus, or Phillip,
who also was deposed, and Stephen the third constituted.

Sergius Bishop of Rauenna, and Christopher, Authors of the former schism,
had their eyes put out.

Stephen. 3.
Stephen Pope, third of that name, Monk of Sicilie, ruled at Rome four years.

One Pope condemns an other.
This Pope assembled a Council at Rome, where all that was revoked, which
Constantine his predecessor had ordained: even in disgrading them, which by him
were consecrated. In the said Council assisted 12. Bishops of France. Naucler.

There was also ordained, that no Laie-man should be made Pope or Bishop, but
successively by order and Ecclesiastical degrees. Gloria in excelsis.
Naucler. Item, that every Sunday the Gloria in excelsis should be sung at
Mass.

There was condemned the Council of Constantinople. 7. wherein the Emperor
Constantine the 2. and the Bishops of Greece, had ordained that Images should
be laid down. This Council was declared heretical, and again Images
commanded, as worthy of honor and veneration. This thus agreed upon, the next
morning there was made a great procession, where the Pope went on foot in
great devotion, and all others. Naucler, and Supp. Chron.

A great token of repentance for a Pope.

Charlemaigne the son of Pippin, 22. King of France, had this surname of
great, for his prowesses and virtues. He had marvelous wars. The wars of
Chalemaine.
The first in Aquitane. The second against the Lombards. And the third against
the Saxons. He had also war in Spain, in Bauiere, and in Hungary against
the Hunois: which Historiographers declare in their order.

Adrian Pope, a Roman, Constant. 5. Adrian.
governed the Roman Church 24. years.

This Pope showed himself cruel against such as impugned the service of
Images, and made a book Entitled, Of the worshipping of Saints. Chron. Sigeb.
and Abb. Trit.

Dedier 22. and last king of Lombards, desired the love and friendship of this
Pope, but he would not consent thereunto: Saying that he would not accord with
him which so often had broken his promise: wherewith Didier being moved, The
end of the kingdom of the Lombards.
practiced many evils against the Church of Rome, In so much that Adrian was
constrained to demand aid in France. Supplim. of Chron.

Charlemaigne came into Italy at the request of Adrian, against Didier, and
obtained victory against him: after he had reigned 18. years he sent him
prisoner into France, with his wife and children. And the kingdom of the
Lombards finished in Italy, which had endured 224. years, or 213.

After he had overcome the Lombards, he instituted the University of Pauie,
and adorned it with learned people.

Charlemaigne came to Rome and kissed the Popes feet. Kissing the Popes feet.
Blundus and P. Emilius.

He restored to the Roman Church his revenues and privileges, and ratified
all that which his Father Pippin had given to the said Church. Wherefore this
Adrian caused a Council to be held of 153. Prelates: by which was given to
Charlemaigne the right of Inuesture, placing Bishops in possession of their
seats, and to elect the Pope of Rome from hence forward. Distinct. 63. cap.
Adrianus.

This privilege endured not long, and was but feined and hypocritical. And
the succeeding Popes observed it not: saying it was but courtesy and a
personable privilege which could not exceed the person of the Emperor which
then was.

Leon Emperor, fourth of that name, son of Constantine Emperor, reigned
five years, his wife was of Athens, Leon. 4.
named Hirene (otherwise also Theodora) a fair woman, and of great spirit.
Naucler.

He loved precious stones, and having seen a Crown full of precious stones in
the Treasury of Saint Sophie, put it upon his head: but by the coldness
thereof, he fell into a Fever, whereof he dyed. Chron. Sigeb. Fasc. temp.
Naucler. Supp. Chro. After his wife Hirene reigned.

Charlemaigne enterprised war against the Saxons, Infidels, and Painims: and
this endured 33. years. Naucler. For they often revolted and feined themselves
to be Christians, abusing Charlemaigne. Abb. Vrsp. Finally they were made
subject.

Adrian builded certain Towers and walls at Rome, and gave great gates of
Brass to the Church of S. Peter: and adorned the Altar with a covering of
Gold.

He ordained that an hundredth poor people should be nourished in the Court of
Lateran. He restored S. Anastatius, and other ruinated Churches. He was
puissant and noble of race, and none of his predecessors came to like temporal
glory and riches. Supp. Chro. Fasci. temp.

Charlemaigne displeased at the discord of the Church Music, betwixt the
Romans and the French, sent two Clerks to Rome to learn the Song of the
Roman Church, which first instructed the Church of Metes in Lorraine, and
after al France, in the same singing. Supp. Chron.

Constantine. the 6.
Constantine 6. of that name, Emperor 76. of Leon the 4. reigned ten years
with his mother Hirene, but being come to age, he deprived her of the Empire,
exhorting her rather to deal in domestical affairs, without meddling with
governing the Empire. Sigeb.

Charlemaigne made war in Spain against the Sarrasins. Naucler. Where the
Peers of France were betrayed Ganelon.

Hirene had her devotion toward the virgin Mary, and all other Saints: And at
the request of Pope Adrian, and of Therasius Archbishop of Constantinople, she
assembled after Sigeb. a Council at Nice, called the seventh, of 350, after
some: or of 325. Bishops, Naucler. Wherein it was decreed, that not only in
Temples should be Images: but also that they should be worshipped of right, and
that al gainsaiers should be excommunicated: but this decree was after
abolished by Constantine. Chro. Eusebius. Constantine the 6.


Here took the University of Paris her beginning, by the Alenin an English
man, who was Charlemaignes master. Erectio^ of the University of Paris.


Constantine the 11. year of his Empire, deprived his mother of the Imperial
government, and caused all Images to be cast down in Temples, and reigned
above 7. years.

At this time a Sinode was held in Spain, Images prohibited. Images forbidden
in Spain.
in a Town call- Eliboris or Granado, where were congregated nineteen Bishops,
and thirty six Priests. Felix Bishop of Aquitaine, was President there.
Amongst other points, there was principally concluded that there should be no
Images nor paintings in Churches.

The year 793. an other Sinode was held at Francford, by Almaigne and
Franconia. The Pope Adrian knowing this, sent two Bishops, Stephen and
Theophilacte, to urge the Decree made for Images at the Council of Niece, by
the means of Hirene. In so much that the Sinode held at Eliboris in Spain,
was at the said Francford condemned. Abb. Vrsp.

Seeing now Jesus Christ was left to be portraied by the preaching of his pure
word, Images were admitted into the Temples of Christ: therefore no marvel if
so many contentious follow.

Hirene grieved to be deprived of the Empire, by presents, Nicephorus) five
years before, then put him in prison, where he deceased few days after.
Hirene then his mother, governed alone by the space of three years.

She also caused to be taken out of his grave the body of Constantine the
fifth, Father of her dead husband, and made it publicly to be burnt, and the
Ashes thereof to be cast into the Sea, because in his life time he had broken
Images. This did she at the Instigation of Theodorus Bishop, who favored the
Pope touching Images. Henry Bullenger.

Hirene. Adrian.
Alcuin, or otherwise Albin, Disciple of Beda the Venerable, Monk, and after
Abbot of S. Martin of Tours, Charlemaignes master, made three books of the
Trinity, and many other books. Also the life of S. Vaast Bishop of Arras.
Abb. Trit.

Counsels in the time of Charlemain.
Charlemaine during his reign, caused 6. or 7. Councels and Sinodes to be
held: whereof five, that is to say, at Magunce, Worms, Rhenes, Tours, and
Arles, were assembled against the abuses of Ecclesiastical persons which then
were very great, and did much displease the Emperor Charlemaigne.

Ansegisus Abbot of this time, made four books of the Decrees of
Charlemaigne, and of his son Lewis. Amongst other things, and above all, he
would that Bishops should preach to the people the true doctrine drawn out of
the holy Scriptures, and not otherwise: Thereupon alleging the saying of
Gregory. That the Priest which goes without the care of preaching, lightly,
lights against himself the wrath of the hid Judge.

He also ordained that no man should make profession of Monachisme, without
demanding the Kings license to shun many frauds. He would few Feasts should
be ordained. He repressed the superfluity of Priests, and ordained that they
should be norished of the Ecclesiastical reuenews with ye poor.

This was S. Boniface then accounted the Apostle of Almaigne.
He one day sharply reprehended the Archbishop of Magunce called Boniface,
because he had usurped a Cross all covered with gold, and enriched with
precious stones, as an Imperial Scepter. For occasion thereof being offered in
a public assembly, he said to him in choler; Is it thus you make profession
of the Cross of Christ? Do you thus feed the flock, being rather in order of
an Emperor then a shepherd? An other which on S. Martins even was made
Bishop, and for joy thereof forgetting to come the next day to the Temple, was
dismissed by Charlemaigne, saying: What will he do hereafter, when at first he
is so forgetful of his office? Also one other having received a great benefice,
for joy, being upon horseback, cast himself down with great agilitie before
the Emperor. To whom the Emperor said: So far as I see you are an able man,
and a good horseman, I have need of you: Leave hardly this benefice to some
weaker man. Auentinus the Historiographer in his books of the Annals of
Bauaria.

We may see by the recital hereof, that Popes had not that sovereign power
which afterward their successors usurped. The Emperors called Sinodes, and
proposed statutes and decrees, and conferred and bestowed benefices.

At Francfort whilst Charlemain wintered there, a Council was held, wherein
the decree of the Council of Niece held by Hirene touching Images (as is
said) was declared false, and altogether condemned. And although the Popes
Factors, as Vrspergensis and others do pass and dissemble it, yet so is the
truth. And that the Pope Adrian sent thither his Ambassadors, Stephen and
Theophilacte Bishop. There also was condemned the heresy of Felix and
Eliphandus, which acknowledged their fault, and asking pardon were restored to
their dignities.

Charlemaigne caused a book to be published in his name, which agrreed with
the Articles of the said Council. Yea and moreover, he answered two books
which were found written by Adrian, to Therasius Patriarch, and to the Emperor
of Constantinople. By this writing Charlemaigne taxes, and covertly condemns
Adrian, without naming him Idolater.

There was also a Council held at Cauaillon, under Charlemaigne, wherein
amongst other superstitions which were there condemned, that of Pilgrimages in
respect of Religion, was sharply repressed in the 45. Canon. Alleging that
saying of S. Hierome. Men should not be praised because they have seen
Jerusalem, but because they have lived well.

Leo the third of that name, borne at Rome, Leo. 3.
after he had received the Papal dignity, Incontinently sent to Charlemaigne
the Keys of S. Peter, the Ensign or Gonfanon (as they call it) of the Town
of Rome, with other presents: requiring him that he would do so much, that the
people of Rome might yield themselves subject to the Pope in delivering him
their oath of fidelity. For he feared the people one day would not stoop
under his tyranny.

But Charlemaigne willing to do a thing pleasing Leo, Constantine the 6.
sent a certain Abbot called Agilbert, who by the Emperors commandment
constrained the Roman people to swear fidelity to the Pope.

For this cause the people conceived such an hatred against the Pope, that
having found some which stirred them more to execute their fury, and to serve
them for guides and Captains: as one day he went a procession, having cast him
from his horse they spoiled him of his pontificiall apparel, and beat him
well. In which tumult none put out his eyes nor cut out his tongue (as the
Papists affirm, teaching that straightway he was divinely healed, by so
manifest lies to amplify his authority): but indeed he was only put in
prison in the Monastery of Saint Erasmus, as Mantuan says in his fourth
book, des Fastes.

Charlemain Emper. 801. the first name of treschristian, the first of Emperors
that were Crowned by the Popes.
Finally, as Charlemaigne came to Rome, the people knowing how he was
affectioned toward the Pope, for the fear they had of him, changed the anger
they had conceived against Leo into favor, and durst not enterprise to prove
the crimes whereof they accused him. After then they had been examined touching
his life, they cried all with one voice, That the Apostolic seat ought not to
be judged by a Lay person. By which answer Charlemaigne being appeased, after
also that Leo had affirmed by an oath that he was not culpable, he declared him
absolved and innocent.

The Pope for these benefits, willing to yield some pleasure on Christmas
day, as soon as the King was come from the Church, he put the Crown on his
head, and pronounced Charlemaigne Emperor of the Romans, without that, he had
aspired to receive the Imperial Crown. And all the Roman people cried
saying; Life and victory be to the thrice Christian Charles, always August,
Crowned of God; great and peaceable Emperor. And whereas before they used to
call him by the name of Patrician, he was called Emperor: the year of his
reigned 23. and of our salvation eight hundredth and three.

Hirene Empress of Constantinople, Charlemain.
Hirene.
hearing what had been done at Rome, sent three Ambassadors toward
Charlemaigne to confirm the peace. Charlemaigne on his side also sent his
Ambassadors toward the Empress for a greater confirmation of peace,
demanding her in marriage; whereunto she had consented, but for the hinderance
by ambushes laid against it: as if she would have sold the Empire by her
marriage to strangers.

Nicephorus then was crowned Emperor, Nicephorus.
and Hirene chased away; who passed the rest of her life in exile. Nicephorus
sent his Ambassadors to Charlemaine, Division of the Empire.
to renew the alliance upon those conditions; That both should be called
Augustes and brethren together: the one of the East, and the other of the
West: That in Italy which is on the side beyond Naples, Accord of division.
and on the other side beyond Sipont: namely, all that which stretches toward
the Sea, should belong unto the Greek Emperor, and the rest to the French
Emperor.

That Venice should be in the midst, and as the limitte and border betwixt
those two Empires, and acknowledge the Majesty of them both. That the
Venetians should be subject neither to the one nor the other, but should use
their own laws, and be the friend of both, whether in peace or war. Some
say, that the Emperor after his Coronation said, that if he had known the
Popes enterprise, he would not that day have entered into the Church.

Advertisement.
Although successively there were always Emperors of Constantinople, which
kept the Roman Empire until the Town was occupied by the Turks: yet because
the true brightness and Majesty of the name and of the tuition of the Empire,
and of Italy, was in Charlemaine and his successors, we leave in Nicephorus
the Greek Emperors, because they have not been like these. Therefore leaving
the East, namely, that of Constantinople, we will set down in order the
Emperors of the West; namely of Rome.

Charlemain.
Charlemaigne then delivered the Roman seat from all molestations of foreign
Princes, and achieved that for which principally he came into Italy: that is
to say, at the siege of Pauie, having constrained Didier the last King of the
Lombards to yield himself, he got possession of all Lombardie. And to the
end they should no more molest Italy, he drove them away as seditious
persons, and sent Didier Captive with his wife and children into the Town of
Liege. Paul. Diaconus, an Historiographer, and Secretary to the said Didier,
was led with him; and from that time Charlemaigne made his the Kingdom of
Lombardie, leaving all the Towns of Italy in their accustomed liberty, to
the end he might give no occasion of trouble unto the Greek Emperor.

The alliance of Scotland with France.
About this time, Acayus the 65. King of Scots, made the first alliance with
King Charlemaigne, and with France, which has endured ever since, and yet at
this present is maintained betwixt these two Nations.

Bauiere conquired.
Tassilo Duke of Bauiere, moving war against Charlelemaigne, lost his
Country, and was put in a Monastery with his son; and although he was
Charlemaignes kinsman, yet for his faith before violated, he used this
severity toward him.

Nicephorus.
Nicephorus reigned at Constantinople eight or nine years, whom the Romans
would not acknowledge for Emperor: whereupon there rose great envy and hatred
betwixt them of the East, and of the West.

A Schism betwixt them of the East, and of the West.
Whatsoever agreement was made, there was still envy and enmity betwixt the
East and the West Emperors, and they could not suffer one an other: yet this
dissension happened not only betwixt them, but also betwixt the East and the
West Churches; whereof altogether the Pope was cause, in intent to withdraw and
exempt himself from the obedience of him of whom he held all his good.

Charlemaigne enriched many Churches, Abbeys, and Bishoppricks; especially in
Almaine, the Bishoppricks of Magunce, Strasbourge, Colongne, and Treuers,
giving them great privileges. Briefly, there were few renowned Churches in
Germany, nor in all the two Frances, which he endowed not with some goods and
revenues.

Johannes Scotus, a Monk of S. Benet, a Disciple of Beda, and a companion of
Albin or Alcuin, Charlemaignes master, wrote upon S. Mathewe three books, and
other things. Abb. Trit.

Hinmarus Bishop of Rhemes, before Monk of S. Deuis, wrote two books of the
life of S. Remy Bishop. Tritem.

Charlemaigne at the last got the upper hand of the Hungarians, and took great
riches from them: for it had been two hundredth years that they did no other
thing but pill and spoil all other Nations, without being pilled themselves.
After, he tamed the Bohemians, having overcome their King called Lechon. And so
in the end Charlemaigne was peaceable of Italy, France, Almaine, Hungary,
and Bohemia.

So oftentimes the Lord sends puissant Monarkes to repair things confused,
Wherefore God sends great Monarks
as also to repress the insolency and disordinate dealings of great persons
dispersed on the earth.

Charlemaigne of the age of 72. years, died at Aix in Almaine, of a Fever and
a Plurisie, the year of his reign, 46. of his Empire 14. and the year of
Christ 814. having instituted the University of Paris and Pauie.

Lewis, Charlemaignes son, by his wife Hildegarde, surnamed Le Debonaire,
because he was of a soft and gracious spirit, Lewis surnamed the Debonaire,
Emperor Stephen. 4. A subtle Fox.
was after the death of his father, pronounced Emperor by the chiefs of the
Kingdom.

Stephen, fourth of that name, a Roman, being substituted in the place of Leo,
three months after went into France toward Lewis Debonaire the Emperors,
to the end to purge himself concerning his election: Lewis.
for that against the decrees of Adrian and Leo his predecessors, he had been
chosen and confirmed Pope by the Clergy and the people of Rome, without the
counsel and authority of the Emperor. Wherein we see that the Roman seat
is so faithful an obseruer of her own laws and ordinances, that the first
that succeeds him which made them, breaks and transgresses them. But to the
end that this flatterer using hypocrisy might the rather for a time abuse
Lewis, he set on his head a fair Crown (which he brought with him) and an
other on the head of the Queen Hirmingarde, calling her Auguste, or Empress.
But the subtle Fox being recompensed by the Emperor, returning, and the
Church of Reate in Italy, even then falling vacant, he would not consecrate
the Bishop who was chosen there, unless he would first acknowledge that the
Emperor should approve his election. But see what followed after. As soon as
he was come to Rome, he began to think that the right and pre-eminence given
to Charlemagine and his successers, might bring with it many mischiefs,
therefore taking the greater hardiness, by the softness and benignity of
Lewis, thought it good to abolish such a right: and there upon pronounced that
the Popes election ought to be in the power of the Clergy, of the Senate, and
of the Roman people; yet fearing to provoke the Emperors anger against him,
he added this Interpretation: namely, that it should be very lawful for them
to elect the Bishop of Rome without the authority of the Emperor, but that it
should not be lawful to consecrate him without the Emperors presence, or his
Ambassadors. So by this means for a certain time were the Emperors kept from
the election of the Pope. Yet because Stephen occupied not the seat past eight
months, he could do little of that he forethought to increase his authority.
But he died in his accustomed superstition. Anno domini. 817.

Pascal first of that name, a Roman Monk, following the train of Stephen his
predecessor, was chosen Pope by the Clergy and people of Rome, without the
consent of the Emperor. And as the Emperor complained of this election,
Pascal subtly purged himself by his Ambassadors sent thither. By tract of
time this subtle and malicious Pope seeing there was danger if he longer
deferred to augment his authority, so straungely enchaunted the Emperor
Lewis, The right of choosing and Inuesture of Bishops, belonged to the
Emperors.
insomuch as he bare great honor to the Roman Church, that he consented to
remit into the hands of the Clergy and the people, the right of electing of
the Pope, which had been given before to Charlemaigne; and also that he
should by his Letters confirm all Donations made by his predecessors, although
they were made of things acquired by unjust and unlawful violence. This he
did as one ignorant of their cautelous and deceitful dealings, and sealed them
with his seals. But after he had Crowned at Rome Lotharie his son Emperor,
(to the end that by that means he might more easily compass that which he
sought) he did so much by treason and secretly, that Theodorus and Leon,
officers of the Emperors house, which faithfully held their masters part, had
their eyes put out, and after their heads cut off by the means of certain
mutinous and seditious people. And although he were accused to the Emperor, as
well for the sedition which had been stirred, The Pope purges himself by oath.
as for the murder against their persons committed: after he had assembled a
Sinode of a certain number of Bishops, he purged himself by oath.
Notwithstanding he accused of treason them which were slain, and pronounced
that by good right they had been slain: declaring them to be absolved which
murdered them.

Behold the holiness of these holy Fathers in their kingdom of perdition.

Pascal honored with a most magnificall Sepulcher in the Town, two thousand
bodies (if he fail not in his account) of Saints before dead, which were
buried in Church yardes. He builded all new the Temple of S. Praxides, and set
in it the bodies of S. Cecilie, Tiburcius, Valerian, Maximian, and other
Martyrs: also of S. Vrbain and other Bishops: He reedified some Churches which
were like to fall with great age.

Lewis upon great devotion he had to the Apostolic Sea, bestowed upon the
people and Clergy of Rome, the power to choose the Pope and the Bishops,
which authority belonged to the Emperors. But he reserved this prerogative;
that the Pope being chosen, he should always send to the Emperors to
confirm amity. Naucler.

The Emperor also ratified the donation made to the Pope of Rome by his
predecessors, and signed it with his own hand, and his three children, ten
Bishops, eight Abbots, and fifteen Earls.

The Copy of these Letters are in Volateran, in the third book of his
Geographie.

Pascal then tarried not long after to command under pain of excommunication
that none should presume to receive an Ecclesiastical Benefice of a Layman,
whosoever he be. Supp. Chro.

Great signs and maruells happened in this time.

In Saxe a great Earthquake; so that many villages (as Vrsp. says) perished by
fire.

In diverse places it reigned stones amongst hail, which slew men and beasts.
Naucler.

Eugenius Pope, second of that name, borne at Rome, ruled three years.
Eugenius. 2. Schism.


A Schism rose up in the Church, and there was great discord amongst the
Cardinals, some choosing Sozimus, but finally Eugenius obtained the Papacy,
for he had in him great appearance of holiness.

At this time a Peace was confirmed betwixt Leo Emperor of Constantinople, and
Lewis the Roman Emperor. Naucler.

The King of Denmark, named Hariolus, cast out of his Kingdom by the children
of Godfrey, came for succors to the Emperor Lewis, and obtained help to be
restored into his Kingdom. Chron. Sigeb.

Translation of holy bodies.
Now was translation of the bodies of many Saints from Italy, into Almaine,
France, and England. Fascic. temp. This was all the Religion of this time.

Michael Emperor of Constantinople, Michael, Emperor of Constantinople.
sent Ambassadors toward Lewis Debonaire, to understand his opinion towching
the Images of Saints; namely, whether they should keep them, or reject them.
Lewis sent them to Pope Eugenius to hear his opinion. Bonif. Simoneta. This
Emperor Michael, sent to Lewis the books of the Hierarchy of S. Denis. Chro.
Sigeb.

Lotharie King of Italy came to Rome, and was royally received of Pope
Eugenius: he reformed the estate of the Town, and all Italy, and ceased all
partialities, Rome then, was not yet the Popes.
and appointed at Rome Magistrates to do right to the people. Naucler. Blond.

Valentine, second of that name, Cardinal and Deacon, a Rome only forty
days, an eloquent man. Bonif. Simoneta.

Organes became first in use in France about this time, by a Priest called
Gregory, who learned his cunning therein in Greece. See the Hist. of France.

Gregory Pope, fourth of that name, a Roman, ruled at Rome 16. years.
Gregory. 4.


This Pope would never accept the Popeship, unless first the Emperor would
approve his election, and thereof he was certified by an Embassage which the
Emperor sent to Rome, to examine the said election. Naucl. and Abb. Vrsp.

The Sarrasins with the Souldan of Babylon, came into Rome, Peter, made a
stable for horses, Rome.
and wasted Pouille, Calabria, and Sicilie, and pilled and spoiled all where
they went. Chron. Eusebius. and Naucler.

Naucler. says, that in the Council held at Aixle Chapele, A Council at Aix
wherein the superfluities of Bishops were cut off.
under this Pope, the year of Christ, 830. there was ordained a mean and rule
for Monks, Nuns, Canons, and others to live in.

There was also ordained that every Church should possess rents and revenues,
that so Priests might have whereon to live, and so to keep them from applying
themselves to any profane thing, or dishonest gain. Prebendes were ordained
for Monks, that for necessity they might not be withdrawn from holy things.
There was also granted Franches and liberty to Monks, Clerks, and Priests,
that they should not be subject unto temporal Lords, etc.

The body of S. Mark was transported from Alexandria to Venice. Naucl.

Lewis: even his own children, angry at the second marriage of their father,
with one called Judith, an audatious woman. He sent them far from him;
namely, Lotharie into Italy, Pippin into Aquitane, and Lewis into Bauiere.
Notwithstanding he was imprisoned in the Monastery of S. Modard at Soissons.

John le Maire declares this History as follows. In the time of Gregory
the fourth (says he) was held a Council at Campaigne, which was detestable
and pernicious, by the disordinate Prelates of France, who grieved that at the
former Council the Emperor had corrected their pompes and disordered
superfluities; having caused them to leave their Rings, they conspired against
him, and caused the children to take Arms against their father, and to take
him and hold him in straight guard at Soissons; the Pope Gregory aiding in
this exploit. Moreover, at the said Council (or rather conuenticle and
monopole) the said Bishops and Prelates coniured, condemned their sovereign
Prince and Lord to lay away Arms and his military Girlde, and to dispoile
himself of his Imperial dignity, and in the place thereof, to take the Monks
Cool or Frocke. O false, wicked, and Pharasaicall Priestly hypocrisy (says
he). This is not the first time that thou have conspired in great disdain
against such as reprehend and correct thee. For thou begannest at the head,
that is, at our Lord Jesus Christ. But afterward this said Emperor was again
established into his Kingdom by an other better Council of Bishops and
Prelates of France, and by the conduct of certain good Barrons and loyal
Captains of his kingdom, being nigh touched with his troubles and griefs.
His sons which had imprisoned him, demanded pardon for their fault and
villainous enterprise, and obtained it. See John le Maire. Ebdo Archbishop of
Rhemes, and many other Prelates which had conspired against the king, were
deposed from their dignities, condemned and banished out of France, Chron.
Sigeb.

Gregory the fourth instituted the Feast of All Saints, upon

Rabanus first Monk of S. Benet, and Abbot of Fulden, Rabanus.
after Bishop of Magunce, flourished at this time. He expounded all the Bible,
as well the old as the new Testament, and made many other books.

Strabus a Monk of Fulden, a Disciple of Rabanus, Strabus. The Ordinary Close.
was the first which made the ordinary Close, which after was augmented.
Tritem.

Bertramus Priest, a learned man, and well instructed in true piety, made a
book of Predestination, and an other of the body and blood of the Lord,
wherein he speaks very properly of the Lords Supper.

He served for a light to illuminate others in this dark time.

Turpin, Archbishop of Rhemes, wrote two books of the acts of Charlemaigne.
Abb. Trit.

Lewis Debonaire died of the age of 64. years, having Mets in the Sepulcher of
his mother Hildegarde. After his death, rose up a cruel time: for whilst his
children Lotharie, Charles, and Lewis, were in debates and wars, the
Sarrasins on the other side lifted up themselves, as also the Saxons, with
others. At a battle given at Fountenay, a Town of Auxerrois, Lotharie fled to
Aixle Chapelle, and and from thence to Vienne.

Lotharie or Lother obtained the Empire 15. years. The Charlemaigne, Lotharie.
soon finished in this man, whose Empire was divided. He had such debates with
his brethren, Lotharie.
that one day at an Easter Feast, almost all the Nobility of France perished
at a combat, wherein Charles had the victory. Finally, there was means found
of agreement; namely, that Charles surnamed Le Chaune, should be King of
France, Lewis King of Germany, and Lotharie who was then the eldest, should
have Gaul, Belgique, Province, and that portion of the Country which of his
own name was called Lotharinge: that is to say, Lorraine. He already possessed
Italy.

Lothaire left three sons, Lewis, Lotharie, and Charles, unto which he made a
partition: to Lewis, the Empire, with Italy: to Lothaire, Austrasia and
Lorraine: and to Charles the youngest, the Kingdom of Province. This partition
was during his life, in the presence of the greatest of his Kingdom. After, he
took him to a Monastery.

Sergius. 2.
Sergius Pope, the second of that name, a Roman, ruled Lewis, the Emperor
Lothaires son, who sent to Rome for that purpose, and the said Lewis was
crowned King of Italy by Sergius. Nauclerus.

This Sergius was before called Swines Snowte, and therefore changed his name,
and so gave first occasion to his successors to change their names in their
election.

He then, and they which followed, esteemed more of the name which they receive
at their cursed unction, then that they receive at their baptism: wherein
there is an apparent mark of Antichrist.

A mark of the beast.
Some there are, which by reason of certain mysteries and secrets which were
then revealed, count the number of the Beast from this change of the name,
until the 7. year of Julius the second of that name: who casting S. Peter's
keys into Tiber, took Saint Paul's Sword: whereof we shall speak in his
place.

Benefices sold to them which would give most.
This Pope had a brother called Benet, who outragiously vsursped to himself the
Church goods: and there was so great covetousness at Rome, by the carelessness
of Sergius, that Bishopprickes were publicly sold to him that would give
most: and no man in authority sought any remedy for such an enormitie: which
they said came because of the Sarrasins coming into Italy.

Yet he was very diligent to adorn and repair Churches, and to place many
holy bodies in them. Supp. Chron.

He builded a Monastery nigh the Church of S. Siluester. Supp. Chron. He added
to the private Mass, the breaking of bread into three pieces.

Leo, Pope, 4. of that name, a Roman, ruled 8. or 9. years. Leo. 4.
He was presently chosen, even before his predecessor was

He repaired many Temples which the Sarrasins had destroyed.

He ordained that no Layman should presume to enter into the Quier of the
Church, The people separated from Priest in the Church.
nor to come nigh the Priest when he sung Mass, unless it were to the
offering. For that place is ordained for them which do divine service. Chron.
Eusebius. He also made many Collects and Orisons: as Deus cuius dextra beatu^
Petru^ ambulantem in fluctibus, etc. Item, Deus quibeato Petro collatis, etc.
Item, Deus quiab ipso huis mundi principio, etc. Item, Presta quaesumus,
omnipotens and misericors Deus, etc. against the assaults of the Sarrasins and
Earthquakes.

He builded the Castle of S. Angelo at Rome, The Castle of S. Angelo.
repaired the walls and gates, and builded fifteen Bul^arkes for the defense
of the Town. And he himsefle went to war against the Sarrasins.

It was he which enriched the Cross with precious stones, the which the
Deacons used to carry before the Popes.

The year of Christ 849. Leo Emperor of Constantinople was slain in his
Palace, he being in his Chapel, by a conspiracy of his Nobles, and
especially of Count Michael, who after obtained the Empire nine years.
Naucler. Chron Sigeb.

A Sinode at Rome of 64. or after some, 47. Bishops, was assembled by Leo:
wherein a great Cardinal was condemned and deposed, because he had left his
Parish five years, and for other crimes. Notwithstanding, after this, the same
Pope ordained that a Bishop ought not to be condemned unless he were euicted
by 72. witnesses.

A great mutation happened in France by the Normanes, Frisons, Britains, and
others: which wasted it.

Adulphus (after the Chronicle of Eusebius) or Ethelwolphus, or Alidulphus, or
Adolphus after some, the first Christian King of England, S. Peter's pence in
England.
went to Rome on Pilgrimage with his son Alfredus. Nauclerus. And granted to
the Pope Leo of each house in his Country a certain piece of Silver for
tribute, payable to the Popes of Rome every year, in the honor of Saint
Peter, which custom was long time after kept.

This Tribute was called S. Peter's pence, or guilt, and so was all England made
subject to the Popes seat. Functius.

The body of S. Helena, mother of Constantine the great, from Rome, was
transpoted into France. Chron. Sig. and Fasc. Temp.

In Almaine upon the coast of Rhene, a great famine came, and after that, a
great earth quake: whereby S. Albons Church at Magunce fell.

An Advertisement.
As for the Popes on the Roman seat, from Phocas the Emperor hitherto, they
have still multiplied, new traditions, ceremonies, buildings, pleasures,
pompes, and wars, they have devised and practiced murders, alterations and
chaunges of Kingdoms; in such sort, as finally the Church under their
gouernmenment became altogether the whore whereof is spoken in the Apocalips:
and the better to discover the thing, the Lord has manifested the truth
thereof to all the world in this Pope that follows, John. the 8. who being a
woman, and an whore, has showed in her body the true portraict of the great
spiritual whoredom of the Roman Popes, which after, still more and more is
manifested.

John, 8. of that name, John. 8. The great whore.
took the name of an English man, because of a certain English Moonke of the
Abbey of Fulden, which he loved singularly: as for his office he was a Pope:
but for his Sex he was a woman. This woman, being an Almaine by Nation,
borne at Magunce, and first called Gilberte, feigned her self to be a man;
having taken on her man's apparel, went to Athens with her amorous Lover the
Monk: In which place she profited excellenty in all kind of Sciences; and
after the Monks death came to Rome, still dissembling she was a woman: But
because she was of a very sharp spirit and had a notable grace, well and
promptly to speak in disputations and public Lectures, so that many marvelled
at her knowledge, every one was so affectioned toward her, and so well she
gained the hearts of all, that after the death of Leo, she was chosen Pope.
Into which office being brought, she bestowed holy orders (as they call them)
after the manner of other Popes: she made Priests and Deacons: she ordained
Bishops and Abbots: she sung Masses: she consecrated Temples and Aultars: she
administered the Sacraments: she presented her feet to kiss; and did all
other things which the Popes of Rome used to do, and yet her Acts were then of
very little or no value.

Whilst this woman was thus in the Papal office, the Emperor Lotharie now
old, took the habit of a Monk, and Lewis the second of that name being come
to Rome, Lewis. 2.
took the Scepter and Imperial Crown at her hands, with S. Peter's blessing.
In doing whereof, this whore of Babylon showed her self to have that power,
that she made Kings subject unto her. In her time Ethelwolphus king of England
gave cowardly the tenth part of his Kingdom to the Clergy and Monks (as
Horeden says) and his son Ethelbaldus espoused Judith his mother in law,
his fathers widow now dead. But whilst this Pope was in his estate, she was
got with child by a Chaplain of hers a Cardinal, who knew well of what Sex
she was. And as she went on Procession solemnly to the Church of Lateran, she
brought forth this child gotten in whoredom, betwixt the Collosse and the
Church of S. Clement, in the midst of Rome in the public street, in the
presence of all the people of Rome, and died in the same place, as she
delivered her child, the year of our Lord, 857. Because of such a fault, as
to bring forth a child in a common street, she was deprived of all honor
accustomably done to Popes, and buried without any Papal Pomp.

Here thou may see (Reader) how the Roman Church cannot err, after they
have caused a Mass of the holy Ghost to be sung. This Act alone certainly
does so evidently show that it is the seat of the great whore, and the mother
of all whoredoms, that there is no Apelles whatsoever that can better paint
her in her colors.

But to the end that Popes and anointed Fathers may seem to detest such a
sin, they turn from that street, as from a place which they much suspect,
because of the evil luck. Functius makes no doubt so say that this was
permitted of God, that this woman should be created Pope: and withal, that she
should be an harlot publicly proved, because in these times she made kings
subjects unto her, (as Ethelwolphus and Alfredus were in England) that they
might acknowledge Antichrist for their king. For God in this Papesse harlot
would manifest to the world this whore of Babylon, whereof the holy Ghost has
foretold, to the end the faithful I might take heed of her. But to the end
those good Fathers should no more fall into such an inconueniency, they have
ordained that a Deacon should handle their privy parts in an holied Chair, to
the end he may be known whether he be a man or no. But now whilst they be
Cardinals, and before they be chosen Popes, they engender so many bastards,
that none can doubt if they be males, neither is there any more need of so holy
a ceremony.

Lotharie now old, having divided his kingdom to his children, and made
himself a Monk (as is said) died the year 855.

Lewis, second of that name, the son of Lotharie, Lewis. 2.
(unto Italy and the Empire) was a kind man, and one that feared God. He
reigned nineteen years, and died the year, 874.

Benet Pope, third of that name, a Roman, ruled at Rome about three years.
This man when he was chosen Pope, Benet. 3.
received the office weeping, taking God to witness that he was not meet for
such a charge. He was three days in fasting and prayer, desiring the Lord to
give him grace well to govern the Church. Sup. Chron. Naucler.

The Emperors Ambassadors came and confirmed his election.

He visited the diseased, nourished the poor, comforted the desolate, and
defended Widows and Orphans. Supp. Chron.

He ordained that the Pope by his corporal presence, should honor the
obsequies of a Bishop, Priest, and Deacon. Boniface Simoneta. And commanded
all the Clergy to assist the Funerals of a Pope. R. Barns.

He was deposed from his Papacy by the conspiracy of certain wicked persons:
and a Cardinal called Annastatius, A Pope deposed, and after restored.
usurped the seat: but after, he was rejected and sent to prison, and Benet
was restored by the Emperors Ambassadors. Chron. Sigeb.

The English men came into France about this time, and wasted it. Chron. Eusebius.

Nicholas Pope, the first of that name, a Roman, Nicholas. 1.
ruled at Rome about ten years: or after Nauclerus seven

He was esteemed so holy, that after S. Gregory the great, there was found
none comparable to him.

He was created Pope in his absence, and placed in the Apostolic seat against
his will. R. Barns.

He builded the Temple or Church of the Virgin Marie, which men call Lanoue.
The same.

He made many decrees, and amongst others, he ordained that that Emperors and
secular Princes should be rejected from the Counells of the Church, unless
there were some question of Faith. Did. 91. Cap. Vbinam. Item, that secular
men should not judge the life of Clerks. Did. 28. Cap. Consulendum. Item,
that it should not be lawful for any to prejudice or contradict his judgment,
neither to reprehend his sentence and opinion, nor to judge of his judgment.
9. q. 3. Patet. Item, that the Pope may not be bound nor unbound by any secular
power, because he is called God. Did. 96. Cap. Satis euidenter. Item, that
Bishops ought not to go on warrefare, but occupy themselves in Prayers and
Orisons. 23. quest. 8. Cap. Reprehensible. Item, that hone should assist at the
Mass of a married Priest. Did. 32. Cap. Nullus. Item, he commanded to take
the Sacraments even of such Priests as were of wicked life, if they be not
rejected of Bishops, or excommunicated for some notorious crime. 11. quest. 8.
Cap. Sciscitantib. Item, he would that the decrees of his predcessors and
their Epistles, should obtain every where virtue and authority.

By his authority the Sequences were newly added and sung at Mass, at the
solicitation of Norgerus Abbot of S. Gall; who after was Bishop of Liege.
Abb.Trit.

He writ a long and very rude Epistle unto Michael Emperor of Constantinople,
in mainteinance of his Apostolic Primacie.

He ordained that no secular Prince should presume to usurp things belonging
unto Priests.

Lotharie excommunicated.
He excommunicated Lotharius, brother of the Emperor Lewis, because he kept
two wives, Theoberge and Galdrada, and sent a writing against him to the
Bishops of France, Almaine, and Italy. 2. quest. 1. Cap. Scelus. Item, to
Charles le Chauue, Uncle of the said Lotharie, 2. quest. 1. cap. An non.
Moreover, he excommunicated and deprived of their dignities, the Arch-bishoppe
of Treuens Theogaldus, and the Arch-bishoppe of Coloigene Gontarius, because
that consenting to the divorce, they maintained and defended the said Lotharie,
9. quest. 3. cap. Precipue. cap. Thegaldum. Whereupon Lotharie seeing himself
accused, and also that they proceeded against him by excommunication, he took
again Theberge his wife, and rejected Galdrada: but straight after he again
forsook his wife and called again Galdrada, and after could never be separated
from her for any correction. Naucler.

John Archbishop of Rauenna, meaning to maintain the ancient liberty of
Rauenna, which Constantine and Justinian the two Emperors, and Leo the second
Pope, had taken from them, was cited to appear at Rome, and because he
appeared not, he was deprived of his dignity. The said Archbishop went to the
Emperor and besought him to entreat the Popes license to go to Rome to
defend his cause without danger: which the Pope granted at the Emperors
request. The Archbishop admitted to plead his cause before many Prelates,
confessed himself guilty of Treason toward the Pope, and therefore demanded
mercy and pardon of all them which were present. The Pope received him into
grace upon certain conditions: namely that in full Sinode he should purge
himself of heresy. That each year he should go to Rome: That he should
cease consecrating of Bishops although they were Canonically elected, unless
it were by the authority of the Pope granted by his Letters. That he should
change nothing of Ecclesiastical goods without the Popes license, under pain
of excommunication.

The Bishop of Strasburge called Ratholdus, otherwise Radulphus, sent to Rome a
Priest of his Diocese, convicted to have slain his mother: unto whom although
there was enjoined hard penance, yet the Pope permitted him to keep his wife
with him, to avoid the danger of fornication. See 33. quest. 2. chap. Latorem.
and Renamus in the annotations upon on Tertullian, in the end.

But this Pope Nicholas made great haste to publish constitutions and decrees
touching the singlenes and continency of Clerks, but he could obtain nothing
therein. A Bishop also of Aspurge in Almaigne, called Huldric, greatly resisted
the said decrees, and writ an Epistle to Pop: Nicholas, which is worthy wholly
to be here inserted, to confound the Popish error of the singlenes of Priests.
I have therefore translated it word by word from his Latin original, as
follows.

One Epistle of Huldric Bishop, to Pope Nicholas.
Huldric Bishop only in name, as a son promises and bears love, and as a
servant fear to Nicholas his Lord, Father and vigilant Pastor of the holy
Roman Church. Father and Lord, after I knew thy Decrees made upon the
singlenes of Priests, lately brought unto me, to be far from discretion, a
fear vexed me with a sadness. I say fear, because it is commonly said that
the sentence of the Pastor, be it just or unjust, is to be feared. I was also
afraid that the weak Auditors of the scripture (which sildome obey a just
sentence, yea often cast it off as if it were unjust) will not bind themselves
upon commandment unto an error, or an importable transgression, for the
pleasure of his Pastor.

On the other side, heaviness and compassion moved me: For I see not by what
means the members can be guarded, when the head is detained with so grievous a
malady. For what thing is more grievous, or more worthy of compassion
toward all the Church, then when the Bishop of the Seat (unto whom
appertains the examination of all the Church) withdraws himself, and
straieth, yea though never so little from holy discretion? Assuredly thou art
not a little out of the way when thou would that Clerks (whom thou
should admonish to keep chastity of marriage) should be compelled by
violence and imperious force, to keep themselves continent.

For is not this violence, yea even after the common judgment of all that have
knowledge, when any is constrained to keep a particular Decree against the
Institution of the Gospel and doctrine of the holy Ghost?

And seeing there are many examples both of the old and new Testament, which
teach (as thou know) an holy discretion, I beseech it may not be grievous to
thy Fatherhood, if of many I bring some few in this my writing.

The Lord in the old Testament has constituted and ordained marriage for
Priests: and we never read that after he forbad it.

He says well in the Gospel, That some are chaste which make themselves
chaste for the kingdom of heaven: Math. 19. verse. 11.
but he adds, that all men understand not this word. He that can comprehend
it, let him comprehend it. And therefore the Apostle says, As for virgins I
have no commandment of the Lord: 1. Cor. 7. verse. 25.
but I only give counsel. Which counsel yet all cannot (as thoa may
consider) comprehend, after the sentence of the Lord. Thou feast
notwithstanding many to whom this sentence of the Gospel is pleasant, and
flatter themselves, being more willing to please men then God: and under a
false appearance of chaslitie, commit many great and enormious sins; do
subborne and corrupt other men's wives: and which is more, do not abhor to lie
with Males, and with brute Beasts. And to the end the estate of the Church
should not be so wasted and corrupted with such a pollution, infection, and
contagious a pestilence, the Apostle S. Paul commands and faith: To avoid
fornication, 1. Cor. 7. verse. 2.
let each man have his wise. But hypocrites corrupt this sentence, and say
falsely that it only appertains to Lay people. And yet they make no
difficulty nor conscience, in whatsoever holy order they be constituted, to
abuse other men's wives. And all those (which we cannot see without weeping) are
abandoned to the aforesaid sins and enormities: surely they understand not
the scripture. And because they have too rudely pressed the breast thereof, in
lieu of milk they have drunk blood. For this sentence of the Apostle, namely:
Let each one have his wife: excepteth no person but him that has the gift of
continency, or him who has purposed to persevere in his virginity after the
Lord. Wherefore (o reverend Father) it shall be your part to see that whosoever
either with hand or mouth has made a vow of continency, and afterward would
forsake it, should either be compelled to keep his vow, or else by lawful
authority should be deposed from his order. An to bring this to pass, ye shall
not only have me, but all other of my order to be helpers unto you. But ye you
may understand that such who know not what a vow mean, are not to be violently
compelled thereunto, hear what the Apostle says unto Timothy. A Bishop says
he, must be irreprehensible, the husband of one wife. Which setence least you
should turn and apply only to one only Church, mark what he infers after.
He that knows not (says he) how to rule his own house and family, how
should he rule the Church of God? And likewise the Deacons (says he) let them
be the husbands of one wife, which have knowledge to govern their own house
and children. And this wife how she is wont to be blessed of the Priest you
understand sufficiently I suppose by the decrees of holy Siluester the Pope.
This decree is contrary to the Bishops and Prelates in Queen Mary's days.
To these and such other holy sentences of the scripture, agrees also he, that
is the writer of the Rule of the Clergy, writing after this manner. A Clarke
must be chaste and continent, or else let him be coupled in the bands of
Matrimony, having one wife. Whereby it is to be gathered, that the Bishop
and Deacon are noted infamous and reprehensible, if they be divided in more
women then one: Otherwise if they do forsake one, under the pretense of
Religion, both they together, as well the Bishop as the Deacon, be there
condemned by the Canonical sentence, which says; Let no Bishop or Priest
forsake his own wife, under the color and pretense of Religion: If he do
forsake her, let him be excommunicate: and if he so continue, let him be
discharged. S. Augustine also a man of discreet holiness, says in these
words; There is no offense so great or grievous, but it is to avoid a greater
evil. Furthermore we read in the second book of the Tripartite History, that
when the Council of Nice going about to establish the same decree, would needs
enact, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, after their consecration, either
should abstain utterly from their own wives, or else should be deposed: Then
Pathuntius (one of the holy Martyrs of whom the Emperor Maximus had put out
the right eye and hockt his legs) rising up amongst them, withstood their
purposed decreement, confessing marriage to be honorable, and calling the bed
of matrimony chastity: and so persuaded the Council from making that law;
declaring thereby what occasion might come of it to themselves, and their
wives, of fornication. And thus much did Pathuntius being unmarried himself,
and the whole Council commending his sentence gave place thereto, and left the
matter free without compulsion, to the will of every man, to do therein as he
thought good. Notwithstanding there be some which gatte S. Gregory for their
defense in this matter, whose temeritie I laugh at, and ignorance I lament: For
they know not being ignorantly deceived, how dangerous the decree of this
heresy was, being made of S. Gregory, who afterward well revoked the same
with condign fruit of repentance. For upon a certain day as he sent to his
Fish-poole for Fish, More then 6000. heads of Infants found in the Popes Moate,
through the wicked decree Of the single life of Priests.
and did see more then six thousand Infants heads which were brought unto him
out of the same Ponde or Moate, did greatly repent himself of the Decree
before made touching the single life of Priests, which he confessed to be the
cause of that so lamentable a murder: And so purging the same with hearty
repentance, altered again the things he had decreed before, commending that
Council of the Apostle which says; That it is better to marry then to burn.
Adding moreover himself thereunto and saying; It is better to marry then give
occasion of death. Peradventure if those men had red with me this which so
happened, I think they would not be so rash in their doing and judging,
fearing at the least the Lords commandment: Do not judge that ye be not
judged. And S. Paul says; Who art thou that iudgest an other man's servant?
Either he stands or falls to his own master, but he shall stand, for the
Lord is mighty and can make him stand. Therefore let your holiness cease to
compel and enforce those whom only you ought to admonish, least through your
own private commandment (which God forbid) you be found contrary, as well to
the old Testament as the new. For as S. Augustine says to Donatus, S.
Augustine to Donatus.
This is only that we do fear in your Justice, least (not for the
consideration of christian lenity, but for the greatness and greeuousnes of
transgressions committed) you be thought to use violence in the executing
punishment, which we only desire you (by Christ) not to do. For transgressions
are so to be punished, that the transgressors may repent their lives. Also an
other saying of S. Augustine we would have you to remember, which is this.
Nilfiat nocendi cupiditate, omnia aute^ charitate proficiendi, and nihil fiat,
crudeliter nihil inhumaniter. That is, let nothing be done through the charity
of profiting, neither let any thing be done cruelly, nor ungently. Item of the
same Augustine it is written: In the fear and name of Christ I exhort you,
which of you so ever have not the goods of this world, be not greedy to have
them. Such as have them, presume not too much upon them: For I say to have them
is not damnation, but if you presume upon them, it is damnation. If for the
having of them, ye shall seem great in your own sight, or if you do forget
the common condition of man through the excellency of any thing you have, use
therein due discretion therefore, tempered with moderation: which cup of
discretion is drawn out of that fountain of the Apostolic preaching which
says: Art thou loose from thy wife? do not seek to thy wife: Art thou bound
to thy wife? do not seek to be loosed from her. Where also it follows; Such
as have wives, let them be as though they had them not. And they that use the
world, let them be as not using it. Item, concerning the widow he says; Let
her marry to whom she will, only the Lord. What it is to marry in the Lord.
To marry in the Lord, is nothing else but to attempt nothing in contracting of
Matrimony, which the Lord does forbid. Jeremy says also, Trust not to the
words of lies, stain not the Temple of the Lord. The which saying of Jeremy,
Hierome expounding says thus. This may agree also and be applied to such
virgins as brag and vaunt of their virginity with an impudent face,
pretending chastity, when they have an other thing in their conscience. And
know not how the Apostle defines the virgin, that she should be holy in
body, and also in spirit. What a virgin is after the Apostle.
For what avails the chastity of the body, if the mind inwardly be
deflowred? Or if it have not the other virtues, which the Prophetical Sermon
does describe? The which virtues, for as much as we partly see to be in you,
and because we are not ignorant that this discretion (although neglected in
this part) yet in the other actions of your life to be kept honestly of you) do
not despair, but you will also soon amend the little lack which is behind.
And therefore with as much gravity as we can, we cease not to call upon you to
correct and amend this your negligence. For although touching our common
calling, a Bishop is greater then a Priest, yet Augustine being less then
Jerome, (notwithstanding the good correction proceeding from the lesser to the
greater) was not to be refused or disdained: especially when he which was
corrected, was found to strive against the truth to please men.

For as Saint Augustine says writing to Boniface, Augustine ad Bonifacium.
The Disputations of all men be they never so Catholic or approved persons,
ought not to be had in steed of the Canonical scriptures. So that we may
disprove or refuse (saving the honor and reverence which is due unto the^) any
thing that is in their writings, if there be any thing found contrary to the
truth. And what can be found more contrary to the truth then this? When as the
truth it self, speaking of continency, not of one only, but of all men
together (the number only excepted of them which have professed continency)
says: He that can take, let him take, Which saying, these men do turn and
say: He that cannot take, let him be accursed. And what can be more foolish
amongst men, the^ when any Bishop or Archdeacon run themselves headlong into
all kind of lust, adultery and Incest, yet shame not to say, that the chaste
marriage of Priests do stink before them? And as void of all compassion of true
righteousness, do not desire or admonish their Clerks or fellow servants to
abstain, but command and enforce them as servants, violently to abstain: unto
the which Imperious commandment or counsel of theirs, they add also this
filthy and foolish suggestion: The absurd and filchy saying of Papists.
saying that it is more honest, privily to have to do with many women, then
openly in the presence of many men, to be bound to one wife. Which truly they
would not say, if they were either of him, or in him which says: Woe be to
you Pharisees, who do all things before men. And the Psalmist, Because they
please men they are confounded: for the Lord has despised them. These be the
men who ought rather to persuade us to be ashamed to sin in his presence,
with whom all things are naked and discovered: rather the^ to seem pure and
neat in the presence of men. These men therefore although through their sinful
wickedness deserve no counsel of godliness to be given them, yet we not
forgetting our humanity, cease not to give them counsel by the authority of
Gods word, which seeks all men's salvation, saying: Thou hipocrite, cast first
the beam out of thine own eye: and then thou shall see clearly to pluck the
Mote out of thy brothers eye.

Moreover this also we desire thee to attend what the Lord says of the
adulterous woman: Which of you that is without sin, let him cast the first
stone against her. As though he would say; If Moses bid you, I also bid you.
But yet I require you that you be competent Ministers and executors of the
law: Take heed what you add thereunto: take heed also I pray you what you are
your selves. For if as the scripture says thou well consider thy self, thou will never defame nor detract from an other.

Gregorius.
Moreover, it is also signified unto us, that some there be of them which (when
they ought like good shepherds to give their lives for the Lords flock) yet
are puffed up with such pride, that without all reason they seem to rent and
tear the Lords flock with whippings and beatings. Whose unreasonable doings
S. Gregory bewailing thus. Quid fiat de onibus, quando pastores Lupi fiunt?s
That is, what shall become of the sheep, when Pastors themselves be Wolves?
But who is overcome but he which exercises cruelty? Or who shall judge the
persecutor, but he which gave patiently his back to stripes? And this is the
fruit which comes to the Church by such persecutors, also which comes to
the Clergy by such spiteful handling of the Bishops, or rather Infidels. For
why may you not call them Infidels of whom S. Paul thus speaks and writes to
Timothy; 2. Timo. 3.
That in the latter days there shall certain depart from the faith, give heed
to spirits of error, and doctrine of devils, of them which speak false
through hypocrisy, and having their consciences marked with an hot Iron,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats. etc. And this is
if it be well marked, the whole handful of Darnel and Cockle, growing amongst
the Corn: yea this is the accomplishment of all madness, that whilst they of
the Clergy be compelled to relinquish the company of their own lawful
wives, they become afterward fornicators and adulterers with other women, and
wicked ministers of other sinful filthiness. These be they which bring unto
the Church of God this Heresy (as blind guides leading the blind) that it
might be fulfilled which the Psalmist speaks of, as foreseeing the errors of
such men, and accursing them after this manner. Let their eyes be blinded that
they see not, and bow down always their back. For as much then (o
Apostolical Sir) as no man which knows you, is ignorant, that if you through
the light of your discretion had understood and seen, what poisoned pestilence
might have come unto the Church through the sentence of your decrees, they
would never have consented to the suggestions of certain wicked persons.
Wherefore we counsel you by the fidelity of our due subjection, that with all
diligence you would put away so great slander from the Church of God, and
through your discreet discipline you would remove the Pharasicall doctrine
from the Flock of God: So that this only Sunamite of the Lords (using no more
adulterous husbands) do not separate the holy people and the kingly
Priesthood from her Spowse Christ Jesus, through an irreconciliable
diuorcement: seeing that no man without chastity (not only in the virgins
state, but also in the state of Matrimony) shall see our Lord Jesus, who with
the Father and the holy Ghost lives and reigns for ever. Amen.

This Epistle, shows us as it were with a finger, that in all times the truth
of the Lord has found a passage through the midst of the Furies of this
world, raising up faithful Ministers to oppose themselves against the horrible
discipations of the adversaries.

The Sarrasins came from Affricke into Italy, unto the Territory of Beneuent,
before whom went the Emperor Lewis the second, being aided by his brother
Lotharie, who dyed in the way at Plaisans. Pal. Floren.

The King of Bulgaria received the Faith, made himself a Monk, and left the
kingdom to his son, who rejected the Faith: In so much as his Father came
out of the Monastery, and went against him in battle, and having obtained
victory put out his sons eyes, and held him in prison, giving his kingdom
to his younger son, and after returned to his Monastery. Naucler. and Sigeb.

The body of Saint Innocent Pope, was transported from Rome into Saxony, by
the Duke of Saxe. Chron. Sigeb.

Michael Emperor of Constantinople, made a fellow and companion of his
Empire, one called Basile, a Macedonian, a puissant man, by whom afterward he
was slain. Nauclerus.

Lewis son of Lewis de Bonaire, king of Germany, Uncle of Lewis 2. Emperor,
obtained a victory against the Cleuois, and caused their Dukes eyes called
Rastrix, to be put out, because he had falsified his faith. Naucler.

After the death of Nicholas Pope, the seat was empty eight years, seven
months, and nine or ten days, as some say. Abb. Vrsp.

The Britons were vanquished of the French, under Charles le Chauue, king of
France. Naucler.

The Normains being overcome, received the faith. Naucl.

The Country of Holland was erected into an Earldom or County, and
Flaunders likewise, whereof Baudwin was the first Count.

Adrain. 2.
Adrian Pope, second of that name, the son of Talarus Rome five years. The
Emperor having sent his Ambassadors for the Popes election, the Clergy and
Roman people, attended not their coming, but usurping the authority of
choosing, proceeded to the election. The Ambassadors mal-contented, the subtle
Romanists laid the fault upon the common people, as hard to repress and
appease, being stirred. They satisfied with this excuse, saluted Adrian with
the name of Pope. Platina. R. Barns.

Soon after came Letters from the Emperor, signifying that the election
pleased him, and because strangers could not know the quality of him which
should be elected, he granted the election to the Citizens. Naucler. and Cor.
Abb.

Adrian then ordained that no Layman should thrust himself into the election
of the Pope. Naucler. and 63. Dict. Cap. Nullus.

He sent three Legates to the Bulgarians, who were newly converted, namely,
Siluester, Leopard, and Dominic, to ordain the affairs of that Church, after
the Roman fashion: but after persuaded of the Grecians, they cast off the
Latin Priests, Division betwixt the Latin and Greek Church.
and received the Greeks: which afterward engendered great hatred betwixt the
Latin and Greek Church, and all the division of the aforesaid Churches came
only for the Primacie, and for the diversity of Ceremonies. Robert Barns, and
Nauclerus.

Edmond the last King of the East Angles, was slain by the Painims of
Denmark, Anno. 871. and was Canonized a Martyr.

Alfredus, or Aluredus, the 7. English king, was crowned by the Pope Adrian.
Polydore. Lib. 5.

The Grecia^s used bells by the benefit of the Venetia^s. Sabell.

About this time a Council was held at Constantinople, which was called the
eight general Council. Adrian sent thither his Legates, Donatus Bishop of
Ostia, Stephen, Nephesin, and Marinus, a Deacon of the Roman Church. R. Barns.
Ignatius who unjustly was deprived of his Patriarchall dignity, was restored:
and Photin (some call him Phocas) was rejected and excommunicated. Sabellicus
in his 9. book. 1. cap. It was there ordained that they of Bulgaria should be
subject to the Roman church, the Emperor Basilius contradicting it.

Here it was also ordained, that no Layman should be admitted to the election
of a Pope, an Archbishop, a Patriarch, or Bishop, but that the Bishop should be
chosen by the Clergy, of the Chapter. R. Barns.

Adrian excommunicated Lotharius King of Lorraine, brother Lewis, for his
adultery: but coming to Rome as he returned from the war against the
Sarrasins, (as some say Nauclerus alleges) to excuse himself, received the
Communion with his Princes: but they all died within the year. And the King
Lotharius himself died in the way in the Town of Plaisance. Fascic. Temp.
Chron. Vrsperg. and Sigeb.

In Lombardie nigh Brize, it reigned blood three days Nauclerus, and the
Chron. Sigeb. And in France there was a great multitude of Graffe-hoppers with
six wings, Chales. 2.
five feet, and two teeth, which destroyed all grass, herbs and Trees. They
were driven into the English Seas, by the force of exceeding great winds: and
again by an other wind they were returned upon the Sea sands, upon the
putrefaction whereof came such a pestilence, that great multitudes of men dyed
says Sigeb. Naucler. says that the third part of men died.

This is not Friar Scotus.
John Scotus, a learned man, was called from France into to England, by
Alfredus, King there, who founded the School at Oxenford, where the said
Scotus governed: but after making himself a Monk, he was slain by the Monks
of that covent as he was teaching: he was cunning in the Greek tongue, and
translated into Latin the Hierarchy of S. Denis. Naucler.

John 9.
John Pope, 9. of that name a Roman, ruled at Rome ten Suppl. Chron. being a
Cardinal Deacon, he wrote Saint Gregory's life in four volumes.

Lewis the Emperor being in Italy dyed, having reigned 19. years, and was
buried at Milaine. His successor was Charles the second of that name,
surnamed, le Chauue, the son of Lewis le Debenaire, of his second wife
Judith, and uncle of the dead Lewis the second. After he was King 36. years,
he heard say that the Emperor his Nephew was dead, and incontinent went to
Rome to receive the Crown of the Empire, having ordained Boso his wives
brother, King of Province.

Pope John in a small time crowned three Emperors, and after gave occasion of
great contention and war. First he crowned Charles le Chauue, who two years
after he came into Italy to drive the Sarrasins out of the kingdom of Naples,
was taken with a Fever at Mantone, where he dyed, being poisoned by his
Physician a Jew, called Zedechias, the year 878. having been King 36. years,
and Emperor two years, and was buried at Verseile: and after (as some say)
was transported to S. Denis. The Pope understanding of his death, would that
his son Lewis le Begne should be chosen Emperor. But the Romans
contradicted it, and would that Charles the third surnamed le Gros, son of
Lewis king of Germany it should be chosen.

The Pope remaining still in his opinion was sent to prison: Lewis le Begne.
but he escaped by the help of his friends, and fled into France, where he
remained a year, first in Arles, and after at Lions: Finally, some say at Troy
in Champaigne, where he assembled the Council of the French Church, and there
created and crowned Lewis le Begne Emperor, and saluted him Augustus.

In the mean while Charles the third was at Rome and kept it. He sent for the
Pope, who returned to Rome, Charles. 3.
and pronounced, that the said Charles might dwell at Rome, and crowned him
Emperor: And so they reigned together two years. Finally, Lewis was poisoned,
and Charles reigned alone 12. years. Plat. Florent. and Robert Barns.

This Pope at the same Council, gave to the Flemings a Bishop in Tornay.

Lewis le Begne, two years after he was crowned in France, 1. of that name,
died at Champaigne, and left his wife great with child, who after brought
forth Charles le simple. Nauclerus.

Charles called le Gros, Charles le Gros.
the son of Lewis King of German, being at Rome, occupied the Empire and
reigned alone. And by him the Empire or the French men returned to the Naucler.
and R. Barns. and came not at the wish of the French, nor according to the
imaginations and subtle devices of the Pope.

This Pope John, ordained that such as offended in Sacrilege quest. 4. Chap.
Quisquis.

John le Maire says that this Pope was a cruel man, and disgraded Formosus,
Bishop of Portensis, which was an occasion of many mischiefs. Fasci. temp.
Some Historiographers say, it was for that he was the cause that the said John
Pope was imprisoned at Rome.

Finally he was poisoned, or as some say, slain with the blow of a Mallet,
upon a conspiracy made against him. Chron. Abb. Vrsp. R. Barns.

Pascasius about this time was Abbot in Saxony; he writ a Book of the
Euchariste, and most men followed his opinion, which pleased the Schoolmen
more then the opinion of Johannes Scotus, Charles le Gross.
or of Bertramus, which were rejected, as shall be told in his place.

Martin. 2.
Martin, second of that name, a French man, by evil arts entered into the
Popedom. Supple. Chron. and governed a year and five months, before he was
called Marin.

Betwixt Martin Pope second of that name, and Adrian Sigebert and Visperge,
place Agapetus: but other Historiographers make no mention of them.

Adrian. 3.
Adrian Pope, the third of that name, ruled at Rome a year and three months.
He ordained that from thenceforth the Emperors should not meddle with the
election of the Pope: And that his aurhoritie therein should be no more any
thing requisite, but that the election of the Clergy should be free. Did.
62. chap. Nullus chap. Adrianus. He made this Law whilst the Emperor was
occupied in the war against the Normains, which then endured not long. For
Leo the eight, Pope, did ordain clean contrary, as shall be said afterward.

The order of Clugny, Berno, and Odo.
Platina says here, that William Pyon Duke of Aquitane, and Count Auerne,
founded the first Monastery of the order of Clugny, under the rule of Saint
Benet, and made Berno Abbot there, after whom Odo succeeded, who having been a
Musician at Tours, came to be a Monk at Clugny. Chron. Sigeb.

The Emperor Charles became jealous of his wife for the great familiarity
she had with Luitwaldus Bishop of Verseil, who in a full assembly protested
that he never had her company. She notwithstanding accepted the divorce, and
withdrew her self unto the covent d'Aulaui, where she made an end of her
days. Sigeb. and P. Phrig. 9.

At this time the Normains Northern people did great hurt in France, after
they had spoiled Artois, Cambray, Liege, Brabant, Gelders, and Treuers, etc.

Charles being not able to resist them, finally agreed with them, in giving in
marriage the daughter of Lotharie his cousin germain called Gille, to Geffrey
or Rotfrid their King, and assigned for her dowry the Country of Frise, upon
condition he should be baptized. Notwithstanding those Normains afterward
afflicted France, and besieged the City of Paris, as shall be said.

The subjects of Charles le Gros grieved at his cowardlinesse, because he let
France be so outraged by the violence and cruelty of the Normains, and that
also he had forsaken his wife a good woman, they deposed him as unworthy and
unprofitable for the government of the Empire, and gave him a Curator named
Arnulfe, or Arnould, Curator.
who was his brothers son. Some say that Charles le Gros finished his days
in great poverty, in the Abbey of the rich Angel, called in Alemand Richenna,
nigh unto Constans by the Lake, The end of the Emperor Charles.
without any great honor of Sepulcher. Others say he was strangled by his own
people.

This is a glass for great Princes of the world, and an excellent pattern of
the human condition.

Arnulphus the^ his Nephew by his brother Carloman Duke of France, Oriental
(which then was called the Teutonique Kingdom, comprehending Bauier, Sorabe,
Saxe, Turinge, Frise, and Lorraine) was made Emperor. He was a valiant man,
and repressed the Moranians and Slauonians, after he made strong war upon
the Normains, nigh the River of Mense.

Stephen Pope, fifth of that name, Stephen. 5.
ruled 6. years and ten months, in the Roman seat. It was in his time that
the tale of S. Michael in the Mount Bargamus in Pouile is said to be true. The
sign of the Cross.
There was one of his Decretals to Hubert Archbishop of Manyeance. 2. G. v. c.
Consuluisti. ordained the song of Cross, de consecrat, 6. did. v.c. Nunquid.

Odo 31. King of France, reigned nine years. He was Tutor unto Charles le
Simple, and crowned King to resist the Normains which then vaunted they would
destroy all France.

Arnulphus.
We must not here forget that Odo brought unto France Charles, the sixth king of
France.

Formosus.
Formosus Pope, before Bishop Portuensis was appointed Pope, and ruled five
years and six months, against the will of some Romans, which pretended that
Cardinal Sergius was chosen. But in the mean while Sergius conceived a
mortal hatred against Formosus, and went into France. And therefore there was
a great Schism, which was the ninth, cruel and scandalous, Schism. 9.
and endured a long time, as shall be hereafter seen.

This Formosus bought the Papacy (as John le Maire says) during which time he
did nothing of account, unless some will say he whitened the Church of S. Peter.
Suppl. Chron.

He called Arnulfe to Rome, and consecrated and crowned him Emperor, who
afterward beheaded the chief enemies of Formosus. Chron. Abb. Vrsp.

In this time was held a Council at Vienna in Dauphine, where two Cardinals of
the Roman Sea, Paschal and John, presidented: and yet was it lawful for
Priests to espouse wives if they were maids and not widows, to shun bigamy.
John le Maire in the second and third part of Schisms and the Councels of the
Church.

The Priests then had power to marry in France, almost nine hundredth years
after the Apostles.

Arnulphe subjected Italy and Burgongne.

Benafice 6.
Boniface 6. of that name, a Tuscane borne, ruled at Rome

There was a sharp and great famine in this time. Vrsperge.

There fell a great debate for the body of S. Denis Ariopagite. The Almaines
said it was transported by the Emperor Arnulphe, into the Town of
Reinsbourge, and there was showed a Bull of Pope Lewis the 10. approving that
translation: but the Chronicles of France say the contrary, that it is in the
Abbey of S. Denis in France.

Note again (Reader) the life of these Popes, from Formosus or from John the
9. which excommunicated the said Formosus, until Leo the 8. and consider the
sanctity of the Apostatike Sea, the contentions, aemulations, enuies,
ambitions, and persecutions. O unlucky time says Fascic. Temp.

This Pope gave three thousand years of true pardons to all Priests, Mess
denomine Jesus.
which devoutly should sing the Mess of the name of Jesus: that is, three
thousand years of true pardon for every Mass which should be sung with three
Sierges lighted. Missale Romans witnesses it.

Stephen Pope, 6. of that name, a Roman, Stephen. 6.
ruled a year and 4. months. R. Barns.

This Pope did evil recompense his predecessor Formosus, Anania. He by
Council cut off his ordinances. He caused his body to be drawn out of his
Tomb, and put upon it a Papal habit, and after took it off and put upon it
Lay-apparell: then finally he buried it in that habit. Platina. Naucler. and R.
Barns.

The Sarrasins of Affrike again occupied Sicile. Palen. Florent.

Stephen Pope, at the last repented his faults, and became a Monk. Supp. Chron.

Roman Pope, borne at Rome, reigned 3. or 4. months, Roman.
and 22. days, a seditious man, and contrary to his predecessor Stephen, for
he established the Acts and Decrees of Formosus, and ceased and annulled them
of Stephen, Naucler.

The intention of these Popes (says Suppl. Chron.) is to abolish the renown
one of an other.

The year of Christ, 900. or there abouts, Arnulphus Emperor being too
voluptuous and rebellious against the Clergy men, the Author of Suppl. of
Chron. says he was eaten with vermin. Sigibert says, that after long
sickness and languishment he died. He was carried and buried at Ratisbone in a
Monastery. Nauclerus. But Palmerius who added unto the Chron. of Eusebius,
says he died making war upon the Normanes. Others say he was poisoned the
12. year of his Empire, leaving his sons named Alnulphus, the wicked Duke of
Bauiers, and Lewis of an other wife, who succeeded in the Empire

After his death the Hungarians came into Germany, upon a people called
Marauani, or Morauians, which Arnolphe had already conquered by the help of the
Hungarians as is said, and put all to fire and sword.

Behold the fruit of calling the enemies of the Faith into Christendom, says
Abb. Visp.

Charles le Simple, son of Lewis le Begne, 13. king of France, reigned 27.
years. The Sea of Hist.

In his time the Danes and Normanes returned in greater companies then ever
they did, their Captain was called Roll, a cruel man, loving the effusion of
Christian blood. He burnt on a S. John's day the Church of Naules, and Martired
S. Guiniard, Bishop of the said place, before the Altar as he said Mass, and
after burnt the City of Angiers, of Tours, and many others. In Aquitaine they
destroyed Charlemaignes Palace, and ceased not to do infinite evils, until by
a near accord they had gotten a new habitation; that is to say, Neustria,
which of their own name they called Normandy, and Roll was called Robert or
Rubert, after he was baptized.

Lewis. 3.
Lewis Emperor, third of that name, the son of Arnolphe, Naucler.

The Hungarians made war in Baeieaire, unto which the the said Emperor Lewis
was made tributarie, and gave a great sum of silver to escape. Naucler. For
in pursuing his enemies which feigned to fly, he was surprised by Ambushes.
They to satisfy their rage, ran all over Almaine. Chron. Abb. Vrsp.

Theodorus. 2.
Theodorus Pope, second of that name, a Roman, reigned at Rome 20. or 22.
days, a seditious man, a very monster in nature, and wholly adversary unto
Stephen. Lewis. 3.
He received all such as before had been ordained by Formosus, and greatly
esteemed the favorers of the said Formosus. Naucler.

Who would not marvel that eight Popes should obtain in so little space the
Roman seat under the Emperor Lewis the third? that is in the space of 12.
years, says Naucler.

John Pope, 10. of that name, ruled at Rome two years and more. This also was
a very seditious monster, John. 10.
and revived contentions already buried: whereby there was great sedition and
tumult amongst the Roman people, because some maintained one side, some an
other: wherefore for fear he fled to Rauenna. Where he assembled a Council of
74. Bishops in the Emperor Lewis his presence, the King and Archbishops of
France, to confirm the ordinances of Pope Formosus, which before were rejected
by Stephen. In the said Council was all that disanulled which Pope Stephen had
practiced against Formosus; yea the ordinances of Stephen were burned. R.
Barns. and Sigeb.

Lewis the 3. was not crowned for the discention which then was in the Papacy:
and withal, that the Popes would not crown for Emperor such as were chosen
out of the country of Almain, but only such as came out of Lombardie. Palin.
and Supp. Chron.

Benet Pope, 4. of that name, a Roman, governed 3. years. Benet. 4.
Supp. Chron. and 4. months. Naucler. In those great troubles of his
predecessors, he did nothing worthy of memory, says Plat.

At this time in Italy, Calabria, and Pouille, the Sarrasins did infinite
mischiefs.

Leo 5. of that name, governed 40. days. Supp. Chron.

A Cardinal Priest his familiar, called Christopher, Leo. 5.
imprisoned Leo died of grief, seeing himself thus handled of him unto whom
he had done so much good.

In what authority is this Papal seat which is so easily usurped by a
private person, by force and faction in a moment? says Naucler.

Christopher. To be a Monk the refuge of the miserable.
Christopher Pope, ruled at Rome 7. months, as he acquired the Papacy, so
lost he it. For he was deposed and imprisoned. Some say he was constrained to
make himself a Monk, which was the only refuge of the miserable. For at this
time Churchmen being insolent and given to wickedness, were not sent to the
Isles: but for their disorders were detained and enclosed in strong Monasteries.
Naucler. and Chron. Abb.

Sergius then, third of that name, was Pope, and ruled seven years, Sergius. 3.
and three months: after some, eight years, and 15. or 16. days.

This was he, who in the election of Formosus was cast off, and who returning
into France, secretly returned into Rome and usurped the Popedom: yet fearing
that Christopher should work some treason, he caused him to be drawn out of
the Monastery, and put him in a common prison, and yet putting him in a
straighter prison, poorly and miserably he finished his days. Suppl. Chron.

The Western Empire divided.
The Occidentall Empire was at this time divided. For there was one Emperor in
Almaine, and an other in Lombardie. The first in Italy was Beringer, who made
a great Army against the Emperor Lewis the third, and gave him battle in
the Plain of Verone, and discomfited him; whose eyes afterward he caused to be
put out, so the Lombards for a time had the Empire by force.

A Monster represented the estate of that time.
A Monster was presented to Lewis the third, which had a dogs head, and all
the other members as a man. A figure of that time. For men were then without an
head, and as dogs barked one against an other: yea both the Popedom and
Empire were divided. Fasci. temp.

The Hungarians pilled and destroyed the Countries of Saxe and Turinge. Chro.
Abb. Vrsp. And from thence entered into Italy using the like cruelty. The^ was
there the Duke of Fornil, called Bere^ger, who usurped the title of the Empire
in Italy, and reigned 4. years: against whom, came the Emperor Lewis the
third. But he was betrayed by his people, Conrade. 1.
who in the night time took Berenger into the Town of Verone; In so much that
he was taken and had his eyes put out, so he dyed soon after. Thus the Empire
which had endured an hundredth and ten years in France since Charlemaigne,
was transported unto the Lombards. Chron. Sigeb. and Naucler.

Conrade first of that name, Duke of Franconia, was made Emperor after Lewis
the third, who deceased without a son, so that this Conrade is esteemed the
last of the race of Charlemaigne, which had the government of the Empire more
then an hundredth years. All the Great men of Germany did elect without
consent Otho Duke of Saxe: but Otho feeling himself old, excused himself, and
appointed them this Conrade, a magnanimous man, son of Conrade Earl of
Franconia and Hesset. And Arnold the wicked son of the Emperor Arnulphe, was
Duke in Bauiers. In the succession of Arnulphe aforesaid, there are amongst the
Historiographers, some uncertain things touching their genealogy.

But we have here set in order all such as descended of Charlemaigne, to show
the marvelous change in the greatest things of this world. Who can read them
without being ravished in admiration, when we consider the greatest Kingdoms
and dominations to flourish for a time, and in the end being mingled with
turbulent devotions, are in such sort debilitated and weakened, as they come to
nothing. Wherein we must acknowledge the admirable providence of God.

Charlemaigne the son of Pippin, left his son Lewis de Bonaire Emperor:
who had Lotharie Emperor: who had Lewis of Bauiers, King of Germany, who
brought under the Bohemians had Charles le Chauue Emperor. Lewis Emper. 1. of
that name. Lewis the young king of Germany, Franconia, and Turinge. Lewis
Emperor 3. of that name surnamed le Begue, which reigned but two years, had
Lothairie King of Austrasia called Lorraine. Charles le Gross, Emperor, who
took the Empire from Lewis le Begne. Charles le Simple. 30. King of France.
Charles king of Prouence. Carloman Duke of Bauiere, and of the kingdom the^
called Teutonique, had Arnulphe Emperor, who was father of Lewis Emperor, 3.
of that name; and of Conrade last Emperor of the race of Charlemaigne.

The Empire then of Germany was transported from the ligne of Charlemaigne to
Conrade, Duke of Franconia: but the kingdom of France remained certain years
in the house of Charlemaigne, seeing there was yet some remaining of the race
of Charles le Simple.

Anastasius. 3.
Anastasius Pope, 3. of that name, governed at Rome two Supp. Chron.

He bare himself honestly without committing any act worthy of reprehension.

Laudo. 1.
Laudo Pope, a Roman, ruled at Rome five or six months.

About this time the Venetians obtained a license and privilege of the
Emperor to beat money.

Hubert in Lorraine flourished now, and was made a Saint.

The Sarrasins destroyed Calabria, Ponuille, Beneuent, and other Regions of the
Romans. The Sea of Hist.

Beringer, second of that name, reigned in Italy 7. or 8. years. Beringer. 2.
Some say he was chased away the third year of his reign by Rodolphe, king of
Burgongne; and that the same Rodolphe having reigned three years, was after
also driven away by Hugues king of Arles.

John Pope, 11. of that name, John. 11.
before Archbishop of Rauenna, having been deposed by a popularie tumult, ruled
after at Rome 13. years and two months. Naucler.

He was Pope Sergius his son, and proved no better then his father, saving
he was a good soldier. For he chased the Sarrasins out of Calabria, with the
help of one called Alberic, Marquis of Tuscane. Finally, as the said John
gloried in his victory, attributing all by great insolency to his own
prowess, he stirred against himself the fury of his own soldiers, who
stiffled him to death. John le Maire. He had cast out of Rome the said Marquis
Albert, who to avenge himself of the Pope, brought the Hungarians into Italy,
which pilled and wasted all. Finally he was put to death by the Romans.

Henry, first of that name, Duke to Saxe, Henry. 1.
surnamed the Faulconer, son of Otho Duke of Saxe, who had refused the
Conrade his predecessor, who being sick in his bed, sent his brother Eberard
toward the said Henry, with the Mantle royal, the sword, the Lance, the
Diadem, and other Imperial ornaments, who found him at his pastime with his
Hawks, which was cause that he was called the Faulconer. For there he was
saluted Emperor. Nauclerus.

He made war against the Hungarians, Slauonians, and Bohemians.

The combat of Tournois was invented by him.

Hugues reigned in Italy ten years, whom Lotharie his son succeeded.

King Charles the Simple was by treason taken of Hubert,

Earl of Vermandois, and poisoned in the Castle of Peronne, where he died,
Henry. 1.
and was buried in the Church of S. Foursi. See the Sea of Histories.

Rodolphe Bourgongne, 31. King of France, reigned two years.

Before this time there were not so many degrees amongst Gentlemen and
Noblemen, nor so great diversity as there are at this. Dukes, Marquesses,
Counts, or Clerks, simple Counts and Knights, were rather names of offices,
then hereditarie Seigniories. For Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, or Counts,
were Governors of Countries and Lands: whereupon they were committed by
Emperors and Kings.

Duke.
Duke was a sovereign, chief, or head of soldiers, as may be seen by
ancient Letters.

Count or Earl.
Count or Earl, was a Judge and Goueruernour ordained in a certain Town or
Region; and so Germany was full of Countes: Lantgraues.
amongst which, some were called Lantgraues, that is to say, Countes of Regions
or Countries. Some Maruegraues, Marqusses. Palatins.
or Marquis: that is, Countes of certain Marshes or Countries. Some Countes de
Palatin, which were Governors of some Kingdom subiugated or conquered. This
may be seen in the second book of the Laws of the Lombards. Some were
governors of Bourgages, Bourgraues.
and so were named Bourgraues. The most auncientest name of dignity after
Kings and Princes, Baron.
is the name of Baron, which signifies Lord, whose sons were called young
Lords. And this say some was the estate of the Nobility before the Othons
reigned. After their time all things changed. For then Counts were made
hereditarie, and were lifted up above Barons, Marquesses,

Lewis 4. of that name, surnamed Vltramarin, 32. King of France, the son of
Charles le Simple, after his fathers imprisonment got with his mother Ogine,
toward his Uncle King of England: but as soon as he retutned, he was in
strife for the Kingdom with Rodulphe of Burgongne, who died about eight years
after at Auxerre, Anno. 937. and so Lewis reigned alone.

Leo Pope, Leo. 6.
sixth of that name, ruled at Rome 7. months and 15. days.

The Danes at this time were converted to the faith.

Stephen Pope, 7. of that name, a Roman, Stephen. 7.
ruled at Rome 2. years and 12. days. Supp. Chron.

The Duke of Bohemia Spireneus, received the Christian faith at the persuasion
of the Emperor Henry. Suppl. Chron.

John Pope, 12. of that name, a Roman, John. 12.
ruled at Rome 4. years, 10. months, and 15. days. Supp. Chron.

He did nothing worthy of memory, a coward, and is not numbered in the
Catalogue of Popes: after some Historiographers.

Lotharie the son of Hugues, reigned in Italy two years.

The Sarrasins in Italy took the town of Geans, and spoiled it. Naucler.

Berenger third, the Nephewe of Berenger the first, Berenger. 3.
reigned in Italy 11. years, with his son Adelbert.

In this place Histories are very confused.

The Emperor Henry the first dyed of the Palsy, the year of his age 60. and
of his Empire seventeen: having ordained

Otho the great his son, successor of the Empire, Otho the great.
by the consent of all the great and Noble men, who after was consecrated by
the Archbishop of Magunce, Hildebert. He Henry his elder brother, Giselbert
Duke of Lorraine his brother in law, and Eberhard Earl of Franconia: but he
drove them all away, and reduced all under his obedience.

Wencelaus Prince of Bohemia, Wencelaus.
was slain by his brother Boislans upon ambition to reign. But Otho revenged
the death of the said Wencelaus, making war upon Boislans, which endured
fourteen years: Otho the great.
and finally having vanquished him, he brought the Country into his obedience.
Chron. Sigeb. and Supp. Chron.

Leo. 7.
Leo Pope, 7. of that name, a Roman, ruled at Rome three years, 6. months,
and 10. days. Supp. Chron.

Anthropomorphites.
The heresy of Anthropomorphites (which say that God has a corporal form)
was at this time renewed. Rotherius Bishop of Verone, writ against them.

Stephen. 8.
Stephen Pope, eight of that name, an Almaine, or a Rome three years, four
months, and 12. days. R. Barns. Some say he was murdered by certain Romans
in a sedition: In so much as he was never publicly seen. Chron. Abb.

France was afflicted by an horrible pestilence and by inward contentions. The
faction and puissance of Hugues of Paris, troubled King Lewis exceedingly.

Martin. 3.
Martin Pope, 3. of that name, a Roman, ruled 3. years, Supp. Chron.

Agapetus. 2.
Agapetus Pope, second of that name, a Roman, a magnanimous Rome 9. years, 7.
months, and 10. days. Supp. Chron.

He called again the Emperor Otho to Rome, against Berenger.

Berenger. 4.
Berenger 4. the 7. Emperor of the Lombards, reigned 13. years. The Sea of
Histories.

The Hungarians again in Italy. Chron. Abb. Vrsp.

John. 13.
John Pope, 13. of that name, a Roman, ruled 9. years and three months.

His father called Alberic, seeing himself one of the greatest power at Rome,
caused all the noblest and principallest rulers of the City of Rome, to
promise and swear that after the death of Pope Agapetus, they should elect his
son Octauian. Which promise was kept, and he was called John.

This Pope was so excessiuely given to lechery, that he maintained a public
stews: for the shame whereof, some Cardinals writ to the Emperor Otho, that he
would remedy the public scandal and infamy which the Church then suffered:
They were called Cardinals, as chief of the Clergy.
and that it was needful he should in haste come to Rome. As soon as the Pope
heard of this news, he caused the nose of a Cardinal a Deacon called John to
be cut off, being the principal councellor herein: he commanded also that
the hand of an other Cardinal a Subdeacon called also John to be cut off,
because he writ the Letters. When the Emperor understood that for no
admonition the Pope would amend, he caused him to be deposed, with note of
infamy.

Otho was crowned by him, after he having sworn that he would exalt the
Roman Church and the Pope, and that in nothing he would hurt him: as more at
large is contained. Did. 63.100. Tibi domino. Otho remained a certain time at
Rome after his coronation, and admonished this Pope to change and amend his
wicked life, whereof he was blamed. Otho departing, came against Berenger his
enemy. Albert the son of Berenger, who with his father retired at Otho his
coming, seeing Otho departed, came to Rome, and with the Pope complotted
against the Emperor. Two Cardinals advertised Otho of this conspiracy, and
of the Popes wickedness. Otho then returned to Rome, and the Pope fled, after
he had revenged himself of the two Cardinals. Otho being at Rome, caused the
Pope to be thrice called, commanding him to return and fear nothing, and he
should be in surety: but he would not return. Wherefore he caused a Council
to be held, wherein the Pope was condemned and deposed for his evil life. And
there was substituted in his place, Leo a Roman, 8 of that name, Leo. 8.
but soon after the Emperors departure, the seditious and inconstant Romans
drove away Leo, and recalled the aforesaid John, receiving him in great pomp.
Leo got him to the Emperor, who fearing to molest the Church with a greater
schism, permitted the said John to hold his seat. But finally being
surprised in adultery, he was slain by the woman's husband. Robert Barns.
Chron. Sigeb. Nauclerus. and John Maire.

Confer (good Reader) these Popes with the first, and see the difference.

Venice a memorable thing. The Duke of Venice, Peter of Candie, was besieged in
his Ducall Palace, and the Venetians angry against him, set fire on the
Palace: in so much that not only the Palace burnt, but also the Church of S.
Mark nigh unto it, and more then three hundredth houses about it. And as the
Duke thus pressed retired into a secret place of the Palace which was not yet
touched with fire: the people altogether enraged having found him, holding yet
his only son (a young Infant) betwixt his arms, Cruelty of the Venetians.
and requiring upon both his knees and in great pity the mercy of the
people: they were not content most cruelly to murder him with his innocent
son and wife, but after their deaths the bodies of the father and son were
carried unto the butcherie and hewn in pieces, and after cast unto dogs.
John le Maire. and Sup. Chron.

The cause of this massacre was, because he had constrained his first wife to
make her self a Nun, to the end he might with color espouse the sister of
Hugo, Marquis of Hetruria, of whom he had already had one son. Wherefore
having married her, the Allies and kinsfolks of his said wife, stirred the
people unto sedition, and so they perished unhappily. Supp. Chron.

About this time flourished Windichinne, a Monk of Corney in Saxony.

Smaragdus Abbot of S. Michael, of the order of S. Benet, wrote the book
called Diadema monachorum, a right Monkish book. Item upon the rule of S.
Benet, and upon the Psalter another: two upon the Evangelists and Epistles.
Item, one of diverse Sermons. Trit. Abb. Spauher.

Benet. 5.
Benet Pope, fifth of that name, a Roman, ruled (after Nauclerus) Supp. Chron.
he was chosen by the Romans against the Emperors will, after John was slain
in adultery.

The Emperor understanding these news, Otho. 1.
returned to Rome, besieged the Town, and so afflicted it, that they were
constrained to present Benet unto him at his pleasure. The Emperor restored
Leo to the seat, and Benet was deprived, not only of the papal dignity, but
disgraced also of his Sacerdotall, and after banished and sent into Almaine:
where he died in the Town of Mamburge: others say he was put in prison and
there strangled.

Leo then eight of that name, a Roman, Leo. 8.
was restored into the Popedom, and reigned a year and four months. This
The Emperors right to choose the Pope set up again.
and subtle devices, ordained in a full Sinode, that none should be made Pope
without the consent of the Emperor, unto whom above belonged the right of
election from Charlemaine and others. Naucler. and 63. did. cap. in Sinodo.

He restored also to Otho all the donations made to the Roman Church. And this
was it which they say Constantine, Justinian, Pippin, Charlemaigne, Lewis le
Debonaire, and Arit part had given to the Church. All this he revoked and
accorded to Otho the first of that name and to his successors: to the end to
keep Italy from oppressors. R. Barns.

The Abbey of S. Quintin in Vermandois was in this time founded. Chron. Sigeb.

Richard Duke of Normandy founded and restored many Churches and Abbeys:
amongst others the Abbey of Fesanan, of S. Ouan at Roan, and the Abbey of S.
Michael nigh the Sea.

An Advertisement.
Note here Christian by the passed and subsequent Histories, how in this time
Christian Religion was so annihilated, that it was altogether set to gather
dead bones, to build Churches and Monasteries, to rear up and transport dead
bodies, to honor relics, to dream miracles, to make themselves Monks and
Nuns, to dedicate and consecrate Churches, to compose Hymns, and praises of
Saints, to sing and pray for the dead, and such like ceremonies. About this
time also began the fourth pestilence of the Church: that is to say, the
School Divinity mingled with Aristotle's Philosophy, Scholasticall divinity.
which after engendered Transubstantiation and other new doctrines by the
Questionaries, as thou shall understand by this discourse.

John. 14.
John Pope, 14. of that name, an Italian, a Bishops son John, governed Rome
six years, eleven months, and ten days. Supp. Chron. He being
apprehended by Peter Provost of Rome, was put in prison in the Castle of S.
Angelo, where he remained a 11. months: but when they heard say the Emperor
Otho came against them with a strong hand, they took him out and established
him. Some say he was sent into exile and banished into Campania; from whence he
came again after 2. months. For the Emperor took vngeance on the^ that
persecuted him; causing many of them to die by diverse kinds of death, such as
were found culpable of the fact, and banished some into Saxe. As for Peter
Provost, he was delivered to the Pope to do with him at his pleasure. Who gave
him into the tormenrers hands: so he was vnapparelled, and his beard being cut
off, he was set upon an Ass, his face toward the tail, and his hands bound
under the tail of the said Ass, and so was led through the Town and beaten
with Rods. After this he was again brought to prison, and finally sent into
exile in Almaine. Naucler.

Otho. 2.
John Pope, in recompense of the benefit received of Otho, called and declared
Otho the second, son of Otho the first, Augustus. Palin.

In the time of this Pope, Theodorike or Deodorike, Bishop of Mets, caused
infinite holy bodies to be transported from Italy into France, with a piece of
S. Stephens Chain, and a part of S. Lawrence Grate, which the Pope John gave
him. Chron. Sigeb.

These be the Jewels of this dark time.

The King of Denmark and all his Country were converted to the faith by Popon
Clarke. Chron. Sigeb.

Benet Pope, sixth of that name a Roman ruled a year and six months. He was
put in the prison S. Angelo, Benet. 6.
wherein he was strangled, by one called Cinthius, or Cincius: Others say he
dyed of hunger: for which injury, he never did Justice nor vengeance. Naucler.

Roger Bishop of Liege, founded the Abbey of S. John the Evangelist, in the I Will
of Flaunders. Chron. Sigeb.

The heroical acts of this Emperor Otho the first, do sufficiently show him
to be one of the number of such excellent persons as the Lord gives to
repair and restore things thrown under feet. He I say redressed the Roman
Empire, and pacified Europe. By his succors, Italy and Germany were guarded
and warranted, having tamed the Hungarians and French. Briefly, during his life
the Empire took again a brightness and face of majesty. He founded the
silver Mines in Misua, and exercised great munificence toward many Bishops
which held the chief place in the Religion which then was. Many Civil Laws
were made by him: Amongst which, that of the succession of Nephues in
hereditarie goods in the place of their Fathers is greatly commended.

After then in this sort he had delated the Empire, being made stoop with
great age, finally he was surprised with a sudden malady, and dyed the year
973. and of his reign thirty seven: of his Empire thirteen, and was buried
at Magdeberge, in Saint Martins Church, which he had caused to be builded.

Otho 2. of that name, son of Otho the great, Otho. 2.
and of Adetheide, Queen of Burgogne, during the life of his Father, was Aix
le chappelle King of the Romans, The Duke of Lorraine Vassal of the Empire.
Lorraine made less.
he appeased the mutinies which were in Lorraine, and gave the Duchy of
Lorraine to Charles, brother of Lotharie King of France, and made him vassal
of the Empire; but the limits were cut off: For one good part was adjudged on
the one side to the Church of Colongne, and the other to the Church of Liege.

He espowsed the sister of the Emperor of Constantinople.

Otho. 2.
Donus. 2.
Donus Pope, second of that name, a Roman, ruled at Rome a year and five
months. It was said of him, that he was of great modesty and integrity, and
that no injury was done him Supp. Chron.

Many holy bodies as of Patroclus, Priauatus and Gregory, With S. Peter's
Staff, were transported from Rome to Colongne, by Bruno Bishop of the said
place, and by the Bishop of Canterbury, called Odo. Fasci. temp.

Aldebert of Bohemia, Bishop of Prague, went into Pannonia to preach the faith,
and baptized the King of Hungaria: From thence he came into Brusse, where he
was Martyred.

Boniface. 7.
Boniface Pope, 7. of that name, governed at Rome 7. months: Rome conspired
against him. But seeing himself in danger, he secretly pilled the most
precious treasures of the Church of S. Peter, and so fled unto Constantinople,
where when he had remained 8. months, he sold and turned all into silver,
and after returned unto Rome. In his absence they lifted up one of Pauie called
John the 15. He ruled 8. months. Boniface then being returned, drew the
Citizens unto him, and with silver corrupted the vilest and wickedest persons
of Rome. This done, he took the Pope John, and having put out his eyes, made
him die with hunger in the Castle of S. Angelo. Again then he occupied and
usurped the seat, but incontinently after he dyed of a sudden death: his
corpse was drawn with a cord by his feet through the streets, and pierced
with pikes by the Romans: but finally the Clerks buried him. Naucler. Robert
Barns. Cor. Abb.

Benet. 7.
Benet Pope, 7. of that name, governed 8. years and six Suppl. Chron. or 10.
years and 6. months, after Fasci. temp. After some, 77.


This Pope at the Emperors desire, imprisoned many seditious Romans. The Sea
of Hist.

Otho the 2. enterprised a war against the Greeks which held Calabria and
Pouille, Otho. 2.
but he sought to reduce them to the Roman Empire, pretending a right by
reason of a dowry for Theophaine his wife, who was the Greek Empress: but
his enterprise was unlucky. Otho the 2. taken by Pirates.
For he was taken by Pirates and brought unto Sicilia unknown. Afterward being
ordained by a Slauonian Merchant which knew him, he gathered together the rest
of his Army, and returned against the Grecians and Sarrasins, and pursued them
very indiscreetly: In so much that he was strooken with an inuenomed arrow, so
returning unto Rome he dyed, a little after the tenth year of his Empire, The
Dukes of Sauoy descended from Saxony.
leaving Otho the third, and other his children, and amongst them Frederic and
Valderic, Dukes of Saxony, of whom after descended the Countess and Princes
of Sauoy.

Otho third of that name, Otho. 3.
after the death of his Father was very young when he was designed the
Emperor, but of such The Marvel of the world.

Lotharie King of France dyed at Rheimes, being impoysoned Lewis fifth of that
name King of France, last of the line of Charlemaigne, who reigned a year and
little more, and dyed also of poison, and was buried at Campaigne, leaving only
the memory of his name.

A third sort of Kings began to reign in France.
From Pharamond a Painim, unto Hughe Capet, are accounted 587. years. From
Clouis the first Christian, 487. From Pippin the Father of Charlemaigne, 237.
years.
Hughe Capet, 35. in number, and the first King of France, reigned nine years,
and began the third sort of Kings which yet endures in the kingdom of France.
Dantes a Florentine Poet, in his Purgatory says, that Hughe Capets
Grandfather was a Butcher. Of a Count of Paris by the favor of soldiers he
was first saluted king in the Town of Noion. Reigning then newly in France,
Otho. 3.
he caused a Council of Prelates of the French Church to be assembled at
Rheimes in Campaigne. And because he feared the posterity of Charlemaigne
(upon which he had usurped the kingdom) he caused in the said Council to be
deposed, the Archbishop of Rheimes called Arnulphe, or Arnoul, bastard brother
of the king Lotharie, and set in his place a Monk, a Philosopher, and Magician
called Gilbert, or Gerbert: unto this deposition consented all the Prelates of
France, except Sergius Archbishop of Sens, who was sent prisoner unto Orleans
with Arnulphe, but three years after they were delivered. See John le Maire in
the 2. part, and others. Against the said Council, Pope Benet made an other be
held in the same City of Rheimes, wherein the said Arnulphe was restored, and
Sergius or Serinus, and Gerbert or Gilbert, was deposed: who notwithstanding
was after Archbishop of Rauenna, and at last Pope of Rome by devilish means,
whose end was miserable. John le Maire.

Many holy bodies S. Landoul. S. Adrian, S. Amand of Hasban, were transported
into the Town of Gaunt. Chron. Sigeb.

The Abbey of S. Magloire at Paris was founded by ye king.

John. 16.
John Pope, 16. of that name, ruled at Rome 4. months: his Leo a Priest. He
distributed the goods of the Church, to his parents, friends, and Allies.
Therefore he was hated of all the Clergy and people: and was enclosed in the
Castle S. Angelo, where he dyed of hunger. Supp. Chron. and R. Barns.

This custom was afterward much used in the Roman Church.

John. 17. Naucler. Supp. Chron. Platina.
John Pope, 17. of that name, a Roman, ruled at Rome 9. or 10. years, 6. or
7. months, and 8. or 10. days, after the diversity of writers.

In this time Crescentius Momentanus, a Consul of Rome, had usurped rule over
the Town of Rome, and persuaded the Romans and Italians to take again the
Empire. He so persecuted this Pope John, that he was constrained to fly out
of Rome, and to soiourne in Tuscane and Lombardie. But when he heard that the
said John, had now the third time sent for succors of the Emperor Otho, he sent
messengers toward the said Pope to recall him! At whose request the Pope
returning, Crescentius demanded pardon of him.

Otho desiring to have the Emperial crown, having gathered together a great
army, and before he entered Rome he made a peace betwixt the Duke of Beneuent
and the Duke of Capuae: from thence he came to Rome, and was crowned by

Gregory 5. of that name, his cofin, before called Bruno, Gregory. 5.
son of Duke Otho of Saxony, who^ he made Pope in the place of John, maugre
the Romans, and by him was crowned Emperor. Certain time after Crescentius
Conful of Rome corrupted with avarice, procured yt the Bishop of Plaisance,
Schism.
who was a Grecian by nation, a very pernicious man, was constituted Pope,
John. 18.
and was called John 18. and held the seat 10. months. Gregory then retired
toward the Emperor, to be revenged of the injury was done him. The Emperor
sore moved at that outrage, with great power returned to Rome. Crescentius
understanding of his coming, not trusting in the Roman people, caused the
Castle de S. Angelo to be fortified. And as these things were in doing, the
Emperor besieged the towns. The Roman people more meet for sedition then to
fight, desired pardon of ye Emperor, and opened the gates unto the Almains.

Crescentius and Pope John being destitute of Council, retired into the fort of
the said Castle. Some by treason promised them assurance if they would demand
pardon of the Emperor. A true reward of ambition.
They then came down, and as they came were surprised. Pope John after his
eyes were put out and his members mutilated he was slain. Crescentius was set
upon a Mare, his face toward the tail, and his nose and ears being cut off,
he was led before the Town, for a spectacle unto all. Some say he was hanged
without the town, others say his head was cut off. R. Barns.

Therefore Gregory being restored into his Bishopric, seeing the troubles yt in
time past had bin for the election of Emperors, and the variable issues thereof,
assembled a Council, wherein the first ordinance and establishment of Electors
was decreed, to the end the dignity Emperial should no more remain in one
house and family by succession of line. The beginning of Electors.
This election then was given to the Germanike nation, which yet holds it at
this day. Six Princes were established: three Ecclesiastical, that is to say,
the Archbishop of Magunce, of Treuers, and of Colongne: the three other
secular, were the Marquess of Brandeberge, the Duke of Saxony, and the Count
of Palatine, unto which was given the right and power for ever to elect the
Emperor. With them was joined the Duke of Boheme, (Boheme then had not
obtained the title of a kingdom) as the seventh to accord them, if
peradventure they were even in years.

If it be demanded wherefore so high a dignity of election was not rather
committed to other Princes, which then were puissant, namely he of Bauieres,
Sueuia, and Franconia, Historiographers make no mention thereof. But if it be
lawful to set down some appearance of cause, it is certain that Boheme was a
Country meet to maintain the right of election, as a Country invited by
nature. Saxony had that honor, because the Emperor descended out of that
house, as also for that it is a very large and puissant Country. The Country of
Brandeberge held then also on the house of Saxony, and it is likely the
Emperor Otho desired to advance that which was of his own house.

The Count Palatine sued to have that prerogative, by reason of the posterity
of Charlemaigne. For the County of Palatine was then of the line of
Charlemaigne.

After that this election was thus established, the Italians stirred many
troubles against the Emperor: new matter of sedition wanted not thereunto.

John. 18. Invention for the dead.
Whilst John 18. ruled at Rome, and that Gregory the fifth was absent and
dejected (as is said) one called Odillo a Monk, and afterward the Abbot of
Clugni, instituted in his Monastery the day of All-soules, the next day after
All Saints: which institution was incontinently received and approved by all
the Church. The occasion hereof was, that this ignorant Monk had understood of
an Hermit returning from Sicilie, that great noyses and lamentations were
heard in the Mountain Aetna, who he thought were the souls of the dead which
suffered pain in Purgatory: therefore he thought they might be helped by
Orisons and prayers. See Iustine in his book, 3. Chron. Sigeb. and Polyd.
Verg. lib. 6. cha. 9.

The house of Sauoye issued from the Dukes of Saxony, as is said, is raised
into a Count.

The Emperor Otho espoused the daughter of the King of Arragon, a very
intemperate woman, who maintained a young man in woman's array, as one of her
Chamber-maides: but the thing discovered the adulterer, who was burnt alive,
and by intercession of friends the Empress was reconciled: but for all this
she desisted not from perseuering in her incontinences, often requiring men,
before she were required. In the Town called Modena in Italy, she was
embraced with the love of a Count very fair and of good grace, and sought by
all means to cause him to condescend to her luxutious desire, which he would
not, fearing the loss of his estate. She accused him to the Emperor, saying
he solicited her of dishonor. The Emperor angered hereat, in his fury caused
him to be beheaded. But the truth afterward being known, she was burnt alive,
and four goodly places were given to the wife of the said Count in
recompense.

Ammonius a Monk of Fleury, in this time wrote a book of the miracles of S.
Benet, and Herigerus Abbot of Lob, wrote an other of the dissonance of the
Church, and an other book of the divine office. Also of the body and blood of
the Lord, and others, Abb. Trit.

Robert 36. King of France, reigned 34. years, a learned Rome upon devotion.
The Sea of Histories.

Constance his wife founded the Abbey of Poissi, wherein she was buried. The
same.

Siluester Pope, second of that name, Siluester. 2.
of the Country of Aquitane, called before Gilbert, or Gerbert, a Magician,
and Nigromancer

In his youth he was a Monk of Fleury, in the Diocese of Orleans: but for the
ardent desire he had of learning, left his Abbey and got him to Siuile in
Spain, which then the Sarrasins held, and gave himself to a Magitian
Philosopher, who had a book none like it in the Art Magic. Gerbert sought
often to steal it from him, but by reason his master kept it very carefully,
he could not come by it. Yet he persuaded the Philosophers daughter with whom
he had great familiarity, to get the book and lend it him to read, which
she did. Having then the said book, he retired, and fearing to be surprised
with it, he vowed himself to the Devil, upon condition he would bring him
to France. Being returned, he kept a School, and taught the liberal Arts
with great admiration of his Auditors. After he was Master unto Otho the the
fourth, of Robert, son of Hugo Capet King of France, and of Lotharie, who
afterward was Archbishop of Sens: by whose help he was advanced: First to
be Archbishop of of Rheimes as is said, and after of Rauenna, and finally
Pope. During which time he always dissembled his Art Magic, and the
communication he had with the Devil. Of whom once desiring to know how long
he should live in the Popedom, the Devil answered him that he should live
til he said Mass in Jerusalem.

Siluester then giving himself altogether unto his delights, hoping to live
long, and thinking of nothing less then of going to Jerusalem, It came to
pass that one day in Lent as he celebrated in the Church of the holy Cross of
Jerusalem, he was suddenly taken with a great Fever then did he remember yt the
said place was called of ye cross of Jerusalem, and so had bin seduced by the
ambiguity of the answer. Straight heard he great tumults of devils in his
presence, and being surprised with fear began to lament. And although he was a
very wicked man, yet fell he not into despair: but seeing he must needs die,
called his Cardinals and told unto them all his life: and the art Magic which
he had used to come unto that dignity, exhorting them to live holily: and
before all men confessed himself miserable: and ordained that his body should
be hewn and cut in pieces, but especially such of his members whereby he had
worshipped the devil: and then that they all should be put in a cart, and in
what place soever the horses which drew ye cart should stay, there he should be
buried. And it came to pass that the horses without any co^duction of man,
carried his body into the Church of Laterane; where he was laid in a Sepulcher.
And at this day his Sepulcher is a pronosticke token of a Popes death. R.
Barnes. Suppl. Chron. and Nauler.

An Advertisement.
From the time of John the 8. which was the whore, until the year after the
Nativity of Christ, Antichrist reigned at Rome a brazen faced harlot, which
had despised and trodden under her feet holy marriage. All the Popes which were
within this time, which contains about an 150. years, were plunged in all
voluptuousnes, impudency, and carnal villainies: in arrogance, kissing of feet,
Sacriledges, horrible dissentions, homicides, and unbridled impudencies, as
may easily be perceived by the discourse of those proceedings. In this time now
following, after the thousand year, the devil is wholly unchained: And rightly
may this time be called The kingdom of the great Dragons. Apoc. 20.2.


Siluester the second by his Necromancies began to unloose Satan, having
couenanted with him to have the Popedom. Benet the 9. did homage to the devil
in woods and mountains. In Hildebrand or Gregory the 7. and other Popes, thou
shall see what Arts they used.

Otho the 3. the 18. year of his Empire, was poisoned by a Roman woman (which
had bin the wife of Crescentius) at the hour of his departing from Rome, by
the gift of a pair of persumed gloves being poisoned. And this was in revenge
of her husbands death, as says Crantius.

Henry second of that name, Duke of Banier, Henry. 2.
and Count of Bamberge, surnamed the Lame, obtained the Empire by election,
After Abb. Vrsp.


John Pope, 19. of that name, John. 19.
surnamed le Sec (as John Blundus) by Nation an Italian, succeeded Siluester
the Magician, even in the same art and studies which he practiced. Berno says
that there were great co^tentions amongst the Necromancians, such as were
favorers of Siluester and this John: but in the end he carried all away. Some
say he was poisoned, after he had governed 5. months. This Pope gave himself
altogether to idleness and pleasure, as witnesses Crantius. Hydromany was his
study.

Henry. 2.
He commanded the Feast of the Commemoration of the dead (newly invented and
instituted in the Abbey of Clugny, by Odillo as is said) which was in the
month of March, to be remitted until the second day of November, and then
observed also through all Churches. R. Barns, and Supp. Chron.

The name of a Cardinal appointed as a dignity.
The Historiographers say, that at this time the name and appellation of a
Cardinal began to be in great account, as we see at this day. Baconthorpius
To. Barns, and Carrion.

John. 20.
John, Pope 20. borne at Rome, called, Fasanus, was suspected Siluester until
Hildebrand, gave themselves to nothing but diabolical arts. This man after he
had governed four years and five months dyed. Naucl. not without some
suspicion of poison.

In this time there was an horrible pestilence, yea almost through the whole
world. Sigeb.

Fulbert Bishop of Chartres, wrote these Respondes to the praise of the Virgin
Marie. Stirps Iesse, etc. Et Chorus nouae Jerusalem, etc. and other prayers.

Salve Regina.
Herman a Monk of S. Gall, wrote that Salve Regina and Alma redemptoris matter.
Trit. Abb.

Sergius 4.
Sergius Pope, the fourth of that name a Roman, governed the Sea two years,
and six months. Suppl. Chron.

Burchardus, first a Monk of Lob, the Disciple of Albert above mentioned, was
Bishop of Worms: He compiled the ancient Canons, which afterward were
abridged by Gratian: yea rather corrupted, which is easy to judge in comparing
them together. Rhenanus in his Annota. upon Tertullian.

Jerusalem was taken, and the Lords Sepulcher destroyed by the Sarrasins and
Mahumetists. Nancl. and Suppl. Chron.

Benet. 8.
Benet Pope, 8. of that name, a Tusculan, governed the Roman

He crowned the Emperor Henry at his coming to Rome, and saluted him Augustus.

Henry the second builded at Bamberge the Church of Saint George, and prayed
Benet it might be a Cathedral Church: Conrade. 2.
which the Pope agreed unto, upon condition that the said Church should pay
to the Pope every year an hundredth marks of silver, and a white horse with
all his furniture. Platina, and R. Barnes.

Conrade 2. of that name, obtained the Empire, and reigned 15. years. Naucler.
He was the son of Herman Duke of Franconians, and was called Salicus, because
he came of the Sicambians, from whom came the Salicke law. And the French
themselves were called Salickes, which used that law, whereof we have made
mention in Pharamond.

After the death of Henry the 2. Benet was dejected from his dignity by
violence, and a popular sedition of the Romans, Schism 14.
and an other ordained in his place: but after the Antipope was rejected, and
Benet established in his Popedom with great honor, who soon after dyed.
Supp. Chron.

The Historiographers do here allege Peter Damianus a Cardinal of Hostia,
who said that this Pope Benet after his death appeared to a Bishop his
Familier, upon a black horse: and the Bishop said unto him, Art not thou Pope
Benet which art gone out of this world? He said, I am that unhappy Benet.
This was to get silver, and to maintain Purgatory.
Being again asked how he did: he answered; I am grievously tormented: but yet
I may be helped with the mercy of God, by suffrages, Masses, and Alms deeds.
Therefore says he, go to my successor Pope John, and tell him in such a
coffer he shall find a great sum of silver, let him distribute it all to the
poor. The said Bishop hearing these words accomplished them, and after
dispatched himself of his Bishoppricke, and entered into Religion. This is
recited by Naucl. R. Barnes. Suppl. Chron. Fascitemp. John le Maire. Bonif.
Simo. Et Cora. Abb.

Thus played Satan with his Instruments, to establish his kingdom by
Infernal Idolatries, by Purgatories, Masses, and such suggested things.

John. 21.
John, Pope, 21. of that name, a Roman, the son of Gregory, Port. Suppl.
Chron. ruled 9. years, 7. months, or about 11. years after Naucler. And was
chosen before he was promoted to Ecclesiastical orders, against their rights.

He had great troubles against the Romans, but finally he was delivered by the
Emperor Conrade his help. Supp. Chron. whom also he crowned upon an Easter
day: there being present, Rodolphe King of Burgongne, and the King of England.
Naucler.

Henry 31. King of France, reigned thirty years. He had great contentions
with his brother Robert touching the kingdom: but they agreed. He founded the
Pryorie of S. Martin in the fields nigh Paris, and put therein Regular Chanons.
He reigned 27. years: some say 28. having caused his son Philip to be
crowned.

At this time flourished in Italy, Guido Aretin, a Monk of the order of S.
Benet, an excellent Musician, who first invented the Gamma to learn upon the
hand, The Gamma invented.
and the notes Vt, re, mi, fa, sol, la. See The Sea of Histories. He writ also
against Berengarius. Trit. Abb.

Benet. 9.
Benet, Pope, ninth of that name, a Tusculan, before called Theophilact, the
Nephewe of Benet the eight, surpassed in malice his uncle, and governed the
Roman Church ten years, four months, and 9. days, after Suppl. Chron.

Conrade dyed at Trect, and was enterred at Spire.

Henry. 3.
Henry the third of that name, surnamed the black son Conrade the Emperor,
and of Giselle, was chosen King of Romans by the Electors: he was a courteous
Prince, merry and liberal by nature. He appeased Hungary, which was troubled
with diverse seditions. He did as much at Rome to the three Popes which were
there. His wife was Agnes, daughter of the Duke of Aquitaine, and the marriage
was at Ingelheim, at which he did an act worthy of memory. For he cast off
all pompes, and put away all Moris Players, Dauncers, and such like: and in
their places brought poor people.

The Pope Benet was accused of many crimes by the Romans, and therefore the
third year he was driven from his promotion, Henry. 3.
and in his place was ordained the Bishop of Saint Sabine, called Siluester the
third: who likewise was rejected after forty nine days, because he was
unprofitable. Benet recovered his dignity, but he was again cast off, and it
was given to John Arch-bishoppe of Saint John Port Latin: who was called
Gregory the sixth.

Others say that Benet after he was again received into his Popedom, sold it
for money. And so at one same time, the seventh year of the Empire of Henry
the third, there were at Rome three Popes: Benet the ninth, Siluester the
third: and Gregory the sixth. One held his seat at Laterane in the Palace. An
other at Saint Peter's. And the third at Saint Mary's.

A Priest called Gratian, moved with zeal, went unto the Popes, and persuaded
them each one to take some good some of money and depose themselves from the
Papacy. Which they did. R. Barnes, and Naucl.

Upon these stirs, the Emperor Henry the third having heard of those tumults
and scandalles at Rome, to abolish them, was constrained to go into Italy,
with a great power.

Gratian Pope, met the Emperor, and gave him a crown of great price. The
Emperor received the Pope honorably, and they came together unto Rome. The
Clergy assembled, and showed that Gratian was a Simoniacke: having with money
caused others to yield up their rightes, that he himself by that means might
come unto the Popedom. R. Barnes, and Naucler. The Emperor then caused a
Council to be held, wherein all those Schismatickes and Simoniacke Popes were
deposed, and new created.

See Reader, and note the honor hereof, as true ensigns of the seat of
Antichrist.

The heresy of Transubstantiation commenced.
At this time Lanfrancus an Italian borne, of Pauie, flourished in France. He
was one of the first inuentors and authors of Transubstantiation and heretical
doctrine, new and pernicious, before wholly unknown of the ancient Doctors,
notwithstanding received since the year of Christ 1053. at the Council of
Verseil as shall be said.

The new Doctors which have written touching Transubstantiation, were John
Scotus and Bertramus, both which guided with the spirit of truth, writ properly
touching the body and blood of Christ in the Supper.

Abande of such new Doctors as opposed themselves against the true doctrine of
the Supper.
1 Pascasius Abbot of the Abbey of Corbey in Saxony, in the time of Charles le
Gros, the year of Christ. 880. 2 Ratherius Monk of Lob, after Bishop of
Verone, under Henry the first. 3 Herigerus Abbot of Lob, of Saint Benet, under
Otho the third. 4 Guido Monk, and Abbot of S. Benet, under Conrade the 2. 5
Adelmanus Bishop of Brixe, under Henry the third. 6 Guimondus Monk, and after
Archbishop under Henr. 3. 7 Algerus Monk of Corbey, under Henry the third. 8
Lanfrancus Archbishop of Canterbury in England, before Monk of S. Benet, under
Henry the third. 9 Hildebert Bishop of Man's, and after Archbishop of Tours, a
Disciple of Berengarius, but after a great persecutor of the holy doctrine
thereof, under Henry the fourth. 10 Honorius Priest, under Henry the fifth and
others, as Nolsus, Ancelmus, Lomberdus, Petrus Commestor, and Innocent the the
third, which came after.


Siluester. 3.
Siluester Pope, third of that name a Roman, Bishop of S. Sabine, before
called John, after Benet was driven away as is said, was chosen by gifts and
corruption, and ruled 55. days, or two months.

Behold the time of horror and confusion. He which then was most wicked, and
would give most, obtained the feate soonest. Supp. Chron.

Gregory Pope, sixth of that name, Gregory. 6.
ruled two years and six months: in the time of the former Schism, he had
been adjudged a Simoniacke and Homicide, yet he bought the Popedom of Benet.
R. Barnes.

There was great trouble in Hungary under the King Andrewe, and after under
his brother Vela, against such as demanded again to return unto their
Paganism and ancient superstition. Naucler.

Clement Pope, second of that name, Clement. 2.
before called Werdigerus, or Singerus, or Sindegerus Bishop of Bamberge, was
Henry the third, and his wife Agnes, on a day of the Nativity of Christ.
Naucler.

Henry before he departed from Rome, constrained the Romans by oath to
renounce their right of election without any more meddling therein thereafter,
to avoid Schisms and scandales, which commonly rise of such election. Others
say the poor gave them that commandment and defense. Naucler.

The Romans after the Emperors departure forgetting their oath, impoysoned
this Pope, after he had governed nine months. Some say that Stephen his
successor (who was called Damasus) was author thereof. Benno says it was
Gerard Brazure, a friend of Theophilact, and of Hildebrand, a man expert in
poisoning.

In this time men forged Visions and miracles, Sacraments of the Altar.
to establish the Sacrament of the Mass, which then was called of the Altar.
Many durst not speak what they thought therein for fear of Popes.

The wickedness of Popes merited, that the power of election should be taken
from Ecclesiastical persons by the just judgment of God, says Nauclerus.

This Pope was poisoned soon after the Emperors departure.

Damasus Pope, second of that name, Damasus. 2.
otherwise called S. Stephanus Baguiarius, borne in Bauiere, Bishop of Brixe,
ruled by force the seat 23. days, as Histo, and Chron. say. For he occupied
the Popedom without election, either suffrage of people, or Clergy. R.
Barnes.

Leo. 9.
Leo Pope, 9. of that name an Almaine, of the Country Alsac, the Earls of
Ausperge, and being Count or Earl of Etisheim, called Bruno, Bishop of Tulles,
a man of good nature, was sent to Rome by the Emperor, at the request of the
Romans, and being chosen Pope, governed five years, two months, six days,
after Suppl. Chron. Some say, that as he came to Rome, Hugo Abbot of Clugny,
and Hildebrand the Monk, encountered and met him in his pontifical attire:
they persuaded him to take off that habit, and to enter into Rome in his
usual and private attire; upon this reason, that the Emperor had not given
him the right to choose the Pope, but only the people and Clergy of Rome.
Bruno agreeing to their speech confessed his fault, and accused himself, that
he had rather obey the Emperor then God. At Hildebrandes persuasion the
Clergy elected him for this, that he confessed that the election ought to
appertain to the Clergy, and not to the Emperor. Leo then to recompense
Hildebrand, created him Cardinal, and committed unto him the Church of S. Paul.

The year of Christ one thousand fifty one, Leo assembled a Council at
Verseil: where was first handled the opinion of Transubstantiation, (although
that word was not invented of long time after) and there was condemned the
opinion of John Scotus, of Bertramus, and Berengarius Doctor, borne at Tours,
Archdeacon of Angiers, who maintained the opinion of Scotus, and of Bertramus,
touching the Eucharist. In the said Council Berengarius appeared not, but sent
thither two Clerks: and as they would have excused Berengarius, and have told
the reason, they were laid hold on and put inprison. Behold how they disputed,
O Ecolampadius.

These be the pooceedings of the adversaries of the truth, to join tyranny
with ignorance.

Berengarius had Lanfrancus for his adversary, who maintained the opinion of
Pascasius, the first author of this doctrine against Scotus and Bertramus.

Hubert Cardinal, Rogerius and Guimondus maintained Lanfancus his part, which
mingled subtilties with outrages against Berengarius, who showed himself little
constant. For although he had the truth on his side, yet had he a certain
hatred against Lanfrancus and Rogerius, mingled with glory and hope of
victory, which made him loose the desire he had to maintain the purity of
the doctrine. For he mingled withal certain speeches of marriage and the
Baptism of little children, and therefore they stifled amongst some errors by
his fault. So comes it to pass, when without the fear of the Lord we will
maintain the cause of the Gospel. O Ecolamp.

At this time the Emperor caused a Sinode to be held of an hundredth and
thirty Bishops at Magunce. Some write that Leo was there, and there it was
ordained that the Clarks should nourish no dogs for hunting, nor hawks.

That Clerks should deal with no secular nor profane affairs.

That none should be admitted or received into a Monastery for a Monk,
unless he were of a lawful age, and that he should come in of his own good
will without constraint.

Simony and marriage, was forbidden Priests.

That the houses of Clerks should be builded nigh unto Temples and Churches,
12. quest. 2. cha. Necessaria.

Henry the third gave to Leo the Town and Country of Beneuent, to redeem the
yearly rent of an hundred marks, paid (as is above said) yearly out of the
Cathedral Church of Bamberge: and Leo confirmed the privileges granted to
the said church, and accorded to the said Archbishop the Mantle (which they
call Palilium) to use three times in the year. At Easter, at the Feast af S.
Peter, and S. Paul, and upon S. George his day, the Patron of that Church.
Naucler.

Upon the aforesaid Sinode, Nicholas a Monk of Constantinople, writ a Book
against the Latins, Entitled De nuptijs Sacerdotum. Of the marriage of
Priests: which was condemnemned by Hubert, the said Popes Legate, and sent to
Constantinople. Trit. Abb.

For the Pope is ignorant of nothing.
This Pope being at Ratisbone, the Legates of Paris being present, approved the
Relickes of S. Denis, whereof there had been a long doubt, whether they were
Saint Denis his Relickes or no. Chron. Abb. Vrsp.

Under Henry the third, the Hungarians returned unto Paganism, and having
rejected the Faith, put to death all their Bishops and Clergy. Naucler.

Upon a Christmas day, Leo the ninth, and Henry the third, being at a great
Mass, in the Town of Worms, after the Subdeacon had sung the Epistle in the
accustomed manner and Tune, the Pope presently dejected and deprived him of his
office: because he sung the Epistle in the Popes presence, in an other Song and
Tune then the Roman Church did.

The Archbishop of Worms who said Mass that day, grieved that his Subdeacon
should be so handled, after the Gospel was sung, retired into his Episcopal
seat, leaving his office unperfected, saying he would make no end if the Pope
would not restore his Subdeacon to his former state. The Pope because he would
not hinder that the service should not be ended, restored his Subdeacon. R.
Barn. Albert. Crane lib. 4. Saxo. ca. 45.

Anne Queen of France, wife of Henry the first, founded in the Town of Senlis
a Church of S. Vincent, where are Regular Chanons, and an other in the suburbs
where were Nuns. The Sea of Histories.

After the death of Leo the third, the Romans fearing the puissance of Henry
the third, durst not attempt a news thing against their oath, which they made
in the time of Clement the second: wherefore they sent Hildebrand toward the
Emperor to choose a Pope: who using the authority of his Legation, designed
Henry the fourth, the son of Henry the third Emperor. Victor. 2.
And in the mean while Victor was chosen Pope, second of that name, not so
voluntarily as to please the Emperor, in electing an Almane borne of Bauier,
before called Gebhard, who ruled two years and three months. Naucler.

He assembled a Council at Florence against Forncating and Simoniacke
Priests: He calls married Priest Fornicatiors.
whereat he deposed many Bishops, Prelates, and Priests, which he called
Fornicators, which had not left their wives according to the Council of
Magunce. There were Clerks threatened with great punishments if they did not
obey the Decrees and Cannons of Popes.

There was also confirmed the opinion of Paschasius, contrary to Scotus,
Bertramus, and of Berengarius.

Hildebrand by authority of the said Council was sent into France to Tours,
to assemble a Sinode touching the matter of the Sacrament and of
Transubstantiation. There was Berengarius permitted to defend his opinion: But
seeing all went by affection, and that he could not maintain his opinion
without danger, upon pusillanimitie and cowardice, he said he held the
opinion of the Catholic Church: by which words he rather satisfied the
Legates and the said Council, then kept the liberty worthy of a Chistian
man. Oecol. lib. 3.

Plurality of Benefices.
Plurality of Benefices began about this time, and after Fascic. temp.

The year of our Lord 1056. Henry the third dyed the Henry which succeeded
him, and Conrade Duke of Bauiers.

Henry Emperor, fourth of that name, Henry. 4.
obtained the Empire, and reigned fifty years.

Stephen Pope, 9. of that name, borne of Lorraine, Stephen. 9.
Abbot of Montcassin, called Frederick, brother of the Duke of Lorraine, ruled
at Rome ten months. Naucler. After others four months.

Henry. 4.
He brought under the obedience of the Roman seat, Millane: which since the
time of the Apostles has never subjected, says Platin. and R. Barns. Others,
as Naucler. and Supp. Chron. say 200. years.

Stephen accused the Emperor Henry the fourth, of heresy, because he
diminished the authority of the Roman seat. Platina. And having heard that
the Churches of Italy and Burgongne were corrupted with Symonie, he sent
Hildebrand to root out that Cockle. Hildebrand and having made his commission
returned to Rome, and found the Pope very sick: who thinking to die, caused
his Churchmen to come unto him, and made them swear that they should never
suffer any to sit in the Apostolic seat, unless he were chosen by the
consent of all: yet coming again to his health, he came to Florence, and
called a Council: but he died there eight months after. Nauclerus.

A Scottish Monk called Patermis, being in Almaine in a Town called
Paderbrune, fire was put in the Abbey wherein he was: yet though he might, he
would not come out: choosing rather to be burnt for the vow of his obedience,
then to shun the danger by going out. Sigeb.

The opinion or obstination of vows is founded upon such examples.

Benet Pope. 10. of that name, of Campania in Italy, was a Bishop of
Vileterne, before called Mincius, and ruled at Rome 9. months. Benet. 10.


The Romans corrupted by silver, elected him against the Canons, although the
Cleagie were against it, but he was constrained to give over the Popedom. For
Hildebrand returning from Florence, Schism.
brought with him Gerard Bishop of Florence, who after was chosen at Senes. And
after his election was assigned a Council in a Town called Sutry, against
Benet. And thither came Goafred Duke of Italy, the first husband of Matilde,
and Guillebert great Governor. Item, the Bishops of Lombardie and Hetruria, and
others. Which thing Benet understanding, fled, putting off his pontifical
habit, and after led a private life.

Nicholas Pope, second of that name, borne of Sauoy, Nicholas. 2.
called Gerard, Bishop of Florence, governed three years, and six months.

He was eleced at Senes, by the instance of Hildebrand, because he thought it
no sure thing that the election should be at Rome, seeing Benet the tenth and
his friends were there present.

Nicholas coming to Rome, assigned a Council nigh Laterane, of an hundredth
and forty Bishops. Wherein it was ordained that the election of the Pope should
be made by Cardinals, Clerks, and the Roman people: And that whosoever
should attempt to come to the Popedom, by silver, favor, ambition, or other
unlawful mean, and not by Canonike election, that he should be held for an
Apostare, and an excommunicated person, dejected of every one, without any aid
or favor. Did. 33. cap. In nomine Domini.

That ordinance endured not long: For afterward Cardinals alone without
either Clergy or people usurped that election.

In this Council Berengarius Deacon thinking rather to save his life then to
maintain the truth, denied it, The pusillanimitie of Berengarius.
submitting himself to the will of the Council. His confession (or rather
recantation) is contained Deconsecrat: did. 2. cap. Ego Berengarius

It was at this Council of Rome, that transubstantiation was decreed; that is
to say, that after the bread is consecrated, we must believe the bony of Christ
to be so in the Sacrament, that sensibly and really he is between the hands of
the Priests: broken and bruised with the teeth. And the Pope Nicholas
constrained Berengarius so to say and confess: the said Nicholas being so
taught and persuaded by Lanfrancus. Vadian.

But the first opinion of Berengarius which he pronounced for temporal fear,
was this that follows, as Lanfrancus himself recites in his book of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, The words of Berengarius touching the Sacrament.
against Berengarius. The sacrifice of the Church (says Berengarius) is made
of two things: that is to say, visible and invisible, of the Sacrament, and of
the thing of the Sacrament. Which thing yet (that is to say, the body of
Christ) if it were before our eyes, if it were present, it should be visible,
but being elevated unto heaven, and being set at the right hand of the Father,
until the restoration of all things (as says S. Peter the Apostle) it cannot
be drawn from heaven: for the person of Christ consists of God and man. But
the Sacrament of the Table of the Lord (that is to say) the bread and wine
consecrated, are not changed but remain in their substances, having
Similitude with the things whereof they are Sacraments, etc. He said moreover,
that the bread and wine after the consecration were only the Sacrament, and
not the true body nor the true blood of the Lord: and that they could not
sensibly, but sacramentally be administered of the Priests, or broken and
bruised with the teeth of the faithful. In the same Chapter, Ego Berengarius.

Golfred, Count of Pouille and of Calabria died, leaving his son Bagellard
his heir: but Robert brother of the said Golfred, and uncle of the said
Bagellard, having taken from him all that his father had left him, usurped
Beneuent, which belonged to the Roman seat. Wherefore the Pope excommunicated
him. Robert then knowing that he had taken the aforesaid Countries from his
said Nephew, did what he could to return into the Popes favor, and prayed him
to come into Calabria for the good of peace. Being come, he absolved Robert of
the Bond of excommunication. After, he adjudged him Pouille and Calabria, upon
condition he would yield him Beneuent and Troy, Towns of Pouille, and all that
which belonged unto the Roman seat. Item, that he would give him help in his
necessities. Robert promised all this, and gave him an Army by which the Pope
recovered many places about Rome, and made them subject to the seat. As
Prenesta, Tusculum, Numentum, and beyond Tiber certain Castles, even unto
Sutri. Rob. Barns.

The Pope is content to make his profit to the damage of Orphelius: he
consented unto the Rapines of Robert, so that he might have his help.

Ancelmus the disciple of Lanfrancus, succeeded his master in the Priorie of
Bec, and Lanfrancus was made Archbishop of Canterbury in England. Chron. Sigeb.

Phillip the 38. King of France, son of Henry, Philip.
reigned 49. years.

Alexander Pope, second of that name, of Millaine, Alexander. 2.
ruled at Rome a year and five months, whose History is this. After
Nicholas, one Ancelme Bishop of Luques was chosen for the renown of his
virtues, without the Emperors knowledge, and was chosen being absent from
Rome. For he resided in his Bishoppricke of Luques. After the election, the
Cardinals went for him and conducted him to Rome, and was named Alexander. But
some Bishops of Lombardie (whom Alexander pleased not because he was not of
their band) stirred a schism, and under shadow that they said he entered by
Simonie, they would needs have an other, such as they liked: and at the
instigation of Gilbert Bishop of Parme, a man mighty amongst others, they drew
toward the Emperor, to show that the election has always appertained unto
the Emperors. Briefly, they obtained of him to choose an other Pope at their
pleasure, seeing Nicholas the second was chosen without his knowledge. As soon
as they were returned into Lombardie, they assembled a Council, and did choose
one called Cadolus of Parme, a rich and marvelous puissant man, under whom all
Italy bowed, except the Countess Martilde, or Mehaut. Cadolus then being so
chosen Antepope, drew toward Rome with a strong band, and the power of the
Lombards.

The Pope Alexander met him, Homicide committed for the Popedom.
accompanied with his Romans, and the batraile was hard and sharp, nigh Neron
under the golden Mountain, where was a great slaughter: but finally the
victory turned on the part of Alexander. Yet Cadolus for one evil encounter
lost not courage, but before a year was passed, by the means of certain
friends which held his part (which he had gained by force of silver) entered
into Rome. The Romans yet ran to Arms: but Cincius the Provost, his son
of Rome, put Cadolus in the Forte of S. Angilo. The war betwixt those two,
endured the space of 2. years. Finally, Cadolus was constrained to yield
himself, and redeem his life with 600. Marks of silver. After to content the
Emperor who favored the said Cadolus, a Council was assembled at Mantua,
where were the Emperor and the Pope Alexander, A Council At Mantua.
and there in the presence of all the Prelates, the Pope purged himself both
of Simony and Ambition and matters were agreed both of the one party and the
other. John le Maire. 11.

The determinations of the Council.
1 In the said Council was ordained that none should hear the Masle of a
Priest that had concubines. 17. did. c. Preterhoc.

2. Whosoever wittingly should be promoted by a Simoniake, he should be
rejected and deposed. 1. q. 2. c. De caetero.

3. That Cloister Monks should not be admitted to the offices of Clerks. 16.
q. 2. c. iuxta calced. tenorem.

4. That Clerks should take no Ecclesiastical Benefice of a secular person.
16. q. 1. c. Perlaicos.

5. That men should give Benefices and Ecclesiastical orders to learned
people, without selling or buying any of them with any contract. 1. q. 3. c.
Exmultis.

6. That he which should be excommunicated, cannot excommunicate an other. 14.
q. 1. c. Audiuimus.

7. That Alleluia should be banished out of the Church from Septuagesima,
until Easter.

Whilst this Council was held at Mantua, Richard the Normane with his son
William, took and occupied certain places of the Roman seat, as Capua,
Beneuent, and others. Hildebrand was sent against Richard, and constrained him
to yield up again such places as he had taken. The Pope attending Hildebrand
at Pise, they returned together from thence unto Rome, R. Barns.

This Pope Alexander gave Lanfrancus Archbishop of Canterbury, for the
victory obtained against Berengarius, touching Transubstantiation, two
Archiepiscopall Mantles, or Palls, the one of honor, and the other of love.

Histories recite at length how the Pope Alexander was handled by Hildebrand,
who succeeded him, and how finally he detained him in great miseries, after he
had been beaten and outraged of him. And after this time Hildebrand retained
to himself all the revenues of the Church of Rome, and assembled great sums
of silver. After then that Alexander was dead, under the miserable servitude of
Hildebrand, the year of our Lord, 1074. the same day at night he was
Inthronized in the Papal seat by his soldiers, without the consent of the
Clergy or people, least if he had tarried too long, an other had prevented
him. In his election none of the Cardinals had subscribed. Whereunto when the
Abbot of Clugny was come, Hildebrand said unto him: Thou have tarried too long
brother. The Abbot answered. And thou Hildebrand have made too much haste, that
occupiest the Apostolic seat against the Canons, before the Pope thy Lord be
buried.

But how Hildebrand was put in possession, in what manner he lived, how he drew
Cardinals to him which should be witnesses of his life and doctrine, how
miserably he tormented them, and with what heresies he infected the world,
what periuries, what great treasons he committed, hardly can many describe
them. Yet the blood of so many Christians shead, whereof he was author and
principal cause, cries yet higher then all that. Behold what Benno says.

Hanno the second Archbishop of Colongne, caused both the eyes to be put out of
certain Judges which had condemned a poor woman: of which, one Judge lost but
one eye, for that he brought the other unto trial. In memory of this
Judgment, were erected Images without eyes. Naucler.

Nauclerus also and others do tell here of a rich and mighty

Gregory Pope, 7. of that name, before called Hildebrand, Gregory. 7.
borne at Siennes in Tuscane, ruled at Rome 12. years, and one

Having abandoned the Monastery of Clugny, where he was a Monk, and being
come to Rome, he insinuated himself into the familiarity of Laurence an
Archpriest, of whom he learned Magike Arts and Negromancie: which Arts the
said Laurence being yet young, had learned of that devilish Monster Syluester,
Pope, second of that name, with certain others. There was a certain
particular intelligence betwixt this Laurence Thoaphilacte, John Gratian, and
Hildebrand, all Archpriests or Cardinals of the Sinagogue of Rome. Archpriests
and Cardinals.
Wherefore Hildebrand did whatsoever he would with Theophilacte, whilst he was
in the Popes office, under the name of Benet the ninth. But which is more,
until he came to be Pope, nothing was done under the other Popes but at his
pleasure. When he list (as Benno says) he would shake his skirtes, and fire
would come out like sparks: and by such miracles he abused the eyes of simple
people, as if it had been some sign of sanctetie. And therefore says Benno,
when the devil could not persecute publicly Jesus Christ by the Painims, he
disposed himself fraudulently to destroy his name by that false Monk, under
the show and color of religion.

Authors rehearse that this Hildebrand poisoned seven or eight Popes, by the
service of Gerard Brazut, to the end by that means he might the sooner come
unto the Papacy. Yet during those great troubles, he handled all things so
subtly, that none doubted he by any means aspired to the seat. And although
he was not Pope by name, yet in effect he was the Organe and only Instrument
of him that was ordained Pope, or of all his wicked inventions: and by little
and little, he practiced under the other Popes, that which he executed in his
own Popedom. This notable Hypocrite under the color of Canons, and a
certain piety, he did whatsoever he would, although he was the most unjust
and the wickeddest in the world. He accused Alexander the second his Lord and
Master, because he had sought succors and help of the Emperor against his
aduersaties: and said it was not reasonable (according to Canons) that he
should enjoy the Papal dignity, which had demanded succors of a profane
Prince. Having dismissed the said Alexander of his dignity, he imprisoned him,
and caused him secretly to die, and incontinently usurped the Papal seat,
whilst men prepared for the obsequies and funerals of the dead. He
communicated his silver and counsel with Brazut, and certain Jews his
familiars, by the means of which, he found many tongues at his hire, which
cried with an high voice (yea even before Alexander was buried) S. Peter the
Apostle has chosen Hildebrand: and they placed him in the Papal Chair under
the name of Gregory the 7. The 1000. year after the destruction of Jerusalem.
And this was done the 1000, year after the destruction of Jerusalem: In the
which year the 6. Vicars of Satan began to attribute unto themselves openly
the name of God, and the office and virtue of Jesus Christ, true God, and true
man. For as soon as the said Gregory had bin declared and ordained Pope, the
same was proclaimed, that the true Vicar of Christ Jesus was chosen. And also
the same Gregory appropriated unto himself that which is said of Jesus Christ
in the second Psalm. He overthrew the laws of God in forbidding marriage to
Priests, and casting kings out of their seats. Apoc. 20. c. 8. Croisaides
against the Turks.
It was he which shead out the first seeds of the war of Gog and Magog, which
were the most pernicious and bloody that ever was, and which his familiar
Vrbain 2. of that name, afterward pursued. Baleus Anglus.

The beginning of the mischiefs and extreme calamities of Croysades against
the Turks, under a show of recovering Jerusalem.
Benno a Crdinall, rehearses the history following. The History of Hildebrand
his Negromancie.
One day (says he) as Gregory came from Albe to Rome, he forgot to bring with
him a book of Negromancie which he held very dear, and without the which he
never went, or at least very seldom. Whereof remembering himself at the door
of Laterane, he called hastily two of his most familiars which accustomed to
serve him in all his wickedness and villainies: and commanded them that they
should bring him the said book with all expedition, straightly charging them
that they should not presume so much as to open the book by the way, and that
upon curiosity they should not enquire upon the secrets thereof. But the more
he commanded them, the more inflamed he their curiosity diligently to seek
the secrets thereof. As then returning, they had opened the book, and had
curiously read the devilish commandments of that Art, suddenly the Angels
of Satan presented themselves: the multitude of which, and the horror of them,
brought those two young men almost out of their wits, that with much adoo could
they come to themselves. And as they themselves rehearsed it, those evil
spirits insisted strongly, saying. Wherefore have you called us? wherefore have
you disquietted us? Command us quickly what you will have us to do, else we
will fall upon you if you keep us any longer here. One of the young men then
answered; cast us down these walls straight. And saying so, he showed the^
with the hand certain high walls nigh the town of Rome, which in a moment
these evil spirits overthrew to the earth.

They then thus terrified, trembling and almost out of breath, scantly could
come to Rome unto their master. Behold what Benno says, who was in that time.

Gregory being come to the papal dignity, began incontinently to solicit
that the Canons which his predecessors had made by his cautelous Council,
touching Simonie and singleness of life in Priests and Monks, should be
observed: not to the end he might wholly abolish the wicked and detestable
merchandise which was made of Ecclesiastical Benefices: but that under some
color of honesty, he might take from Princes the power to confer and
bestow them, and to the end that by that mean all Bishops might be reduced and
brought under the power and authority of the Roman seat; which because of
the right of Inuesture, were obliged and beholding unto Princes, more then unto
the Pope of Rome. And although that the Emperor Henry were the greatest of all
Princes, yet this arrogant and proud merchant judged it best, A Council at
Rome.
first to touch and deal with him tragically for the cause of Simonie. He
assembled a Council at Rome in the place of Laterane, touching these things:
but the Emperor being hindered because of his wars, could not intend to
debate his right in the Sinode. The Pope notwithstanding had taken the matter
so at heart, that for that cause he ceased not to use both treasons and
murders, and that more is, he stirred in many places intestine and inward
wars, which engendered all manner of calamities. For first he laid ambushes
for the Emperor, he sought by diverse means to cause him to die. In so much
as he sought to have slain him even in the Church as he should be at his
prayers.

The Cardinal Benno rehearses thus the History. The Emperor (says he) had
a custom often to go make his prayers in the Church of S. Mark, in the Mount
Auentine. As then, Hildebrand enquired diligently by certain spies, What
treason is there that Popes will not excogitate?
of all that he did: he gave charge to mark the place wherein the Emperor
prayed oftnest either standing or on his knees, and suborned one, promising him
a great sum of money, to lay great stones on the beams or upper lofts of the
Church (see the holy council of this Pope) and that he should lay the^ so well,
that when the Emperor should make his prayers, he might let them fall on his
head to dash out his brains. But as he which had enterprised such a villainy,
was at hand to accomplish it, and went about to handle and remove a stone, the
heavy for him, the stone by the weight deceived him: and the scaffold which
was on the beams being broken, the stone and the poor miserable man, by a
just judgment of God, fell upon the pauement of the Temple, and was all burst
with the same stone. After the Romans understood how all things was past, they
bound the feet of that wicked villain, and by the space of 3. days trailed
him through the streets of the town. But using their accustomed humanity,
commanded he should be buried.

The son of Benno says here yet further: that John Bishop of Port, who was
Hildebrands Secretary and great familiar, coming into the Pulpit which was in
S. Peter's Church, said amongst many other things, in the hearing of the people
and Clergy, Hildebrand has done such a thing, and we also as deseruers,
should all be burned alive: The Host cast into the fire by Gregory the
seventh.
meaning to give to understand that which he had done of the Sacrament of the
body of our Lord. Whereof Hildebrand demanding Council of a certain thing
(as of old the Painims did of their Idols) cast it into the fire, because it
gave him do answer, although the Cardinals which were then present spoke
against his deed.

This is a beginning of the fruit of that cursed decree of Transubstantiation,
applied unto Charms and Inchauntments.

The Emperor excommunicated.
He excommunicated also the said Emperor Henry, without lawful accusation,
without Canonical appellation, without form of justice: yea even for that he
was but too obedient unto him. He divided also from him the Princes of the
Empire, and sought by secret treasons to destroy him, but God preserved him. O
strange treason proceeding from the sanctuary, or rather from him who seemed
to be the high Priest to govern the Church, to have superintendancie over
Judges and Elders. By menaces also he constrained Bishops to swear that they
should not defend his cause, neither should they favor or help him in any
thing, drawing violently the scripture to make them serve his false dealing.
Notwithstanding (says Benno) so soon as he arose up from his seat to
excommunicate the Emperor, the seat (which had lately been made of new and
strong wood) by the will of God, of it self brake in many pieces in a terrible
manner. In such sort as it gave to know, that he that did sit upon it, would
sow terrible schisms against the Church, by so arrogant and presumptuous a
manner of excommunication. This says Benno.

But when he saw that all his Ambushes could serve him for nothing, he began
to use open force and emnities, and after he had excommunicated Henry,
declaring all his subjects acquitted of their oath of fidelity, which they had
delivered him, he sent the Crown of the Empire unto Rodolphe Sauoic, with this
Latin verse, such as it is.

Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho. That is to say, the Rock has
given the Diadem unto Peter, and Peter gives it unto Rodolphe. Henry then
being for this cause sore troubled, laid down his royal apparel and came
toward him into the Town of Canuse, with his wife and little son, in the
time of a strong and sharp winter, and through a very dangerous way. Being
before the gate of the City (says Benno) from morning till night, without
having either meat or drink, in apparel of cloth, and barefooted, being
made a spectacle for Angels and men, he required pardon in all humility. He
endured three whole days in a very lamentable affliction; In so much that
Hildebrand (who took his pleasure the mean while with his whores and Monks)
mocked him. He desired sore that he might have entry into the City, but it was
refused him: And as with great instance he demanded it by the space of three
days, he was answered that the Pope had no leisure to speak with him. Henry
taking not in evil part that they would not suffer him to come into the City,
remained in the suburbs not without great grieuance. For the winter was
sharper then of custom. Yet to the end he would offend no person, he kept 3.
whole days there without departing. Finally, the fourth day, at the request of
the Countess Matilde (who as Histories say, loved a little too much the Pope)
and of the Abbot of Clugny, and of the Earl of Sauoy, called Adelrans, he was
permitted to enter of the Pope. But when he demanded pardon of the Pope,
Arrogance diabolical.
setting his Crown betwixt his hands and in his power, he would neither pardon
nor absolve him of excommunication, unless first he promised to purge himself
in a full Sinode of his fault, with other unlawful and unreasonable conditions.
All which things he promised and confirmed them by estate: yet would they not
remit him into his Kingdom.

Can any body have have a more lively portraite of the Image of Antichrist?

The Princes of Italy, after they knew this, Sledan recites it in his 3. book
of the 4 Monarchies.
were exceedingly offended that the Emperor had so made his agreement with
Hildebrand, and that so dishonestly and vilely he had submitted himself to
him, who had invaded the Papacy by wicked practices, and who had polluted and
defiled all with murders and adulteries. etc.

After this, the Pope with his Cardinals glorying that he had brought the
Emperor into servitude, durst now adventure to enterprise greater things. But
the Emperor afterward took courage, and straightway dispatched all that, by
taking Arms: Wars between the Emperor and Rodolphe.
And after many sharp and hard wars he vanquished Rodolphe in battle. Who
having his right hand cut off, made call all the Bishops and Priests on his
side. Which being come, after one had brought him his hand, he spoke in this
sort. I confess that this is worthily come unto me, and well bestowed upon me.
Rodolphe his repentance.
Behold the hand wherewith I have delivered the oath of fidelity to my Lord
Henry: but at the solicitation of you, I have so many times unluckily fought
against him, and also falsified my faith unto him: and therefore I have
received a reward such as my perjury meriteth. See if you have guided me in a
right way. So then and now keep to your Prince the fidelity which you have
promised unto him. As for me, I go to my Fathers: and incontinently after,
Rodolphe yielded up the spirit.

After this man was dead, they elected an other by the commandment of the
Pope: namely, Herman of Saxony, Count, or Earl of Lucenbourg, who not without
the Lords will, was slain by a woman, who let fall a great stone upon his head
as he assailed a Castle in Almaine. And the malice of this cruel tirant could
not be repressed, but it stirred up a third Competitor to this good Prince:
Egbert of Misue slain
namely one Egbert, Earl of Misue, his parent: but being surprised by the
Emperors people, he was miserably put to death.

What man would not be moved by such judgments of God, to obey his
Magistrate, and abhor all rebellion and sedition: yet this Roman seat was
never stirred therewith: but finally wrought the Emperors son Henry to
rebel against his father.

The writings of Henry the 4. sent to the King of France, by which he
complains of his sons injuries, and of such as drew him on to do them, do
at large declare this tragedy, and at this day are to be seen.

Matilde Countess, kept ordinary company with the Pope, and never departed
from him, as his harlot, Matilde the Popes harlot, named the daughter of S.
Peter.
despising Aron her husband, Marquess of Est. In so much that she was
commonly called S. Peter his daughter. She was divorced by the Roman seat
for some affinity that was pretended to be betwixt them. From thence came it
as Lambert Hirsueldensis has left in writing, that all people accused them,
that there was a villainous and dishonest love betwixt them: and every one
said she lay with the Pope, and had unlawful company of him which had taken
from Priests holy and honest marriage. The Abbot of Vrsperge, called Conrade de
Lihtenaw, adds this in his Chronicle. Certain it is that Hildebrand was not
chosen of God, but brought in of himself by fraud and force of silver, who
overthrew the Ecclesiastical order, troubled the Kingdom of the Christian
Empire, procured the death of a peaceable King, maintained periuries,
entertained noyses and dissentions, sowed disorders, stirred scandalles, made
divorces, and shook and ouerthrewe all which seemed well ordained amongst them
which lived holily, etc. First, he was a great hypocrite, who with force of
excommunications, deprived Ministers of the Church, of their wives, and filled
the world with an infinite number of buggeries. In such sort, that that great
City which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt: that is to say, the Roman
Church, was made after this time, a true Sodom and Egypt, his buggeries and
Idolatries.

In the mean time he moved marvelous tragedies in Italy, France, Almaine,
and England, Troubles on all sides stirred by the Pope.
which would be too long to rehearse in this place; and such dealing displeased
many persons and wise men which were in that time. For to speak neither of
England nor Italy, as well in Almaine as in France, there was 24. Bishops and
more, which together with their Clergy were married, and defended, and
constantly maintained their marriage.

He commanded Clerks to vow singlenes, that is to say, not to marry: briefly,
the most tiranically that could be, he forbad Priests marriages, commanding
them to leave their wives; or otherwise to be deprived of their offices and
prebe^ds. He willed that from henceforth none be admitted to Ecclesiastical
orders, unless he first promise and vow chastity.

Also he ordained that none should hear Mass of a Priest that had a concubine.

He forbad Monks to eat flesh at any time. De consec. did. 5. c. Carinum.

He commanded that no Christian should eat flesh on the Saturday. De consec.
did. 5. Carinum. 36.

Why do not Monks observe that commandment as well as they pretend to
observe their vow of chastity? For they are for like power.

He ordained the offering of the Mass.

He Canonized one named Liberius an Arrian, and commanded his Feast should be
celebrated, as Benno witnesses. He commanded tenthes should be paid to
Priests. And took from the King of Poloigne his Crown, interdicting his
Kingdom. He condemned the opinion of Berengarius touching the Sacrament, and
was the first they say, that preached Transubstantiation. He condemned as
sacrilege, a Layman possessing Tithes. Him that gave Inuestures of Benefices,
as an heretic: and he that received them of a Layman, as an Idolater. So by
this means made he the Popes leaden dagger so strong as her power was able to
drive back the Iron force of the Empire.

Henry opposed himself against the force and enterprises of the said
Hildebrand, and the year of our Lord, 1083. in a Sinode that he caused to
assemble at Bresse, after all crimes were laid against him, before the asse^bly
by good right he was deposed from his Papal seat, and so appointed in his
place an other Pope, Clement. 3.
which they named Clement the third. He sent straight his Army to Rome, drive
out Gregory, and to bring in Clement. The town was by him brought unto such
poverty, that the Inhabitants were constrained to purchase peace. But
Hildebrand not thinking to be in presence of the Emperor, and being abandoned
and rejected of the Romans, fled unto Salerne, the year of the Lord, 1086.
where he finished his life in exile, which had caused so many to die, by the
sword, by famine, by poisons, and other sorts of deaths.

Yet the Papists made a brute run, that after his death he wrought many
miracles: yea even after, a Priest of Saxony, (as Sigebert witnesses) as he
died, had seen him tormented in hell.

Antonine and Vincent rehearse that this Hildebrand being at the article and
point of death, ready to yield up his soul, called to him a Cardinal his
familiar, unto whom he confessed both to God and S. Peter, and to all the
Church, that he had grievously sinned, and had not done his office and duty in
the Apostolic state, and that by the persuasion of the devil, he stirred
hatreds, enmities and wars amongst many through the world. He commanded the
said Cardinal to transport him toward the Emperor Henry the fourth, and to
cry him mercy for the faults he had committed against him, and that he should
deliver him from the excommunication, and likewise all his, as well alive as
dead. Anto. and R. Barnes.

Multiplication of the orders of Munkerie.
In this time the order of the Templers began, Templers. Rugular Chanons.
Grandmont.
and the order of Regular Chanons, in a difference from secular Chanons.
Volateran.

The order of the Monks of Grandmont, of the rule of S. Benet, took his
beginning of one named Stephen of France, which carried hair upon his flesh.
Volaterane.

The order of Charterux began, Bruno borne at Coloigne, Chartreux.
a Schoolemaister, and after a Chanon of Rheimes, having heard the voice of a
Doctor renowned in his life, when he made his obsequies saying, I am condemned
by a just judgment of God, was afraid, and for suertie entered into an
Hermitage with certain Disciples, and founded the Charter house in the Country
of Dalphine, in the Diocese of Grenople, by the means and help of Hugues
Bishop of Grenople, who also received the habit of Chartreux. And so began
the order, the year of Christ, 1084. Chron. Sigeb. and Emil. lib. 5. and Plati.

The year of Christ 1089. in the time of Gregory the seventh, and of the
Emperor Henry the fourth. The Abbey of S. Savior of Andim, of the order of S
Benet, in the country of Hainault, in a little Island called in Latin commonly
Aquacinctum, or Aquis cinctum, was began by two noble persons, Sicherus, and
Gualterus, which went unto Ancelme of Ribemont, a noble man, and demanded the
said I Will, The Abbey of Andim. Victor. 3.
being part of his patrimony, where the Abbey was builded. Sigeb.

Victor 3. of that name, borne in Italy, called before Didier, Montcassin, and
Cardinal of the Court of Rome, was made Pope, not by election of Cardinals,
or of the Roman people, but was there inthronized by that harlot Matilde, and
the Normaines of that faction, and governed a year and four months.

After he had received the Papal dignity as Gregory his successor, he
began lustily to maintain his part against the Emperor and the Pope
Clement: and he which was a Monk to defend his predecessor Monk, according
as he had been informed by the said Matilde, the lover of Gregory. But death
kept him from showing by effect, yea with some great public calamity, that
poison which he had hid in his heart, and the enraged hatred which he had
conceived against them. For the year of the Lord 1088. he finished his life
with his Papacy, and that sooner then he looked for. Some Authors, as Herman.
Contract. Carsulan, Peter de Premonstre, and many others, recite that he died
of poison which was put in the Challice by his Subdeacon as he sung Mass. Yet
Vincent is of an other opinion as Platina rehearses it, when he says that he
dyed of a Flux of the body, and that is not far from a suspicion of an
impoysonment: For they which take poison do sometimes fall into a Flux of the
belly, because the guts and inward parts are wasted and corrupted. Some
Historiographers, slaves of the Roman seat, have maliciously said that this
was procured him by the Emperor Henry, others by the Pope Clement, although
this wicked act was done by no other but by his Chaplain, doing his office of
Subdeacon. Some have left by writing, that in this time many prodigious and
strange things against nature appeared. For domestical birds, as hens,
geese, pigeons, and peacocks, fled into the mountains and became wild, and that
the greatest part of fishes, as well of Rivers as of the Sea, died.

Philip King of France forsook his wife Berthe, the daughter of Baudwin,
Count of Holland, of whom he had a son and a daughter. Chronicles of the
Kings of France.

The Relickes of S. Nicholas, were transported from the city of Mirrhe, into
the Town of Bar. Whereof came that famous Idol which gives the name of Saint
Nicholas in Lorraine.

Chaunges of many Dukes in the Country of Almaigne.
Who can here express how many evils and calamities that Intestine and civil
war of Almaigne has caused, being stirred by the Pope, not only amongst the
greatest Princes which were slain therein, but also in change of siegnories?
The Emperor Henry, after that his enemy Rodolphe was dead, The calamities of
the civil war of the Almaines.
(about four years after he had been placed in his Imperial seat) gave the
Duchy of Sorabie to Frederick de Stanfeu his son in law.

The race of Franconian Dukes in a small time perished altogether. Egbert
Marquess of Misue, unto whom the Bishops had given hope to have the Empire,
after the death of Rodolphe was also slain in the battle of the Saxons, which
the Emperor Henry gained. Also Gebbard Father of Lotharie, who after was
Emperor, dyed in the wars. Briefly, the forces of Almaigne were wholly
debilitated and changed in this unlucky war of the Popes.

Vrbane. 2.
Vrbane 2. of that name, borne of Tuscane, called before Otho a Monk of
Clugny, and under Hildebrand, Cardinal of Oftie, was inthronized in the
Papacy against the will of the Emperor, by such as had inthronized Victor,
namely by that harlot Matilde, and the Norans then Lords of Pouille, and ruled
12. years 4. months, and 19. days.

This is the Disciple and household servant of Hildebrand, whom Benno calls in
despite Turban, a schismaticke, an heretic, and companion of Liberius the
Arrian, which Gregory the seventh canonized as has been said. Who (says he)
for fear that the poison of their errors might not be known, after the
manner of Sorcerers mingled honey therewith: For subtly and under an intent to
deceive, he added holy scriptures to his lies, and perseuering in his errors
with his Hildebrand, he was sent into hell with the Apostate Angels.

Vrbain (say some Authors of our time) perturber of the world, or rather
whirle-winde of the tempests of Towns, the familiar of Hildebrand, watered,
maintained, and caused to grow the pernicious seeds which his predecessors had
before dispearsed here and there. He excommunicated Guibert Archbishop of
Rauenna, which was named Clement the third, because he had been chosen by the
Emperor.

At this time all things were in great trouble, as well in Almaigne as in other
Nations, by the disputations then happening betwixt the Clergy and the people,
but because Vrbane would not absolve any which had been excommunicated by
Hildebrand, fearing to fall in danger of his life, went secretly out of
Melphe: the second at Troy in Pouillie: the third at Plaisance: the fourth at
Cleremont, the year of the Lord, 1094. and the fifth at Tours; in which he
confirmed the acts of the monster Hildebrand, and made new Ecclesiastical
ordinances: to the end the Papal authority might in nothing be diminished in
that which had been acquired by violence and deceit.

He ordained that a Clarke might not receive Inuesture of a benefice of a
secular Prince whatsoever: he be. He writ to Matilde, an ancient friend and
lover of the Roman Church, and armed all her sinagogue against them of the
Emperors side, whom he calls heretics.

He gave also to the Archbishop of Millaine, the Pall Archiopischopall, and so
confirmed the orders and Sects of Chartreux, and of the Monks of Cisteaux.
Such as had wives, after they were promoted unto the order of Deacons, he
deprived the^ of their offices, taking also from Priests, their sons, their
estates, and administrations. He made the Archbishop of Toledo (who had made
an oath unto him) Primate of all Spain, to the end by that mean the beast of
Rome might make subject all Spain unto him. He stirred Christian Princes to
take arms against the Sarasins, under color to recover the Town of
Jerusalem. And for that purpose he marked with the sign of the Cross three
hundredth thousand men; and in the mean while he guided all things for his own
profit. For the year of Christ 1095. because he would not find means to do
his businesses as he would, for many tumults and seditions raised against him,
he took occasion to depart from Rome and come into France. He commanded to
assemble an universal Council of all the church in the City of Cleremont in
Anuegue: Council at Cleremont.
and made an Oration of great efficacy. For straight there crossed themselves
to the combat at least three hundredth thousand men, all ready to go unto
Jerusalem, of the number of which, there were many valiant Princes, who to make
money, sold their own lands and signeories, as Hughe the great, the King of
France his brother. Robert brother of the Duke of Normandy. Robert or
Rambert, Count of Flaunders. Raimond Count of S. Giles. Stephen Count of Blois.
Brunamon or Bayamond, Prince of Pouille: and Godphrey de Bullon, who was the
chief, with his two brethren, Eustace and Baudwin. Also Ansele of Ribemont,
and many others.

He excommunicated the King of Galatia, because he had put a Bishop in prison,
and exacted this oath of such as he would promote to orders. So God help me,
and these holy Evangelists of God. He made also certain their statutes,
namely Clerks should every day say the hours of the Virgin Mary (a very
Idolatrous thing) and unto her to dedicate the Saturday with a Mass. He
ordained that no person should come into Popish orders, unless he were a virgin,
that is to say unmarried, whoremonger, or buggerer, as their acts showed. As
for Priests they must needs be without wives, although they passed not for
whordomes. He forbad that Bishops should be ordained without titles, and that
faith should be kept unto such as Popes had excommunicated. He held himself
close for the space of two years, in the house of one Peter Leon, for the
fear he had of one John Paien, a Roman Citizen, where also he died, the year
of the Lord 1099. and his body was buried secretly beyond Tiber, for fear of
enemies. The same year died also Guibert, which was called Clement the 3.
after he had seen three Popes dead in his time. Theodorus Bibliander writes
in this sort of that Hildebrand aforesaid and this Vrbane, speaking to the
Princes of al estates. Hildebrand (says he) in inciting the Emperor of Greece
against the Turks, The evil which comes of Croisadoes against the Turks.
sowed the seed of the war of Gog and Magog, against which cries the blood of
the Church, shead with a miserable ruin and loss, by the sword of his tongue.
O how much blood has been shead at the solicitation of Vrbane the second! to
the end that under the color of making war to amplify the Christian
religion, and recover the sepulcher of the Lord, he might be put again in the
Roman seat, after having oppressed such as were of the faction of Guibert.

Frederick Barbarossa did so the year of the Lord 1188. Frederic 1228. The
King of France Lewis 9. who was a Saint after his death, did as much the year
1288. Sigismond did it twice. Anno. 1409. Vladislaus King of Hungary, Anno.
1420. who dyed nigh Varne. And at this day what shall we judge of such as bring
the Turk into Christendom to avenge their particular injuries?

This Pope Vrbane by excommunications constrained Philip King of France to take
again Berthe his first wife, which he Monstrell, upon the sea: and to leave
his second Bertrande, who was wife of the Count de Angiou.

Nice in Bithinie is taken, and after the Town of Jerusalem, by the
Christians, whereof Godfrey of Bulloine was constituted King. Naucler.

Antioche was taken by Boemondus a Norman, son of Robert Duke of Pouille.
Supp. Chron.

The reward that those noble Combatants and fighters for Christendom got, was
the carrying away of Relickes. The Spear which pierced the side of Jesus
Christ, was found in the said Town, in the Church of Saint Andrewe. Supp.
Chron. Robert Count of Flaunders, brought away the Arm of Saint George, which
he sent into the Abbey of Anchin. Sigeb. Godfrey was the first King of
Jerusalem. Baudwin his brother, is called the second. Naucler.

Paschall second of that name, borne of Italy, Paschall. 2.
called before Rainer a Monk, and lately created Cardinal, of the title of S.
Clement, by Hildebrand his master, succeeded Vrbane the second in the Papacy.
When this proud Squire knew he was chosen, he would not mount into the Papal
seat, until first the people had cried thrice, Saint Peter has chosen Rainer.

After this, being apparrelled in a Scarlet Roabe, and a Theater or Crown
upon his head, mounted upon a white steed, he was led to the place of
Laterane, where the Papal Scepter was given him: and he was girt with a
Baudrier or large Girdle, at which hung seven kayes, and as many seals, New
blasphemies of the 7. kayes.
as Ensigns or tokens of the Papal power (so much did this great Antichrist
and adversary of God magnify himself) by which things signified, that
according to the graces of the holy Ghost, which they distinguished into seven)
he had the power to open and shut Churches.

By this means this harlot mounted on horsbacke, being come unto a perfect
age, in such sort increased, that she got upon the Beast with ten horns: which
she had governed until our time in great pride and arrogancy, as had bin
foretold. Apo. 13.17.

This sovereign Vicar of Satan on earth, employed all his time in wars and
seditions, whilst Godfrey de Bulloine and other Christian Princes fought
against the Sarrasins in Siria. And to the end he might not be esteemed less
the^ Hildebrand, he sought all the means that might serve to the greatness of
his Roman seat. He furiously deposed from their dignities, all the Bishops
and Abbots which had been ordained by the Emperor. He sent into exile one
Albert Theodoricke, and Maginulphe, who aspired unto the Papacy. He assembled
at Rome a Council of the Bishops of Italy and France, Anno. 1101. because of
an opinion of a Bishop of Fluence touching Antichrist already borne, as
Sabellicus rehearses. For seeing so many mischiefs committed in the Church,
he said Antichrist was already manifested but he was repressed by many
injuries done unto him.

Nicholaits after the Pope. See 10.6. q. 1. ca. Decimus.
He again prohibited Ministers to marry, as all his Prelate predecessors had
done, and called that marriage the heresy of the Nicholaits. He pronounced
that they were great heresies, to make no account of yielding obedience to the
Roman church, and to despise censures, and also to receive Inuesture of
Benefices at the hand of a profane man. He renewed the statute of paying
tenths to Priests that said Mass, and would needs it should be a sin
against the holy Ghost to sell tenths.

In this Sinode he renewed the excommunication of Gregory the seventh, and of
Vrbane the second, against the Emperor Henry the fourth, and published it
again. And which is more, the rage of this cruel tyrant was so inflamed
against him, that he stirred the son of the said Emperor, called Henry the
fifth, to take arms against his Father: an horrible thing to speak.

There was never inhumanitie nor cruel act, if this were not.

The Son, yea that only Son, not angered or stirred up by any public or
particular injury, despised not only his Parent, The disloyalty of the
Emperors son, Henry. 5.
neither only abandoned and destituted him of his succors and help: but under
color of the Church and the public good, assaulted him by arms, besieged
him, by circumvention took him traitorously, despoyled him of his Imperial
dignity, and made him die a poor miserable man, in great captivity and
heaviness. And all this he did (says Rodolphe Galterus) not by the
commandment of any barbarous tyrant, Henry. 5.
not at the instigation of some Phalaris, but by the Council of the holy
Father of Rome. Rejoice (says he) you Caligula and Nero, and you all which
have been renowned for cruelty, for you have now found one that shall take
away the memory of your name so cruel, because he goes much before you: that
is to say the Pope of Rome, who commands the son to draw his sword against
the Father.

Henry then the fourth, was dispoyled of his Imperial dignity: and finally
his son Henry the fifth by treason took him prisoner, the fifty year of his
Empire, as he went unto an assembly held at Magunce he died, after he had been
miserably handled in the City of Liege, Anno. 1108. after the Chron. of Eusebius.
or 1116. after others.

But the enmity of this Papal Monster was not yet appeased by this death, for
in an enraged manner he did exercise his cruelty against him after his death,
commanding by Letters that his body should be unburied, cast out of the church,
and transported from Liege to Spire, and to be deprived by the space of five
years of Sepulcher.

Behold how this proud Antichrist obeys Magistrates ordained of God!

But see what God did in the mean time. At Spire blood ran out of Loaves of
bread, as Vrspergensis faith in his Cronographie.

The year of the Lord, 1. Pet. 2. cha. Romans 13.3.
1106. he made an assembly of many Princes and Bishops at Guardascall in
Lombardie, with whom he handled matters appertaining to the Faith (that is to
say, concerning the Popes kitchen) as of homages, of fealties, and of oaths
that Bishops had before made unto Lay persons. He despoiled also the
Archbishop of Rauenna of his lands, applying them unto his own profit. And
this Pope not content with such cruelty, caused the body of Guibert Archbishop
of the said place of Rauenna to be taken up, who had bin chosen Pope by the
Emperor Henry the 4. in the time of Gregore 7. six years after he was laid
in the Sepulcher. Henry 4.


Now as for Henry the 4. he was an excellent Emperor, meet for an Empire, of a
noble race, and an incomparable spirit.

O that other Princes had possessed such hearts, and had not attributed so much
unto that Roman harlot.

He was affable and benign toward all, liberal to wards the poor: It is
said that during his life he fought with Ensign displaied, threescore and two
times. After many Histories.

Henry. 5.
Henry the fifth of that name, son of Henry the fourth, and Berthe, Marquess
of Italy; was chosen at Magunce, by the Governors and chief of the Empire,
and reigned twenty years. Chron. Palm.

Lewis le Gros.
Lewis le Gros, otherwise called the good Lewis, 39. King of France, reigned
28. years, and was crowned at Orleance, Sens. It is said of him, that he often
disguised himself in the habit of a poor man, or of a woman, or servant, the
better to know the truth of some secret matters of his kingdom. He was
founder of the Abbey of S. Victor in Paris.

Henry the fifth went to Rome, to appease seditions stirred since Gregory the
seventh, and continued in Victor, Vrbane and Paschal the second. The Emperor
and other Princes would use the authority, right and privileges of ancient
Emperors. For Charlemaigne and others which had obtained the Empire since
three hundredth years and more, under threescore and three Popes, bestowed
Bishopprickes, Abbaies, and other Benefices. Against this authority and
custom, the Pope following by Sinodall decrees, maintained that
Ecclesiastical Benefices ought not to be given by Laie-persons, and
excommunicated as Simoniackes, as well such as received them, as them that gave
them. This Emperor then being at Rome, after he had kissed the feet of the
holy Father, prayed him to confirm and to like of such as had ordained
Bishops: But as he refused to confirm them, Henry 5.
he was taken by the Emperor and imprisoned, and came not out until he had
confirmed them all, and yielded him the right of Inuesture given unto
Charlemaigne, and thereupon making Letters and Seals, and also confirmed the
said Emperor. Yet after the Pope had said Mass and was in his Chair (says
Masseus) behold the soldiers came suddenly in, crying, Yield unto Caesar that
which is Caesar's: and assailed as well him as all the Clergy, carrying them
all out from thence and spoiled them, without leaving them any thing, then put
they them in prison in the Mountain of Soracte.

Finally, after debates and discentions were appeased, The Inuesture of
benefices yielded unto the Emperor.
and the Emperor Henry crowned, Paschal renewed the privilege of Inuesture of
Bishops, and pronounced before all the assembly, that whosoever made of no
force the said privilege was excommunicated.

There was also sung Gloria in exelsis, because the peace was made betwixt the
Emperor and the Pope. But so soon as the Emperor was returned into Almaigne,
this perjured Traitor revoked all he had promised with solemn oaths:
affirming that he accorded with the Emperor, not of his good will, but by force
and constraint.

After this, he condemned that privilege, and excommunicated the Emperor,
and stirred marvelous Tragedies, which incontinently were published throughout
all the wide world.

He assembled a Council at Troyes in Champaigne in France, A Council at
Troyes in Campaigne.
wherein again he forbadde marriage unto the Priests of France, as
Hildebrand had before forbidden the Priests of Almaigne, even to the chasing of
some Prelates out of their Seats, because they were married. Desiring to
increase the Papal authority, he renewed the quarrel of giving
Bishopprickes, which had caused great calamities throughout the Regions of
Europe. Ancelme an Archbishop of England, and a Monk, augmented the
Impudencies of this Pope, by such Sophisticke persuasions as he had before done
them of Vrbaine. For he was their Councellor at Rome, and their Vicar in
England.

The King of England deprived of his right by an Archbishop. Luke 22.25.
Marriage of Priests condemned in England.
This Ancelme tirannously deprived Henry the first of that name, King of
England, of the right that Kings have to provide officers used by the Kings of
Israel, David, Solomon, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, and others; likewise
against the saying of Jesus Christ. The Kings of Nations have rule over them,
etc. But so it is not with you. He also perpetually condemned the lawful
marriage of Priests in England, as has been said: against the holy laws, as
well of the old, as of the new Testament, and the manifest examples of the
Primitive Church: to the and by the suggestion of Satan, the Clergy might
serve there in all Sodomie to the Dragon called the devil, and to Antichrist
his Vicar.

Bertol Duke of Zeringuen and of Souabe, founded the City of Fribourg in
Brisgoye. Naucler.

Paschall assembled a Council at Laterane, wherein he revoked the right of
Inuestures, accorded unto Henry the fifth, whereby arose a new schism. And the
Popes Legates declared the said Henry to be excommunicated; whereof rose great
evils. For the Emperor returned to Rome the second time, and the Pope Paschall
was constrained to fly.

Barnard of the age of 22. years, accompanied with 30. persons, entered into
the Religion of the Cisteaux, in the time Stephen lived, the third Abbot of
that place.

Emilian and Flaminian, in the month of June, nigh Rauenna and Parma, without
and within. Chron. Sigeb. and Palin.

Cleruaux was founded, whereof S. Barnard was the first Abbot, being of the age
of 27. years, and was there, by the space of 36. years. Naucler.

The fruits of the war of Jerusalem.
Four orders came from Jerusalem. Naucler.
Four new orders of the crossed.
1. The order of Chanons of the Sepulcher of the Lord, and they had double read
crosses. 2 The order of the knights of S. Ihon, otherwise called the knights of
Rhodes, and they wear black apparel, with a white Cross on their breasts. 3
The order of Templers, which have the white habit and the red Cross. 4 The
order of Teutoniques or Almaignes, or otherwise the knights of the Virgin Mary,
which had a white habit and a black Cross.


The Pope Paschal sent to the Bishop of Palerme in Sicilie, the Archiepiscopall
Pall, yet with a condition, that by oath he should bind himself to the Pope
of Rome. The said Bishop humbly sent him word, that he marvelled, and with him
the Princes and Councillors of Sicilie, how the Pope demanded an oath of a
Bishop: seeing Jesus Christ in S. Matthew, cha. 5. had forbidden to swear: and
that it was not found by any Council that it was lawful to exact such an
oath. The Pope sharply answered in these terms. The proud answer of a Pope.
Think thou (says he) that any Council can prescribe a Law to the
Roman Church? Know thou not that all Councels have their perfection and
virtue by the Roman Church? Martin Luther.

In this time lived Hiltpert or Hildebert, Bishop of Mons, a favorer of
Transubstantiation as well as Ancelme.

Matilde or Mehaut Countess, Matilde gives her goods to the Pope.
of the age of 66. years died, and gave her goods by Testament unto the Roman
Church. R. Barnes.

The Emperor Henry was defrauded by the said Testament, for he was cousin of
the said Countess: which after gave occasion of great stirs and murders. R.
Barnes and Naucl.

Baudwin second King of Jerusalem, dyed: and Baudwin his Nephewe, surnamed
Burgo, was created the third King of Jerusalem.

Gelasius Pope, 2. of that name, Gelasius. 2.
was a Monk of Mountcassin, Chancellor of the Roman Church, named John,
Gayotte a City of Campaigne in Italy. Soon after his election, he was
apprehended by Cincius, a mighty man, and imprisoned: but inco^tinently he was
delivered by the people. The Emperor sent his Army to Rome. Gelasius fearing
his coming, fled to Gayette. The Emperor created an other Pope a Spaniard,
called Maurice, otherwise Burdin, Archbishop of Bracare, which was called
Gregory the eight. This done the Emperor returned into Almaigne, and then
began the eighteenth Schism. Schism. 18.
Gelasius condemned the Emperor and the Antepope, and sent into Almaigne the
Bishop Prenestin, to publish the excommunication against the said Henry the
fifth. R. Barnes. Gelasius secretly came to Rome, but he was known of his
enemies, and with much adoo escaping, went for refuge into France. Suppl.
Chron. He ordained a Council at Rheimes, whither came barefooted, Robert of
Lorraine, founder of the order and place of Premonstre: and entreated of the
Pope Gelasius, license to preach the word of God, and also authority and
confirmation of his order. Naucl. Chron. Sigeb.

This Pope had already dedicated the great Church of Saint Laurence at
Florence, and had there placed the Ashes of S. John Baptists bones, newly
brought from Mirrhe, confirming them, and approving them for the true Ashes of
S. John. Supp. Chron.

This Pope Gelasius died of a pleurisy at Clugny, where he was also buried,
having ruled at Rome a year and six months.

Calixt. 2.
Calixt 2. of that name succeeded him, and was 5. years Pope: Guy, (or Guido)
of Burgongne, after Fasc. temp. and the Sea of Histories: or brother, after
Supp. Chron. He was Doctor in the Civil Law, and in Theology. Without
contradiction he was chosen of the Cardinals, and honorably received at Rome.
When the Antepope Burdin heard those news, he met him, thinking to have
hindered him: but he profited nothing, for he was in full battle overcome with
the French help. And being taken by the Pope Calixt, and by the Cardinal of S.
Grisogon, chief of his army, he was set upon a Camel, his face toward the
tail: and in such sort he made him go at his entry, and then imprisoned
him. John le Maire. Fasc. temp. Eghardus says that the said Antepope was
powled and made a Monk: because when he resided at Sutry, he was a party of
many robberies committed upon such as went and came to Rome. Chron. Sigeb.

Calixtus made continue the Council at Rheimes in Champaigne, which Gelasius
had commenced, wherein he excommunicated the Emperor Henry the fifth, as an
enemy of the church. Resignation of Inuestures. Anno. 1122.
This excommunication was about the cause of the quarrel of the Inuestures of
Bishops. John le Maire. Henry the fifth fearing to be deposed from his Empire as
his Father was, accorded the right of Inuestures in a full Council it Rome,
unto Calixtus. Supp. Chron.

Calixtus ordained that the Bishop of Compostella should be made an
Archbishop: for the reverence of the body of Saint James who rested there:
And he made a book full of Fables of the miracles of the said S. Abb. Trit.

He appointed the four times for taking orders (as they call them) for before
they did take them only three times in the year. This decree is attributed
unto Calixtus the first.


He excommunicated such as took silver for Baptism, and for burying. Chron.
R. Franc.

By this Decree Popish Priests should be excommunicated.

He founded a Monastery of the order of Cisteaux, called Boneuan. Fasc. temp.

He ordained it should not be lawful for any Bishop to turn from the Roman
Church, neither to contrary it. For (said he) even as the Son is come to do
the will of his Father: So it behooves all Christians to do the will of their
Mother, (that is to say) the Roman Church. Did. 12. ca. Non decet.

See how this brazen faced harlot of Rome alleges scripture: and is not
ashamed to call her self a Mother.

He excommunicated all such as molested Pilgrims which went to Rome. 24 q. 3.
chap. Si quis.

William Duke of Pouille, preparing himself for the voyage of Constantinople,
to take unto wife the Emperor Alexis his daughter, recomme^ded his country to
the Pope Calixt, doubting the ambition of Roger his cousin, who failed not
inco^tinently after the departure of the said William, to seize upon Calabria
and Pouille: Insomuch as William was deprived both of his wife, and of his
Principality, and dyed without children. Naucler. and Corno. Abb. Calixtus
prepared an Army against Roger, but the Popes death came betwixt, and Innocent
the second pursued the enterprise.

John, a Patriarch of the Indians, came unto Rome, and rehearsed to the Pope
and Cardinals in a Council, that by a miracle S. Thomas the Apostle came
every year to give the Eucharist unto the good, and refused the wicked.
Naucler.

Miracles and apparitions are on all sides forged.

The Emperor Henry the fifth, bearing a long time an hatred unto the King of
France, assembled a great Army to run upon him, taking occasion that he was
at the Council which the Pope Calixt held at Rheimes, wherein he was
excommunicated: and vaunted that he would destroy the City of Rheims, where
the said Council was held, but when he perceived the Kings power which met him
with the precious standard called the Auriflame, he desisted from his
enterprise, and returned into his Country. John le Maire.

Pomerania received the Christian Faith. Nancler.

Honorius. 2.
Honorius Pope, second of that name, borne at Imola in Italy, Lambert, Bishop
of Ostia, and was promoted rather by the ambition of some, then by the consent
of the good. Supp. Chron.

He invested Roger of the Duchy of Pouille, after the said Roger had done unto
him homage: who also was King of Sicilie. The same.

Robert author of the order of Premonstre, went to Rome unto the Pope, and
obtained what he desired concerning ye order. Nauc.

Arnulphe slain at Rome.
Arnulphe Archbishop of Lion, had at this time a singular grace in preaching,
who after he had preached in France and Italy, came unto Rome. But because in
his Sermons he rebuked too sharply the vices, the delights and pompes of
Churchmen, he was slain.

Honorius feined to be grieved thereat, yet he made no search for the murderers.
Plat. and Sabel. Bonifa. Simo. say that he did this in favor both of the
Nobility and of the common people.

The year of Christ, 1125. Henry the 5. died in the City of Vtreict, without
heir male.

Lothaire, in the Almaine tongue Luder, the son of Count Gebhard (who was
slain in the war by Henry the fourth, Lothaire.
as Saxony, was chosen Emperor: a man of great industry and prudence, and
persecuted the race of the Emperor Henry, whereof arose many troubles: For
Frederic and Conrade, Dukes of Souanbie, were a long time Rebels unto him.
Finally, S. Barnard Abbot of Cleruax reconciled these two brethren with
Lothaire.

Hugo a Saxon by Nation, and surnamed of Victor, a Theologian of Paris, was at
this time in Paris. Amongst his writings are found many complaints against the
disordinate life of Clerks in this time. It is he whom some say, that at Mass
as he lifted up the body of our Lord, there appeared a little child, which said
unto him: Eat me. And he abhorring it, said he could not eat him, unless he
hid himself again under the bread: and straight it came so to pass, and he
eat him.

Who sees not that this is a fable invented to prove the new doctrine of
Pascasius and Lanfrancus? And yet this is against their doctrine, and
especially against that of Thomas Aquine, in the third part, question. 76.

Charles Count of Flaunders, Nephew of Lewis King of France, was traitorously
murdered as he was on his knees in the Church of S. Donatus in Brugis in
Flaunders. The murderers were certain villains of the Country, which were
grievously punished in sundry manners. Sigeb.

Baudwin the second, who was the third King of Jerusalem, died in a Monks
habit: whom Fulco succeeded. Naucl. Chron. Sigeb.

Innocent Pope. 2. of that name, a Roman, governed 14. years. Innocent. 2.


Lothaire.
After his coronation he attempted mortal war against Roger the Norman. Who
first named himself King of Naples: but in the end Innocent was overthrown in
battle, and led away prisoner. Whilst he was in prison the Romans elected
Peter Leon, the son of a puissant Roman Citizen: But Innocent after he had
agreed with the said Roger, was constrained to go into France for succor
toward King Lewis le Gros, of whom he was honorably received. Being come
into France, he held two Counsels; one at Auerne, and an other at Rhemes in
Campaigne. From France he retired toward the Country of Liege, where he found
the Emperor Lothaire, who also promised all the assistance he could: by means
of which, he returned into Italy. Anacletus the Antepope stole away all the
treasures and Relics of the Church to wage them which were of his band: he
died with grief, and his Cardinals craved pardon.

In the Council held at Rheimes, Subdeacons were commanded to live without
marriage, under pain to loose their Benefices.

There became a contention betwixt the Pope and the king of France, because
that after the death of Alberic Archbishop of Bourges, the Pope sent one called
Peter, by him consecrated Archbishop of the said place, to reside and rule
there: but the King rejected him, neither was be received into the Town,
because he was created without his knowledge. Sigeb.

Innocent agreed and set a peace betwixt the town of Pise, and the town of
Genues, and raised them up unto Archbishops.

A Sinode at Rome at this time ordained, that no Layman should presume to lay
hand upon a Clarke, under pain of excommunication, from which none could
absolve him but the Pope, unless he were at the point of death: for then his
Bishop might absolve him. 17. Quest. 4. Chap. Si quis suadente diabolo.

In this time was Richardus de sancto victore, and Hugo a Monk of Corbie in
Saxony, who wrote the book (de clanstro animae.)

A new Pelagian.
Peter de Balard, an heretic of this time, said that the passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ was only given us for an example of patience, of virtue, and of
love, he showed unto us. Wherefore he was condemned with all his writings by
the Pope Innocent. S. Barnard writ against him.

Writers say, that one called John of Time (if it be a thing Charlemaigne,
whose Councellor he was, and died in this time. Naucler. and Suppl. Chron.

The Emperor Lothaire went to Rome to restore Innocnt, according to his
promise.

The faction of the Guelphes for the Pope, and of the Gibellins for the
Emperor, began in this time. Naucler.

Lothaire returning from Italy, the second time after he had dejected Roger
of Pouille and Calabria, died of the pestilence nigh Trent amongst the
Mountains, in a poor lodging says Naucler. But Palin, says that he died at
Verona, the 13. year of his Kingdom, and the 7. of his Empire, leaving one
daughter, called Gertrude.

Conrade 3. of that name, Duke of Souabe, Conrade. 3.
son of Frederike of Haulte Staufen, and of Agnes, daughter of Henry the
fourth,

Lewis the young, 7. of that name, 40. King of France, reigned 43. years. He
upon superstition went into Spain upon pilgrimage unto S. James.

Ascalon was taken of the Christians beyond the sea. Suppl. Chron.

Edessa a City of Mesopotamia was taken of Alaps, a Prince of Turkey, the
Christians put to death, Beginning of evils.
and women violated upon the Altar of S. John Baptist, says Naucler.

Fulco King of Jerusalem, fell from his horse as he ran at an Naucler. and
Chron. Eusebius.

Baudwin 3. and 5. King of Jerusalem, succeeded him.

Celestine Pope, 2. of that name, an Italian, Celestine. 2.
before called Guido, a Priest, Cardinal of S. Mark, having ruled 5. months

Lucius Pope, 2. of that name, borne at Boulongne, Lucius. 2.
before a Priest, Card. of S. Cross, named Gerard, ruled about one year.

This man willing by force to take away the dignity of the Patrician.
Patrician from the Romans, Conrad. 3.
was on the body wounded with the blows of stones by the common people. R.
Barns. And being oppressed with the Romans, he sent unto the Emperor, who
being occupied otherwhere, could not succor him.

He did all he could to incite Christians to war beyond the sea, because he
had received news how the holy Land was in danger to be lost for the
Christians. John le Maire. Some say he died in a sedition. Others, that he died
of the Pestilence. Supp. Chron. and Fascic. temp.

Eugenius. 3.
Eugenius Pope, third of that name, borne at Pise, a Monk Cleruaux, Disciple
of S. Bernard, Abbotte and Cardinal of S. Anastasius at Rome, ruled eight
years and four months.

He was constrained by the Romans (whom he had excommunicated with Jordan the
Patrice) to fly from Rome, and shaking the dust off his feet against his
enemies, he got him into France, not only to shun the fear of the said
Romans, who with force of Arms chased him away, but also to encourage and
draw on the French King Lewis to the succors of the holy Land. He celebrated
then a Council at Vezelay in Burgoigne: and there caused S. Barnard with his
lively voice to utter out all the mischief like to fall unto the holy Land.
After which speech of S. Barnard, the King vowed to give succors to the
Christian Princes beyond the Seas, and the Queen Helionor his wife promised to
follow him: and with them, many Princes, Barons, and Noble men of France. Also
the Emperor Conrade the third, Alphonsus King of Spain, Henry, King of
England, and many other Princes and Prelates: yet in this voyage they did
nothing worthy of memory, and this was the second universal voyage, as John
le Maire says, but the third expedition to go into Jerusalem. The first under
Vrbain, and the second under Paschal. Anno. 1101.

Eugenius also assembled a Council at Rhemes, and called thither Cardinals
and other Prelates, of whom he was consecrated, as appertained. And there S.
Barnard confuted by disputation, and vanquished Gilbert Poretaine, Bishop of
Poitiers, an excellent Clarke, who erred in touching the unity of the Trinity.

There were made many decrees for Monks: that they should not leave their
Monasteries, nor Baptize, nor carry children unto Baptism: that they might
not enjoin penance, nor give absolution: that they might not visit the
diseased, nor assist the funerals of the dead. Briefly, that they might not
apply themselves unto secular businesses, but remain sollitarie in their
Monasteries. That the husband or wife ought not to enter into Religion, and the
marriage should not be broken, if one of the parties contradicted it: nor
without the consent of the Bishop, if both parties accorded. There was also
ordained for the maintenance of schools, and for provision of Doctors and
Masters.

After those things done in France, Eugenius returned unto Rome, where he was
honorably received of the people, but soon after died at Tiber, where he went
to recreate himself. His body was brought to Rome, and buried in the Temple of
S. Peter. Suppl. Chron.

In this time reigned Gratian the Monk, who compiled the Decretall. Which
Eugenius approved and commanded to be read through all Universities. Supp.
Chron.

Petrus Lumbardus Bishop of Paris, compiled the books of Sentences.

Petrus Commestor wrote the Scholasticke History.

Auicen and Auerrois lived in this time, excellent in Physic.

By the writings of Saint Barnard we may know how in this time being so
miserably corrupted, Touching the doctrine of S. Barnard.
he strove against the impiety of Popes, and the Ecclesiastical sort. See his
67. Sermon, where he calls them the Ministers of Antichrist. In the Sermon
57. In the book unto this Pope Eugenius, and in the 33. Sermon upon the Cant.
he often says that Prelates are but pilates. He reprooueth Eugenius, that
leaving the word of God, he advanced humane traditions. Hugo Cardinal in his
Postile upon S. John, alleges that S. Barnard said in a certain place. It
seems o good Jesus, that all the University of Christians have conspired
against thee, and they are the chief of the coniuration which obtain the
Primacie of the church. At the end of his days he showed well that he
perfectly knew the true doctrine of the Justification by Jesus Christ, on whom
only was his refuge, rejecting all other sanctities and righteousness. His
writings yield a certain witness of him.

The Emperor of Constantinople, Emanuel, sent victuals to the Christians
beyond the Seas: but like a traitetous wicked man he mingled chalk amongst
their flower, whereof infinite people died. He gave also guides unto the
Emperor Conrade, which conducted him through solitary places; Insomuch that he
lost all his soldiers. As much also almost came unto the king of France, yet
they both got into Jerusalem. The Emperor Conrade, the King Lewis, and Baudwin
King of Jerusalem, being in Jerusalem, determined to assail Damas. Naucler.

Aluisius Abbot of Auchen, and Bishop of Arras, died in this journey of the
holy Land, in a town called Philopolis, and Simon Bishop of Noyon, at Selencia.

Bishops, Abbots, and Monks, trotted then in voyages beyond the Seas.

Norway received then the faith which was then.

S. Barnard died of the age of 36. years. Naucler.

Conrade the third, Emperor, returning from his voyage of Jerusalem, died at
Banberg. 1152.

Frederic. 1.
Frederic, first of that name, surnamed barbarous son of Frederic Duke of
Souanbe, who was brother of the said Conrade, was chosen Emperor.

This was a Prince of a good spirit, hardy, of great stature, and fair of
face, his hair and beard, was read, affable, and gracious. After his
election, he led seven times his Army against the Italians which rebelled
against him.

Anastasius. 4.
Anastasius Pope, 4. of that name, a Roman, Abbot, ruled the

Adrian. 4.
Adrian 4. of that name, borne in England, a man learned, Nicholas-breakspeare,
the son of one named Robert, Albons, of a Regular Chanon he was made Bishop
Cardinal, and after Pope, ruled at Rome five years and six months.

He was sent unto Norway by Eugenius the third, Pope, to preach the faith, and
when he had instructed the people of the said Country, he was chosen Pope.
Being received, Excommunication for temporal goods.
the Romans prayed him to leave the administration of the town free to
Consuls and Magistrates, after their ancient manner, which be refused: whereat
the Romans grieved, did many evils unto a Cardinal. In so much that Adrian
set all the City of Rome under an Interdict or excommunication.

After his election he would by no means go to the Church of Laterane to be
consecrated, Arnold Bishop.
until first Arnold bishop of Brixe were cast out of the Town: who opposed
himself against the Administration of civil things, and of the temporal
sword which the Clergy had usurped. And therefore he called him an heretic,
soliciting the Roman people to maintain their liberty, Magistracy, and
other offices. R. Barns.

Of this same time was Peter de Blois, who in his writings touched the
wickedness of the Cleargie-men. In a certain Epistle which he writes to a
Bishops Official, he admonishes him to come out of Babylon, detesting the
tirannie of Bishops and their Officials, calling them infernal harpies which
do but powle and sheere the Church of Jesus Christ. He often calls the
Clergy, Siria, Edom, Calves of Bethel, Idols of Egypt, the fat of Samaria,
Priests of Baal, and Judges which forge unjust laws, and many such like names
he gives them. This says he of Rome. At Rome all is subverted by gifts,
Monks may do all things by silver, and redeem by annual pentions, all
wickedness of the flesh. The Pope and his disciples.
There filthiness began to be sung in the Tabernacle of Geth, and in the
streets of Ascalon. So was he made the Prince of Sodom, and his Disciples
after him, are set in the chair of pestilence.

Such writing should be noted for their excellency and raritie.

The year of Christ, 1155. Frederic went into Italy, Adrian met him even at
Sutry, hoping by the Emperors means to revenge himself upon his enemies. And
as he arrived at the Emperors lodging, the Emperor hasted to meet him,
Frederic. 1.
and as he lighted he held the left stirrope of his horse, and taking him by
the hand led him into his Castle. The Pope greatly disdaining, held as a
mockery, that the Emperor at his lighting held his left stirrope, and not his
right: Insomuch that he departed from his Castle much offended and discontent.
The next morning the Emperor dissembling all, like a wise man, calling the
Pope as he met him again, held his right stirrope at his lighting. For he
had not forgotten his lesson of the day before.

After they went to Rome, and there Frederic was crowned by Adrian at S.
Peter's, and returned into Almaigne. Ri. Barnes.

John of Salisbury, Bishop of Chartres, was in this time, who sharply opposed
himself against the wickedness of Popes and Clergy. He writ a book,
Entitled Obiurgatorium Cleri. In his book Entitled Policraticus, he says
thus. In the Roman Church are set Scribes and Pharisees, John de Salisburie a
true Doctor.
loading men's shoulders with insupportable burdens. The great Bishop is heavy
unto all, yea importable. His Legates cast themselves so into the fields, as if
Satan were come from the Lord to torment the Church. Judgment amongst them,
is no other thing but a true merchandise. They esteem of gain as of piety it
self. They justify the wicked by gold and silver, and rejoice in wickedness.
They eat the sins of the people. They are apparelled and nourished in all
luxury: whilst the true worshippers worship the Lord in spirit. He that
sticks not unto their doctrine, either is he judged an heretic, or a
schismaticke, etc.

Often were there such Doctors in the Church, but they durst not speak nor
write of all that was needful. In a book Entitled Speculum, that is to say,
the Glass. It is said that that good Bishop John, amongst other complaints,
has been sometimes heard say to the Pope Adrian the fourth (his very familiar
friend) these words. The Pope indeed is truly the servant of servants, A word
of condemnation comes from the Popes own mouth.
because he serves the Romans, servants of covetousness. The same Pope
Adrian was heard say to the said Bishop John, That there were many Popes which
rather succeeded Romulus in murders and paracides, then S. Peter in feeding of
sheep.

Romulus, the first founder of the Citte of Rome, slew his own brother Remus,
and so the walls were dedicated in that Parricide.

Adrian excommunicated William the son of Rogier king of Sicily and Pouille,
and absolved his subjects of their oaths toward him: but seeing he profited
nothing by that means, he incited Emanuel Emperor of Constantinople: Emanuel
promised the Pope to deposed the said William. Only he demanded three Maritime
or Sea Towns if he came to his purpose. These conuentions made, in the mean
while the Grecians occupied Pouille, and wasted it. William understanding these
practices, prayed the Pope to be reconciled unto him, and that he would only
grant him the title of king of the two Sicilies, and he would restore him
whatsoever he demanded; yea he would give of his own. The Pope was content,
but the Cardinals kept him from it. William then went into battle against
the Grecians and obtained the victory, drove the Grecians out of Pouille, and
recovered it. The Captain prisoners were bound with chains. Afterward he went
against Beneuent and besieged it. The Pope and his Cardinals which by chance
were there, are prisoners, and constrained to demand peace, and to agree wiih
him. The Pope first absolueth him of his excommunication, and pronounces and
declares him King, after having done him homage to hold his Land and Seignory
of the holy Father. Adrian returned to Rome, and straight fell unto contention.
For the Consuls would maintain their franchise and ancient liberty. Wherefore
fearing (because the Interdict endured yet) he got himself Anagnia or
Arignianum. R. Barns.

Frederic was not content that the Pope without his knowledge had granted the
title and right of Sicilia, because he was thereby defrauded of the Inuestures:
also for that the Popes Legates pilled so the Countries subject unto his
Empire. Because the Pope began secretly through all the Empire to sow reasons
to retire his subjects from his subjection. Wherefore he demanded homage of
the Bishops of the German Nation, and oath of fidelity: he forbad that any
should appeal unto the Roman Sea. He commanded the Popes Legates which
appealed not to him, to get them out of his Countries. The Pope very much
grieved at all those things, as also that the Emperor set his own name before
the Popes in his Letters missiues which he sent; writ Letters unto him,
rebuking him for those foresaid things, See the Tenor of the Popes Letters in
the Popes lives, by R. Barns and Naucler.
admonishing him to amend. The Emperor answered them from point to point.
First, that justly and by good right he set his name before his seeing the Pope
owes all humility to the Emperor as Christ has taught. And if Popes have
any privilege, it comes of especial grace, and by the liberality of Kings
and Princes.

Also that Jesus Christ has taught us to yield to every one that which belongs
unto him, to Caesar that which belongs unto him. Wherefore he justly
redemaundeth the inuestures and homage of Bishops. Touching Cardinals and
Legates, that justly he rejected the^ out of his Country. For said he, they
come not to preach, but to pill and spoil: not to confirm peace, but to heap
up silver. Wherefore he prayed the Pope and his, not to move so many schisms
and scandalls, but that that they would study for peace and humility. Naucler
and R. Barns.

Frederic took the Town of Millaine, and made it subject to the Empire. Sigeb.

After this, the Pope ceased not to solicit the Italians to withdraw their
allegiance from the Emperor, and therefore he sent his Legates to Millaine, to
persuade them to revolt. But the Millanois sought no other thing but a quarrel
for that purpose; and that was, that the Emperor was excommunicate. The Pope
then wrought a co^spiracie against the Emperor with the aid of William king of
Sicilie, of them of Millaine, and other Nobles of Italy, which gave a great
sum of silver to the Pope to excommunicate the Emperor. The coniuration was
confirmed by oath, upon condition that none of the^ should ever return into
grace with the Emperor, unless all were consenting thereunto. And if by
fortune the Pope died, that they should then elect a Cardinal of their own
faction and band.

After the former defense of the Emperor that none should appeal to Rome, the
Bishop of Laud going to Rome by appellation, was encountered by certain of the
Emperors people; and after they had beat him, they put him in prison. The
Pope Adrian sent toward the Emperor two Legates with very sharp Letters. In
which amongst other words, there were these. Although thou have not answered us
as thou ought, yet do we not repent if thou had received greater benefits
at our hands then thou have received. Which words so angered the Emperor and all
the Princes, that with much adoo did they abstain from violating the League.
Of which one of them answering for the Pope, said foolishly. If the Emperor
(says he) hold not his Empire of the Pope, of whom holds he it? By which
words Otho Pallatin Wittilispach before the Emperor drew his sword, and ran
against the said Legate, and hardly was retained from sleying him. Naucler.

For store of silver, then the Pope Adrian being at Anagnia, thundered forth the
sentence of exco^municatio^ against Frederic: But God ( John de Cremona says)
who by the mouth of the Prophet speaks. (They shall curse you, and I will
bless you) overthrew their enterprise. For it fell out that the Pope after he
had denounced the excommunication, came out of Anagnia to take air, nigh a
Fountain of which he drank: but soon after a Fly entered into his mouth, and
kept so in his throat, that he left his breath and so died. Naucler. Vrsperg.

The year 1160. Frederic laid siege before the Town of Millaine, which was
revolted.

Pauie, Plaisance, and as it were all Lombardie, yielded themselves subject
unto him. Chron. Sigeb. Crema is pilled and spoiled.

Behold what they gain to believe the Pope, and rebel against their natural
Lord.

The poor men of Lions, otherwise called Vandrois, The poor men of Lions.
were in this time.

After the death of Pope Adrian, yet ceased not the former conspiration against
Frederic, for the coniurators sent a strong man of body, who was a good
Musician, but counterfeited a Ieaster, to the end to take occasion to sley the
Emperor: but he was surprised and put to death.

Again they sent him an Arrabian Ehchaunter, who carried Mearcery ware, and
drugs impoisoned. But the Emperor finding out his treason, caused the
Enchaunter to be strangled.

The Duchy of Bohemia was erected to a Kingdom under Frederic. Naucler.

The Prince of Austriche was made a Duke.

The body of S. Bartholomew, and the body of Paulin Bishop of Nole, were found
in an old Church, says Sigeb.

Millaine, and carried into the said City. Fasci. temp.

Helinandus rehearses that the Pope Adrian was wont to say; That there is
nothing in the world more miserable, nor condition or estate more unlucky,
then the Popedom. And that he found such tribulation in the Apostolic seat,
that he wished he had never departed from England. And that he was never so
much at ease, as when he was but a simple Cloyster-Monke.

Adolphe Count of Nole d' Albigeois, was slain by the Slauons, Apostates of
the faith: his death was revenged by the Duke of Saxony. Henry Leon.

This Henry founded three Abbeyes, at Lubec, Racebourg, and Souerum. He visited
the sepulcher, and builded the church of S. Bloise at Brunswic.

Amongst many relics, he gave to the said Church of the blood of Jesus
Christ, which he brought from the holy Land, says The Sea of Histories.

Alexander. 3
Alexander Pope, third of that name, of Sienne in Tuscane, The Sea of Histories.

He was before called Rowland, and was an enemy of the Empire, and therefore
was he chosen by 22. Cardinals.

A schism of 17. years.
Some elected one called Octauian, a Roman Citizen, Priest, Cardinal of S.
Clement, called after, Victor the third: who came toward Frederic. So was
there a great schism which continued 17. years.

Alexander sent his Legates toward Frederic, who the^ besieged Cremona, to the
end by his authority to take away the schism. The Emperor commanded that the
two elected Popes should come unto him unto Pauie, and there he would assemble
a Council to take order for that schism. Alexander sent him the old answer:
that the Pope might not be judged of any living man, etc. and would not assist
or appear, but retired himself unto Anagnia.

Victor appeared, and was approved Pope, and the Emperor sent him into
Almaine, and commanded that every one should obey him: whereat Alexander being
greatly moved, sent sentence of excommunication, against both the Emperor and
the said Victor, at Cleremont in France.

We have seen that after Charlemaigne many petty Kings rose up in Italy,
whereof some were called Berengarij, which brought into subjection the kingdom
of the Lombards. Otho the great got Lombardie out of their hands. But after
Millaine as it increased in riches, so the Citizens withdrew themselves from
the obedience of the Roman Empire. Frederic having raised a great Army,
constrained them with others to yield to the yoke. But the common people
bearing evil will unto the Emperor minding again to reuoult, discovered
their wicked intent with a marvelous insolency. The Empress Frederic his
wife, having a desire to see the Town, entered into it with effeminate
assurance, without fear to suffer injury of such as obeyed the Empire. But
the common people forgetting all honor, being exceedingly enraged, A mockery
offered unto the Emperor.
set the said Princess upon a she Ass, causing her to turn her face toward
the tail: the which they gave her for a bridle in her hand, and in a mockery
sent her out at one of their gates. The Emperor taking just indignation
against this injury, besieged them seven years before they could enter: but at
the last constraining them to yield, he ruinated and sacked the Town with
great effusion of blood. He received some to mercy, but it was upon this
co^ditio^, that if they would save their lives, they should draw out with their
teeth a Fig from behind of the she Ass. Many chose rather to die then to
suffer that ignominy. Others desiring to live, did whatsoever was commanded
them. From hence comes a just mockery amongst the Italians, to show the
thumb betwixt two fingers, and say; Ecco la fico, Ecco la Fico.
behold the Fig: Crantes recites this Story in his 6. book of Saxonia.

Frederic sent Ambassadors unto the King of France, to take away that schism
from Rome, they agreed to meet in a certain place very convenient for France
and Almaine, and that was at Dijon. Thither came Henry king of England, the
king of Scotland, the king of Bohemia: Alexander would not be there, saying he
was not ordained by his authority. The King of France was not there in favor
of Alexander.

Frederic not well content that he and so many Princes had thus lost their
pains, commanded Victor to draw into Italy: but Victor died in the way at
Luques: and in his place Guido Bishop of Cremone, was chosen, who afterward was
called Paschall the third: unto whom the Emperor Frederic, the Duke of
Bauiere, the Count Palatin in Rhene, the Lantgraue of Turinge, the Bishops of
Magdeburg, of Breme, of Treuers, of Colongne, and of Banberge, promised him
obedience. R. Barns.

The 6. king of Jerusalem.
Amaricus the brother of Baudwin, was the sixth King of Jerusalem. Sigeb.

Alexander in the mean while held a Council at Tours. But at Rome the
Vicegerent of the Pope Alexander, the Bishop of Prenestine died, and in his
place was substituted John, Cardinal of the Church of S. Peter. He by silver
and other means drew to Alexander the most part of the Roman Citizens: and
did so much, as they created new Consuls, such as favored the said Alexander.
They recalled Alexander out of France, and he was well received at Rome, the
Bishop of Pauie was put out for that he held on the Emperors side.

Frederic the third time went into Italy against certain that rebelled, and
came to Rome to know the cause of those Popes. Alexander would not appear,
but drew back as before.

The Towns of Italy rebelled against the Emperor at the persuasion of
Alexander, and they conspired together.

The Millainois reedified their Town in favor of this Alexander, Alexandria.

Frederic the fourth time returned into Italy with a great Army against the
rebels: but Henry Leon Duke of Saxony, corrupted by silver (as is thought)
left the Emperor, and returned into Saxony with his company.

The Emperor required him not to fail him in that great need, but he lost
time: therefore was he constrained to withdraw from Italy, and return into
Almaine, in a servants apparel, and that with great difficulty.

Behold how by Popes the world has ever been troubled.

The year of Christ, 1173. Saladin slew his Lord the Chron. Eusebius.

The year of Christ, 1175. Frederic the fifth time returned Italy: but at the
persuasion of his Confessor, he converted his Arms against the Turks: and
passing through Hungary, came unto Constantinople, and occupied many Towns
and places of the Turks, as Philomenia and Iconium, after he came into Armenia
the less, finally even to Jerusalem. Whilst Frederic was thus busied with the
Turk, the Pope Alexander with his confederates ceased not to think how they
might destroy him. To the end then that he should not return victorious, the
Pope sent to the Souldan the Image of the Emperor, which he caused to be
drawn very lively by an excellent Painter, with Letters by which he gave
advertisement unto the Souldan, to sley or destroy the said Emperor by
treason, if ever he pretended to live in peace.

The Souldan having received the said Popes Letters, with the Emperors figure,
sought by all means to come to his purpose; but occasion fell not out so
soon. But finally as the Emperor returned from the conquest of Ierasalem
being in Armenia, one day as it was very hot, he withdrew into a wood with a
few of his people, and with his Chaplain, and not thinking of any danger,
there made his people go aside, and he and his Chaplain lighted off their
horses, vnapparelled themselves, and so refreshed them in a running stream of
water. There was he surprised by the ambushes which the Souldane had laid, and
were carried through the wood unto the Souldan. His people knowing nothing of
his taking, sought him all the next morning.

The brute came unto the Camp, the Emperor was drowned, and by the space of an
whole month they sought him in the flood where he washed. The Emperor being
brought before the Souldane, feigned himself to be the Emperors Chaplain, but
the Souldan knowing him by the Image the Pope sent him, maintained that he was
the Emperor of the Christians, and indeed commanded that straight some should
bring him the said Image, and that the Popes Letters should be read. The
Emperor astonished at this treason, confessed the truth and demanded favor.
Certain time after, the Souldan sent him away, under certain covenants agreed
betwixt them. The Emperor returning, assigned a day at Noremberg, and
assembling his Court, declared the Pope Alexander his treason, showing his
Letters and the Image. Briefly, every one promised him help to pay his
ransom, and to do justice of the said Alexander.

In this time of darkness and horrible tempests, after the Grasshoppers and
vermin of begging Friars, which devoured the title grain of the world: here
gave the Lord again a light, as it were the break of day.

The beginning of the Waldois.
Peter Waldo a Citizen of Lions, began by little and little in this time to
clear the thick darkness thereof: and this was as a first and little beginning
of the Instauration of the Christian doctrine and religion.

The History is this. In the Town of Lions, as many of the chief of the Town
in Summer time to recreate themselves and talk together, one amongst them
suddenly fell down dead in the presence of others; amongst which was this
Waldo, a rich man, who more then all other men was moved and surprised with
fear, Sudden death gives occasion to Waldo.
and an apprehension of the humane frailty, and began to think (the spirit of
God drawing him) more nearly to repencance, and to meditate true piety more
then ever he had done before. He began then to give much more alms, to open
his house to all, and to speak of penance and true piety to such as for any
cause came unto him.

This fear was of God, Note here the diversity of examples.
the fruit and the end shows it in this person. But the fear that moved
Bruno to seek remedy and comfort to his fancy without the word of the Lord,
was of the devil, and proceeded of his illusions.

This liberality drew many poor and needful people unto him, that they came
by troops, and he always expounded some place of holy scripture in the vulgar
tongue: for he was a man learned (as the writings of that time witness, and
the Catalogue of the witnesses of the truth) the Bishop of the place, and the
Prelates which carried the keys as they say, and would neither enter, nor let
others enter, began to murmr that a Lay man, or secular man (as they call
them) should handle or declare in the vulgar tongue the scripture, and make
assemblies in his house: admonishing to cease to do so under the pain of
excommunication. But for all this, the zeal that Waldo had to advance the
glory of God, and the desire the little ones had to learn, was nothing
diminished: but contrary, the resistance and tyranny of the Prelates gave
occasion to discover the errors and superstitions of the Roman seat, which
then were as it were hid in darkness.

The like happened in our time: for when the Pope and his Priests could not
endure that Martin Luther should reprehend their Indulgences, they were the
cause that a further search was made into their errors, and so discovered
their abominable blasphemies.

Waldo now gathered in the vulgar tongue many places out of the ancient
Fathers, Waldo strengthens himself with places of the Doctors.
to confirm and strengthen such as were of his side, not only by the
authority of holy scriptures, but also by witness of Doctors, against the
adversaries. It is likely to be true, by Historiographers, yea even by the
writings of the adversaries, that this assembly endured certain time (it may
be four or five years) that Waldo taught in the Town of Lions, before he was
driven to exile and banishment. For because he was mighty and had friends, he
was not so soon exposed to dangers which afterward were laid for him. And
thus came the appellation of the Pope of Lions. Some called them Waldois, some
Lyonists, and some Insabbatati: that is, such as observed neither Sabbath nor
Feast, and many other like names to make them odious and detestable, as shall
be showed in the discourse of this History.

Alexander understanding the Emperor marched to come to Rome, perceiving
himself culpable of the treason he had done him, the 7. year of his Popedom,
fled from Rome in the habit of his Cool, and came unto Venice, and remained in
a Monastery: where finally being known, he was led by the Duke and the Senate
with great solemnity into S. Marks Church. The Emperor understanding yt
Alexander was at Venice, sent Ambassadors to demand Alexander. The Venetians
maintained the Pope, which the Emperor seeing, sent thither his son Otho with
an Army, yet commanding him not to fight against the Venetians before his
coming. But Otho led with youth gave battle, lost the victory and was
prisoner. Which the Pope seeing, would not agree with the Emperor, unless fist
he came to Venice and received the means that he would offer. Frederic to help
his son came to Venice: the Pope would not absolve him of ye bond of
excommunication, until he presented himself at the door of S. Mark his
Church. When he was come thither, the Pope commanded him in the presence of all
the people, to cast himself upon the ground, and to demand pardon of him. The
Emperor prostrating himself upon the earth at the Popes feet: he set his
foot upon the Emperors neck, and pressing it down said; It is written, Super
aspidem and basiliscum ambulabis and conculcabis Leonem and draconem: that is
to say; Thou shall go upon the Aspe and Basilike, and tread under thy feet the
Lion and the Dragon. The Emperor taking in ill part the contumely, answered;
This was not said unto thee, but unto Peter. But the Pope stepping again upon
his neck, answered; Both to me, and to Peter. The Emperor fearing the peril or
an hid danger, held his peace, and so was absolved: and an accord was made
betwixt them, upon condition that the Emperor should hold Alexander for the
true and legitimate Pope, Venice, and so ceased ye schism.

This Pope gave many privileges to the order of Chartreux, and Canonized S.
Barnard.

The bodies of three Kings (as they call them) were transported from Millaine
to Colongne, by the Bishop of the said place. Sabell. Eun. 9. lib. 5.

The order of the Carmalites began in this time, Carmalits. Willelmin.
and the order of Willelmins Hermirs. Fasc. Temp.

About this time Henry the second, King of England, seeing the power of Bishops
and Clergy too great in England, and that they by oaths made to the Pope,
did alienate themselves, and the Forces of the Realm by such means weakened,
renewed the ancient rights, called the Dignities of the Kingdom. And above
all that, which says, That Bishops and Prelates shall swear to be loyal and
faithful unto the king and the public utility of the kingdom. Thomas Becket
Archbishop of Ca^terburie gave that oath to the King; but after repented
himself thereof, as of an unlawful oath, and demanded therefore the Popes
absolution. The King grieved at such perjury, banished him; and about five
years he was in France. The question was long debated at Rome, and cost much
money upon Ambassadors going between the one party and the other. Gratian
co^piler of the Decrees, was sent on the Popes side, and Petrus Lombardus on
Becket his side. The king fearing apparent dangers on the side of France, was
glad to be quiet: but Becket being restored, and still remaining contrary to the
king, and unwilling to absolve such as before he had excommunicated, he was
slain by certain Nobles of the Realm. The 48. year after his death, there
was a disputation in Paris amongst the Doctors, whether he were damned or
saved. There was one Roger a Normane, who maintained that he deserved death,
being a Rebel against the King, who is the Minister of God. Others contrary,
maintained that by good right he ought to be held in the number of Martirs,
because he died for the Clergy, and so the Pope Alexander canonized him.

This History shows us what difference there is betwixt the Popes Martyrs
and them of Jesus Christ.

The punishment makes not the Martyr, but the cause.

Many have written against this Archbishop Becket, and condemning him, have
maintained the Kings cause. Baleus rehearses it. So does John Eliot, and John
Bishop of Poitiers.

Monasteries founded.
Our Ladies Church of Paris is now builded by the Bishop there called Maurice,
who also founded besides three Monasteries, that is Negranx, Hermeries and
Years. The Sea of Histories.

About this time were there seen in the West Countries three Suns in
September, and the year after three Moons. Chro. Eusebius.

Baudwin fourth of that name, the seventh King of Jerusalem, reigned six
years. Chron. Eusebius.

Berthold, Duke Zeringen, son of Conrade the Emperor, founded two Freburgs,
that is to say, free Bourgages or Francborgs: the one in Brisgoy, and the other
in little Bourgogne, commonly called Vchland, against Sauoye. And 12. years
after he founded the Town of Berne, Berne.
which he surnamed because of a Bear which he encountered in the place where
the said Town was builded. For that word in their tongue signifies Bear.
Naucl.

The situation thereof is almost an Island which the River of Arre makes.

Phillip dieu done, 2. of that name, 41. king of France, son of Lewis le
ienne, constituted the Escheuins of Paris, and environed with walls a great
part of the town, and walled the wood of Vincennes nigh Paris. Naucler.

At this time was a great multitude of Jews in France, of which there went a
report that every year they stole a Christian child, and led him unto a
place under the earth, and after they had tormented him, crucified him, and
that day they call great or good Friday. King Phillip hearing this, caused the
Jews to be taken and tormented in diverse sorts. The Jews chased from France.
He burned 80. in one fire, and after the year 1186. he drove them all out of
his kingdom, except such as were converted to the Faith. After the King being
scarce of money through wars, demanded of the Jews a great sum thereof, and
having it granted, he was content they should again come into his kingdom: As
also his successor Lewis opened them all the kingdom of France.

Lucius Pope, third of that name, of Luke, Lucius. 3.
ruled at Rome four years, two months, and 18. days.

He was before called Hinebaldus, or Vbaldus, Cardinal of Ostia. This Pope
would needs banish the Consuls and Patricij at Rome: wherefore he was cast out
of Rome, and withdrew himself to Verona. Such as took his part, some had
their eyes put out, others were set upon Asses, their faces toward the hinder
part, and were ignominiously handled. After some.

In this time was the fourth expedition made beyond the Sea, and there were
crossed unto it the King of France Philip Augustus, and Henry King of England.
Saladins tenth.
And there was a tenth laid upon all Benefices and reuenews of Church goods,
to help the charges of the war. And this Subsidy was called Saladins tenth.
John le Maire.

Vrbane Pope, third of that name, borne at Millane, Vrbane. 3.
of the people of Cribelles, ruled a year and six months, or as it were
Suppl. Chron. Before he was called Imbert. Suppl. Chron. Sigeb.

Baudwin King of Jerusalem, left the kingdom Guyon of Lusignan, his sisters
husband, and the said Guyon was the last King of Jerusalem.

Saladin, by avarice, ambition, and discord of Christians, occupied Jerusalem,
which the Christians had held from Godfrey de Bouillion, 88. years. He took
also Aca, Beritus, Biblon, and all the rest even to Ascalon, inclusiuely.
Naucler.

Gregory Pope, 8. of that name, borne in Beneuent, Gregory. 8.
ruled at Rome 57. days.

He sent messages unto the Christian Princes and their people, to go against
the enemies of the Faith, promising Indulgences and pardons unto all; but he
dyed upon that enterprise, as he went unto Pise to solicit, that they of that
Town with the Geneuois together, might send into Asia for the defense of
Religion. Cor. Abb.

Lynonia, or Lyfland, a Northern Land, was converted to the Faith.

Clement Pope, third of that name, Clement. 3.
the son of a Roman Citizen, ruled at Rome 3. years and 6. months, and
made a Decretall against such Priests as celebrated Mass in wodden vessels,
Frederic 1.
and with common bread.

The Emperor Frederic, Philip King of France, Richard King of England, and the
Pope Clement, agreed together to send money unto the Christians: they sent also
many ships, and after went themselves in person, with many Princes and Prelates
of Jerusalem, but they could not accord: therefore soon after they returned.
Supp. Chron.

Frederic being at Nice, a City of Bithinia, it being also very hot, he
descended into a flood to wash: but the force of the water carried him away, so
that he was drowned, in the presence of his people, the 37. year of his
Empire, leaving five children which he had of his wife Beatrix, daughter of
Regnand, Count of Besanson.

The King of England was taken by a Duke of Austriche, called Leopold, as he
returned passing through Almaigne, and was delivered unto the Emperor Henry
the sixth. For his ransom, were sold the treasures of the Church, the
Chalices of Gold and Silver, etc. and so returned into England. During this
time, the King of France but a little before also returned into France, and
occupied certain Towns appertaining unto the King of England.

The treasures of England sold for the Kings ransom, came 200000 marks of
silver.

Celestine. 3.
Celestine 3. of that name, a Roman, before called Iacinthus, very aged, (his
Father was called Bubonis) was chosen Pope by the Cardinals upon Easter day.

Henry. 6.
The next morning he Crowned Henry Emperor, 6. of that name, son of
Frederick, and at the exhortation of this Pope, he made an expedition to go
unto Jerusalem.

William king of Sicile dying without heirs, it was thought that therefore the
kingdom should devolue unto the Roman seat: but the greatest of the kingdom
elected Tancredus, the bastard son of the said William. A Nun dispensed
with to marry.
The Pope stirred heereat, drew Constance the daughter of Roger, and sister of
William king of Sicilie, out of an Abbey of Nuns in the Town of Palerme, and
dispensed with her marriage. Wherefore Henry son of the Emperor Frederick,
espoused her, Henry. 6.
For the diversity touching this history, see Naucler.
and so came unto the kingdom of Sicilie and occupied it. And Tancredus was
slain in battle, so Henry abode in place. The said Constance of the age of
55. years, conceived and brought forth a son called Frederick the second,
who after was Emperor. Supp. Chron.

The order of the Friars of the Hospital of the Almaines, began at this time.

Also the order of the Trinity.

The year 1191. the Town of Aca was taken by the Naucler. says here, that
Saladine seeing the force of the Christians, determined to have yielded them
the town of Jerusalem: but the discord happening betwixt the King of France
and the King of England, was cause of very great troubles.

In matter of divorce, Celestine permitted the Catholic party to remarry, if
the other party fell into heresy. But contrary, the Pope Innocent forbad it.
Poll. Ver. de diuor. cap. 5.

Arthois was erected into an Earldom, the year 1195. and Lewis, son of
king Philip.

The kingdom of Cyprus came into the hands of the Christians, and remained
there 275. years.

The Archbishop of Magunce with a multitude of Almains, Hungary and the
Queen, went into Palestine against the Sarasins. Sigeb. They took Berinthus
and Ioppe. Naucl.

Innocent Pope, third of that name, borne in Campania, Innocent. 3.
his father was Trasimondus, of Anagnia, a man of base estate, Suppl. Chron.
ruled at Rome 18. years.

This Pope, a very dangerous pestilence, Transubstantiation is made the 13.
article of the Faith.
added unto the Articles of the Faith Transubstantiation, as a 13. Article. See
the Decretalls, Tit. 1. De summa Trin. and side Catholica, ca. Firmiter
credimus.

This Decretall was made the year of Christ, 1215. and promulged in the
Council of Lateran. Where were the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Jerusalem,
70. Archbishops, 400. Bishops, 12. Abbots, 800. conuentuall Priors, and many
Ambassadors of kings and princes to stop the Sarasins. A Croisado.
For there was a Croisado published, therefore was there demanded the 4. penny of
all rents.

Innocent. 3
Confession instituted.
He commanded that the Canon of the Mass should be received as if it came from
and were ordained of the Apostles. See the Decretals, Dit. 46. De celebratione
Missaru^, ca. 6. cu^.

He commanded confession in the Priests ear, that is, that he which came to be
capable of deceit, should confess himself at the least once in the year to
his own Pastor. See the Decretals Tit. 38. chap. Omnis vtriusque sexus.

Canonizing of Saints, reserved to the Pope.
In the said Council of Lateran, it was ordained, that the Canonization of
Saints might not be done but by the Pope.

There also was condemned the book of Ioachim Abbat, against Peter Lombard.

Now was the error of Almaric Bishop of Chartres, (of whom we shall hereafter
speak) and of the Albigeois: against which Innocent made preach the Croisado.

There was also ordained, that if Princes had offended one an other, the
correction thereof should appertain unto ye Pope. Nauc.

The year of Christ 1199. the Emperor Henry dyed at Palerme. Being sore
heated in the pursuit of an Heart, he drunk so much of a Fountain that he
rankeled his body.

Philip brother of the said Emperor Henry, Duke of Souabe, obtained the
Empire, and reigned 8. years. He was crowned at Magunce.

Innocent hated Philip, and was against his election: The Bishop of Colongne
and other Princes, as well seculars, as of the Clergy, seeing themselves
despised that they had not been called to the election of the said Philip, upon
an assembly at Aix, they chose for Emperor Otho, the son of Henry, surnamed
Lion, Duke of Saxony and Bauiere, and was crowned by the Archbishop of
Boulongne: Division of the Empire by the Pope.
so was there a division in the Empire whereof great mischiefs came in
Almaine, by Rapines, pillings, fires, wars, Robberies. Benefices
Ecclesiastical became litigious, and much silver did run to Rome. Naucler.
and Vrsperg.

Otho. 4.
Otho then 4. of that name, Duke of Bauiere and Saxony, a man proud and
hardy, reigned three years, being a favorite of Pope Innocent: who had said
that he would either take away Phillips Crown, or he should take away his.
Vrsperg.

There happened then great discord in Almaine by the Popes treason, who
procured Phillips death. Frederic. 2.


Otho of Wittilispach, Count Pallatin, entered into the Emperor Phillips
chamber at Bamberge, The death of the Emperor Phillip.
and slew him traitorously with a dagger, the ninth year of his reign. His
Esquire seeing this, being greatly troubled, began to cry, and being wounded
in the cheek, fell down. The traitor fled to the Bishop of Bamberge, a
companion of the conspiration in the Popes favor: who notwithstanding was
afterward slain by the Emperors Marshall nigh Ratisbone, being hid in a poor
cottage. See Naucler.

After the death of the said Phillip, the Pope sent unto Otho, to come to Rome
to be crowned, and so he was, the year 1209.

Adolphe Bishop of Colongne, who sometimes was on Phillips side, was deposed by
the Pope, and died in exile. Naucler. and likewise the Bishop of Sutry, before
the said Phillip was Emperor, because he had absolved him from an
excommunication.

The year of Christ, 1210. Otho whom the Pope so much Phillip the Emperor, is
now become the Popes mortal enemy, yea even to be excommunicated, and in full
Council declared to be deposed from his Empire: with commandment from the
said Innocent, that none should hold him for Emperor, nor obey him, acquitting
his subjects of the oath they ought him. Naucler.

This done, he sent Letters to the Archbishop of Magunce, that he should
declare the said Otho through all his Cities to be excommunicated and deposed
from his Empire, in full Council held at Rome: which he did. Whereupon the
Princes of Almaine invaded his Bishoppricke, and put all to fire. The cause
wherefore the Pope published the said excommunication, was because Otho
occupied Romandiole, the patrimony of the Roman Church.

Otho then fearing a new change, left Italy and returned into Almaine: which
he found all troubled for the said excommunication.

The Abbey of S. Antoigne by Paris, a religion of women was founded about this
time. The Sea of Hist.

The king Phillip gave to the Church of S. Denis diverse precious relics which
the Emperor Baudwin had sent him from Constantinople: that is to say, the true
Cross of a foot long; also the hairs which Jesus Christ had in his Infancy;
one of the thorns of the Crown; one side and four teeth of S. Phillip; the
clothes wherein Jesus Christ was wrapped in the maunger; and the purple
garment which he had on at his passion. See the Sea of Hist.

Such as were great in this world, submitted their greatness unto those toys
and trifles, more then childish.

The year of Christ, 1212. Otho having assembled the Princes at Noremberg,
showed the Popes subtle deu^^s against him, and that unjustly he persecuted
him. From thence he led his Army into Turinge against his enemies which took
the Popes part: After he came into Saxony, where his marriage was celebrated
with the daughter of king Phillip, who died four days after.

John King of England, King Richard his brother, made his kingdom subject to
the Roman Pope. For a sign whereof, he promised to pay yearly five marks of
gold. Suppl. Chron. or 1000. marks of sliuer. See the Annals of France.

Frederic. 2.
After Otho had been Emperor 4. years, Frederic 2. of Henry 6. king of both
Sicilies and of Jerusalem succeeded: and after his election made in Almaine,
he was anointed and crowned at Aix: and Otho deprived of his Empire, died the
year following of a flux of blood. Naucler. and the said Frederic reigned 44.
years, or 33. after Suppl. Chron.

Innocent edified the Hospital of the holy Ghost, and gave unto it great
revenues. He repaired the Church of S. Sixtus. He gave unto all the Churches
of Rome, the weight of a pound of silver to make their Challices on, upon
condition that none should sell or alien them.

The four Sects of begging Friars.
Friars.
S. Francis an Italian, of a Town called Assisium, was in this time.

S. Dominike a Spaniard of Caliroga, Iacobins.
in the Diocese of Lexonia, in this time also. The said Dominike went to Rome,
and prayed the Pope Innocent in the said Council of Lateran, to confirm his
order of Iacobins: but he would not consent thereunto.

Albert Patriarch of Jerusalem, made the rule of Carmes, Carmalits.
the first Author of the said order in Siria.

The Pope approved the order of the Hermits of S. Augustine. Augustins.


The Emperor used all diligence to get favor of the Pope, thinking to live at
rest: yet was he excommunicated, because he had not accomplished the vow he
made to go unto Jerusalem: then had he great troubles all over. But the
Emperor hasted his voyage beyond the Seas to mittigate the Popes fury: The
wicked disloyalty of the Pope.
but whilst he was absent, the Pope got Pouille under his power. The Emperor
Frederic understanding this fraud of that subtle Fox, returned with a great
Army into Pouille, drove the Popes people away, and recovered that which was
taken from him. Then the Pope again excommunicated the Emperor because he had
allied himself with the Souldane, and writ Letters unto the Souldane, by which
he prayed him, that he would not yield the holy Land unto the Emperor, as he
understood by a certain uncertain brute that he would do. Also he sent and
commanded the Princes of Almaine, that they should elect none of the children
of Frederic for King, nor any of his house.

The Historiographers of France make here mention of one called Almaricus of
Chartres, a learned man, but an heretic, Almaricus of Chartres.
who approved (say they) all whoredoms, under the veil of charity. Many of
them both men and women, as well Ecclesiastical as Lay People were taken, found
guilty, and condemned at Paris, and burnt without S. Vistors gate. They say
further, that Almaric maintained that every one was bound to believe that he is
a member of Jesus Christ, and that when Jesus Christ suffered death and
passion, we suffered with him.

The said Almaric after his death, was condemned and excommunicated at a
Council at Rome, and his bones cast out of the Churchyard, and after burnt to
ashes.

Eating of flesh in Lent.
Nauclerus also recites, that there was in his time in the Country of
Alsatee, many heretics which maintained it to be lawful to eat flesh in
Lent, and upon Fridayes. And that they themselves said that it was no sin to
have the company of women: but a natural thing. There was at Strasbourg about
80. burnt.

Such as are against the Popes doctrine, have been ever flaundered, and
Histories have often followed their affections when there has been a question
of truth.

The Albigeois or Albiois, a people which had received a beginning of the light
of truth, opposed themselves against the Idolatry of Transubstantiation: which
first gave them occasion to withdraw thmselues from the Roman Church. They
inhabited the Country about Toulouse and d' Albi. S. Dominike Author of that
new Sect of such as named themselves preachers, S. Dominike persecuteth them.
came from Spain, and persecuted them greatly both in deed and word.

The Pope sent also toward them his Legate Nicholas Bishop of Tusculan, who
being there with 4. horses and 2. Mules, returned in a little time with 50. and
with great pillage, having exercised great tirannie against these poor people,
upon whom they laid enormious crimes, to make them odious to all the world.

This Pope caused to be published a Croisado against them, and gave full
indulgences and remission of sins to such as would make war upon them. Simon
Count of Mountfort, went against them, and overcame a great number nigh unto
Toulouse: 140. were burnt in the Diocese of Narbone, and 400. in the Diocese
of Toulouse, at diverse times. In this overthrow of the Albigeois, Peter king
of Tarracon, who had drawn them back, and bore them favor and amity, was
slain at the combats. Simon de Mountfort pursued his victory. See Matthew de
Paris, an English Historiographer, who was in this time.

Innocent was held a Council in France, against king Phillip of France, after
he was returned from beyond the Sea. The Popes Legate had laid an interdict
upon all the Kingdom of France, because the King had put away his wife
Ingeberge, sister of the King of Dalmatia (or Morauia, after some Chronicles)
under the color that she was his kinswoman, and had espowsed newly the
daughter of the Duke of Boheme, called Mary. Against the sentence of the said
Legate, the King armed himself, with appellation to a future Council, and in
the mean while revenged him of the Bishops which had consented unto the said
sentence. For he cast them out of their Diocesses and Benefices, and caused to
be held in straight guard the said Ingeberge, in the Castle of Estampes.

The King took again his first wife Ingeberge, whereupon his second dyed of
grief. The Children the King had by her were declared legitimate.

The year 1216. Innocent dyed at Pise, and there was buried: Pise and Genes.

Honorius Pope, 3. of that name, ruled at Rome ten years, Honorius. 3.
7. or 8. months, and certain days, and was chosen at Peruse.

The first year of his Popedom he confirmed the order of the Iacobins, which
his predecessors had refused to do. Honorius being admonished by a dream
confirmed it: A dream the foundation of Iacobins.
For in a Vision he thought that the Church fell, and that S. Dominike
sustained it with his shoulders: by reason hereof he sent for him, and so was
confirmed the third older of Mendicants or beggars. Yea Honorius would needs
have him to obtain the first place.

He commanded that the Host should be kept in a place by it self, and well
enclosed. The Host shut up.


That when the Priest lifts up the Host, the people shall

Jerusalem was rased even to the foundations, by Gordirius the son of
Saladin, whilst the Christians were before Dimiere. Supp. Chron.

Honorius went into France fearing Frederic, and held a Council at Lions,
where he declared Frederic an enemy of the Church, and deposed him of his
Empire: delivering all Princes from their oath of fidelity that they had
promised him. Naucl. All the cause was, because he conferred Benefices.

Honorius, then did so much with the Princes of Almaigne, that John King of
Cact^le (or Henry Lantgraue of Turinge) was elected Emperor: and after
Rodolpe, or William Count of Holland, who reigned two years: which obtained
not the Imperial blessing, being prevented by death.

Histories in this place are confused.

The year 1220. or 1223. Dominike the Emperor died.

Honorius confirmed the Religion of S. Francis, which was the fourth order of
Mendicant Friars. All the four orders of the said Mendicants, were confirmed
by Honorius Fascic. Templ.

The fullness of all Infection is come into the Church by these four plagues
of begging Monks.

Frederic was reconciled with Honorius, by the means of John King of
Jerusalem, who gave his daughter in marriage to the said Frederic.

Lewis. 8.
Lewis 8. of that name, Father of S. Lewis, the 12. King of France, reigned
three years. He made war upon the English men, when his Father Phillip did
the like upon Otho. He spoke with the Emperor Frederic, and renewed the
fraternity betwixt the French and Almaignes. See Gaguin. li. 3.

All Lombardie at the persuasion of Pope Honorius rebelled against the Emperor
Frederic. Naucler.

Honorius dyed, and was buried in the Church of S. Mary the greater.

Stigmates of S. Frances.
The said year (or as others say 1224.) was invented the Fable of the
Stigmates, and wounds of S. Francis.

S. Claire was in this time, a Disciple of S. Frances, Suppl. Chron.

Gregory. 9.
Gregory Pope, 9. of that name, before Bishop of Ostia, Hugolin, or Anagnia,
of the parentage of Innocent: and as Platina says, Honorius his Nephewe, ruled
at Rome 14. years and three months.

Decretals gathered together.
This Pope heaped up Decretalls by one of his Chaplains called Raymond, and
commanded all Doctors and Masters to hold the said Decretalls, and to use
them through all Christendom in Schools and Judgments.

The Pope Canonized S. Dominicke and S. Francis, also S. Elizabeth, daughter of
the King of Hungary.

He ordained that the Salve Regina should be sung at the tolling of a bell.
Paralip. Vrsperge.

Gregory took this boldness to admonish Frederic, under Asia to recover the
City of Jerusalem. At the second time he denounced him excommunicated: In so
much that Frederic was constrained to go into Syria, by the advice of his
friends, but after sending to Rome to be absolved, the Pope refused it: and
withal sent unto ye knights, Templars, and Hospitaliers which were there, in
any wise not to favor the Emperor, but as a public enemy: and moreover
procured that his subjects of Pouille revolted. To bring this to pass he sent
John king of Jerusalem with a great band. Which thing being understood,
Frederic withdrew hastily from Syria, leaving his Marshall with his Army.

S. Lewis 43. King of France, reigned 44. years.

Blanch his mother, who was ordained Regent by Testament, gained the hearts of
the Princes and Lords, part by force, part by love, which practiced evil
against her son.

The year 1237. the Genenois elected a Duke, after the manner of the Venetians.

About the year 1238. a solemn disputation was held at Paris by the Doctors
in Theology, against the plurality of Benefices. See Chron. Reg. Fran.

Peter de Vigne, or Vinea, Petrus de Vinea.
Chancellor unto the Emperor Frederick 2. writ at this time many Letters in
the Emperors name, whereof there are yet some extant imprinted, whereby he
complained that all the world cannot fill the insatiabilitie of the Pope. That
the Turpitudes of the Clergy are so great and enormious, as shame forbids
to speak thereof.

He also manifestly maintained, that the Pope neither by divine or humane
right, has any power of the sword. He was also excommunicated of the Pope.
William the Goldsmith.
William the Goldsmith was also at this time, who shows that he Pope is
Antichrist, Rome Babylon, and the Prelates, members of Antichrist. Caesarius
10. did. 3. of his Dialogues.

The fruit of the doctrine which the Waldois at that time dispearsed abroad,
was seen in the persons of many which opposed themselves against the frauds
and errors of Popes seats.

Frederic went into Italy against Millain and other Cities which rebelled.
The Pope joined with the Venetians against the Emperor: and the third time
excommunicated him. There contentions were published by Letters, wherein are
contained the reproaches that one offer unto an an other. Gregory in great
impudency calls the Emperor the forerunner of Antichrist, and an heretic,
because he said the Pope had no power to excommunicate. Gregory published in a
Sermon the Croisado against the Emperor, and showed S. Paul's head, the rather
to move the Romans against the Emperor, promising reward of glory and of
eternal life, to all such as crossed and armed themselves against Gods and the
Churches enemy. Great mischiefs happened at Rome and thereabouts. Such as
Emperor caught were cauterized and marked in the forehead with an hot Iron.

The faction of Guelphes and Gibellins, showed it self in this time.

Co^tentions were sharp all over, and divided into two Factions, that is,
Guelphes. Gibellines.
into Guelphes and Gibellins. Some say that this Emperor when he was thus
tormented of the Pope, called in the Almane tongue such as favored him,
Gibellins, because he leaned himself upon the^, as an house upon 2. strong
walls. And he called such as were contrary and followed the Popes part,
Guelphes: that is to say Wolves. But the pronuntiatio^ has bin corrupted. From
this division proceeded infinite mischiefs, and destruction of Towns and
people: so that the miserable calamity of these Factions cannot be expressed.
There was no town but it was divided. But at Millain were those Factions, the
Vicounts held on one side, and the Turrians the other, which were two great and
noble Families in the Town: about the dissension whereof, all the Town was
turned into sedition.

Gregory willing to assemble a Council at Rome to depose the Emperor (the king
of France consenting thereunto at the Popes request). The Emperor caused watch
to be laid both by land and sea. Forty Galleys which the Cardinals, Bishops
and Abbots had made, were taken by them of Pise.

Gregory understanding those news, excommunicated them. Finally, the year of
Christ, 1241. Gregory afflicted with so many mischiefs fell sick, and dyed
with sorrow and grief.

Accursius Florentine, an expounder of the Pandects, was in

Margarite daughter of S. Lewis Duches of Brabant, Celestine 4.
founded the Monastery of S. Marcel nigh Paris, for religious women, Margarite
lived the residue of her days after her Fathers decease.

Celestine Pope, 4. of that name, borne at Millaine, ruled at Rome 18. days
only: before called Ieffrey, Bishop of Saint Sabin, a very ancient man. He
often used this sentence. It is harder to be moderate in prosperity then in
adversity. Suppl. Chron.

After his death the seat was vacant about two years, for the horrible
dissentions that then were amongst the Clergy.

Bolloigne taken by Frederic, the University and study was removed from
thence to Padua. Naucler.

S. Lewis founded in the Bishoppricke of Benuais, the Abbey of Loy anmont,
where are Monks of the order of Sisteaux: the Covent of the order of Sisters
Minors, nigh Paris, otherwise called the humility of our Lady. The Hostel Dieu
of Paris, of Pontoise, of Compienne, of Vernon: the Abbey of Beaulieu: the
Abbey of S. Matthew at Roan. He founded also in the town of Paris the Quinze
Vingts, the Church of S. Cross, the Chartreux, the Fillis Dieu, the house of
Saint Augustine, and the white Mantels.

Innocent Pope, 4. of that name, before called Senebaldus, Innocent. 4.
borne at Senes, ruled Rome 11. years, 6. months, and six

He added unto the Feasts ordained. Multiplication of Feasts.
See the Decret. De consec. did. 3. cap. pronuntiandum.

He came for refuge into France, fearing the Emperor, and held a Council at
Lions, whereat the degree and estate of Cardinals was exalted against
heretics, and commanded by Edict, Frederic. 1.
that from thenceforth they should go on horsback, and a red attire on their
head, and a scarlet gown, for a sign and witness that they ought to be
always ready to suffer and to present themselves unto all perils and dangers,
for the defense of Christian Religion, even to shead their blood. C. Masseus.

O craft and childish mockery.

He cited the Emperor personally to appear. And because he appeared not, he
excommunicated him, and deprived him of his Empire, although he sent thither
his Ambassadors.

Immunities of Monks.

He gave great Immunities and privileges to Monks, not only to Mendicants,
but to all others, and made likewise the rule of the sisters of S. Claire.

After this Council, he sent to the Electors, to proceed to a new election.
Frederic on his side writ Letters to the King of France, by which he showed the
wrong that the Pope did him. See Naucler.

The Electors at the Popes commandment elected Henry Lantgraue of Turinge, who
having laid siege before Vlme, was strooken with an Arrowe, and soon after
died of a Flux of the belley. Naucler.

O deiection of Christian Princes, that will suffer themselves to be so fondly
carried away by a foolish fear of excommunication.

The fruits of the faction of Guelphes and Gibellins.
This Pope having not only absolved from the oath of fidelity the Emperors
subjects, but also excommunicated all Lords and Princes which favored and
obeyed him: so moved and angered the Emperor, that he deprived 40. Bishops of
their dignities, sacked the houses which appertained unto the Popes parents,
and caused to be put to death upon a Gibbet many notable persons which had
consented to the Popes conspiration.

Note how many troubles and mischiefs comes in the world by Popes.

After the death of Henry, Guilliam Count of Holland was chosen, but soon
after was slain of the Frisons.

In the said Council of Lion, was the Croisado published; whereof S. Lewis was
made chief. Frederic. 2.
But yet the holy Land was not recovered: For things went always from evil to
worse. S. Lewis in that voyage beyond the Sea was prisoner.

Frederic gave to Manfroy his bastard son, the Kingdom Sicilie: but the Pope
Vrbaine took it from him by reason he was contrary unto him, and gave it to
the brother of S. Lewis, Charles Count of Aniou.

In this time reigned Odo Chauncelor of Paris, Hugo Cardinalis Iacopin, Vincent
the Historiographer, Alexander de Hales an English man, Alexander de Villa dei,
a Friar, who made the doctrine.

The year of Christ, 1250. Frederic founded a Town in Italy, and called it
Victoria. It was after taken by the Popes soldiers and by his Legate, and
raced unto the foundations. Then Frederic returned into Pouille, The death of
Frederic the second.
where soon after he died of sickness, of the age of 57. years. Some say he
was traitorously slain by his son Manfroy.

Conrade King of Germany, was crowned in his father Frederic his time:
understanding then of his death, he went into Italy, and from thence into
Pouille, where he became sick. His bastard brother Manfroy to reign
peaceably, gave the Physician a sum of silver to poison his medicines,
whereof he died but first he made his Testament, and instituted Corradin his
son, heir of his kingdoms and countries, and was honorably buried.

The Pope assembled soldiers to go against Manfroy, and thinking shortly to
obtain his kingdom, died at Naples sooner then he thought, and was buried in
the Church of Saint Laurence. Naucler.

S. Lewis returned from beyond the Sea.

The College of Sarbone was now instituted and founded at Paris, by Robert
brother of S. Lewis. Sarbone instituted.


Alexander Pope, 4. of that name, of Campaigne, Alexand. 4.
ruled at Rome 7. years.

The Pope canonized S. Claire.

The Hermittes of the order of Saint Augustine, Augustine Hermits.
were by this Pope drawn from their Hermitages in woods, unto good Towns, The
Empire vacant
commanding them to preach and hear Confessions, and gave unto the said
order, privileges, exemptions, and indulgences.

He excommunicated Manfroy the bastard, and after made war upon him; but the
Pope was overcome, and his Legate imprisoned at Naples.

The Archbishop of Rauenna was created Legate Apostolic: he preached the
Croisado against Ecclinus, promising eternal life to such as would go to
war against the Popes enemies.

So did Gregory the 9. against Frederic the 2.

The year of Christ, 1256. William Count of Holland, fell into a poole, and
his horse not being able to get up, was slain by the Frisons.

After the death of Henry Lantgraue of Hesse, and of William Count of Holland,
the Electors disagreed. Some elected Alphonsus King of Castile. Others, Richard
Count of Cornwall, the King of England his brother, and that by the Popes
Instigation. Naucler.

There was a schism in the Empire 23. years, after Naucler. or 28. after
others: and all by the occasion of Popes; and this schism endured from the
year, 1245. until the year 1273. which was the first year of the Empire of
Rodolphe.

The first League of the Switzes.
The alliance of Leagues and Cantons in the Country of Switze, began now.
They drove out of their Country many Noble men which were tirants, and
committed unjust actions upon them. So did they defend the poor, the Orphans
and widows, whereby they became renowned through all the world, says Fasci.
temp.

Ordinances of King Lewis.
In this time, S. Lewis king of France as soon as he was returned, made many
goodly Laws and ordinances to hold his people in justice: Bayliffes, Prouosts,
and Sargeants, in their duties, that they might not be raueners or eaters of
the people, under the pain to be put from their offices.

He drove from his Court Morrisdauncers and Ieasters, forbidding Officers to
take gain, or to take Benefices for their children. He ordained that the
blasphemers should have the hot Iron set in their brows. He went into
Affrike, took Carthage, and besieged Tunes. The plague fell in his Camp,
where he died of a Flux of the belley, having reigned 44. years. His body was
carried to be buried at S. Denis. See Emil. Lib. 7.

An opposition against the Sects of Mendicants or begging Friars.

Guilliam de S. Amor, Doctor of Paris, Chanon of Benuais, flourished in this
time. In his Sermons (as himself witnesses) he especially envied against the
hypocrisy of Prelates: saying that that vice was of all most dangerous,
wherewith all the Church was infected. He opposed himself against Monks, and
above all against Mendicants, accusing them that they troubled Churches, and
brought out the witnesses of the scriptures, which make mention of Antichrist
and his supporters. And applying them to the time present, proved by 39.
signs, that begging Friars were false Prophets. He expounded that place of the
Gospel: If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou possessest, etc.
Upon which place the Mendicants founded their order: And he gave to know in
full disputation, that the place was not meant of actual policy (as
Sophisters speak) but of habitual poverty: that is to say, that Jesus Christ
demands of us, not that we should forsake and cast off that which we have,
but that we be ready (when the confession of the name of God, and the glory of
Jesus Christ requires it) to abandon and forsake, not only that which we
possess, but even our own souls: and not only (as is said in an other
place) to leave their father and mother, but also to hate them, Luke 14.16.
yea our own lives. Briefly, Jesus Christ would that we should be ready to
forsake all, when the confession of his truth requires it.

There are learned people of our age, which say they have seen four books
which he writ, Entitled, a Collection of the Catholic and Canonicke
scripture. He writ also a book Entitled the fifty marks and signs of false
Prophes. He writ against Bonauenture, who then was the chief Buckler of the
begging Friars.

Matheus Paris an English Historiographer, writes that in this same time there
was in the school of Paris great disputations against Monks, which by
multitude would needs oppress and oppugn all the school, having forged a new
book full of errors and blasphemies, which they then rejected and entitled
(Euangelium eternum) that is, the everlasting Gospel; which they would needs
bring into light. But to appease this tumult, there were six delegates of all
the school, which were of the greatest estimation in all the University,
amongst which was Guilliam de S. Amor, to send them to Rome unto the Pope, and
show the insolences and blasphemies of those Monks. The Monks also sent
thither on their part: and after great contention, their errors were condemned
touching their eternal Gospel. But the Pope with certain Cardinals, Monks,
repressed nothing the tirannie of the begging Friars, thinking it was needful
that such his black guard should become mighty over all. These be the words of
Matheus Paris, who was in this time.

We also find a book written in this time, intriuled (de periculis mundi) of
the dangers of the world, which the Papists attributed unto Guilliam de S.
Amor, making him alone of that opinion: but it seems to have bin written by
many, and contains complains against those new rising Monks, with an
advertisement unto the Church, that by them great mischiefs would follow.

This S. Amor was condemned an heretic, whereupon great stirs fell out
amongst the schools at Paris: but to obey the Popes commandment, Guilliam S.
Amor was banished from France.

We hear that some of his books are yet at this day in the library at
Sorbone: and many other Doctors have since written the like, as in our
discourse shall be said.

Truth is always banished, yet still gets the upper hand of all.

Alexander being come to Viterbe, to make peace betwixt the Venetians and
Geneuois, died there, and the seat was vacant four months.

Albert the great, and other studious people were at this time at Paris.

An Advertisement.
From Siluester the 2. that devilish Magician, until this time 1260. Popes
have reigned as Incarnate devils in all trumperies, deceites, oppressions of
the good, and manifest tirannies. Their Cardinals, Legates and Bishops, have
come out from them as Satan's to trouble the world. The greatest Monarkes have
been tormented by their infernal furies. Examples for all, are the two
Emperors, Henry the fourth and fifth, the two Fredericks, first and second, and
other Princes of the earth. From henceforward, from Innocent the fourth, and
Alexander the fourth, the Popes by a new forged Army, The Popes new soldiers.
established and privileged by them, they wasted and destroyed all: that is to
say, by four Sects of Mendicant Monks, (which like true Locusts) devoured and
consumed by their Sophistike doctrine, whatsoever was green of the word of
God. From which (like thieves which enter into the sheepfolde by breaches and
mines) nothing can be looked for henceforth, but thefts, robberies,
persecutions, and murders of the true faithful, which God gave and raised up
to maintain the eternal verity.

Vrbain Pope, 4. of that name, Vrbain. 4.
French borne at Troy in Campaign, a Monk, of the order of Cysteaux, Patriarch
of Jerusalem, Rome three years, one month, and four days.

The Greeks recovered Constantinople, which the French had held 55. years.
Chron. of the Kings of France, and the Sea of Hist.

Vrbain instituted the Feast of the Sacrament, The Feast of Transubstantiation.
and the Octaues, with Indulgences (whereof he was free) to such as observed
the said Feast. Martin fifth, Pope, doubled them, and added yet others to such
as fasted the eve, and as went to the Precession and Communion that day.

S. Thomas d' Aquin Iacopin, made the office of the said feast, with the Prose
and the Hymn, and sent it to the Pope; who for a recompense of such an
invention, sent him a Dove of silver, etc. Naucler.

The year of Christ, 1263. Vrbaine sent to S. Lewis King of France, that he
would send him his brother Charles Count Angiou, and Count de Prouence, with a
good Army, then he would crown him King of Sicilie, and give him Pouille and
Calabria. He said that the said Kingdom was held of the Roman Church, and
that the king of Sicilie was the Popes man. Vrbain caused the Croisado to be
preached in France against Manfroy, who occupied the said Sicilia. The said
Charles came and marched in battle against Manfroy, and after against
Conradin, and overcame them both, and so obtained the Lands: but the end was
miserable. For the Sicilians after, in the year 1282. rebelled against him,
maintaining the quarrel of the king of Arragon, whom they would needs have for
their king. And they marked the doors and gates of whatsoever houses the
French men lay in, in the Country, then at an evening slew them all
indifferently, and opened which they knew to be great with child with the
French men, and cast away their fruit, that there might remain none of that
generation in that Country. The Euensong of Sicilie.
This occasion was afterward ordinarily called, The Euensong of Sicilie.

In this time, Bonauenture General of the Friars, wrote two books against M.
Guilliam de S. Amor.

The one of the poverty of Christ, and the other an Apology of the poor. The
Bishoppricke of Ratisbone was offered unto him: but he refused it, loving
better to follow his studies: and died of the age of 80. years. Chron. Abb.

Chaplet invented.
Under this Pope, the Idolatry of Chaplets was invented at Amiens in Picardie,
called Peter the Hermit. See Peter Viret of the spring of Chapelets.

The Souldane made a great Army in Siria.

A Comet seen 3. months together.

This Pope died at Peruse, and for troubles the seat was vacant 10. months.

Clement. 4.
Clement Pope, fourth of that name, borne at Narbone, ruled Rome 3. years, 9.
months, and 21. days: before he was called Hugo Falcodius, he had been an
advocate, and was after the king of France his Councellor. After the death of
his wife, he was Bishop of Puy, and after, Archbishop of Narbone; lastly.
Cardinal and Bishop of Sabine. Finally, A Legate.
by the Pope Vrbane he was sent into England for the reformation of peace, and
being in that Legation, was chosen Pope at Peruse, after the death of Vrbain.

He caused to come info Italy, Charles brother of the king of France, and made
him Senator of Rome, and sent two Cardinals into the Church of Laterane, and
there crowned him King of Jerusalem and Sicilie: upon condition
notwithstanding, to swear to pay unto the Roman Church yearly 40000, pieces
of gold, and that he should not receive the Empire at the hands of the
Almaines, no not though they would thrust it upon him.

The Sarrasins came into Spain and committed a great

The year of Christ, 1267. Conradin, This was the last Duke of Sanabe.
the true and Legitimate King of Sicilie, son of Conrade who was son of
Frederic the second, vanquised in war by Charles Count d'Angiou, and was
finally taken and disclosed by a Mariner, unto whom he gave his Ring in pawn
for his passage to Pise, but he was brought unto the Count d' Angiou and put
in prison: afterward by the Popes Council he was beheaded, the year 1268.
Naples with Frederic Duke of Austriche and many others.

There is great diversity in Histories touching the taking of the said
Conradin. See the Chro. of the Emperors in the 2. Tome. John Naucler. in the
Generation 34. in the 2. volu.

See heerevpon Martin Luther, in the book against the Roman Popedom,
invented by the devil.

This Pope Clement demanded a certain Tenth in Almaine, John surnamed
Teutonicus, Glossator of the Decree, Almaine.
and Provost of S. Stephen d'Alberstat, opposed himself against it, and
appealed to the next Council, for which appellation, the said Provost was
excommunicated by the Pope, and deprived of his office. The Sea of Hist.

Clement having a Nephew which held 3. Benefices Ecclesiastical, constrained
him to forsake two of them. Naucler.

The said Clement died at Viterbe: and the seat was vacant two years.

Gregory. 10.
Gregory Pope, tenth of that name, borne at Plaisance in Lombardie, ruled at
Rome four years. Before he was called Thiband, Archdeacon of Land, and was
then in the parts beyond the Sea in the City of Acre, when he was chosen at
Viterbe. The Cardinals being in the Conclaue for the election, John Bishop of
Port mocking him, said. Come let us uncover this house; for the holy Ghost
cannot descend and pass through so many couerings.

After his election he sought to pacify the Venetians and the Geneuois.

Phillip 3. of that name, surnamed le Hardy, son of S. Lewis 44. King of
France, reigned 15. years.

Gregory made assemble a Council at Lions, of all the Barons and Prelates of
France, wherein he ruled: and king Phillip met him and gave him a guard of
soldiers, and three strong places about Lions for the surety of his person.
John le Maire.

In the said Council was ordained, that the Pope should be chosen of the
Cardinals incontinent after the others death: and that they should put the
Cardinals in sure prison, wherein they should give them neither to eat nor
drink until they were agreed. This ordinance was then made because the seat
had been vacant almost three years before they could agree upon the election.

In the said Council was also accorded the tenth part of the Church goods to
be given for six years to maintain the war for the conquest of the Land
beyond the sea.

Certain Monkeries defaced.
At the said Council some sorts of Monkeries which lived of Alms were defaced,
namely the brethren des Sacs, the brethren des pres, the brethren des blancs
manteaux, and many others.

Michael Paleologus then the Emperor of Constantinople, came thither for the
union of the Greek and Latin Church, which was ratified by the said Emperor.
And this was the third time that the Greek Church was reunited with the Latin:
but it was alwaie broken, as yet this third union was.

During the time of the said Council, certain Princes of Tartaria, which had
followed the said Emperor Paleologus, received baptism.

Moreover there was great disputation about the voyage unto the holy Land
(which was the old practice of Popes) but nothing was concluded therein.

S. Thomas d' Aquin going to the said Council of Lions, whereunto he was
called, died in the way, of the age of 50. years. Bonauenture was created
Cardinal by the Pope, but soon after he died.

Gregory 10. returning from France to Rome, and passing by Florence, was
required to take away the Interdict (he had forbidden them all right of
warring) but he did nothing therein: And from thence came to Aretinum, where he
died.

After the Empire had been long vacant, and that many Civil wars had
thereupon followed.

Rodolphe Count of Habspurge in Suesia, Rodolphe Emperor.
was chosen king of the Romans by the Electors, a man of mean age, and who had
valiantly carried himself in the charge he had under Frederic 2. He had also
been great Master in the Court of Ottocarus king of Bohemia, who sought to
hinder the election, because he also aspired unto the Empire.

Whilst they were choosing Rodolphe, he held the seat before Baste. For there
were then two factions in the town. Such as favored the Bishop bore a
Perroquet. Such as favored the Count Rodolphe, carried the Star. Rodolphe
sought to place in the Town them of the faction of the Star, which were
chased out. Munster. After he was crowned at Aix, he held certain assemblies
or Imperial Iourneyes, where the king of Bohemia was declared a Rebel, who
(during the vacancie of the Empire) usurped Austrich, Siria, Carinthia, and
Carniota. Rodolphe then with the power of the Princes occupied Austrich, and
drove out Ottocaire King of Bohemia, and after constrained him to yield
himself a vassal, and to do homage. Ottocairus according thereunto, required
that one thing might be granted him, namely that he might not do his homage
publicly. For he was very proud, Rodolphe.
and shamed to bow the knees before him that before had served him as his great
Master. The Emperor agreed that it should be under a Pauillion. Pride mocked.
But this Pauillion was made with such industry, that in drawing it would
divide in four parts. Being then upon his knees and receiving the standerd at
the Emperors hand according to the custom, one broke the coard of the
Pauillion, so that it opened on all parts, in such sort that Ottocairus was
seen of all doing homage on his knees. This being come unto the knowledge of
Kunegunde his wife (which he had espowsed during the life of his other wife
Margaret) as soon as her husband returned, mocked him that he had bowed his
neck being adorned so pompeously, before him that once had been his servant,
and so incited him to revenge himself of that despite. The king being thus
pricked forward, made war upon the Emperor against the oath he had taken,
and against the advice of the Princes of his Country. The Emperor met him, put
him to flight, and finally a Gentleman of Styria wounded him, and being
dispoiled of all that he had, was carried dead to the Town of Austriche, Anno
1279. and 14. thousand of his people were slain besides prisoners. After this,
Rodolphe entered into the Country of Bohemia and wasted it.

Pride intermedled with shame and disloyalty, falls into confusion and
ruin.

The Bishop of Olmunce made the peace, and brought things to this pass that
Wencelaus son of Ottocaire should take to wife Gertrude the Emperors daughter:
and on the other side, Rodolphe the Emperor his son, should espowse Agnes
the daughter of Ottocaire, Austrich also came unto the Emperors son Albert.

The Tartarians.
Till this time the Tartarians were unknown in Europe. Now they showed
themselves, and finally entered into Hungary with five hundredth thousand men,
from thence into Polonia Schlesia, Morauia. See Monstre. lib. 4.

Caliphe of Babylon.
Some recite that in this time, Haalon King of the Tartarians overcame the
Countries of Persia, and took Babylon, then called Baldaca, with the great
Caliphe: who in the Mahumetist law is to be compared unto the Pope of Rome,
in authority and treasure.

This Haalon having the Caalipho prisoner (as is said) invented and ordained in
a great mockery his death in this sort.

It is convenient (says he) that that man (speak of the Caliphe) which loved
so much gain, Insatiable cupiditie punished.
should be nourished with precious viands, go then and place him in the midst
of heaps of gold and precious stones, and let him use such meats. As then he
had certain time been kept in great affluence of gold and silver, and in the
midst of these riches, he died with hunger. See Paralip. Vrsp.

Innocent Pope, fifth of that name, borne at Burgongne, Innocent. 5.
after Supp. Chron. and Cor. Abb. Or in Lombardie, after Fasci Temp. Peter de
Tarentaise, Prior Provincial of the Iacobins in France, Master and Doctor in
Theology, Archbishop of Lions, Cardinal d' Ostia, and great Penitenciary of
the Pope.

See how these Grasshoppers Mendicants, enter already into power to appoint
over them the King Abadon, as is spoken, Apocalips. 19.

Whilst this man was Bishop of Ostia and Cardinal (whose office it is to
consecrate the Pope) Bonauenture Friar was also Cardinal and Bishop of Albe.
This Peter or Innocent, Disorders that were in Italy.
being chosen Pope, came soon after to Rome. Where having been crowned in the
Church of S. Peter, that he might rest at his pleasure, he sent Ambassadors,
men of great authority which command them of Tuscane, (which had conspired to
destroy the Pisans) and the Geneuois and Venetians, being at deadly food to
lay down their Arms upon pain of excommunication. The Ambassadors of Charles
King of Sicilie were also there present; by means of whose authority, he
hoped things should more easily have such issue as they desired* The Tuscanes
straight did what was commanded them. And above all, the Florentines: which
also for that cause he declared and absolved of the Interdict which Gregory
his predecessor had published against them. But the Geneuois and Venetian
(whose hearts had of long time been inueterated) consumed one an other by
losses and mutual victories: which notwithstanding Innocent would have made
consent unto that he pretended, if he had longer lived, he took the matter so
much to heart. But he dyed six months and two days after he was chosen Pope,
the same year of his predecessor Gregory, and was buried in the Church of
Laterane. This says Carsulanus, although he had determined to do many things,
yet did nothing worthy of memory, because he was prevented by death. This
Pope (as Platina says) displeased much the secular Priests: Law for the
burial of Clement the fourth.
because that being at Viterbe after he had heard the process that was betwixt
them and the Iacobins touching the sepulcure of Clement the fourth, he
ordained by sentence that his body should be buried by the said Iacobins,
Rodolphe.

Adrian Pope, fifth of that name, borne at Genes, of the house of Tolisques,
before called Othobonus, was created Pope at Rome, in the Palace of Lateran,
after the death of Innocent his uncle, having been ordained by him Cardinal,
Deacon of Saint Adrian, and sent into England with large power to levy a great
sum of money. But as he sought to appease certain discordes betwixt the
King and his Barons, that he might dispatche his business the more easily,
he was clapped up in prison by the Londiners, but finally delivered again.

The year of our Lord, 1266. he held a Sinode in Northumberland, and an
other at London, whether resorted a great number of Bishops and Priests.
There after they had brought to such estate as he thought good the things
appertaining to the Popedom, he published certain laws, which in time to
come England should use in such things as concerned Popery. He declared wicked
all such Bishops as had rashly followed the Princes part against King Henry the
third: which yet were absolved by him, partly by gifts and presents, and partly
because he was constrained unto a quick transportation to the Pope of Rome.

Being then created Pope of Rome, he took incontinently his way toward
Viterbe, and sought to bring into Italy the Emperor Rodolphe, to diminish the
power of Charles King of Sicilie, (this was he which a little before they had
lifted up into that room against all justice and equity) who at that time did
his pleasure and as he would at Rome. But Rodolphe being wrapped in war
against the Bohemians, could not satisfy Adrians request. As for Charles
meaning to fly the envy against him, transported into Achaia all his forces
which he had prepapared to make war: to the end by that mean to make a way
to be Emperor of Constantinople.

Adrian had a will (says Platina) to cause that all Seignories belonging unto
the Church should come into great assurance against such as oppressed them: and
to reduce into an other form the constitution of his predecessor Gregory,
The ordinance touching the shutting up of Cardinals.
touching the shutting up of Cardinals at the Popes election: But death
hindered his enterprises, and opposed it self against the greatness of his
courage. What could he do (says Wicelius Apostate of the truth) that was a
Pope but of forty days? For be deceased at Viterbe, the year 1276. before he
could be consecrated, and was enterred in the Covent of Friars the fourth day
of his Popedom, and the seat was vacant about 28. days.

Many debates and contentions happened amongst the Bishops and Pastors against
the Mendicant Monks which troubled Churches; because whether Bishops and
Priests would or no, they would ascend into Pulpits to preach. Amongst such as
complained of them besides Guilliam d'Amour (of whom we spoke before) there was
Bernard the Glossator of the Decretalls, Godfrey des Fountains, Henry de Gaud,
and many others.

Laurent an English man, Doctor of Paris, in this time maintained the opinion
of Guilliam de Saint Amor, and writ against the Monks a Book containing an
admonition against false Prophets, and an other by which he defends the said
de Saint Amor. The Book that the bogging Friars set out Of the eternal and
spiritual Gospel, to e^^^^ct the true Gospel of our Lord, was publicly
burnt: and to cover their filthiness and impudency, they said that a
certain Monk (which long time before was dead) had made it.

John. 22.
John, 22. of that name of Portugal, borne in the Town of Lisbone, making
profession of Physic, called before Peter of Portugal, He was called Petrus
Hispanus.
of a Cardinal and Bishop of Tusoule, was created Pope.

This Pope although he was accounted a very learned man, yet because he had not
such knowledge of things that he had to govern, as was requisite: and also
because he was of inconstant and mutable manners, as Platina says, he brought
much more damage unto the Popedom, then honor or profit. For he did many
things, wherein he showed himself astonished and light. There was one only
point wherein he was worthy praise; that is, that willingly he helped many
young people which had desire to profit in good Letters, in giving them silver
and Ecclesiastical Benifices, and above all, such as were pressed with poverty.

The Venetians molest the^ of the Marquesdome of Ancone.
The Venetians then did greatly molest them of the Marquesdome of Ancone,
because they made traffic of Merchandise into Dalmatia, without paying any
portage to the Venetian: the Pope defended them not as he ought, they being
the Churches subjects: for he was ready enough in words, but when it came to
lay hand to work, he had neither courage nor hardiness.

They of Ancone seeing themselves destitute of the Popes succors, taking
courage, made a sallie upon the Venetians which had besieged their Town, and
drove them away after having greatly indomaged them.

In all things this Pope accustomed not to use any other Council but of John
de Gauiette, by the will and direction of whom all things were governed: for
that by his means he was chosen Pope. He sent Ambassadors as well toward
Michael Paleologne, as to Western Kings, exhorting them in his name that they
would make Peace one with another, and take Arms against the Sarrasins and
other enemies of Christian religion: which thing if Paleologne would not do,
and if he kept not the union that he had accorded unto, John would give his
Empire unto Charles king of Sicilie.

This Pope promised himself long life, yea he foretold it by the Stars, and
affirmed before every one that he should live long. But as he affirmed such a
folly, in the presence of his people, a new Vault ( Valerius calls it a playing
Hall: Stella, a rich and precious Chamber) which he had builded in his Palace
at Viterbe, fell suddenly the fourth day following, the year 1277. And the
seventh day after the said ruin, being found miserably slain betwixt the
stone and the wood, was enterred in the great Church, the 8. month of his
Popedom.

He knew by experience how great was the vanity of his Divination.

The Sea was vacant by the space of six months by the means of debate
amongst the Cardinals. He writ certain Problems, following therein
Aristotle, the Canons and rules of Physic. The treasure of the poor, and
certain Epistles.

The doctrine of the Waldois.
After that Waldo and his company were driven from Lions, one company drew
toward Lombardie, where they multiplied greatly: In so much that their
doctrine began to be dispearced through Italy, and came even to Sicilie: As
the Patents of Frederic the second given against them when he reigned,
witnesses.

By the recital of such as writ against them, and likewise by one Reinerius,
who lived and and writ a little after this time, it may be gathered that this
was their doctrine. That we must believe the scriptures only in that which
concerns salvation: and that no other thing ought to be received but that
which God commands us. That there is but one only Mediator, and therefore
we must not invoke Saints. That there is no purgatory; but that all men
justified by Christ, go to eternal life; and such as do not believe, go to
eternal death. And that there is neither third nor fourth place.

They receive and allow two Sacraments. Baptism, and Communion.

They said that all Masses, and chiefly such as were invented for the dead,
were abominable and damned, and therefore ought to be abolished.

All humane traditions ought to be rejected without holding. them for
necessary to salvation. That singing, and recital of the official, and
fastings tied to certain days, superfluous feasts, the difference of meats,
as well of degrees and orders of Priests, Monks, and Nuns; as blessings and
consecrations of creatures, vows, pilgrimages, and all the confusion and great
heap of ceremonies before inverted ought to be abolshed.

They denied the Popes supremacy, and above all the power he had usurped upon
policies. And they admitted no degrees but Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

That the Roman seat is very Babylon, and that the Pope is the fountain of
all evils at this day.

That the marriage of Priests is good and necessary in the Church.

That such as hear the word of God and have a right knowledge thereof, are the
true Church: to which Jesus Christ has given the keys to cause Sheep to
enter, and drive away Wolves.

See briefly the doctrine of the Waldois, which the enemies have impugned, and
for which (by their own witness) they were persecuted in this time.

Mathias Illiricus in the Catalogue which he gathered of the witnesses of the
truth, says that he has by him the consultations of certain Advocates of
Auignon. Also of three Archbishops, of Narbone, of Arles, and of Aix, and
likewise of the Bishop of Alban to root out the Waldois, written past 300.
years: by which it appears that then and before there were a great number of
the faithful here and there dispearced throughout all France. It may also be
collected by the consultations of the said Archbishops, that as the number was
very great, the persecution was very cruel. For in the end of them, there is
thus found written. Who is so new in France that is ignorant of the
condemnation of these Heretics Waldois made of long time so justly? A thing so
famous, so public as has cost so great expenses, sweats, and trauells for the
Catholic, and has been sealed with so many condemnations and deaths of
those wicked Infidells, can it be called into doubt?

It appears then what a butcherie in this time was made of the faithful, and
what cruelty the supporters of the Roman Antechrist exercise against the
good.

Nicholas 3. borne at Rome, of the house of Vrsins, Nicholas. 3.
called before John de Gauette, (the election being deferred until the sixth
month, not wthout great debate and contentions amongst the Cardinals)
occupied the papal seat.

Charles king of Sicilie, as Senator of Rome, The charge of the Conclaue.
had the charge of the Conclaue, who insisted much that some of the French
Nation might be chosen. After then that Nicholas had taken possession of the
Popedom, meaning to diminish the credit and power of Charles, took from him
the Vicariatship of Tuscane, and filled all Italy with vprores and tumults of
war: and to the end he might provide well for his businesses, The kingdom of
Sicilie redemanded by the Pope.
he persuaded Peter King of Arragon (these be old Popish tricks) to redemaund
the Kingdom of Sicilie, showing him that by right of heritage it belonged unto
him, because of Constance his wife. Which counsel pleased Peter well. But what
fruit wrought the counsel of this S. Peter? Peter having gotten into his
power a puissant Army for the sea, came unto Sardeigne, and there attended
till there was some stir in Sicilie. The treason of the Sicilia^s.
For the Sicilians having coniured against Charles, and the French had assigned
a day to sley them all, yea without having respect unto Sex, or condition of
any person, so soon as the sound of Bell should be heard at evening, as shall
be said hereafter. But this cruel and horrible act was not executed in the
time of Nicholas, but under Martin the fourth of that name, his successor.

Nicholas transported to himself the dignity of the Senator of Rome, which
Clement the fourth had given unto e foresaid King Charles, The Exarchat of
Rauenna brought under the Pope.
and ordained for a perpetual Edict that from thence forth no King or Prince
should dare to demand such an estate, or to take such a charge upon him. By
the disloyalty of this Pope it came to pass that all Flammina with the town,
of Bolongne it self, and the Exarchate of Rauenna, (which things had long time
been in the Seignorie and domination of the Emperors) were reduced under the
puissance of the Romish Sinagogue. And besides, he alone took upon him the
charge (as Stella says) of the office of Senator: which the Church had
accustomed to give unto Kings and Princes.

The Popes pleasures.
He enriched the Town of Rome with new edifice; and amongst others, he builded
an house very commodious for S. Peter: and a Park for Hares or Conneys, which
he environed with high walls. Wherein he himself often hunted. He reedified
the Churches of S. Peter and S. Paul, which fell with age. He achieved and
ended a certain house in Laterane, which had long time before been commenced.
He builded from the bottom to the top the Church called Sancta Sanctorum, and
set there the Apostles keys in silver chains. When this Hypocrite sung Mass,
the tears fell from his eyes. He carried such favor unto the Friars, that
he declared certain doubts which were in the rule of the Sect, by a
Decretall Epistle. He made many ordinances for the profit and utility of the
Clergy, (not of Christian people) and made many Cardinals of the order of
begging Friars. He drove from him certain Notaires, commanding under pain of
Excommunication, that in what place souer, Magistrates should be but Annalls
for a year. Many reproved him for that he had made his Nephew called
Berthand, The Pope enriched his Nephew.
Count or Earl of Romagnole, and had sent Latin Cardinal Iacobin his other
Nephew, or rather Bastard, Legate into Tuscane. For Platina, Stella, and others
say, that he loved his own too much. In so much that whatsoever he got from
others, he gave it without reason or measure. For he took by force from
certain Roman Gentlemen, their Castles, and gave them to his friends, and
amongst others, one called Surien.

Papal subtilty.
After he had every where set up the Gibellins, (a sort of mutinous and
rebellious people) into their first estate, to the end they might maintain his
tirannies, he placed in Florence as in other places, Magistrates at his
pleasure, and many other domages he did unto them.

This Pope had also determined to have made two Kings of the house of Vrsini,
and to have placed one in Tuscane, and an other in Lombardie. But as he
purposed to put all these things in effect being in the Town called Sutry, The
Popes death the cause of great good.
he was taken with an Apoplexy of which he died suddenly and without speaking,
the year of our Lord, 1291. And after some, the 4. of his Popedom, although
by his good complexion it seemed he would have lived much longer.

Some say his death was foretold by one which saw a great Inundation or
ouerflowing of the River of Tiber. Some say also he engendered upon a Concubine
of his a bastard, A monstrous Popes bastard
whose hair and nails were like a Bears. See what John de Noyan says in his
Illustrations of Beda.

William Durand a subtle man, made at this time his book Entitled Rationale
diuinorum officiorum.

Albert the great, Bishop of Ratisbone, died in this time.

Martin the 4. of that name, Martin. 4.
borne in France in the Town of Tours, named before Simon, and Cardinal Priest
of S. Cecile,

Being chosen by the French Cardinals which then were in greatest number,
would not be crowned at Viterbe, because he took that Town to be interdicted
for a rowte they made against the Cardinals. For they of Viterbe following one
called Richard Hanniball, Captain of all such as took part with the Italians,
entered into the Conclaue, took the Cardinals and put them in prison, after
having not only despised, but also given the chase to all them of the house of
Vrsins.

This Pope Martin then being come into the old town, which commonly is called
Oruieto, used all the solemnities and created 8. Cardinals that same day,
Charles S. Lewis his brother who was made Ki. of Sicilie by Clement. 4.
that he might be strongest when he came unto combat. But he not only
received very courteously the King Charles coming toward him, but also
yielded him the dignity of Senator, whereof he was deprived by Nicholas. This
every man found not good, for that it seemed it should stir up great
seditions in the Town, seeing the Vrsins were already returned, and such as
were of Hanniballs faction chased away. For Charles was a great adversary of
the Vrsins, for the hatred he conceived against Nicholas. Yet Martin subtillly
casting his affairs, had in great estimation Matthew d'Aquasporta, of the order
of his brethren Friars, Cardinal and Bishop of Port, of the house of Vrsins.

This Pope Martin published sentence of excommunication against Peter King of
Arragon, who ordained an Army by Sea to come into Sicilie against Charles, and
exposed his Kingdom for a pray to the first that could get it, declaring his
subjects absolved of the oath of fidelity which they had promised him, naming
him an usurper of Ecclesiastical goods, and levied an army against him, of
such as had taken the Croisado.

All the pastime of Popes and their supporters, is to stir up war and
dissension amongst the Princes of this world.

Peter de Arragon excommunicated.
Yet Peter making no account of all this, obtained the kingdom of Sicilie with
the help of Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople: who was also
excommunicated, as making no account of that he had promised at the Council of
Lions above.

The French slain all in an hour in Sicilie.
Moreover, the Sicilians not being able longer to bear the pride and whoredoms
of the French: at the persuasion of John Prochita, coniured against Charles,
and slew them all at the sound of a Bell, without having any regard to Sex,
and from thence came the Proverb, when one wishes the death of many, that
they may say, The Euensong of Sicilie, as has been touched a little before.

Besides, this Martin amongst other acts worthy of a Pope, granted to the
Romans that they might choose two Senators of the Nobility, and excommunicated
Paleologus Emperor of Greece. He made war against them of Forley, and
granted many privileges unto Begging Friars, which he knew to be like horses
prepared unto the battle, and all this was still to munite and fortify the
more his tirannie. But as once he Casulanus recites it) the year of our Lord,
1285. he was taken with a secret malladie of which he died, after having said
he endured much grief: although the Physicians found not in him any sign of
death, and was buried at Peruse.

Some Authors, which Thomas Cooper one very learned follows in his
abridgement of Chronicles, have left in writing, that the first year of his
Popedom, he took as the Proverb is, to bread and to pot, Martin succeeded
in the concubine of his predecossor.
the concubine of his Predecessor Nicholas. But for fear such an accident
should happen unto him as did unto the other, namely, that if he had a child,
it should be like unto a Bear, he commanded that all the Bears which had been
painted in the Palace by a Pope of the house of Vrsins, should be defaced and
clean taken away: because he knew well that the figure of things upon which
women think when they conceive their children, oftentimes is certain imprinted
in them.

It appears well that this Pope was herein very expert, but he took no heed
that such a monster showed to the world, what sanctetie there is in Popes
singleness.

Giles of Rome, Bishop of Bourges, Egidius de Roma.
disciple of S. Thomas d'Aquin, lived in this time.

Phillip le Bell 45. King of France, and of Navarre, The Palace of Paris.
reigned after his father Phillip the third, the year 1225. The Palace was
sumptuously builded in the I Will which Seen makes. Euguerrant de Marigni, the
Kings Councellor, and President des Finances, had the charge thereof. In this
Palace the Court of Parliament had his seat distributed into chambers. The
king dwelt there.

The College of Navarre was builded by the Queen Ioane, at the entry of the
reign of this king.

Honorius, 4. of that name, borne at Rome, Honorius. 4.
of the house of Sabellius, which is a noble race, called before James, and
being Cardinal Deacon, after he had been chosen by the Cardinals, took
possession of the Popedom, and ruled 2. years. Naucl.

He had a brother called Pandulphe, Pandulphe Senator of Rome.
which was then Senator of Rome, who greatly punished thieves, homicides, and
other such like.

This Pope dwelt in Mount Auentine, where he builded a new house, and incited
many others to do the like.

He excommunicated Peter King of Arragon, Peter of Arragon excommunicated.
who then occupied the Kingdom of Sicilie against Charles, and confirmed the
Interdict published against him by his predecessor Martin, because he would
not permit that the Popes seat should enjoy that Region.

The Florentines and they of Luke obtained by silver of Rodolphe the Emperor,
liberty for their Commonwealths. The Florentines gave 6000. skutes, and the
Luquets 12000. skutes.

Venice Ducats.
The Venetians also obtained license to forge Ducats of Gold at Venice.

The Geneuois got themselves franchis and liberty. Chro. of the Emp. Tom. 2.

This Emperor was noted of covetousness.

Rodolphe, was martired at Berne by the Jews, whereby they of Berne put the
Jews to death. And therefore the Emperor Rodolphe assembled thirty thousand
soldiers and besieged Berne, but profited nothing, as is above said.

The College of Collets at Paris, was founded by John Collet Priest, Cardinal
of S. Cecilie, Legate in France, borne in Beauoisin, says the Sea of Histories.

He moved a marvelous war against Guy Feltron, who occupied the Towns of
Flaminia, and ouercomming him, he annexed unto the seignorie of Rome all that
Country.

This Pope confirmed the Sect of the Augustines, which was not yet received at
Paris, but was by many impugned, because it was not well allowed by the
Council of Lateran, and granted them many privileges. And besides he would
that the Carmes leaving their colored apparel with bars, should take the
white habit, The Carmes called the brethren of the Virgin Marie.
and ordained they should be named the brethren of the Virgin Marie. After
which goodly deeds, he lived not long: but being dead, the year 1288. he was
carried from the Church of S. Sabine in the Mount Auentine, into the Church of
S. Peter, where he was buried with great pomp.

After the death of Honorius, the seat was vacant ten months. For the
Cardinals being in the Conclaue, died upon sudden malladies, even when great
earthquakes terrified them, and so the election was deferred until an other
time.

Nicholas. 4.
Nicholas Pope, 4. of that name, Minister general of the Friars, called
Jerome, borne at Mark d'Ancone, ruled at Rome four years and one month,
Naucler. or 6. years, 8. months, and 16. days, after some. He succeeded the
foresaid Honorius 10. months after his death: yet the Cardinals were not all
of one opinion.

This Pope superstitiously devout dwelt nigh unto the Church called S. Marie
the greater, Apoc. 8.9.10.
or ad praesepe because they forged that lie, that the Crib where the Virgin
Marie laid Jesus Christ after he was borne into the world is there, and
adorned it with edifices and rich paintings. He created Cardinals of all
sorts of Monks, for the profit of the Kingdom of Abaddon: to the end they
might be light-horses, prepared to the battle, and might have teeth like
Lions, and tails like Scorpions, wherewith they might hurt men. For as Platina
says, he loved all alike, and thought not himself any thing more bound to
his parents and kinsfolk, then unto others.

He caused the Croisado to be preached, and sent at his own charges many
soldiers into Asia to keep the Town of Ptolemais. Supp. Chron.

There happened in his time many civil wars, murders, dissentions, and brawles
at Rome, upon his occasion, giving more countenance to the one part then to
the other. And this contention endured the space of two years and an half.
Fasci. temp.

Many Havens of the sea were lost, the Christians were rooted out of Jerusalem
and Siria, The occasion of the discord betwixt the Venetians, Geneuois and
Pisans.
by a long and great dissension of the Venetians, Geneuois, and Pisans, which
then were (for Communalties) the mightiest by Sea. It is said their contention
was for an Abbey, which each of them said to be theirs: and this quarrel
endured thirty years. In so much that the Popes, Alexander the fourth, Vrbain
the fourth, Clement the fourth, and the Kings of France and Sicilie, were
greatly busied to agree them, and yet did no good. In the mean while the
Empire of Constantinople was usurped by others, and the French and Italians
cast out of Greece. The Ports of Tire and Ptolemais were also taken from the
aforesaid Contendants.

The last year of the Empire of Rodolphe, Charles Prince of Salerne, and son
of Charles King of Sililie, was delivered from the prisons of the King of
Arragon: and after came to Rome, and on the day of Pentecost was crowned King
of Sicilie Nicholas, and absolved from the oathe he had made to the King of
Arragon. See the History of France.

The year of Christ 1291. three thousand Christians were slain by the
Sarrazens in the Country of Syria: the rest for fear retired. Chron. Eusebius.

Acha, according to Naucl. was taken by the Souldan, with fifteen other
Towns, twelve Castles, and a great number of Christians slain: and this
happened by the dissension of the Christians, and rashness of such as were
Crossed says Fascic. tempo.

There was mortal war betwixt the Geneuois and they of Pise, for the I Will of
Corsike: but finally the Pisans were vanquished upon the sea, and more then
twelve or sixteen thousand men slain, with a loss of forty eight Galleys.
Fasci. Temp. And other ships besides them were sunk and drowned. Suppl. Chron.

The Tartarians got hold of the kingdom of Constantinople and a great part of
that Empire. The same.

Nicholas Pope, dyed of grief that all things happened not after his wish,
seeing so manifold calamities all over, and especially at Rome. The Cardinals
after his death retired to Peruse, that their election might be more sure: but
in two years and three months they could not accord. Suppl. Chron.

Rodolphe the Emperor dyed also the year of his age 73. of our salvation
1291. and of his Empire 18. He had for his wife Anne Countess of Hohemberg:
which was buried at Basle, with her son Herman, who was drowned in Rhene.

Adolphe Emperor.
Adolphe Count of Nassau, was chosen Emperor by certain of the Electors, and
Albert Duke of Astrishe by other: yet Adolphe was crowned at Aix the Chapel.
His brother who was Archbishop of Magunce helped him much. He reigned six
years, and after was deposed by the Electors; For besides that he was not
puissaunt enough in domestical faculties to sustain that Imperial dignity,
Adolphe.
he also despised the Princes of the Empire, and dignified diuer without
merit. He committed adulterers, violated Virgins, Nuns and Widows: he
enterprised war against France, because of the kingdom of Arles: but he
executed no memorable thing, saving that he led an Army into Thuringe and
Misne, to pacify contentions betwixt Albert Lantgraue of Thuringe, and his
son Dietere and others.

Celestine fifth of that name, Celestine. 5.
an Esermen by Nation (which is a place nigh the Town of Sulme) by profession
an Heremite, and before called Peter Moron: after that briberies of the
Cardinals which had endured the space of two years, had taken end, by the
favor of Charles the second of that name King of Naples, and of the Cardinal
Latin, was declared Pope.

Incontinently after his election he went to Aigle, and caused to come before
him all the Cardinals, and created new, to the number of twelve, amongst which
there were two Hermites. Ptolomie and Laques have written, that at his
installing were two hundredth thousand men.

In the first Consistory he held (says Christian Masseus) as he went about to
reform the Roman church, Rome can abide no reformation.
to the end the Clergy thereof might serve for an example to others, he
incurred so the maleuolence and indignation of many, that grinding their teeth
against him, they called him sot, and dotard. One of these companions called
Benet, suborned an other, who making a crany or hole in his Chamber, many
nights cried as it had bin an Angel from heaven. Celestine, Celestine, renounce
thy Papacy: For that charge exceeds thy Forces. Some also in the day time
counseled him to give over his Popedom, and provide for his salvation.

The king Charles was advertised of these things, He was too simple for a Pope.
and getting their Pope to come to him, he prayed him as much as was possible,
that he would not reject such a dignity which was give him from heaven:
whereunto he answered: I will do what God will.

As he returned from Naples, it may be having no rest in his conscience, on
the Vigile of Saint Luce, he dismissed himself of that charge, Adolphus.
and hasted to return into his Hermitage. An ordinance to give over the
Popedom.
All this rehearses Masseus: yet first he made a constitution by the consent
of all* that it should be lawful for a Pope to give over such a charge. Which
constitution Boniface 8. his successor, a man subtle and malicious, confirmed
and placed if in the 6, book of his Decretalls. Moreover the said Boniface his
successor fearing that the people despising him would cleave unto Celestine, he
caused him to be put in close prison, where he kept him even till his death. He
died then in prison, the year of our Lord, 1295. the 10. day of May, two
years and five months after he had been chosen Pope.

The order of Celestines.
The Sect of Monks called Celestines, had their name and original of him.

Arlot general of the order of Friars, who made the Concordances upon the
Bible, lived in this time. Abb. Trit.

Boniface. 8.
Boniface, 8. of that name, borne in Campania in the Town of Anagnia, called
before Benet de Gauete, one of the chief Counselors of Celestine his
predecessor, being at Naples, was thrust into his place by a marvelous
treason. Being Cardinal, Priest of S. Martin in the Mountains, he desired so
to come unto the Papal dignity, that he left nothing behind, either of
ambition or fraud, that he thought might bring his purpose to pass. Again,
he was so arrogant, that he despised almost all men in respect of himself.

Intrauit vt vulpes regnauit vt Leo mortuus est vt Canis.
This is he of whom it is commonly spoken; That he entered as a Fox, reigned as
a Lion, and died as a dog. For it was he that solicited Celestine to depose
himself, and so he entered like a Fox; he governed like a Lion, in so much
that he was so arrogant and cruel to the end: so that he called himself Lord
of all the world: but he died like a dog. For his end was miserable, and all
his deeds were reproved, as may be seen by his History.

He said (as Marius witnesses) that he shut Celestine in prison not for any
enmity toward him, but for fear the authors of sedition by his conduction
should do him and the Roman Church any damage.

But who will not say that this Boniface was an horrible monster, and an
ignorant person, having circumuented, Albert.
despoiled, and finally murdered in prison a simple man, which was his father?

After that the Princes of Almaine had chosen Albert Duke of Austrich, Adolphe
having on his side Otho Duke of Bauiers Raoul Count Palatin, and certain
Imperial Cities, gave battle against Albert nigh Spire, which was sharp and
cruel, wherein Adolphus was slain, the year of his Empire, 6. or 8. after
some.

Albert Duke of Austrich, son of Rodolphe the Emperor, Albert.
was again chosen by the Electors, and crowned at Aix the Austrich to his
son Rodolphe, and gave him in marriage Blanch the sister of Phillip king of
France.

He made many wars. That against the Bishop of Salisburie, was for certain
Salt-wells. For this Bishop being provoked by Albert, caused to be destroyed
the place where the Salt was made. The Emperor who could not be overcome, was
impoysoned: but the Physicians gave him such remedies, that the venom came out
at his mouth and nosthrills. The force thereof was so great that it wasted one
of his eyes, and he was called Borgne. He was a magnanimous and valiant
Prince.

He demanded of Boniface to be crowned, but he refused him, saying he was
unworthy of the Empire, because he had slain his natural Lord in battle.
And the said Boniface holding a Crown upon his head, and a Sword at his side,
answered: I am Caesar.

The year 1298. Boniface published the sixth book of Decretalls, and sent them
to the Students of Bolongne, and to other Universities, commanding them to use
them in all judgments and schools.

This proud and arrogant Pope, The sixth of Decretalls.
ordained that all king of the earth which would not hold their Kingdoms of
his sanctetie or rather tirannie, should be excommunicated and deposed. He
excommunicated Phillip king of France, Phillip king of France, excommunicated.
because he would not suffer his money to be carried out of his kingdom, and
cursed both him and all his, even to the fourth generation, yea with his
relics and crosses.

He would not confirm the Emperor Albert, whom he had already rejected
twice or thrice, but upon this condition, that he would occupy the kingdom of
France, and depose Phillip.

Alphonsus of Arragon. The Friars Vado in pace.
He declared Alphonsus king of Arragon absolved, and gave him the kingdom of
Sardeigne, under certain conditions.

John Duns, surnamed the Scot, a Friar, called the subtle Doctor, was in this
time. He died of an Apoplexy. Some say he was buried alive. Supp. Chron.

Dinus the Legist, Petrus de bella pertica, Iacobus de arena, Johannes de
sancto, Geminiano Iacobin, Ihones Andrea, and Dantes Aliger Florentin, were in
this time.

The first Iubile.
The year of Christ, 1300. this Pope instituted a Iubile: giving full remission
of all sins to such as from an hundredth to an hundredth years would visit by
vow of Pilgrimage, the Churches of S. Peter and S. Paul in the City of Rome.
He then celebrated the first Iubile, and opened the Fair for indulgences, and
made them serve even for such as were in purgatory. Agrip. de vanita. scien.

Fratricelli.
Such as they called in Italy Fratricelli, are condemned and persecuted.
Historiographers say, that they used carnal pleasure, contrary to the
honesty of marriage: and this they did in the night time after they had
celebrated their mysteries. Supp. Chron.

One called Aerman, chief amongst them, was unburied 20. years after his
death at Ferrare, (although before he was accounted as a Saint) and his bones
were burnt. A woman called Guillaume. which was very renowned, and her husband
Andre, were also unburied, and their bones burnt.

The Chroniclers rehearse how those of this Sect were disclosed, namely, by a
Merchant of Millain called Conrad, whose wife in the night time haunted these
assemblies, and that the candles being put out, they abused one an other
brutally, and such or like, which have rather an appearance of affable then of
a true narration.

This Pope nourished discords and the dissentions which were amongst the
factions of Italy, and sought always to maintain them. He prohibited that
the Clergy should pay no tribute to Princes, without his leave and license.
He gloried in his pride to be the key-keeper of heaven; and published that he
ought not to be judged of any person, no not though he led an infinite number of
souls into hell with him: because it is lawful for him to do all things.

O Infernal Decree, and execrable blasphemy.

He elevated his parents into dignities: two of his Nephews very young he made
Cardinals: also his Uncle, He made some, Counts or Earls, and left them
great treasures, by means of which, after they would avenge his death. Naucler.

He deprived two Cardinals Colonnois, Peter and James, He reigned as a Lion.
of their Benefices, yea and of their fathers goods: because that during
Celestins life they had written that he was no lawful Pope, but that Celestine
was he. He imputed also unto them, that they had pilled the treasure of the
former Popes.

In a full Council he excommunicated Sarra the said Cardinals Uncle, and
honorable Prince, with all the Collonois. Supp. Chron.

He exercised such enmity against the Gibellins, that understanding that some
of them were retired to Genes, he himself went thither also; to the end to
overthrow them altogether. And as one day upon an Ashwednesday he gave Ashes
unto the people, according to the custom, Porchat Archbishop of the town,
presented himself before him (but he understood of many that he was of the
faction of the Gibellins) falling on his knees, with his head uncovered: which
when Boniface marked, without having any regard to the day, or to the place, or
to the people present, or to religion, became angry against the Archbishop, and
casting a great sort of Ashes in his eyes, said, Remember that thou art a
Gibellin, and that with the Gibellins thou shall be brought to ashes; and
straight deprived the Archbishop of his dignity: although afterward he
remitted him into his former estate. Plat. and Cor. Abb.

But being ungrateful for the good (says John Marie) that his predecessors
had received of France, Note a deuellish arrogance
he rose up in such pride against the King Phillip, that it were an hard thing
to believe. He sent to signify unto the king, in manner of a commandment by
the Bishop of Appaine his Legate, that incontinently and without delay he
should prepare himself to go beyond the sea. Unto which thing then the King
could not well harken, for the great wars he had against the Flemmings. The
Legate seeing that he could not obtain an answer according to his appetite,
he began to use great menaces, saying that if he did not obey the Pope, he
would deprive him of his kingdom: by which two rigorous words, the King being
much grieved, caused the said Legate to be detained a prisoner. But when these
things came to the notice of the proud Pope, he dispatched the Archdeacon of
Narbone, with Letters of command, forbidding the King, that in no case he
should entermeddle to take any subsidy upon the lands and revenues of the
Church, (which thing King Phillip le bell had been constrained to do, because
of great wars that he sustained for the good and defense of the Kingdom) and
moreover that for the Kings contumacie, and for that he had detained prisoner
his Ambassador against the common right of all Nations, the kingdom of France
was deuolued and fallen to the Roman church: And if he did not obey the
commandments and defenses of the Pope, he should be held in the number of
heretics, with all his favorers and adherents. This Archdeacon cyted many
Bishops, Abbots, Theologians, and Decretists, at a certain day named to be
before the Pope at Rome, and annihilated all the indulgences and privileges
given to the French men by the Pope of Rome his predecessors. This rigor
perceived, the king in the presence of his Barons and of all his Council,
commanded upon good deliberation of the Assembly, that the first Legate who
had outraged the King, should be delivered, and that they both without delay
should void his kingdom. Soon after he caused to assemble a Council of all
the Prelates and Barrons of France in the City of Paris. In the said
Council, the King did sit, and reciting the outrages and injuries which he had
received of the Pope Boniface, he uttered how ambitiously and wickedly he came
to be Pope. He demanded of the Ecclesiastical Lords upon whom they had the
foundations and revenues of their Churches and Benefices. After he turned him
toward the Princes, Barons, and Knights, and said unto them. And you Nobles
and Vassalls, what hold you for your King? All they which were there answered
with one voice, that they held their lands and their goods under the kings
hand. Then the king replied and said: Yet you see what force and tirannie
Boniface practices, as if you and all the Realm of France were subject unto
the Roman Church; as now he usurps the title of the Emperor of Almaine: and
having three times the said Duke Albert of Austrich, says himself is Emperor
and Lord of all the world, and in token thereof, he has newly given the
Empire to the Duke Albert, yea even the title of the Crown of France.

These things thus proposed and brought to deliberation, the king interiected
an appellation from the Pope to the general Council, and ordained by public
Edict upon great pains that none should be so hardy to draw or transport any
gold or silver out of his kingdom for the affairs of the Roman Court: and
caused to guard all the Bridges, Ports, and passages. On the other side,
Boniface the eight sought by Ecclesiastical censors, enmity betwixt the
Emperor and the King. Yet notwithstanding they accorded, meeting together in
the plains of Vuancoulers. But the end was this, that to tame the arrogancy
and malice of this Pope, the king secretly dispatched two hundredth men of Arms
under the conduction of one named Sarra Colonnois, a Roman, and of an other
Captain called Nogaret: which secretly passed from Marceille, and by night
took the Pope in his house, which was in Anagnia, in the kingdom of Naples,
He died as a dog.
and carried him prisoner with the aid of the Gibelins to Rome, where he died
24. days after, or 35. days, after Chron. Abb. of grief and age: and all his
goods and treasures went to pillage, John le Maire.

John the Monk Cardinal, the founder of the College Picars at Paris, came
into France at the Popes commandment. The Sea of Histories.

The memorable battle of Courtray in Flaunders which the French lost, and
wherein a great part of the Nobility of France perished. The Sea of Histories.

Benet 11. of that name, a Lombard by Nation, borne at Treuis, Benet. 11.
called before Nicholas, of the order of Iacobius, borne of parents of base
condition, his father was a shepherd: after he was made Cardinal of Ostia,
he was chosen Pope: a man of a cautellous and subtle spirit, and therefore
pleased Boniface exceedingly.

Incontinently after he was come unto the Papaltie, he sought to pacify
Italy, and therefore went to Peruse, but he fell sick there and deceased,
and was buried in the Iacobins. A certain Abbess presented unto him poisoned
figs whereof he died. This was after proved. And Leander affirms that he
died of poison.

The seat was empty about a year.

Phillip le bell King of France, founded in the honor of S. Lewis, the Abbey of
Poisy, where he placed Nuns of the order of the Friars preachers, and after
his death his heart was carried thither and buried. The Sea of Histories.

The first Emperor of the Turks.
The wickedness of men being come to the fullness of all impiety, Ottomanus a
Turk began to reign about this time, and reigned 28. years. He began by little
and little to usurp upon Europe. The occasion was, for that the Emperors of
Greece demanded help of the said Turks against the Bulgarians. But they
seeing the Country fit for them, usurped upon the Emperor, first in Thrace,
and after in Misia, superior and inferior, Macedonia, Achaia, Peloponesus,
Epirus, Dalmacia, and a great part of Illyria and Pannonia; and finally into
Hungaria.

Swissers was made of three Cantons, namely Suits, Vry, and Vnderuald. Naucler.

Peter Casiodore an Italian, a Noble man, and well instructed in piety, was in
this time. He writ unto the Enghsh men not to carry the importable yoke of
the Roman Antechrist, showing the extortions and extreme servitude of England
which the Popes of that time had multiplied. The Epistle begins Cui
comparabo te, etc. which I have here inserted, transcribed, and translated out
of an old book found in the church of S. Albans in England.

To the noble Church of England, which serves in bondage, Peter the son of
Cassiodore, a Catholic soldier and devout Champion of Jesus Christ, desires
salvation and deliverance from the yoke of captivity, and to receive the
price and reward of liberty.

The Scribes and Pharisees placed themselves in Moses Chair, etc. It
follows after: To whom shall I compare thee? Mat. 23. a. 2.
or to whom shall I say thou art like thou daughter of Jerusalem? to whom shall
I equal thee thou virgin daughter of Sion? For thy ruin is great as the Sea:
thou art become sollitarie, and without any sollace, being all the day
overwhelmed wilh heaviness. Thou art delivered into the hands of him from
whence thou can not relieve thy self, without the aid of some one which
will lift theee up. For the Scribes and Pharisees being set upon Moses
Chair, that is to say, The Chair of Moses.
the Roman Princes being thy enemies, are upon thy head, and enlarging their
Philacteries, and desiring to enrich themselves with the marrowe of thy bones,
impose heavy and insupportable burdens upon the shoulders of thee and thy
Ministers, and bring thee vnmeasurably under the charge of paying tribure, thou
which ever have been free.

Let all occasion and matter of maruelling cease: For thy mother which had rule
over the people, having espowsed her subject, has appointed thee for a Father,
and before all others has elevated thee Bishop of Rome, who in no paternall
act shows himself to be such an one. Very true is is that he spreads out
his skirtes, and shows by experience that he is thy mothers husband. For
often he brings to memory in his heart this sentence of the Prophet. Take
thee a great volume and write therein as with a touchstone, after the manner of
men. Hast^ thee to the spoil, dispatch thee of pilling and spoiling.

When the Apostle said, Every high Priest being taken of men, is constituted
for men in things which are concerning God. Does not this show that men must
not occupy themselves with spoils and rapines, to impose censors, and annual
rents, nor to destroy men; but to the end he might offer gifts and sacrifices
for sins? and that he might have compassion of the ignorant and sinners? And
also we read of Peter who was a Fisher (whose successor he says he is) that
after the resurrection of Jesus Christ, John. 21.2.
he returned to his fishing again with the other Apostles: who when he could
take nothing on the left side of the ship, by the commandment of Jesus Christ
he turned himself toward the right hand, and drew the Nets to ground full of
fish. Profitable then it is to exercise the Ministry of the Church in the
right part, by which mystery the devil is vanquished, and a great number of
souls is brought to Jesus Christ: The right side and left of his kingdom.
but surely it is not so of the labor which is taken on the left hand of the
ship: for therein faith staggereth, and heuinesse rules when men find not
that which they seek. For who will believe that one man can serve God and
Mammon both together and please his will, stick to revelations of the flesh
and of blood, and offer to Christ gifts and presents, such as appertain unto
him? Good sheepheards taken form the sheepfold. Psalm. 81.7.
And without doubt the shepherd which watches not for the edifying of the
Flock, prepares an other way a roaring Lion, which seeks every way whom he
may devour.

Behold say I, the strange and before unheard deeds of him which is called
thy father; The office of Priests overthrown.
who takes from the sheepfoldes the good sheepheards, and in their places
sets his Nephews and parents, and others ignorant of Letters, dumb and
deaf, which understand not the bleating of the sheep, neither care for the
biting of the wolves, which like hirelings carry away the fleeces, reap
others haruests, the hands of whom also serve to the pottes, and their backs
turn away from burdens.

Hereby it plainly appears the Priests office was left, the service due unto
God was subtracted, and the custom to give Alms abolished: by which things
the holy devotion of Kings, Princes, and Christans are abolished. This then is
a thing which ought to be found very strange in the judgment of every one, The
Pope opposed against Jesus Christ.
that whereas Jesus Christ commanded to pay tribute unto Kings for himself
and for Peter this man against his will (whose Vicar he says he is) who has
cast back from himsselfe the kingdoms and judgments of the world, seeks to
subject under his domination, Kings and Princes, under the title of his style:
because all that he has set down in writing to be his, he attributes unto
himself.

Nay what does he more with thee o daughter? Behold he draws from thee
whatsoever he thinks good: and yet he holds not himself contented to take
of thee the tenth part of thy grounds, but even the first fruits of the
Benefices of thy Ministers: to the end that as well for himself, as for such
as are of his blood, he might constitute a new patrimony of good and holy
wills of the founders.

Moreover, The wages of the Popes Curriers.

A comparison of the Pope to Nabuchodonozer.


he already imposes other execrable things for the wages of his Curriers
which he sends into England, which carry away not only the victuals of
thee and thine, but also rent of their skins and their flesh like dogs.
Meriteth he not to be compared to Nabuchodonozor, who destroyed the Temple, and
spoiled it of the vessels of Gold? For that which he did, this does he also.
He spoiled the Ministers of the house of God, and deprived them of that which
was necessary for his service. And this here does as much. And surely the
condition of them which are slain by the sword, is better then the condition
of such, as be any thing bitten with hunger. For the first are straight dead,
but the other is consumed by the stirrilitie of the earth.

Let all such as pass by thy way (o daughter) have compassion on thee: for no
sorrow is like to thine. Ier. Chap. 1. of the same, 12.
For already because of thy great dolor and tears which thou have shead, thy
face is blacker then coals: in so much as thou art no more known in the
streets. Thy father has set thee in clowdie and dark places, he has made
thee drunk with wormwood and gall. Lord see the affliction of thy people, A
true description of the Pope.
harken unto their sobbings and come down. For the heart of this man is harder
then the heart of Phaua^, who would not suffer that thy people should go a^
liberty, but only in the force of thy hand. But this afflicted and plagueth
not only upon earth, but also after death. For after death he deuoureth the
goods of all Christians, under color that they died without making testaments.

The Church of England does sufficienly know, that the French men casting the
eyes of their concupiscence upon that kingdom, sought in time past to have
reduced it under their power* but it is to be feared that, that which they
could not hitherto bring to pass, is now supplied by the coniuration of that
man, as of a new enemy. For if the treasures of the Kingdom fail, and that
the Priesthood be overthrown, verily it shall he made less puissant against
the enemies.

Exhortation to the Kingdom of England.
To the end that thou o daughter, and thy Priest, should not fall into a misery
of any longer endurance, it is expedient for the salvation and safety of thee
and thine, that thou o Christian King, and the great Lords of thy kingdom,
(which have adorned thee with great and excellent Benefices, and which in such
a case ought to maintain and defend both thee and those Benefices) should
resist the coniurations and conspirations of that man: who not having regard to
God, but for the aforesaid things, and to enrich his parents, and for his own
nest, lifting himself up as an Eagle, by the aforesaid things, and other
Impostes by him imposed, he has collected all the silver of England by a new
domination.

The simplicity of the world.
Let not then thy dissembling simplicity in this case cause the ruin of thy
kingdom and thy self, and take heed thy remedy come not too late. The Lord
God take the veil from off the heart of this man, and give him a contrite and
humble heart, and make him know the traces of the true God, whereby he may be
drawn from darkness, and constrained to forsake those wicked labors whereof
we have spoken, and that the vine which the right hand of God has planted, may
be filled with good grapes. For take heed unto the Lords words, and to the
Prophecy of Jeremy, to put back such enterprises: who says thus. Thou
shepherd which have dispersed my people, Ier. 22.30.
and put the^ out of their habitations, behold I will visit upon thee the
malice of thy into prises, and no man of thy seed shall sit upon the seat of
David, nor have more power in Judah. Let thy neast be made barran, and ruinated
as So-Some and Gomorrhe.

But if it so fall out that being nothing feared by these words he cease not
his enterprises, nor make restitution of that which he has taken: then let
the^ sing for him that shall be so wickedly hardened, the 108. Psalm. As for
us, we will each day openly sing praises through Jesus Christ, to him unto whom
all things serve.

Thus the light by little and little came forward, and overcame the mighty
darkness.

Clement, 5. ruled in Auignon 8. years and 10. months. Clement. 5.


This Pope was a Gascoin, son of Bernand, a warrior and a Gentleman, borne in
Bordeaux, before called Bextrand Goth, Bishop of Coseran, and Archbishop of
Bordeaux, he being absent in France, was chosen at Peruse, by the Cardinals
there resident. John le Maire says it was at the instance of Phillip le Bell.

After he was advertised of his election, he departed from Bordeaux and came to
Lions, and sent word that all the Cardinals then in Italy, should appear
there, whereunto they all obeyed without delay or contradiction, and the
coronation of the said Pope was made public and solemn in the Church of S.
Just. But this joy and pomp was troubled. The Popes corronation hanselled with
dead men.
For as an innumerable people were mounted upon an old wall of S. Just to see
this great pomp and noblenes, the said wall fell, and flew duke John of
Britain: the King was there wounded, and the Pope thrown over his horse and
rudely trodden under feet, in so much that he lost a rich Carbuncle out of his
triple crown, esteemed at 6000. Florents of Gold: and more then 12. other
notable persons were there wounded and died.

After the Pope Clement was crowned the king took leave of him, and went to
marry his son Lays Hutin to the daughter of the Duke of Burgongne, called
Margarite. The Pope on the other side left Lion, and made his residencie in
Auignon. This was the first of the Popes, that kept there his Roman Court,
where it abode the space of 73. years before it returned to Rome. John le
Maire.

After the end of this solemn pomp, and that all things were appeased, he
created many French Cardinals. But he made not one Italian: only he restored
that dignity of a Cardinal to John and James of the house of Colomnois.
Moreover he sent to Rome three Cardinals, with the power of Senators, by whose
direction the Town and all Italy was governed. He gave to Frederic king of
Sicilie the I Will of Sardeigne, which was occupied by the Sarrasins, upon this
condition, that in chasing them away he might incontinently recover it.

France.

Albert the Emperor, riding in the fields about noone, was slain by his
Nephewe and other Princes of Austrich, his companions. Munster.

An example of Gods punishment.
This judgment might be, because in war he had persecuted the Emperor
Adolphe, who although he was his inferior unto him in power, yet was he
ordained of God and ought him obedience. But such murders remain not
unpunished.

Hiero. Marius adding to the words of Platina, says thus. Clement the fifth
because he desired not to serve others as Jesus Christ commanded his
disciples, but rather to be served even of Emperors, ordained that Emperors
chosen in Almaine, although they took the name of King of the Romans, yet
they should receive of the Pope the rights and name of the Emperor, Moreover
that when the Emperor should be dead, whilst the Empire was vacant, the
government of the towns of Italy subject to the Emperor, should be in the
Popes power.

The Roman Court transported into France, where it remained 74. years.

Auignon the Papal seat.
This Clemens who was a public whoremonger, and a great maintainer of harlots,
Chron. Herm. and Paralip. Vrsp. placed the papal seat in Auignon, to the end
the better to enjoy his delights and pleasures.

He celebrated the general Council of Vienne, General Council of Vienne.
the year of our Lord. 1311. wherein he cruelly abolished the order of the
Templers, to the end to confiscate their goods, and with their spoils raised
up the Hospitaliers into dignities, called the knights of S. John of Jerusalem,
which had conquered the I Will of Rhodes upon the Sarrasins.

The Knights of the Rhodes succeeded in the goods of the Templers.

The Pope excommunicated the Venetians because they had usurped Ferrare, which
was of the Churches patrimony, Ferrare.
and caused the Croisado to be published against them in Italy, till they were
constrained to yield the said seignorie of Ferrare, which they had usurped of a
Lord called Frisius Estensis, who had slain his father to govern at Ferrare,
being notwithstanding aided by the Venetians to do that wicked act. Item he
excommunicated the Florentines and them of Luques.

Henry the 7. would needs make himself to be crowned at Rome, but it was not
without great contradiction and effusion of blood. Robert King of Sicilie,
son of Charles the second, King of Pouille, was condemned of the said Henry
to be beheaded.

Clement granted to all such as coiced themselves against the Turk, that at
their pleasures and will, four souls should be delivered from purgatory: But
the Theologians of Paris detested this, and reproved it, says Agrip. de vanit.

This Pope persecuted such as they named Fratricelli, and one called Dulcinus
of Navarre; and published against the^ the Croisado, for that purpose serving
themselves with the Iacobins.

The Dulcins were named of that Dulcinus, who was executed with his wife
Margarite. Naucler. He had been taught of one called Gerard. They which
detested them and have written their manner of doings, say that they wore white
Mantles, and long hairs: sometimes walking barefooted, sometimes shod. Item,
that they named themselves the order of the Apostles, and they preached saying.
Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Moreover, they said that the
authority which Christ gave unto his Church was expired for the malice of the
Prelates. Henry. 7.
And that the Roman Church was reproved because it was an whore. Also that
they were the Church and followed the rule of the Apostles. That all the Popes
since Siluester were Preuaricators and usurpers because they lived not in true
humility, and that therefore men ought not to give them Tithes.

Many of Dulcius adherents were taken, to the number of 114. persons, dwelling
in the Mountains of Verseil in Piemont.

Rhodes in this time was reconquered of the knights of the Rhodes, which before
were driven away.

Henry. 7.
Henry 7. of that name, son of Henry Count of Luxembourg, and of Beatrix his
wife, was chosen Emperor. He was not rich of goods that his father had left
him, but he was the excellentest Prince of his time, as well in prudence as in
the glory of praiseworthy deeds.

From the death of Frederic the 2. until the year 1308. wherein this man was
elected, the Kings of the Romans had not entered into Italy, namely Rodolphe,
Adolphe, and Albert, and therefore almost all the towns of Italy subject to
the Empire, were revolted.

After Henry was crowned at Aix, he determined to enter Italy to be sacred of
the Pope, but it was not without great danger, for great Ambushes which were
laid for a him at Millaine by Guido Turrian. See the Chronicles of the
Emperors.

Templers burnt.
Many Templers of the kingdom of France, by the commandment of the Pope and
King, for certain accusations were condemned and burnt without Paris. Twelve
or nine Articles contrary to the faith, were imposed upon them: which
notwithstanding John Bocace a Florentine excuses in his 21. Chapter of his 2.
book, of the cases of unfortunate Nobles. Their order endured 184. years: all
their goods were confiscated and given to the knights of the Rhodes. Others say
that the best part of their goods was given to the king by the Popes consent.
Chron. of the French Kings.

Hermanus says, that the Pope Clement in favor of the king, noted them of
heresy and infamy, wrongfully and upon envy. Paral. Vrsper.

Some think that the kings of France, of England and of Spain, conspired
against them for the possessions and Castles which they had in their kingdoms.

The year 1309. the Sarabits (Monks which came out of Egypt) began in
England. Their garments were of Ox and Swines skins, and they were tied with
cords. John Clyn Hybernus.

The order of Paulins entered into England, and placed themselves at Gloucester,
the year 1310. Chron. Caletense.

This Pope Clement in a well leaded Bull (which is yet at this day kept by
Copy at Vienna, at Limoge, and at Poiters, The Pope commands the Angels.
in the Coffers of privileges) commanded the Angels of Heaven to carry into
the Joys of Paradise, and draw out of Purgatory the soul of him, whosoever
should die in the way, going in Pilgrimage to Rome. Moreover (says he) we will
that the pains of hell shall no way be inflicted upon them. Agrip. de vanit.
scie^t.

Iean wife of Lewis king of France, after the death of her husband, went to
Rome, and resigned the kingdom of Naples, delivering it into Pope Clements
hand, who after made a gift of it to Lewis duke of Angiou, brother of Charles
the fifth king of France, saving the profits to the use of the said Iean for her
life. But he enjoyed it not: for he died with five thousand men in conquering
it against Charles Nephew of the said Lewis King of Hungaria, who occupied the
kingdom, and held it four years, and left a son called Ladislaus, who
reigned 29. years at Naples by the help of Pope Vrbain the 6.

This Pope condemned the Beghards or Begnins, Beghards or Begnins.
which would not worship the Bread of the Eucharist.

He commanded that the great Master of the Templers should be burned at
Paris, with one of his companions, in the presence of Cardinals, and made
certain ordinances against the insolences of the Jews, after having
confiscated their goods.

He ordained that oaths delivered by Princes, Oaths of Princes.
were not oaths of subjection, but of fidelity: and commanded that the goods
of the Church should not be alienated.

He ordained that Clerks which occupied temporal traffiques, and wore
precious garments, should be punished; and forbad Monks all kind of huntings,
as well of beasts as birds.

He confirmed the Feast instituted in the honor of the bread of the Eucharist,
which the Papists commonly called, La feste dieu. God his Feast.

Clementius.
He gathered in his volume the Constitutions called Clementius, and pronounced
that the relics of Saints ought to be greatly honored.

He governed the affairs of Italy by Neapolion and Pelagura Cardinals, his
Legates: and added Celestine the fifth to the number of Popish Confessors. He
set in order the constitutions of Monks, and again declared the rule of
Friars.

Finally this Clement being tormented one while with a flux of the belley, and
an other with a pain of the stomach and sides, deceased in a Castle called
Rocquemaure, upon Rosue, the year of the Lord, 1314. his body was carried into
Gascoin, and the Papal seat was empty even till the third year.

This year it self that he died, as Henry of Lucembourg Emperor determined to
draw to him by force of Arms the kingdom of Sicilie, unto which he was
called, he was traitorously brought to death by a wicked Monk, called Bernard
du Mont, Polician of Domcastre: who was of the conspiration of the Guelphes,
and yet made a countenance that he was the Emperors friend. He gave a poisoned
host to this good Prince: who as soon as he felt the mischief, The kindness
of the Emperor.
advertised this traitor Monk to fly away, saying unto him; Away, away, for
if the Almanes perceive any thing, and such as do affect me, you shall die.
So this wicked Judas withdrawing himself to Sienes, received the silver that
had been promised him, for the reward of his treason; but hereby he delivered
not his brethren Iacobins. For many of them perished by fire and sword with
their houses, as well in Tuscane as in Lombardie, and many other places.

University of Orleance.
The University of Orleance was instituted in this time. Chron. of the Kings of
France.

The year at Crist, 1313. the King of France Phillip le bell became a Leper,
and therefore he caused all the Leapers of France and Flaunders, as well men as
women, to be burnt. For he understood that they had infected the waters. And
the Chroniclers of Almaine say that the said king became a Leper, because he
made the Templers die.

Arnold de Villa Noua, an excellent Physician, Arnold de Villa Noua a true and
faithful man.
and Mathematician, (some say of Chalon, others of Narbone) was judged an
heretic, because he said that Satan had made all Christian people stray from
the truth. Item, that the faith of Christians of his time, was no other then
such as devils have. Item, that such as are in Cloisters are out of Charity,
and condemn themselves in falsifying the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and leading
Christians into hell. Item, that the Theologians have maliciously mingled the
Dreams of Philosophers with the holy scripture. Item, that in the sacrifice of
the Altar the Priest offers nothing to God, and that Masses profits
neither quick nor dead. He proved by Daniel and by Sibilla Erithra, that
Antichrist in a full tirannie should persecute the faithful after the year,
1300.

Besides his Physic books, he writ against the Iacobins, The books of
Doctor Arnold.
that it was lawful to eat flesh: The cutting sword against the Thomistes:
The admonition of Jesus Christ to Christians: Of the subtilties of false
Prophets: Of the mystery of the Churches Cymballs: Of the consummation of the
world, and other books. He was judged an heretic by the Iacobins at Tarraeon.
Finally being sent to the Pope by Frederic king of Sicilie, he died in the way,
and was buried at Genes, a true champion of the Lord.

Margarite Queen of Navarre, The Sea of Histories.
daughter of the Duke of Burbon, Iean daughter of the Count of Bourgongne, and
wife of the Count of Poiters, Blanch second daughter of the said Count of
Bourgongne, wife of the Count de la Marshe, were taken by the kings
commandment and condemned to continual prison, for their fornications and
adulteries against them manifestly proved. Yet afterward Iean Countess of
Poiters, returned with her husband. For it was known that she was not culpable
of all that which was imposed on her. Adultery punished.
The Adulterers, that is, Phillip d'Annoy which kept the Queen, and his
brother. Schism in the Empire.
Gualter de Annoy which kept the said Blanch knights, were scorched, there
genitories cut off, and they drawn and hanged.

Schism in the Empire.
There was a division amongst the Electors: some did choose Lois the fourth of
that name, Duke of Bauiere: others, Frederic Duke of Austrich, and the one had
war against the other eight years. In the end Lewis obtained alone the
Empire, and reigned 24 years, after the Chron. of Eusebius. which make 32.
years, The Sea of Hist.

Loys Hutin, son of Phillip le bell, succeeded in the Kingdom: and is the 46.
He had before succeeded Iean his mother in the kingdom of Navarre.

Enguerrand de Marigni, Count de Longueuille, great General of the Kings
revenues, being accused to have robbed the King, was hanged: and his Image
thrown down the Palace stayres.

This king reigned almost two years, and died in the wood of Vincennes, and
was buried at S. Denis.

John. 23.
John Pope, 23. of that name, French by Nation, son of Arnold d'Ossa, before
called James de Cahors, Cardinal, Bishop du Port, after the space of two
years (during which time as has been touched, the seat was empty for the
difference happening amongst the 23. Cardinals) was declared Pope at Lions:
departing therefore from thence with his Court, and coming to Auignon, he
created 8. Cardinals, of the number of which, were Cahors the younger, his
Nephew and sisters son, and John de Gayete, of the house of Vrsins.

He delivered into the hands of the Judge, Hugh Gerard Bishop of Cahors, after
having taken from him his Pontifical ornaments, he was disgraced and given to
the tormentors, who put him to death most cruelly. John le Maire.

Phillip le Long, 47. King of France and of Navarre, brother of Lewis Hutin the
former King, succeeded in the Kingdom, the year 1316. This was by means of
the law Salike. He was called Long, because he was tall and slender. During
his reign, he could never get either of the Church or of the people, tributes,
Impostes, or borrowe that which he damaunded.

Some say, that during his reign the Leapers poisoned the water pits, at the
suggestion and persuasion of the Jews, Poisoning of pits.
whereof followed a great pestilence: but the Jews and Leapers were greatly
punished.

The King determined to make that in all his kingdom there should be but one
manner of weight, measure, and money: but he could not bring to effect that
which was his will, for he died soon after.

He reigned five years without having any war, and was buried at S. Denis.
See Emil. lib. 8. and Gogin. lib. 7.

This Pope John caused to be published the constitutions of the Council of
Vienne, called Clementius, and sent them into the University of Boulogne,
under a fair leaded Bull, commanding they should be used in all Schools,
Universities, and judgments, from thence forward. The Sea of Hist.

Birger king of Denmark having invited his two brethren to dinner with him,
took them, and with Irons laid them in prison, where they died. The same.

A Provost of Paris called Henry Carpenel, The Provost of Paris.
for a false judgment that he had given, was hanged on a gibet.

This Pope John condemned the constitution of Pope Nicholas, which was of the
order of the Friars Minors, and began Exijt qui seminat, and forbad upon pain
of excommunication, that none should gloss or dispute upon it.

See the Decree 6. in the title 12. de verborum signifi.

Charles le Bell, brother of Phillip le Long, and son of Phille Bell king of
France and Navarre, 48. reigned 7. years.

John 23. made a Constitution which begins, Ad conditorem Canonum, against
the Friars Minors.

See the Extrauagants of this John, 23. in the title. 4. de verborum signifi

This Pope John canonized S. Thomas Bishop of Erford, and S. Thomas d' Acquine.
Chron. Eusebius.

Loys Duke of Bauiere, and Frederic Duke of Austrich, with Lewis obtained the
victory, and Frederic was prisoner with his brother Henry. Naucler. Leopold
his other brother came late to the succors. Lewis
See the Chron. of the Emperorus.

This Pope received into the safeguard and protection of S. Peter the Carmes,
exempting them from all subjection of ordinary Judges to the end they might be
subject only to S. Peter as his well beloved children, and moved many of them
to Episcopal dignity. As Guy de Parpinan, John Claran. both of Catalogue, and
some other Nations.

A devilish illusion.
For before he was Pope he had a marvelous vision, or rather devilish
illusion, as he witnesses in his Bull: namely, that as the Cardinals were in
a great debate, the Virgin Marie delivered them and made him Pope, yet upon
this condition, that he should exempt from the pains of purgatory his good
brethren.

An heresy held by the Pope.
This John here taught certain errors, and amongst others, that souls so soon
as they were dispoiled of the body, should not see God before the last
judgment. For as Masseus witnesses, his father had so taught him, being
seduced and abused by the visions of a certain Irish man, called Tundalus.

He sent to Paris two Monks, the one a Iacobin, and the other a Friar, who
preached the same heresy: but Thomas Walleis a Iacobin, an English man,
resisted the Pope; but he thrust him into prison. Thus also did Durand de S.
Porcin, William Caleth, and others.

Colleges of Scribes.
He corrected at his pleasure the orders of Churches, and changed them, and
distributed into a certain number the Colleges of the Scribes: which for
certain prices writ such Letters as by him would be dispatched. He made many
constitutions which were called Ioanninies, and condemned John de Pouilly a
Theologian, because he taught that men must not confess themselves to begging
Friars: yet he constrained the Monkesses or Nuns called Beguines, to marry, and
to detest painting. He held also for certain articles of the faith, that Jesus
Christ gave not to his Apostles any other rule to live well, but that he gave to
other Christians. That the Apostles never vowed the vow of poverty, and that
vows serve for nothing to perfection.

This Pope writ to the Grecians at large, that there was but one Church alone,
whereof he was chief, and the Vicar of Jesus Christ. The Grecians answered him
in few words. An answer of the Greeks to the Pope.
We believe surely that thy power is very great over thy subjects. We cannot
endure thy extreme pride, nor satisfy thy covetousness. The devil be with
thee, for God is with us. By which brevity of words, they showed what was the
Popes manner of life and estate. John de Mandeuile rehearses it in his 6. book.

This Pope declared Lewis de Bauiere to the Church a rebel, schismatike, and
heretic: because that after he was chosen by the Princes, he took the
government of the Empire without any oath to the Pope of subjection. Hiero.
Marius says thus. John pursued with a sharp hatred Lewis de Bauiere: partly
because being chosen king of the Romans by the Princes, he disdained the name
and title of Emperor at the Popes hands, as Clement the 5. had ordained it:
partly also because he maintained and defended against him certain Monks,
which he had condemned as heretics, and therefore John held the said Lewis
for an heretic.

Lewis coming into Italy, Vicegerents of the Empire
placed in all the Imperial Towns Vicegerents, (as reason required) and after
came to Millaine, and because he desired to appease the Popes rage, he sent
Ambassadors unto him even to Auignon, where he resided; who demanded that
according to the custom of his predecessors he would grant him kindly and
with a good and free will the ornaments of the Empire.

The Pope not only refused to do it, The Emperor demands the Imperial
ornaments.
but pushed back his Ambassadors with great shame and ignominy, and cyted the
said Emperor peremptorily (as they speak) that he should come unto Auignon
and submit himself to the ordinances of the Church.

The Emperor knowing the tirannie that reigned in the Church, knowing also
that he had received of God the Imperial majesty, sought on his side nothing
wherein he might violate it. And therefore to Popes he would not subject
himself, as if he were their servant; by means whereof he refused to come
into Auignon: yet because still he greatly desired to nourish peace, he sent
again messengers to make the same request.

The Pope persisted in his opinion, and in token of the hatred he bore to the
Emperor, he excommunicated the Vicountes, unto whom then the Emperor had
given the government of the seignorie of Millane.

The Emperor seeing the Popes heart obdurate, calling to him many Princes and
Lords of Italy, came to Rome, where he was honorably received of all the
people, and required that according to custom some would deliver him the
ornaments of the Empire.

The Romans beseech the Pope for the Emperor.
The greatest Lords of Rome, together with all the people, sent Ambassadors into
France to the Pope, beseeching him that he would visit the Town, and grant
to the King of Romans the Imperial ornaments, which if he refused to do, they
protested to observe the ancient law, and to use the rights of the Roman
people.

John after he had heard the Ambassadors, drove them back from him shamelesly
with rude words and threats, which the Roman people seeing, determined to
grant to Lewis that which he demanded; and so by the commandment of all the
Clergy and people, he was crowned with his wife, by Stephen and Nicholas
Senators, in the presence of all the Nobles, which cried Lewis Augustus,
Emperor of the Romans.

But what did Lewis hitherto, which was not the part of a good Emperor? yet
John understanding this, accused him as one guilty of divine treason and an
heretic, and published against him certain very rigorous process, and dejected
him out of the dignity of the Empire, and put him out of his kingdom as an
heretic and rebel against the Roman Church, thundering out against him a very
cruel pronunciation.

Theologians and Lawiers of this time.
In this time were certain Theologians and Lawyers which said that Christ and
the Apostles had nothing proper, and that the Emperor was no way subject to
the Pope in that which concerns the temporaltie. Of this number were Michael
Oecenus and William; Ockam Friars; Marcille of Padoue, and John de Landum,
Lawyers, with certain others. The Emperor Lewis was so fortified by this,
Lewis fortified.
that he hardly opposed himself against all the Popes enterprises, publishing
in all parts of the Empire an appellation, such as follows.

We Lewis King of the Romans, The Emperors appellation against the Pope.
propose against John which says he is Pope, that he does ill execute the
testament of Jesus Christ touching peace, which he disturbeth in all
Christendom, and remembers not that all the honor he now has, was granted by
S. Constantine to Siluester when he was yet hid. He is unthankful toward the
Roman Empire, Donation of Constantine.
whereof he has received all that great magnificence, which he now abuses,
etc.

As then Lewis and the greatest Lords of Rome knew well the unjust deeds of
John, as also the people, from the least to the greatest, who took in ill part
that their Ambassadors which they sent was so ill handled, and all with one
accord agreed to bring into the Church the ancient custom observed in
electing the Pope: namely, that being chosen by the people he should be
confirmed of the Emperor. And therefore one called Peter Carbaria or Corberia
a Friar, was created Pope, Nicholas 5.
and named Nicholas the fifth, and as for John he was declared an heretic and
a tyrant of the Church, and not a Pastor but a perturber of the peace of
Christians. All which things the Emperor and the Princes Assistant at the
Council held at Rome, submitted to the judgment of the Catholic Church.
This says Marius.

This done the Emperor returned into Almaigne, and the Nicholas remained in
Italy: but finally Boniface Count of Pise delivered him into Pope John's
hands, and he dyed being straightly detained and in great misery. See the
Suppl. Chron.

John de Lisle (some Iordain) a renowned man in France, was hanged at
Montfaucon at Paris, for pilleries and rauishments. Emilius denies that he
was Father in law unto John Pope as some say.

King Charles le Bell was the first that permitted the Pope to levy Tenths in
France, Tenthes levied in France.
and he did it to have part with him. But the Pope did it to war upon the
Emperor Lewis, whom he had declared an enemy of the Church. Chron. Reg. Fran.

Ambition of the Venetians
The Venetians by their Captain and Duke called Franciscus Dandalus, took from
the Patriarch of Aquilia their neighbor, two Cities, that is, Polle and
Valentia, which are in Gorice.

Benet. 12.
Benet Pope, 12. of that name, ruled in Auignon 7. years, three months, after
Naucler. James de Furnerio borne at Toulouse, of poor parents, a Monk of the
order of Cisteaux, Priest, Cardinal, and Doctor in Theology.

This Pope says Marius, was no more modest or loving to the Emperor Lewis,
then John his predecessor had been. For he renewed the excommunications, and
dispoyled him of all royal honor, and of the Duchy of Baniere by his sentence.

This good Prince Lewis assembled at Francford all the Electors, Dukes,
Bishops, Counts, and all such as were thought cunning, as well in humane
sciences as divine, and in the presence of all, by public and solemn
proclamation, he gave new authority to the ancient Laws, King of Romans,
and Emperor. Names diverse, but of the same substance.
and confirmed them: and freely showed that it only appertained to the
Electors of the Empire, and not unto others, to choose the King of the Romans.
So that he which has the greatest number of Princes voices, he is truly
reputed chosen, be he King or Emperor. (For in substance they be one same
thing, although their names be diverse) which Emperor may exercise and
administer the affairs of the Empire without any confirmation of the Roman
seat. Who also ought to be sacred by the Pope, after it shall be signified by
the Princes that he is Legitimately chosen.

But if the Pope refuse, he may he proclaimed Emperor Augustus by any
Catholic Bishop whatsoever, Unctions are ceremonies invented by the Pope.
as has been long time used; seeing especially all such unctions are only
certain ceremonies invented by Popes, which give only the name and not the
thing, in token of the union which ought to be betwixt the Church and the
Roman Empire. For the Emperor makes not an oath of fidelity to Popes, but
for the defense of the faith. And seeing it is so, how can such an oath give
him any superiority in things which concern the Temporaltie.

Moreover, the Emperor also showed that it is a false thing to say, that
whilst the Empire is vacant the right of the Emperor is deuolued unto the
Pope, and that this is against the liberty of the holy Empire, against the
dignity, rights, The administration of the Empire being vacant, belongs to
the Count Palatin.
and majesty thereof: but that by a custom approved and used of long time,
and observed by his ancestors, without that ever was done to the contrary,
during the vacation of the Empire; it appertains unto the Count Palatin of
Rhene, to have the managing of the affairs of the Empire, to confer Feasts
and Imposts, and ordering of other businesses.

After all this to excuse himself, The Emperor yields a confession of his
faith.
he yielded in the presence of all, clearly and holily a reason of his faith*
and confessed openly he was a Christian, believing wholly the Articles of the
Faith, as they were taught by the Catholic Church: and purged himself very
well of all things that were objected against him by John the 23. and Benet. 12.

Who would not admire the piety of Lewis thus vexed and tormented by Popes?
what would this have come unto if he had tried it by Arms against them?

The integrity of this Lewis, Benet overcome with the integrity of the
Emperor.
finally was acknowledged by Pope Benet. And the peace was soon after made
between the Emperor and the Pope. Who straight bore the Emperor such an
amity, that he defended and maintained him hardily in his innocence against
the Ambassadors of the king of France, which used always rude and defamitorie
words against the said Emperor: in so much that the Pope was called by the
said Ambassadors, the Protector of an heretic.

And although Benet for a certain time was not without great fear, because of
their words, The Emperor Lewis absolved.
(for they threatened him with great wars if he absolved the Emperor) yet
he commanded by a public decree (which was proclaimed through all Almaine)
that all processes which had been attempted by John against the Emperor should
be nothing and of no value: and that it appertained not to John to attempt such
things against him, seeing the Emperors and the Popes jurisdiction are distinct
and separate.

He further declared openly that Lewis in all things had borne himself like a
good and valiant Emperor. Yet you must understand that the Pope did nothing
herein, freely and of good courage: but cautelously to acquire the favor of
Lewis. For because he saw the king of France (in the kingdom and seignory of
whom he remained) had taken some ill conceit against him, he feared that if
also he had the Emperor his enemy, there were no person where he might have
succors, if the king of France practiced any mischief against him. The Pope
does all for his profit.
Therefore Benet judged that it should be for his profit if he got the
benevolence of the Emperor: hoping by that means that the other durst attempt
nothing against him.

These be the practices and means wherewith Popes have nourished and do yet
nourish their tyranny in the Church of the Lord.

Benet being menaced by the king of France changed his opinion, and left the
sentences given by his predecessors against Lewis. He placed Vicars in the
Imperial Towns of Italy, and drew unto the Roman seat the charge and
office of a Senator, The Penetentiers.
withdrawing it from the Emperor. He invented all that was needful for the
Apostolic penete^tiary, declaring in order the taxes of Letters, and so
assembled great riches from all nations.

Collations of benefices.
This Pope first usurped collations of all Prelatures, Bishopprikes, and other
benefices, as well for himself as for his successors: and deprived such as
were unlearned and ignorant from their benefices: And ordained that all his
Chaplains should sing by note their Canonical hours. That they should lie in
one Dortoire, Canonical hours sung by note.

The sister of Francis Petrarke, bought by Benet.


and that they should have no other revenues, but that was necessary for their
life and apparel.

He builded in Auignon a very fair house, with Towers and goodly Orchards: And
this old Adulterer bought dear the sister of Francis Petrarke which was very
fair, of her brother called Gerard, to abuse her.

He ordained 6. Cardinals being absent from Rome, and repaired with great
charge and cost the roof of S. Peter's church, and published certain acts
against the Iacobins, Ockam. Dantes.
as Leander witnesses.

Ockam and Dantes held for heretics, because they maintained by lively reasons
out of the scriptures that the Roman Empire depended not upon the Pope, but of
God only. Naucler.

Such as speak against the Pope are heretics.

Benet made many Extrauagants and Benedictines for the Monks of the order of
S. Benet, wherein is made mention in the sixth and seventh Chapter, how Abbots
ought to send their young Monks, such as are fittest to their study unto the
Universities, and offer them pentions to do it.

He made a Decretall which begins Benedictus Deus in donis suis: to the end
benefices should not be given to such as were unworthy of them. Wherein is
confuted and condemned as heretical, the doctrine which his predecessor John
had publicly preached touching the happy souls: and it was determined and
declared yt the souls which had nothing to purge, incontinent as they are
departed from the body do see ye face of God.

He was said to have been so rigorous that he would scant know such as were of
his blood: and said that the Pope had no parents. Fascic. temp.

The year of Christ 1339. the Castle of Loppen was besieged by certain
Gentlemen, with 30000. footmen, and fifteen thousand horsemen: but they were
valiantly driven back and chased away by the Swisses, which with the number of
two or three thousand slew 4000. of the said combatants and three Fasc. temp.
and others.

The Sarrasins in Spain were discomfited, where there were Chro. Eusebius. The
sea of Histo.

Benet dyed in Auignon, to the great joy of many, for his great rigor, and
therefore some write of him.

Hic situs est Nero, laicis mors, vipera clero:
Deuius a vero, cuppa repleta mero, that is,
Here lies death to Laie-men, a viper to the Clergy,
A straier from the verity, a cup full of Wine.
He left great sums of gold and silver, whereof he gave nothing to his
parents and friends, but to the Church.

Francis Petrarke flourished in this time, and Gregory de Aremino the
Augustine and general of his order.

Orchanes second Emperor of the Turks, son of Ottoman, who reigned 22.
years.

Clement. 6.
Clement Pope, sixth of that name, Limosin ruled in Auignon 11. years: before
called Peter Roger, borne of Limoges. First he was Prior of S. Babille, which
is a Priorie of the order of S. Benet, after Abbot of Fescan, after Bishop of
Arras, then Archbishop of Roane, and after by Pope Benet 12. was made Cardinal,
and finally after his death was made Pope, although he was the youngest of all
the Cardinals.

H. Marius in his book Entitled Eusebius Captive, in this manner describes
the Pope. Clement 6. says he, a man very desirous of women, of honor and
power, being incited with a diabolical fury, fixed Letters upon the gates and
doors of Temples, by which he threatened the Emperor upon grievous
punishments, that within 3. days he should renounce the rights of his Empire.

The cruelty of this Emperor was marvelous. This Emperor came to Francford,
and being ready with all his power to do that which was enjoined him, required
by his Ambassadors, that he would receive him into grace.

This Pope answered the Ambassadors, that he would never pardon Lewis, unless
first he confessed all his errors and heresies, and dismissed himself of the
Imperial dignity, and put into his hands, himself, his children, and all his
goods, and that he would promise to take nothing of all those things, but by
his consent. And he gave a Formularie unto the Ambassadors, and commanded them
to present it unto Lewis.

What form or fashion is there here, I will not say of a Pastor, but of a man
only?

Lewis showed this Formularie to the Princes, to the Electors, and to the
Ambassadors of the Imperial Towns. The Princes detested some of the Articles,
for that they were laid by the Pope to the ruin and destruction of the Empire:
and they promised the Emperor succors if he would defend the rights of the
Empire, as he had done before: yet they prayed Clement by their Ambassadors,
that he would leave off such Articles invented to the detriment of the Empire;
but the Ambassadors returned without doing any thing.

Clement laying the cause of all those things upon Lewis, sought the ruin of
him and his children. Wherefore the Thursday before Easter, he excommunicated
him very cruelly, and renewed all the rigorous processes made by Pope John, and
declared him an heretic and a schismatike: he also solicited the Electors to
choose an other Emperor. He deprived the Archbishop of Magunce of his dignity,
and of the privilege and authority to choose: because that knowing the
Emperors innocence, he would not violate his majesty. As for the other
Electors, the new of Magunce, he of Treuers and Colongne being corrupted by
force of gifts and presents by the king of Bohemia, declared Emperor Charles
the fourth, son of John King of Bohemia, who was son of Henry seventh of
that name, who was crowned at Bohemia during the Empire of Lewis: but he was
not reputed a lawful Emperor, no not after the death of Lewis, as may be seen.

Who can here rehearse the horrible wars which proceeded of the wickedness
of this Clement against the Empire?

Twenty thousand French men were overthrown by Edward King of England: who
descended into Normandy, The Journey of Cressy.
and came even to Paris, destroying all the Country. It was called the
battle of Cressy; where there was great effusion of French blood. Chron.
Eusebius. Callais was yielded to the king of England, after it had endured
extreme famine.

A great famine was in all Italy, accompanied with a pestilence and
mortality, which was almost universal. It continued till the year, 1350. See
the Histories of Almaine and France.

Lewis the fourth was poisoned (as is said) having drunk Jane Duchess of
Austrich, See the Chro. of the Emperors in the 2. Tome.
which came to see him; and feeling himself grieved he would needs go on
hunting, and being in the wood, he fell from his horse, as if he had been
stricken with a Palsy, whereof he died soon after. At the article and point
of death he cried: O my God be merciful unto me a poor sinner. Munster and
others.

After his death, there was yet more trouble then before. Edward chosen
Emperor. Frederic.
The Electors were solicited to elect Edward king of England* but he refused
the election as a thing too troublesome. After, they chose Frederic Count of
Misne: Charles. 4.
but he loved better to maintain peace with the Bohemians, then to charge
himself with the titles of the Empire.

At Francford one part of the Electors chose Gunther of Scwartymbourge: who
accepted the Election as being sufficiently munited and puissant to hold good
against the Emperor Charles, who then remained at Magunce. But Gunther a little
after was poisoned and died at Francford, so Charles reigned alone.

Let all people know hereby the detestable tirannie that Popes have exercised
through all the world, spreading the seeds of seditions and wars.

The public reuenewe of the Empire engaged.
The Empire was brought into great calamity: for Charles to the end to leave
his son successor, did so corrupt the Electors with store of gifts and
promises, that he gaged unto them the public reuenew of the Empire, which
they yet detain at this day: and therefore the Roman Empire could not relieve
it self. For then did the Electors constrain Charles to swear that he would
never revoke that he had engaged.

The Empire being overthrown, the Turk assailed the Church of Jesus Christ,
and ruinated many of them in Europe, putting all to fire and sword, and laying
upon them that miserable yoke of Mahomet.

But how can Christian Princes drive back Ottoman and his successors out of
the Church of Christ, if they first repress not the Turkish Pope an household
enemy?

The Iubile remitted to 50. years.
This Pope Clement reduced to the fiftieth year the Iubile, whereof has been
spoken, to the end by that means to gather more gold: and being absent from
Rome, he made it be celebrated Rome every day to the number of five thousand
Pilgrims, entering and going out, as easily might be counted. Thus says Peter
Premonstre.

The bringing in the observation of the ceremony of Iubile, is a renowncing of
Jesus Christ, who has brought us the agreeable time, and the year and day of
salvation and perpetual pardon. 2. Cor. 6.2.

In this time a company of people of diverse Nations were assembled, making a
Sect, Lewis.
Whippers or beaters.
which did beat and whip themselves, going from Town to Town, from Borough
to Borough, and from Village to Village: There came one time 200. from Souabe,
and amongst them was one Prince and two Governors, whom they obeyed. One day
being before the Monastery of Spire, in the day about one of the Clock, they
made a round and stripped themselves naked, except that they had shirtes like
hose, from the thighs to the heels, and so fell prostrate upon the earth one
after an other in form of a Cross, A new Sect. Robes.
and whipped themselves, singing and Inuocating God: they also laid their faces
toward the earth, praying for themselves and for all such as did them good,
likewise for them that did evil unto them. They had certain Priests amongst
them, and some Lettered people: there were also Gentlemen and Handicraftsmen,
women and children. If any man Invited them to dinner, they durst not go, nor
take any alms without the leave of their Governors. But they whipped
themselves twice a day, and each one once in the night secretly. They spoke not
to any woman. They all carried Crosses both before and behind, in their
apparel, hattes, or Caps. Their whips were tied to their robes, and they
remained no more then one night in a Parish.

From the Town of Spire, there were more then an hundredth which raunged
themselves in their company. Error incontinently finds her adherents
Yet none was received of their band, unless they promised to keep all the
aforesaid things. And if any had not enough each day to spend eight pence: and
if he promised not to be confessed, and to have good contrition, and to forgive
all injuries his enemies had done unto him Moreover, his wife must consent unto
him. Finally the Emperor forced them to leave off these toys and bables: and
the Pope forbad them upon pain of excommunication from thenceforth not to whip
themselves. Yet in repentant manner they might whip themselves secretly.

Imbert Daulphin of Vienne, renouncing the glory of the world (as they speak)
took the habit of a Iacobin in the Covent of Lions upon Rhosne: sold the
Country of Dolphine to the king of France, Charles. 4.
under condition that the kings of France should not aliene it, and that their
eldest children should bear the title thereof. And this did he in despite of
such as should have bin his heirs, which had done a thing contrary to his
will. See the French Histories.

Bartholus the Legist or Lawyer was in this time, and Petrus Bercorij, who
translated Titus Liutus into French, at the King John his commandment, and
made the Breuiarie upon the Bible, and the Moral Reportorie.

Phillip de Valois 49. king of France, the Coozin-germain of the three former
kings, having reigned 22. years, died at Noogent le Roy, of the age of 57.
years.

John his son Duke of Normandy, was crowned at Reims, the fiftieth king of
France, and reigned 14. years.

The brotherhood of the order of the star, began in the house of S. Oyon nigh
Paris, at the instance of King John. The knights of this order carried a star
in their hattes or on their coats.

Almaine, because they had infected and poisoned the Fountains and Pits of
water. Fasci. Temp.

Clement the sixth died suddenly, being stricken with an Aposteme, the year 1353.

Innocent. 6.
Innocent Pope, sixth of that name succeeded, borne of Limoges, Stephen Aubert,
he was an advocate Doctor in the Laws and the Decrees: after he was Bishop of
Cleremont and Cardinal of Ostia.

After he had taken possession of the Popedom, looking prudently for his
profit in time to come, Reservation of Benefices.
he suspended certain reseruations made by Clement his predecessor: and
straight ordained that all Prelates and beneficed men should retire unto their
Churches: not to the end to preach the Gospel, but to magnify and maintain
all abuses and Papish rights. And that they might gather the fruits thereof to
live in all Idleness and dissolution.

He said well that Sheep ought to be kept by their own Shepherd, and not by
an hireling.

This Pope would needs gather a tenthe of all the rents and revenues of the
Clergy, but the Prelates of France would not consent thereunto, therefore it
was not levied, yet he did what he could in Almaine, in the Dioces of Spice.
See Nauclerus.

The dearenes of victuals was extreme in France, for the wars of the
Englishmen, the quarter of good wheat was at eighteen pounds at Paris.

He diminished his ordinary expenses (which was great) in reducing his family
to a certain number, yet not very honest, as may be seen in Petrarke.

He would have no person in his house but such as should serve either his
profit or affections, and he very straightly by Edict enjoined all his
Cardinals that they should do the like. Betwixt saying and doing is a long way.
And said that his life and that of all Ecclesiastical persons ought to serve
for an example to others, so that all Christian people may take heed to follow
our examples. Moreover he ordained a certain sallary or stipend for the
Auditors of his Palace, to the end they should steal nothing.

He was sparing in his diet and living (say some authors) but in expenses of
war very large.

The University of Prage in Bohemia, The University of Prage.
is instituted and endowed with privileges by Innocent, at the request of the
Emperor Charles the 4. Naucler.

Charles the 4. going to Rome to be crowned, Outrage done to the Empress.
his wife was taken at Pise, and carried with her Damzels into a Stews to
despite the Emperor, but she escaped from thence in great danger: and then
appeared the virtue of the Almaines. Nauclerus.

The year 1355. Charles the 4. was crowned at Millaine, and after at Rome on
Easter day, upon condition straight to depart out of Italy. Naucler.

What pride was this to command the Roman Emperor to retire out of his own
country? Franc. Petrarke.

The Journey of Poitiers was to the great damage and confusion France, and
victory of the English. The battle of Poitiers.
There were slain the Duke of Bourbon, and the Constable of France, the
Marshall and others, to the number of eight hundredth knights. The King of
France was a prisoner, Phillip his fourth son and others, as well Counts as
knights and men of arms, at least 17. hundredth. See the Histories of France.

The year of Christ, 1359. was held an Imperial Journey at Magunce, whether
the Pope Innocent sent his Legate for the subsidies of the Apostolic Chamber:
and the said Legate had power to dispense with all Ecclesiastical persons
touching Benefices which they had obtained otherwise then the holy Canons
permitted. In this assembly were the Archbishop of Magunce, Treuers, and of
Colongne, the Dukes of Saxe, Bauiere and others. The Emperor then called the
Legate unto him and said: The Pope has sent you into Almaine to exact a great
sum of silver, without reforming the Clergy. After he said to a Canon of
Magunce; deliver me your hatte, and gave him his which was much worse. Then
said he to the Princes which were there; Lock not I with this hatte more like
a warrior then a man of the Church? Then turned he again to the Archbishop
of Magunce, and said. We command that you reform your Clergy, and take
away the superfluity in their garments, shoes, hattes, and other things. The
Popes Legate hearing this, went away all confounded, and as it were flying,
took a boat and got him to Cologne. Naucler.

John de Roquetaillaide martired.
This Pope, a true Tyrant of Babylon, commanded that John de Roquetaillaid
should be burnt in Auignon, because he said something against the Clergy.
This man (says Peter de Premonstre) prophesied many things should come to
pass touching Antichrist and the Popes, and therefore was he held suspected of
heresy. For he began to prophecy the year of our Lord, 1345. in the time of
Clement the sixth, and many things were seen come to pass of that he had
foretold.

The Feast of the spear and nails.
This Pope ordained the Feast of Jesus Christ's Lance and nails: to the end
those dead Idols might be adored by the Christians. He Environed Auignon
with walls and ditches, and without the town founded the Monastery of
Chartreux.

Wonders.
Before this Popes death, there was a great Ecclips of the Sun, such as was
never seen the like; to show that that very time was so full of darkness,
that scant was there any remainder of the light of truth in the Church.

There was also seen in his time a a flame after the sunne-setting (as Masseus
witnesses) which endured a long time, and showed what a great fire should
after come. Moreover there was great numbers of Grasshoppers, which after they
had destroyed the corn, even all trees were burned.

As the said Pope was preparing an Army by sea against the Turks, The death
of Innocent.
because the Romans were in troubles and seditions, he was so vexed in his
mind, that he died with grief, the year 1362. and was buried in the said
Monastery of Chartreux Auignon.

Vrbain fifth of Limosin, Vrbain. 5.
called before Grinnald Grisant the son of an English Physician called
William, Monk of S. Benet, first Abbot of Auxerre, and after of S. Victor,
nigh to Marseillis, being absent in a certain Embassage, was created Pope.

He was a great Doctor of the Canon Law, and an exceeding arrogant Master. He
straight applied himself to defend the liberty of the Papal Church by
covetousness, dissolutions and pompes, and chiefly served himself therein
with such as affectioned him most in such affairs. But above all, he sent one
called Gilles a Spaniard, Cardinal of S. Sabin as a Legate into Italy with
full power: Who as a true Executor of all his bloody commandments, rode
through all Italy, and so repressed the Vicounts and other governors of
Towns, bringing upon them great losses and hurts if they would not submit
themselves under the obedience of the Roman Church.

Yues a Britain Priest, Yues.
sold his goods and gave them to the poor, and was Canonized after his death.
Sabell.

Armacan (some call him Richard and qualify him an Archbishop) a learned man,
published conclusions against Friars, Armacan.
teaching that it was a villainous thing for a Christian to beg without
constraint. Volater.

Baldus a Lawyer of Peruse, was renowned in this time.

Baldus.
Jesuits.
The Monasticke order of Jesuits began by John Colomban and Francis Vincent of
Bourgongne. Volat. and Sabell. They were afterward by the Popes privilege,
called the Apostolic Clerks.

Brigide Princess of Sauabe, had four sons and four daughters: a little
before Pope Vrbain died, she went to Rome to erect the order which after she
instituted. Valat. lib. 21.

She then to accomplish her vow, procured that the order of Monks (named with
her name) as well men as women might be confirmed.

A golden Bull.
The Emperor Charles merited great praise by the Bull of gold, wherein he
gathered many things very necessary to maintain public peace.

John king of France went into England for the deliverance of his brother Duke
of Orleance, and of his son John Duke of Berry, and of many others which he
left in hostage; and being there, died in London, and after was carried to S.
Denis in France. See Emili. lib. 8. and 9.

Charles fifth of that name, 51. king of France, was surnamed le Sage. He
caused many Latin books to be translated into French, yea books of holy
scripture.

Amurathes the third Emperor of the Turks, reigned 23. years, and was the
first that entered into Europe: For he aided the Emperor of Constantinople,
and sent him 12. thousand men, which passed into Greece. This was after, cause
of the taking of the Couuntrey of Asia, the year of Christ, 1363.

Wickliffe began as a break of day, the preaching of the Gospel.

John Wickliffe an English man, a man of great spirit, flourished in this time,
and began as from a deep night to draw out the truth of the doctrine of the
son of God. He studied in the University of Oxford, and came to such degree
of erudition, that he was thought the most excellenrest amongst the
Theologians. In his readings with the purity of the doctrine which he taught,
he also lively touched the abuses of the Popedom: In so much that the
Locusts, that is to say the begging Monks, lifted themselves up against him.
But the Lord gave him for a Protector, the King Edward, during whose reign, he
had great liberty in his profession.

Richard the said Edwards successor, persecuted and banished him: but as a
true Champion of the Lord he remained always constant even to his death. His
conclusions, his books and his doctrine, show sufficiently the gifts and
graces which God had bestowed upon him. Whosoever will more largely know those
things, let him look in the book of Martyrs brought by us into light since
the said Wickliffe.

Vrbane went to Rome to pacify Italy, where he builded Viterbe, and at
Montlacon, minding to return into Italy. And as he returned into France in
hope to bring again the Court to Rome, he deceased at Marcellis, not without
great suspicion of poisoning. Sabel.

An University founded at Vienna in Austriche, by Albert Duke of Austriche.

Planudes a Greek Monk lived in this time: he translated Cato and other
books out of Greek into Latin.

Charles King of France often held his seat of Justice, and was altogether a
man of peace, neither was ever Armed. Only walking nigh Paris, he made his
wars and other his affairs of importance by his brothers and other
Committees, by whom he recovered as it were all that which the English men had
taken from his Father. To help the charges of the war, A Tax upon Wine.
he laid a Tax upon Salt and Wine that men sold. He had five Armies at once
against the English men.

Gregory Pope, 11. of that name, of Limosin, Gregory. 11.
ruled in Auignon 7. years and 5. months, before he was called Rogier, son
Benfort, and Nephew of Pope Clement the sixth: he was the Disciple of Baldus
the Legist, who then read at Peruse.

Return of the Papaltie to Rome.
Most of the Towns of Italy withdrawing themselves from his obedience (as
Volateranus says) at the persuasion of Caterine de Siene, a Nun of the order
of Iacobins, and of Baldus his late master, parting from France with 12.
Galleys, with 3. ranks of Ores returned to Rome, the year of the Lord 1376.

He pronounced sentence of Interdict against the Florentines, which were the
first authors of the revolt, and had seized all the Popes Towns which were
about them. Upon whom finally he made strong and sharp war, because they
made no account of the thunder of his excommunications: which the Legists said
were of no validity, because they proceeded of hatred and enmity. Naucler.

Some set down certain causes of his return into Italy. A woman called
Brigide (says Masseus) returning from Jerusalem, writ to Gregory that the
Lord would that the Roman Court should be turned into her house. Cranzius
adds, that as he reprehended a Bishop, that he left his Church and followed
the Court, he answered him. And thou says he which art Pope of Rome, and which
ought to give example to others, why go not thou to thy Bishoppricke? Then
transported he his seat to Rome at the persuasion of two women and of a
Bishop, the seventh year after he was departed.

Almaigne, and to gather it sent his Legate. But many resisted and formed
appellations against the Pope, saying that they could not pay it. Others that
they would not pay it: and so was there a schism in the Churches of Almaigne.
Naucler.

Petrarke dyed about this time. So did Boccace, of the age of 62. years, Abb.
Trit.

Simon de Cassia was in this time, and S. Bonauenture whom Gregory 2. made
Cardinal and Bishop of Albe. Abb. Trit.

Amurathes was slain with the blow of a Dagger, by the servant of a Christian
called Seruianus: For that the said Amurathes had slain his master.

A new Sect of dauncers.
Peter de Premonstre has left by writing, that in this Popes time there was a
kind or new Sect of devilish people, as well men as women, which without any
shame daunced hardely. And he said that in the year of the Lord 1375. they
came from Aix in Almain into Henaut, and from thence into France. Some said
this signified the return of Pope Gregory and his Cardinals to Rome. These
thought they daunced in a flood of blood, although such as were present with
them saw no such thing. The common people judged that these people were ill
baptized by Priests which keep whores and harlots: and therefore they
determined to have risen up against the Clergy to slay them and pill their
goods, Wencelaus.
but that God remedied it by the means of certain coniurations, and that
which follows in the said author.

The year of Christ 1375. the English men and Brytons, The English fall upon
the the Swisses.
with other people to the number of forty thousand and more, fell upon the
Countries of Alsarce and Sangania, and took Cities and Castles and raced them
to the ground, violated virgins and wives, burned Churches and Monasteries, and
after many other tyrannies they attempted also upon the Bernois: but a great
multitude of them and their Duke were slain and discomfited by the said
Bernois at Frowenbrun, the rest were assailed by other Swisses, and were
overthrown, and so they all perished miserably. Fascic. temp.

The Emperor Charles sought to stretch out the limits of his kingdom of
Boheme, partly by silver, and partly by wars and other means: which was
cause that he gave to John Henry his brother, the Country of Morauia, The
Country of Morauia.
to the end he might renounce the right he had in the kingdom of Boheme. Long
time after he also caused the Princes Electors to elect Wencelaus his son
King of the Romans. Finally, after many requests he obtained that he
demanded, the year of grace 1376. and gained the Princes which elected
Wencelaus King of Romans, Wencelaus.
being but 15. years of age. After his coronation he espoused Ihehanne or Jane
daughter of Albert, Count of Holland, and Duke of Bauiere. But the year
following Charles dyed, which was the year of grace 1378. and of his Empire
33. He was an Emperor worthy of praise, saving that he regarded more his
kingdom of Boheme, then the public weal of his Empire. For knowing his Son
should succeed him in the Empire, he corrupted the Electors by great and
fair promises, the which being not able to accomplish, he gaged unto them the
public taxes and tributes, and brought the Roman Empire into that calamity
wherein it is at this day. For the Electors retain that unto themselves which
should be the Emperors.

A great number of the poor of Lion were burnt at Paris, in the place de
Grieve. The Sea of Histories.

The College of Benuais was founded at Paris, the year 1372. otherwise called
the College des Dormans, because it was founded by three brethren called
Dormans, the one was Bishop of Beauuais, the other Archbishop of Angiers, and
the other Chancellor of France.

Wencelaus son of Charles fourth of that name, was chosen king of the Romans,
being but 15. years of age, at the pursuit of his Father, and crowned at Aix
la Chappelle, with his wife the daughter of Albert Duke of Bauiere, and Count
of Holland. But this Wencelaus was evil made of body and spirit, his body
crooked and of an effeminate courage. He was borne at Nuremberge, and his
mother dyed at his birth. As Soon as he was made king of Boheme and of the
Romans, incontinently he gave himself to all Idleness and dissolution,
following his pleasures, caring for nothing but to make good cheer. And
because he used great tyranny, in the end the Barons of the kingdom took him
and kept him in prison the space of 4. months, The Emperor imprisoned.
til he was brought forth by his brother the Marquess called John: but he
became no better. His subjects then seeing that all the Country was infected
with his orders, tyrannies, whoredoms and dissolutions, they complained to his
brother Sigismond king of Hungary, and he was again taken and imprisoned in
Austriche, but escaping out of prison, he returned into his kingdom, and
returned to his first manners. The Electors of the Empire often admonished him,
but he cared not, therefore he was deprived of his Empire at Bopard.

Bajazet fourth King or Emperor of the Turks, the son of Amurathes, after
the death of his Father, slew his brother Soliman traitorously, and so alone
enjoyed the Empire of the Turks, the year of the world 5335. after Christ's
Nativity, 1373. To revenge the death of his father, he made war against Mark
Lord of Bulgaria, Mark Lord of Bulgaria.
overcame and slew him, and so subjected a great part of his Country. A little
after he ouerranne Hungary, Albania and Walachie, and did great hurt, took
many Christians and led them into Thracia prisoners. In his enterprises and
affairs he was so hot and so sudden, that he was called Bajazet Hildrin,
that is to say, thunder from heaven. He brought under as it were all Greece,
being aided with the goods and graces of nature, both in body and spirit. He
besieged Constantinople by the space of eight years. Whereupon the Emperor
sailed into France requiring succors, which was granted him: yet got Bajazet
victory of the French, Hungarians, Almaines, Syrians and Misians, in one
assembly against him: after he returned to Constantinople, and there was no
other mean to conserve the Empire of Constantinople, but that Tamberlan, who
was Lord of a certain Country of East Scythia toward Parthia, having (as it
were) an infinite number of people, put to the sword in one only battle on
the Mount Stella (where Pompey fought with Mithridates) 2. hundredth thousand
Turks, and overcame Bajazet, and bound him with chains of Gold and put him
into a Cage of Iron, and so led him through all the Countries of Asia and
Syria: In the which miserable estate the said Bajazet died. He reigned twenty
and six years.

Edward King of England who had so many victories in France, died of the age of
74. years, the year 52. of his reign.

Charles the 4. and Wencelaus his son, came into France to accord the French
and the English: but they returned without doing any thing, because of the
death of the Queen, and her daughter Isabel.

The Pope Gregory after he had done all that belonged to a good Pope, (as
Platina says) being tormented with an intolerable pain of the blather,
deceased the year of the Lord 1378. Some say that at the hour that he yielded
the spirit, the fire flamed in the palace of Auignon, which could not be put
out until the greatest part of it was burnt. And after that, followed a
schism in the Popedom, the greatest of all the others. Then says Masseus,
the people and Clergy of Rome assembled toward the Cardinals, and prayed
them to choose some Italian, and no French man.

Vrbain sixth of that name, a Nepolitain by Nation, Vrbain. 6.
called before Bartholemewe, Archbishop of Bar, being not yet of the order of
Cardinals, and absent at the great pursuit of the Romans, was created Pope.

He was (says Crantzius) a cruel man, of whom by prayers nothing could be
obtained. Being come to the Popedom he would not procure that peace might be
amongst Christians as his duty was: but sought to revenge himself of injuries
done him by Cardinals, and by Jane Queen of Sicilie.

Clement. 7. This is not numbered in the Catalogue of the Popes.
Clement Pope, 7. of that name, was also chosen, and ruled in Auignon 15.
years.

And thus began the 22. Schism, the cruellest and horriblest, which endured
long.

This came to pass for that after the death of Gregory 11. the Cardinals
parted themselves into two bands, the Italian Cardinals by constraint of the
Romans did choose the said Bartholemewe Archbishop of Bar, and called him
Vrbane the 6. but because he reproved and reprehended the Cardinals for their
lightness, they all departed from him, and went into the City of Tendes,
where upon envy with the French Cardinals they chose one called Robert, borne
at Geneua, Cardinal of the title of the twelve Apostles, and called him
Clement the seventh, who came to dwell in Auignon, because of the schism.

Nauclere says that this Clement was borne at Catalongne, and was chosen 3.
months after the promotion of Vrbain 6. For the French Cardinals, for the
heat of the time demanded license of the Pope to go into Anagnia, and from
thence were transported into Pouille, where they elected the said Clement.

When Vrbane saw himself thus left of his Cardinals, he created thirty new
upon one day.

A schism of forty years.
This schism endured forty years until the Council of Constance: whereupon
came great disorder. The King of France and all his kingdom: Item Spain and
England held the part of Clement the 7. The other Countries, that is to say,
Italy, Almaigne, Hungary, etc. followed Vrbane the 6. and on both sides there
was great contradiction.

The kingdom of France endured great evils about this schism. For Clement had
good 35. Cardinals maintained and living chiefly of the said kingdom, and all
held the best Prelateships, benefices and dignities.

The kingdom there also was sore grieved, with Impositions, Annuities, Tenths,
Inventions to draw silver.
expectiue graces and other inventions: Insomuch that the poor Clerks and
Students of the University of Paris could get no Benefices, but all were
occupied for Cardinals and other Courtiers of Auignon, who had ever hired
people to enquire of the value of Benefices.

Vrbane was cautelous, seditious, and discourteous, Vrbane.
memoratiue and reuengefull of injuries, and one that took pleasure to sow
dissentions amongst Christian Princes, rather the^ appease them. Neither could
he live in peace with the king of Hungary and of Naples. He would have deprived
Charles king of Sicilie of his kingdom, Insomuch that Charles came against him,
and constrained him to fly to Genues by sea, and as he passed on, the Pope
caused 5. or 6. Cardinals to be drowned, because he thought they favored
Clement the 7. who was at Auignon.

Two other Cardinals fled toward the said Clement, and were welcomed: but
Vrbain excommunicated them, and Clement absolved them, and the two Popes one
excommunicated an other, and their adherents. Naucler.

Vrbain absolved the Florentines of an excommunication to acquire their grace
and favor.

To show himself devout, he instituted the Feast of the visitation of the
Virgin Mary in the Mountains.

He went to Naples to put Ladislaus son of Charles king of Naples, and Jane
his sister from their heritage: but it was in vain. Therefore he returned to
Rome, wherein he was poisoned and died.

The said Charles at the solicitation of Pope Vrbain the 6. came from Hungary
to Naples, where being, Acts worthy of the Papal seat.
he slew the Queen Jane to please the Popes apppetite.

All the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Priests, which adheared unto the
said Jane, were deprived of their Benefices by the Pope, and in their places
other were instituted. See Naucler.

So Charles remained king of Naples five years, afterward he returned into
Hungary, but by the subtlety of the Queen he was poisoned, and died the
year, 1385. So wickedly as he had caused Queen Jane of Sicilie to be slain:
So the Queen of Hungary slew him. Note the trobles yt come of the Pope.
But the cause why Vrbane sent for Charles to Naples was in despite of Queen
Jane, who had received his Cardinals into her kingdom, wherefore he deprived
her thereof, and was crowned King of Sicilie by the Pope, the year 1381. under
condition that he should leave to his Nephew certain Duches and Counts in
Sicilia. But because the said Charles was poor, the Pope sold the Churches
goods, yea and the goods of certain Monasteries, even amounting to 8000.
Florence: he aliened also and sold certain ornaments of Gold and Silver,
Crosses and Images, with which help he obtained the kingdom of Naples as is
said.

The three Flower deluces of France.
Charles the sixth, son of Charles the fifth, was sacred King of France very
young. He would bear but three Four deluces in the French Arms. His Father
left him 1800000. Scutes. ( Gaguin says 18. Millions) and yet at the
beginning of his reign he had no money: For it was dissipated and dispearsed by
diverse Tutors and Governors.

Clement 7. crowned Lewis King of Naples, who by arms occupied the Province,
going into Italy against the said Charles and Vrbane, having in his Camp 30.
thousand fighters: but he dyed two years after he was in Italy. The
Fountains and waters were impoysoned, whereof he dyed and all his Nobility.
Naucler.

The said Jane Queen of Sicilie and Countess of Prouence, the wife of Charles
Duke of Calabria, son of Robert King of Sicilie and Navarre, and the sister
of the King of France Philip, had made the said Lewis, Duke of Aniou, her
heir. (For she had now reigned 30. years without having any line. The Sea of
Histories.

Lewis Archbishop of Magdebourge, as he daunced in the Town of Calvin with
Ladies and Damozels until night, sell upon the ground and brake his neck, and
beat out his brains, with one of the Ladies which he led. The same hist.

The year 1381. Hugo Aubriot, born at Bourgongne, who before had been great
Governor de Finances of France, by the means of the Duke of Bourgongne was
made Provost of Paris, and during his government, the policy of Paris was well
administered. Many buildings were made, as the bridge of S. Michael, the walls
toward the Bastile, S. Antonie, and the length of the River of Seine: the
little Bridge, the little Castle, and many other places. He was accused of many
crimes, and above all, for that he derided Churchmen, and principally them of
the University of Paris; which conceived great enmity against him: but
especially because he caused to be builded the Tower of the little Castle upon
the little Bridge to repress the Insolences of Scholars, and to stay their
night courses. Wherefore at their pursuit many secret Inquestes were made
against him, and he was charged to have had the company of Jewish women.
Aubriot.
That he believed not in the Sacrament of the Altar, but mocked at it, and
would never be confessed. Being charged with these informations, he was
imprisoned in the Chastelet, and from thence yielded to the Bishop of Paris his
prison, and was declared an heretic worthy to be burned. At the Princes
request the sentence was moderated, and he was publicly placed on a Scaffold
in our Ladies Court at Paris, as an heretic and contemner of Sacraments, and
as such an one, condemned to perpetual prison with bread and water.

He was afterward delivered from the said prison of Paris by a popularie
tumult, which would have made him their Captain, but he withdrewe himself to
Dijon where he was borne.

The ninth of July, Ludolphe or Lupolde Duke of Austriche, with a great company
of people of war deceived by the counsel of the Nobles, The Swissers prosper.
fell upon the Swissers nigh Sempac, which were in number of a thousand six
hundredth, which drove away all that multitude, and slew the Duke of Austrich
with eighteen other Princes. Two years after the Gentlemen which escaped,
returned with six thousand combatants: but two hundredth men of Glaronne put
them to flight, and overcame 2400. Fasc.

About the year 1387 fell there a schism betwixt the University of Paris,
and the Friar Iacobins. One Doctor of the Friars Preachers called John de
Montelon, The disputation of the conception of the Virgin Marie.
preached and maintained publicly that the Virgin Marie was borne in original
sin.

Such questions come of pride and ambition, they are not such as the Lord
requires.

The name of Huet.
At Rouen an other Doctor of the same order preached publicly, that if he
proved not that the Virgin Marie was conceived in original sin, let them
call him Huet, that is Owl. Hereupon in despite and derision of them, when men
saw any of the said order, they called them Huets. The Sea of Hist.

Charles 6. king of France, visited the Pope Clement 6. in Auignon.

Antichrist makes war upon himself.
Clement died the year of our Lord Jesus 1392. and was buried in Auignon, as
they say. These two Popes sent terrible Bulls into diverse parts of the world,
and sowed diffamitorie books, wherein they named one an other Antichrists,
Schismatikes, heretics, tyrants, traitors, thieves, unjust, sowers of tares,
and children of Belial. John de Ligni Doctor of both laws, published a
Treatise in favor of Vrbaine: and the Abbot of S. Vast the kings Councellor of
France, an other in favor of Clement.

The seat of Rome could never be better approved of Antichrist, then by the
acts of these Popes, and the witness of their partakers and accomplices.

Boniface. 9.
Boniface Pope, ninth of that name, ruled at Rome 15. years; Neapolitain, and
elected of the age of 30. years, before called Peter Thomocel. He was the
likeliest amongst the Cardinals which Vrbain had created.

He confirmed the feast of the visitation of the Virgin Marie, instituted by
Vrbain his predecessor.

He fortified the Castle of S. Angelo against the Roman people.

He made a law whereby he obtained the seignorie of all the world: that is to
say; That it should not be lawful for any person to enjoy any Benefice
whereunto he should be promoted, before he had paid to the Fiske or Apostolic
chamber all the reuenewe of the first year.

He abolished Tribuns, which was a noble Magistracy in the Town of Rome: and
constrained the Romans by a cruel Edict to call a stranger to be Senator,
namely, one Maleteste of Piscane.

Boniface canonized S. Brigide, as is above said, in the life of Vrbain the 5.

He made great merchandise of Indulgences, and sold them for money.

The year of Christ, 1394 Clement the seventh dyed in Auignon.

Benet Pope, 13. of that name, Benet. 13.
otherwise called Peter de la Lune, borne at Catalongne, father to the king of
Arragon, governed Auignon 21. years, and after went into Arragon, in the time
of the Council of Constance.

Before he was Pope being a Cardinal, he made a voyage to Paris to cause the
schism to cease. And then in the University of Paris, were M. Peter d'
Aliaco, Cardinal, De Aliace. Gerson.
Doctor in Theology: and M. John Gerson, who after the said Aliaco, was
Chancellor of Paris.

The year 1395. the Christian Princes, Sigismond king of Hungary and Boheme,
brother of the Emperor Wencelaus, Phillip d' Artois, John Count de Neuers, and
many other Christian Princes, were discomfited nigh Nicopolis, going against
Bajazet the Turk, to give succors to the Emperor of Constantinople: the
pride and dissolution of the French was cause thereof.

The beginning of the Dukes of Millaine.
We have said that in the time of Henry the seventh there was at Millaine two
factions, that is, Two factions at Millaine.
of the Gibellins and of the Guelphes. The Vicounts stuck to the one, the
year 1250. and were the strongest in their families. In so much that in the
end Matthew Vicount cast out of the Town of Millaine the great family of
Turrians; Galeace succeeded Matthew in the administration of the Commonwealth.
After Galeace, came Actio his son, out of whose helm fell the Serpent. And
because this man dyed without issue, his Uncles John Bishop of Millaine and
Luchin, took the government of the Duchy, and had great wars against the
Cities of Parme, Land, Cremone, Bergame, Genes, and others, and subjected
them. The Bishop being dead, and Luchin also, the administration came to
Barnabas, who with the aid of his brethren, had many wars against the Pope
of Rome, but principally he a long time molested Bolongne, until the Citizens
redeemed themselves with money. See Munster.

Battle against the Turk.
The unlucky battle for the Christians in Hungaria against the Turk, where
20000. Christians were slain, and infinite others taken and put to death. The
Count of Neuers was there taken prisoner, but his life was saved with 22.
others, Gentlemen. His ransom was 200000. scutes. Naucler. and the Sea of
Histories.

Benet the 13. granted to the Universities, Rolls to have provision of
Benefices.

Mary daughter of king Charles made her self a Nun at Poissy. A National
Council in France.
The year of Christ 1398. was assembled a Council by the Prelates of France,
wherein it was said, that because Pope Benet would not accord to that way of
cession, they would obey him no more in any thing. That Ordinaries should make
collation of Benefices. That unto elective dignities men should proceed by
election, without any more resorting to the Pope Benet.

The English men imprisoned, and after ungently murdered their king Richard:
because he had made peace and accord with the king of France, without consent
of the people.

Bernard, brought a S. Snairy, and placed it in an Abbey of their order called
Cadoyn, in the Diocese of Cahors. Annals of France.

How then say they it is at Chambery?

White Mantles.
The Sect of white Mantles in Italy was destroyed. For Boniface the 9. made
take there Rector, and caused him to die. Some say he was burnt. See Naucler.

The Trinetois otherwise called the Brethren of the redemption of Captives,
which was also called the order of Inham, multiplied greatly.

Turelupins.
The Turelupins are persecuted, they were otherwise called the poor of Lions:
many were burnt in France with their babes.

John Hus.
The light brought in by the writings of Wickliffe, greatly profited such as
came after him, and above all to John Hus, who also cleansed the fountains of
the Gospel, which were filled not only with infectious clay and mire, but
also even with mortal poison, which the begging Monks and profane
Schoole-philosophie had tempered. And although the virtue that God had given to
this person, meriteth a longer recital of his beginning, yet we will send the
Readers to the book of Martirs, since Wickliffe and Hus. As for us, we have
chiefly to render thanks unto God, that through him and other true faithful,
he has sent us the light of his Gospel.

The Pope Benet gave to Charles the sixth, king of France, An admonition to give
thanks unto God.
the tenth part of all Ecclesiastical goods: partly that the king should
maintain and defend him, and partly to the end he himself might be partaker
of the booty. And as he made his residencie in his Country of Catalongne, in
a strong Castle called Pauiscole, maintaining himself to be the true Vicar of
Jesus Christ; he was condemned many ways by the authority of the said
Council.

He assembled a Council at Parpignan, and created many Cardinals. Finally,
dying at Pauiscole the year of our Lord, 1424. he commanded his Cardinal,
that straight they should choose an other in his place, and they elected one
called Giles Munios, Chanon of Bercelone, The Council of Constance condemned
this Pope Clement. 8.
and named him Clement the 8. He incontinently at the Instigation of the king
Alphonsus created Cardinals, and did all that which Popes are accustomed to
do. But after that Pope Martin the first had agreed with the king Alphonsus,
Giles by his commandment, renounced all the rights which he pretended in the
Popedom, and was declared Bishop of Maiorque, and the Cardinals created by
him, willingly renounced their dignities of Cardinals.

The witness of Mathias Flactius of Esclauonia, a diligent Author, extracted
and taken out of Theodoric of Nyem, shall not be here impertinent: who made a
Chronicle of that schism, comprised in three books. Theodoric of Nyem says
he, who was a very familiar Secretary to a certain Pope, and a good and a
wise man, has faithfully described the history of this schism, which has
been amongst Popes by the space of 39. years before the Council of Constance.
Good God what subtilties, what frauds, what wickedness, and what strange
acts rehearses he of those Popes and good spiritual Fathers in that History:
whereby they mock God, all Religion, and the Church of Jesus Christ, yea
molest and do subject it to their tirannie? And surely I confess that although
before I had read, heard, and seen many of their villainies, and that
therefore I had conceived in my self an evil opinion of the malice of that
Antichrist and of his children, yet after I had read this book, I perceived
that they were ten times more wicked then ever I could have thought before. In
the same book also he says, that such are not worthy of the title of
Emperor, which make a countenance not to see, yea dissemble the execrable
wickedness of Popes tirannies.

Chrysoloras.
Chrysoloras of Constantinople, taught Greek Letters in Italy, which 700.
years before had not been in use: whose daughter espowsed at Constantinople,
Francis Philelphe.

Gunnes.
Bertholde Schwartz Monk and Alchemist was the first of Gunnes and Artillery
about this time.

Scotland converted to the Faith.

Wencelaus Emperor for his cowardice and covetousness was deposed from the
Empire, and his Nephewe elected.

Iosse.
Iosse son of John Henry, Marquis of Morauia, who was Charles the fourth of
that name, Marquis of Brandebourge, an unprofitable man, was chosen king of the
Romans by some, before Robert (as some say) being now old, because he was the
uncle of Wencelaus, yet he was never crowned: For there passed not six
months after his Election.

Robert.
Robert or Rupert, Duke of Bauiere, and Count Palatin of Rhene, was chosen
after Frederic Duke of Brunswic and of Lunebourge. This Frederic was a valiant
Prince, wise and exercised in Arms, and truly worthy to govern the Empire,
but there was long time enmity betwixt him and the Archpriest of Magunce. For
before he was crowned, the Count of Waldec having charge of this gentle
Archbishop, Robert.
he slew him villainously, which was cause of great hurly burly and tumult
throughout all Almaine, until the Princes Electors assembled in the Town of
Bopert: where they Elected Robert Count Palatin, a man well exercised in deeds
of war, and a great lover of Justice, but of a small stature: But willing to
enter into Aix la Chapelle to be crowned, the Citizens were against it: saying
that in that case they could not favor Robert, because as yet they were not
absolved of the oath they had given to Wencelaus: But that the election might
not be unprofitable, the Bishop of Colongne, Robert crowned at Colongne.
crowned Robert in the Town of Colongne. After this, Robert made preparation
to go to Rome, the year 1402. to receive the Imperial Crown, but he was
hindered by the Venetians and Millanois, and so could not execute that which he
had enterprised. The death of Robert.
He dyed at Oppenhem the tenth year of his Empire, and was buried in the
Town of Heidelbourge.

Innocent the seventh, borne at Sulmo, before called Cosmar de Peruse, Priest,
Cardinal of the title of Saint Cross: all Italy being in great trouble, was
created Pope after Boniface the ninth.

This Pope (as Platina says) being yet a Cardinal, used customably to
reprehend the negligence and pucillanimitie of Popes: saying that with their
carelessness the schism and trouble which was the^ so great, as well in the
Roman Church as in the commonwealth, took yet no end. But being mounted into
the Papal seat, and in some things following the fashions of Vrbain and
Boniface, his predecessors which he reprehended, being a private person, not
only he did the things which he condemned so sore before, but he could not so
much as bear, that one should speak to him thereof.

He governed the affairs in such confusion, that once the Citizens of Rome
being come toward him to require him that they might have their old liberty,
and be put in possession of the Capitol, of the bridge Miluins, and of the
Fortress of Adrian: The Romans request to the Pope.
And that that pernicious schism which was in the Church might be taken away:
wars and seditions banished: remonstrating that to do the same, the king of
France promised to deliver his hand, and that Leter de Luna would not refuse to
enter into the way of agreement. But in place to grant their request, he sent
them toward his Nephewe Loys, who remained at the hospital of the holy spirit
as were toward an hangman prepared for them, who took eleven of his Citizens
which came to consult with him touching the affairs of their Commonwealth,
which was in perishing by the Popes negligence, and put them all to death, he
after cast them out of the windows to the ground, saying that schisms and
seditions could not be otherwise taken away.

With this cruelty the Roman people being moved, having called to their aid
Ladislaus (or Lancelot) king of Pouille, took Arms for the punishment of that
cut-throate Lewis; but the Pope to shun the fury of the people, fled to
Viterbe, with Lewis his Nephewe.

Rising of the Roman people.
The people seeing they could not take vengeance of him that had committed such
wickedness, fell upon the Curtezans, whose goods were almost all pilled: yet
some saved themselves in the Cardinals houses: which being aided with their
people, received such as came unto them, although very hardly.

After the Romans having taken the Capitol, and being seized of the Mount
Miluins, they assailed the Fortress of Aebrian: but it was lost labor,
although John Colomne the Count of Troy, and other valiant Captains assisted
them under the conduction of the King Ladislaus. In the end this stir being
appeased, the Pope came again to Rome, where he created many Cardinals:
amongst which was Angelius Corrairus a Venetian, Petrus Philargus of Creete,
and Otho Colomnus a Roman Gentleman. The Marquisate of Pise.
Having by this means strengthened and established his Popedom, he created
Lewis his Nephwewe, Marquis of Pise, and after appointed him for the
principality of Firman.

This Pope demanded as well in France as in England, the half of all
Ecclesiastical revenues (as Gaguin says) but it was not granted him. After
which things he lived not long: for the year 1407. he died at Rome.

Divisions in Religion in the Country of Boheme.
We have abouesaid that the Emperor Charles the fourth instituted the
University of Prage, and provided it of learned men: and as a Prince given to
Letters, adorned often with his presence the disputations made in Schools. But
because the Teutonians in that University seemed to carry away the prise and
honor there in disputations above the Bohemians, Teutonians or Almaines.
they were greatly ashamed that strangers should surmount them: It came to
pass that one of the Bohemians having recovered the books of Wickliffe,
communicated them to his companions, and they drew out of them great
arguments, which the Teutonians could not resist, whereupon many dissentions
fell amongst them, even to batteries and murders. The Teutonians seeing this,
forsook the place; Insomuch that more then 2000. Scholars on one day went out
of Prage, the year 1048. and came to Lipse, where they begun an University
after leave obtained.

John Hus then had the greatest renown, John Hus.
a man that came out of a village called Hus, which signifies an Hen, whereof
he took his name. He was of a great and quick spirit, and well spoken,
beginning to recommend the doctrine of Wicliffe to the people. The Bohemians
instructed with this doctrine, began first to set against the Pope, esteeming
him no more honorable nor greater then other Bishops or Priests. And thereupon
reformed the doctrine by the conclusions and Articles following.

Articles of the doctrine of the Bohemia^s.
1 That the dignity makes not the Priest or Bishop honorable, but sanctity of
life and good doctrine. 2 That souls separate from bodies, go right unto
eternal pains, or straigth obtain happy life. 3 That there is no witness
in all the scripture whereby can be proved that there is Purgatory after this
life. 4 To make oblations and sacrifices for the dead, is an invention of the
covetousness of Priests. 5 Images of God or of Saints: benedictions of waters
and such like things, are forged of men against the word of God. 6 That the
orders of begging Friars were invented by devils. 7 That Baptism ought to be
administered with water, without cream, oil, spittle, and such pollutions. 8
That the Temple of God, is the world* That such as build Churches, Monasteries,
and Oratories, therein to enclose him, do enclose Majesty which is
incomprehensible. 9 That the ornaments of Priests, Chasubles, Corporals,
Chalices, Plates, Vestments and Aultars, are all but vanity. 10 That in vain
we implore the help of Saints, and that it is time lost to sing the Canonicke
hours.

That fastings merit nothing.

11 That the Eucharist ought to be administered under both kinds. 12 They
rejected the Mass, and received only the Communion of the supper, the word
and prayer, and many other Articles drawn from the holy scripture.


Gregory. 12.
Gregory 12. of that name, borne at Venice, called before Angelus Corrarius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, and Cardinal, Priest of the order of S. Mark,
was chosen at Rome after the death of Innocent: but upon this condition, that
if the profit and utility of the Church required it, he should give over his
Papal dignity, because of Benet 13. named Peter de la Lune, who succeeded
Clement 7. in Auignon.

The Venetians took of one named Franciscus Curiario Vicar of the Empire, two
Imperial Cities, Verone and Padua, after, the said Francis was sent prisoner
to Venice, where finally he was slain in prison. So after they usurped
traitorously the Town of Rauenna, which was the Roman Churches Patrimony.
They sent to summon with great magnificence the Governor Hostasius Polentan,
his wife and his son, and prayed them that they would come and take their
pastime at Venice at a certain great Feast and solemnity which was made
there. But whilst he was at Venice, they took Rauenna by treason, and sent
the said Lord, his wife, and his child, into perpetual exile into the I Will of
Candie, where they died poorly. John le Maire.

Lewis Duke of Orleance, coming from the Queens house about eight of the
Clock at night, was murdered at Paris by Apostate people, which first threw him
off his Mule, and when he was fallen on the earth, an Almaine his Squire fell
upon him thinking to save him, who was also put to death with his Master. John
Duke of Burgongne caused him to be slain: who after the case was known, fled
incontinently from Paris and came to Arras, riding 42. Leagues that day. See
the Annals of France by M. Nichol. Gille.

This Pope Gregory approved the Sects of the Monks of Mount Oliuet and
Hieronymites, Monks of Mount Oliuet.
with the congregation of them of Venice, which were named of S. George de Alga.

Benet the 13. being in Auignon, the king Charles the sixth sent in Embassage
toward him, the Dukes of Bourgongne, of Berry and of Orleance: to the end to
persuade him to give place to his right for the good and union of the Church:
and that on the other part Gregory the 12. would do the like. Whereunto the
said Benet gave no answer, but left the said Princes without bidding them
farewell, Benet in the Castle of Panisole or Peninsole.
and retired into Spain for fear he should be compelled to renounce the
Popedom, and held a Council at Parpignan, and after went to remain in the
Castle of Panisole, to be there more assured.

In this time was a Council held at Pise, A Council at Pise.
to reunite the Universal Church, whereunto Gregory and Benet were cited, but
they had no care to appear, but derided it. And so thinking to do well, they
made a double schism and division. Before there was two Popes, and now three.
For at the said Council Gregory and Benet were deposed, and one called
Alexander was instituted. During the said Council of Pise, Gregory the 12.
fled also into Austrich: but fearing not to be there in surety, he returned
into Italy, and dwelt in the City of Arinunum, under the protection of a
Baron called Malateste. To the said deposition of the two Popes, as it were all
Christian Nations consented, except a part of Spain, and the Count Arnimake,
and the kingdom of Scotland, which favored the said Benet the 11.

What shall we say of this schism of three Popes, but that it is a token that
that seat of Babylon shall be divided in three parts: as it is said in the
Apocalips, and that from thence shall come the ruin of Antichrist and his end?

Alexander 5.
Chrisebeles or Calephin, the first, the fifth Emperor of the Turks, obtained
victory against Sigismond. This Calephin reigned six years, and left two
sons, Orchanes and Mahomet: but Orchanes was slain by his Uncle Moses, who
was after slain by Mahomet the first of that name.

Alexander Pope, fifth of that name, was elected at the Council of Pise, borne
in the I Will of Candie, of the order of Friars, called before Peter Philarge, or
of Candie: First Bishop of Navarre, after Archbishop of Millaine; and
consequently Cardinal, Priest of the title of the Church of the 12. Apostles,
and succeeded Gregory in the Popedom.

Two Popes deposed.
After that the two old Popes Gregory and Benet were deposed at the Council of
Pise as is said, this was chosen by the consent of all the Cardinals, unto
which degree and dignity he being come (as Platina says) it was with good
right that they called him Alexander: Seeing he that before was but a poor
begging Friar might be compared to any Prince whatsoever, in matter of
prodigal and superfluous expenses, and in greatness of courage.

Herehence it comes that that Graspopper in times past of small and base
condition, did obtain in the Kingdom of Abaddon, a face like a man's, and
teeth like to them of a Lion.

This Pope also used commonly to say as he played, that he had been a rich
Bishop, a poor Cardinal, and a begging Pope.

Ladislaus deprived of his kingdom.
This Alexander was of so great boldness, that in the Council of Pise with the
consent of the Priests that were there present, he tirannously deprived of the
right of his father the kingdom Ladislaus then king of Naples and of Pouille:
who occupied certain seignories which the Church had ill gotten: And unjustly
adjudged it to Lewis Duke d' Aniou.

After that this Council of Pise was finished, this Pope went to Bolongne: of
which Town a wicked Sodomite called Balthazar Cosse, Cardinal of S. Eustache,
had the government: whom Alexander confirmed in his election, because through
his subtle devises that Council had been assembled: And also for that he was
a man meet encounter at any time with such as would seize upon any goods of
the Church. Robert.


There was in this man (as Platina says) more fierceness, boldness and
secularitie (if I may say so) then his estate required. His life was esteemed
like a man of wars, given altogether unto cruelty. In such sort that in this
holy singleness of life, he thought that many things were lawful unto him,
which ought not so much as to be named. See what Platina says.

Amongst other acts worthy of a Pope, A Bull of the Stigmates of S. Francis.
this Alexander published certain Bulls touching the Stigmates or marks and
wounds of S. Francis his Idol, that they might be placed in the rank of the
Articles of the Christian faith: and ordained them a solemn Feast that they
might be honored of the faithful.

As this good Pope began to be sick of a poisoned drink which was given him
by Marcillus of Parma, a Physician whom Balthazar had hired to do it for a
great sum of money (as Panetius recites it in his 56. Sermon) And knowing
that his death was nigh, he exhorted the Cardinals as they came toward him to
mutual concord, and to maintain the liberty of the Church.

That is to say, to make peace amongst the wicked, and to maintain the Papal
pomp and seat, that Jesus Christ may be trodden under foot.

John Bauiers Bishop of Liege, the Duke of Bauiers his brother, Lord of
Holland, and Count of Hainaut, being chased from the Town, demanded help
against the Liegeior of the Duke of Burgongne that married his sister: 16000.
after the Chron. of France, and 36000. after the Chron. of Almaine.
who fighting against them of Liege, he slew more then forty thousand of
them, burnt their City, Churches and Monasteries. The Priests slew and put to
death their women and children. Fascic. Temp.

The University of Lipse or Lypizen, was set up by the Masters of the
University of Prage, by the aid of Frederic Marquis of Misne, and after Duke
of Saxony.

Sigismond son of Charles the fourth, Sigismond.
King of Hungary and of Boheme, brother of Wencelaus, after the death of
Albert was chosen Emperor of Rome by the consent of all. He performing the
duty of a true Emperor, Sigismond.
was very renowned in wisdom, knowledge, and bounty: He loved virtuous
people and such as were learned, and raised them up unto honor and dignity:
yet he was vanquished by Amurathes Emperor of the Turks, and lost a great
battle, and his Tents and Pauilions. He went by the space of three years
through Europe, to set order, and to root out the great schism so damageable
to all Christendom. Therefore having rejected three Popes, schismatikes and
vnlegitimate, and which held the seat at Barione, Oddo Columnius was made Pope
by the consent of all.

John. 24.
John Pope, 24. of that name, succeeded Alexander, and ruled at Bolongne five
years or thereabouts: he was before called Balthazar Cosse, or Ihea de Coza,
after the Sea of Histories, Cardinal of Eustache.

Some there are, even of such as approve the Popish tyranny, which affirm
that he came unto the Popedom rather by force and violence, then by free and
Canonicke election. For (as Stella says) being at Bolongne rather as a Lord
and Master then as a Legate, when the Fathers were there assembled to choose a
new Pope, he exceedingly threatened them if they elected not such an one as
pleased him. Therefore many were presented whereof he would not approve one.
Then said the Cardinals unto him; Name him of whom you can like. And he
answered; Give me S. Peter's Mantle and Pontifical habit, and I will give them
unto him whom I would to be Pope. When he had the habit he put it upon
himself, and said, it is I that am Pope. But although it displeased the
others which were there present, yet they must needs dissemble it, so furious,
terrible, and environed with soldiers was he.

A Sinode at Rome.
After his election he remained a certain time at Bolongne, then went he to
Rome, it being the chief of his enterprise. There he assembled a Sinode, to
the end to give the Imperial Crown to Sigismond.

History of the Owl.
In the first Session of this Sinode, as the aforesaid John was sitting on an
high seat, after the Mass of the holy Ghost was sung, there came an Owl, who
placing her self upon one of the balkes of the Temple, and looking directly
upon the Pope, saluted him in a strange manner with his fearful song. Such as
were there present began to wonder, looking one at an other: and also casting
their view upon the Pope, they could scant keep themselves from laughing. As
for John he began to be much ashamed, to sweat, and to be sore anguished
and tormented in himself. Finally finding no other mean whereby he might
remedy his so great confusion, after he had given leave to such as were there
assembled, he rose up and retired. There was an other Session after this,
wherein came the like. For this Owl could not be chased away neither for any
cries, no nor yet for stones and staves which were cast at him.

There were then many which by this spectacle were induced to believe that such
spiritual pillars have long time governed the Church of Rome. Nicholas
Clemengis Archdeacon of Baieux, recites this History in his Epistles.

A Council assembled at Constance.
To put end to the aforesaid discords and slanders, they were forced to
assemble a general Council, for which, the place was assigned at Constance.
This was against the Pope John's will, who desired it might be held in such a
place wherein he had more power then the Emperor. See Naucler. and Leonard
Aretin, who were in this time.

In the said Council finally appeared Pope John the 24. of that name, and
arrived at Constance upon S. Simon and Iudes even. Anno. 1414.

Likewise the Emperor Sigismond came thither on Christmas even after midnight,
with the Empress his wife, and many other Princes, Counts, Barons and Nobles,
which were in number about 30940. persons Courtiers, says the Sea of Histories.

With the Pope John arrived four Patriarchs, twenty and nine Cardinals, 47.
Archbishops, and 160. Bishops. See Naucler.

On Christmas day the Pope sung three Masses, one at midnight, one in the
morning, and one at noone: and Sigismond attired Deacon like, sung the Gospel,
Exijt edictum a Cesare, etc. Naucler.

This Council endured three years and seven weeks after some, or about four
years after Naucler. and there was 46. Sessions. See the 2. volume of
Counsels.

Champaine besieged.
The year 1414. the king of France laid siege before Champaine, and it was
taken by composition. He took Soissons, and after laid siege before Arras:
but a peace was made by the Duchess of Holland, sister of the Duke of
Burgongne. The Sea of Hist.

The Friday after Candlemas day, (as they call it) there arrived at the
Council six Cardinals of Pope Gregory's the 12. which approved the Council
by the authority of the said Gregory. Naucler.

The Journey of Blangy.
The year 1415. was the battle of Blangy, betwixt the English and French,
wherein the chief blood of France was shead: and it was commonly called La
male Iournee. The Sea of Histo.

In this time Wencelaus king of Boheme, was required by the Council to send
John Hus, who went thither with the Emperors safe conduct. John Hus and Jerome
of Prage.
There went with him also Jerome of Prage, with one only Clarke. They were
admonished and greatly solicited to desist from their opinions, but they were
constant. They maintained that they were true in their propositions and
reasons, being founded on the truth of the holy Gospel. And contrary, that the
Roman Church had withdrawn it self from the truth and the Apostles doctrine,
etc.

See a more ample declaration of this History, in the first part of the book
of Martyrs.

The death of John Hus and Jerome of Prage.
They were both condemned to be burned. John Hus was first executed about the
fourth day of the month of July, the year 1415. and a good while after,
Jerome of Prage was also burnt in the month of September. They endured death
constantly, and merrily went to the fire glorifying the Lord, even in the
midst of the flame. Their Ashes were cast into the Lake of Constance.

The Bohemians understanding what was done at Constance against their Doctors,
sacked and spoiled all the Couents and Monasteries of the Country, and fired
them: and from that time withdrew themselves from the subjection of the Roman
Pope, as is said.

In the said Council John Wickliffe an English man, Wickliffe burnt after his
death.
was condemned an heretic: and although dead, yet his bones were condemned to
be unburied.

Also Lay People were inhibited to communicate the Sacrament under both kinds.

There was also a Decree that the Council was above the Pope, and not
contrary.

That the Council has full power to correct, judge, and depose the Pope, yea
to ordain of all things, and not the Pope to Judge, correct, or change
Decrees and Statutes of the Council.

John 24. Pope, seeing that in the said Council many crimes were objected
against him, John 24.
fled away in a disguised habit, by the help of the Duke of Austrich,
Frederic, and by the Magunce: although the Emperor did all he could to hinder
it. Naucler. He fled first to Shaffufe, and from thence to Lusemberge, and
after to Fribourge, to take his way toward the Duke of Bourgongne if he could
get thither. Naucler.

The Duke Frederic was cyted in full Council by the Emperor and that many
times: And for that he appeared not, the Emperor absolved his subjects of the
oath of disobedience which they ought unto the Duke. Also he deprived him of
all his riches and goods; and gave his goods to such as could take and occupy
them. This gave many occasion to assail his person and his goods, whereof yet
at this day the Cantons and the Valesans hold many places, as Bade, Melingen,
Prenigarten, Wallestat, Diossenhosen, which they got by force of Arms. Others
occupied other Towns and places. See Naucler.

John was taken and brought to Constance, and there detained prisoner at
Richman.

After they proved against him 40. criminal Articles. He was deposed by all
the Council, the Wednesday of Trinity, 14. and 15. and he himself approved
his deposition. In the second Volume of Councels there is mention made that
more then 54. Articles were proposed and proved against him, to every of which
he answering cried; Ah I have yet committed a greater crime; namely, I have
passed the Alps, and am come into Almaine. After his condemnation he was
given unto the Count Palatin, who kept him three years in Menhen: he was not
suffered to have any Italian with him, no not his Chamberlain: his Guard were
all Almaines, and he spoke unto them by signs only. Naucler.

After the deposition of Pope John, they proceeded also against Pope Gregory
the 12. who was cyted to appear in person, but he would not come there: yet
either by fair means or force, he sent Malateste, Lord of Armenia, with an
ample procuration and power to resign the said right he had in the the Papal
dignity into the hands of the said Council. The which was done, and the said
Gregory 12. was created Legate in the Marquesdome of Ancone, where he died
soon after with mourning in the Town of Racany, which is a Port of the
Adriatike Sea. John le Maeire.

There remains yet the third Antipope, Peter de la Lune. Of him it was that
Gerson often said: We must needs take away this man of the Moon (called Benet
the 13.) who would not obey the Council, but died obstinately in the Kingdom
of Arragon: and commanded his Cardinals on his deathbed, that as soon ar he
was dead they should elect an other, which they did, and elected Clement the 8.
borne at Barselone, wherein they profited little. For the Pope Martin (as shall
be said) had the Popedom whole, and had the obedience of all the Princes in
Christendom: yet the said Clement the eight was after made Bishop of
Maiorque. See John le Maire.

Benet troubled much the Emperor Sigismond, For seeing he would not consent
to any agreement, the said Emperor was constrained in person first to go into
France unto the King, then to the King of England, to make an atonement
betwixt those two Kings. Item, toward the King of Arragon in Spain, with
certain Ambassadors deputies of the said Council, to exhort them to hold the
hand to the union of the Church, and to persuade the said Pope to do as others
did, which he would never be brought unto. Then the Princes of Spain, the
Arragonians, the Cathelains, Armignaes, and the Kings of France and England
seeing his obstinacy, followed the opinion of the Council, and withdrew
themselves from the obedience of Pope Benet the thirteenth, which Sigismond
signified to the said Council. Naucler.

Sigismond returned after to Constance about Candlemas, Benet of his Popedom,
and after declared him an heretic and a schismatike, the 18. day of March.
1417. Naucl.

This Pope John whilst he was placed in the Roman seat, amongst other Ieasts
of a Pope, he did that which follows in diverse Authors. He had stirred
marvelous wars against the king Ladislaus, and assembled a Council at Rome
to find means to drive him from his kingdom. He also commanded to make a
procession with the head of S. John Baptist, for that subtly and cautelously
he had determined to sell it to the Florentins.

He approved the Sect of such as named themselves De la Chemise, or
Frisonniers, The Frisoniers, or de la Chemise.
which lifted themselves up in the territory of Luques: and admitted the
congregation of that new reformation in the Monastery of S. Iustine, commenced
at Padoue by Lewis Barbe.

As Pope Martin the fifth was at Florence, this Pope being delivered from
prison (contrary to the opinion of all, so that all that were present
marvelled thereat) came thither toward him, and after he had kissed his feet,
acknowledged him as his Pope, the successor of S. Peter, and saluted him as if
he had bin some earthly God. Martin moved with affection, certain days after
received him into the number of Cardinals, and he made him Bishop of Tusculu^:
but after certain months he finished his life sad and grievous, the year of
the Lord, 1419. in the same Town of Florence: where he was honorably buried
with great pomp in the Temple of S. John Baptist by Cosme de Medicis, who ever
bore him great love.

Cleues Sauoy.
In the said Council the Counts of Cleues and Sauoy were erected to Duchez by
the Emperor Sigismond.

Things being effected as is said, the Emperors will was that there should now
be an handling to correct the manners of Ecclesiastical persons, and to reform
the Church: but it was said that this could not well be done during the
vacation of the Apostolic seat: wherefore it was concluded to proceed to a
new election of a Pope. Naucler.

Martin. 5.
Martin Pope, fifth of that name, called Otho, a Roman Colonnois, of one same
accord and will, by the consent of all was chosen of 33. Cardinals, at the
Council of Constance: and was called Martin, because he was consecrated on S.
Martins day, he governed fourteen years.

The Emperor Sigismond very joyful that the Cardinals had chosen such a Pope
and so necessary to the Christian commonwealth, entered into the Conclaue,
where without regarding his dignity, falling on his knees before the Pope, in
great reverence he kissed his feet. On the other part the Emperor received
him beningly, and heartily thanked him for the diligence and pains which he
had taken to establish the union of the Church. Naucler.

After that the Emperor had long time traveled to assemble this Council of
Constance, desiring to see the particular reformation of the Church, excused it
that Rome had been long without an head, and the time would not permit to begin
a reformation, for the Council had long endured. Wherefore an other Council
should be assigned at Basil where that should be done, and so the Emperor was
frustrate of his purpose and hope for seeing a reformation in the Church-people.

In the said Council was dispatched Letters and Bulls to Lewis Duke d' Aniou,
to go take possession of the kingdom of Pouille for him and his. Naucler.

Martin Pope returning from Constance to Rome, remained two years at Florence,
and for recompense of his entertainment, he ordained that the Bishop of that
place should be a Metropolitan, and subjected there unto the Church of
Volaterre, Pistorie and Fesides.

The Hussites came up at this time, The Hussites
which rejected all humane traditions, more purely preaching the doctrine of
Jesus Christ, which engendered many contentions betwixt Laymen and Clerks.

A pestilence was at Florence, where died more then 16. Chron. Eusebius.

Mahomet Emperor of the Turks, died after he had reigned

Wencelaus died taken with fear, because of a tumult raised Prage: he fell
into an Apoplexy, and from that evil into a palsy, which within 18. days
took away his life, the year of his reign 20.

Charles 7. of that name, king of France, the only son of Charles the 6.
succeeded his father. He was assailed by the English and Bourgonions, and
having lost as it were all the Country of the Frontiers, took his recourse
into Bourges, and there remained a certain time, and therefore the enemies in
mockery called him king of Bourges. Henry son of Charles his sister, called
himself in his titles, king of England and of France: and at Paris was crowned
king of France.

A pucell or maid plaide the part of a man at Arms, Jane the Pucelle.
and gave succors to Orleance which was besieged, constrained the enemies to
leave the siege: conducted the king Charles to be crowned at Rheims, passing
through the places which the enemies held. The English after were driven from
Paris.

The Taberlites, Adamites, Orebites, heretics in Boheme were in this time. See
Naucler.

Sigismond with the Pope and Almaine, banded themselves together to make war
against the Bohemian Hussites, but they got nothing, but were feign to leave
them. Naucler.

John Gerson maintained in this time that we must rather believe the sentence
and opinion of one Doctor approved and confirmed by the Canonicke Scripture,
then the Popes declaration. Item that we ought rather to believe a Doctor well
learned in the holy scriptures and alleging a Catholic authority, then a
general Council.

A Council began at Pauie, but the pestilence became so Pise the year 1424.
and from thence remitted to Basil seven years after in the year of Christ,
1430.

Millaine called Carmagnolle, a valiant man, but a Traitor: who stole from the
said Duke the strong Town of Brixe, Ambition of the Venetians
and the year following the Town of Pergamum and their appendances: which
places, King Lewis the 12. recovered, the year 1509. after that the Venetians
against all right and reason had avowed themselves to be right possessors
thereof the space of 80. years. John le Maire.

The Pucelle of Orleans.
The Pucelle or Maid above mentioned, called of Orleance, borne in Lorraine,
called Jane, did things incredible in warlike affairs for the King of France
his succor. Finally having found means by force and subtlety to enter into
the Town of Campaigne, (which was besieged) making sallies upon the enemies,
was taken by John de Luxembourge, and from thence sent to Roane to the Duke of
Summer set where having been kept certain time, she was burnt. She was
accused to be an Enchauntresse. See the Annals of France.

Martin of the age of 63. years, died at Rome of an Apoplexy. He commanded
before his death to assemble the Council of Basil: For in the Council of
Constance, it was concluded that from 10. years to 10. years, there should be
held an Universal Council of the Church; which was not observed.

Eugenius. 4.
Eugenius 4. of that name, borne at Venice, of the order of Celestines, called
before Gabriel Condelmer, the son of one called Angelus, being Cardinal,
Priest of the title of S. Clement, obtained the Papal dignity in the place
called Minerua, (as Platina says) by this means. When Gregory the 12. who
was of the house of Corrariens, and Venetians by Nation, was chosen Pope, being
before Canon of the Celestines of the congregation of S. George in the place of
Alga, he carried with him this Gabriel, who was of his profession,

Henry King of England of the age of 12. years was crowned in the great Temple
of Paris as King, by the Cardinal of Winchester.

Sigismond went to Rome and was Crowned Emperor by the Pope Eugenius, after he
had reigned 23. years. Chron. Eusebius.

At the instance of certain reporters and flatrerers which said that Martin
his predecessor had been very curious to gather great treasures: some brought
this man into such a rage, that he caused his Vice-chauncellor, with all his
familiars and Nephews to be taken and dispoiled of their goods.

After this, the Romans applying themselves to recover their ancient
liberty, crying let us go to Arms, and having driven away all Eugenius his
officers, and taken Francis Condelmer, his Nephewe or bastard, and his
Chamberlain, they created new Magistrates, which they called Governors, and
had power of death and life over all.

Eugenius amongst so many troubles being uncertain what to do, began to think
to fly away: Eugenius flies away.
having then changed his habit and taking a Monks frocke only with a Monk
called Arsennius, put himself in a fishers boat; and without that they which
kept him perceived he retired to Ostia by the River Tiber, Then when certain
of the Romans knew that he was fled, they assailed him as well as they could
with stones and shot. From thence he went unto Pise, and after unto Florence in
certain Galleys which purposely had been prepared for that purpose. Where
making his residence certain years he made sixteen Cardinals, amongst
which there were were two Grecians, namely, Bessaron, who was a cunning man in
Philosophy, borne at Nice, and Isidorus of Russia, and Guillam de Stouteuile,
Archbishop of Rouan.

The Coucell of Basil.
After the Council of Constance, there was an other held at Basil, which
Cardinal Julian began by the Popes commandment: being forced so to do by
the Emperor Sigismond: And because then Sigismond was gone into Italy (as is
said) to receive the Imperial Crown, the Italians sought to persuade the Pope
to break the Council of Basil and bring it unto them, that the Towns of
Italy might be enriched with the great sums of money that should be brought
thither: and that the Country should not be subjected unto strangers:
alleging for a show, that Sigismond came for no other cause but to make
himself Lord over Italy.

Sigismond after his Coronation returned unto Basil.

This Council endured ten years, and there the Cardinal Julian called of
S. Angelo, was President.

The Bohemians being called unto the said Council with sure access and safe
conduct, proposed 4. Articles wherein they differed from the Roman Church.

Articles proposed by the Bohemians.
1 The Communion given to the people under both kinds. 2 That civil dominion
is forbidden by divine right to the people of the Church. 3 The preaching of
the people ought to be free. 4 That public sins ought not to be borne, if it
were but to shun a greater mischief.


In the said Council the Bohemians were permitted to communicate under both
kinds, as a thing lawful by the authority of Christ, and profitable and
healthful to all such as duly received it. Vadian and Naucler.

In the time of this Council of Basil was Papistrie set up in Bohemia by the
great means and industry of Sigismond: but incontinently after they came to
that they did before. Naucler.

About the year of Christ, 1436. (as says Naucler,) or 1438. after others,
Eugenius would needs transport the Council of Basil to Ferrara, A Council at
Ferrara.
for his commodity; and after unto Florence: his excuses were because the
Greek Church would rather agree there with the Roman Church then at Basil:
notwithstanding the Council proceeded against him, and he was cyted three
times, but would not appear. There was against him proposed that he was a
favorer and a lover of wars, a persecutor of Church men, and a man of blood,
and scandalous. Naucler.

In the Counccell of Ferrara were presented the Pope Eugenius, the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and the Emperor of the same place, John Paleologus, with his
brother and five hundredth men: so was the said Church of Greece reunited with
the Roman Church. The said Council was transported from Ferrara to Florence,
the year 1439. The Grecians accorded the holy Ghost to proceed as well from
the Son as the Father. They agreed also to Purgatory: and the Roman Pope to
be the primate of the Catholic Church: which they had never done before now,
but ever were of contrary opinions. But as soon as they were come to their
Country again, at the persuasion of Marcus Bishop of Ephesus, they again
denied the two last Articles, Plat. Vola. and Naucler.

It is strange that the Grecians which have been so slow to acknowledge and
confess so true a doctrine of the holy Ghost, are now so quick and light to
accord so frivolous and false a thing: that is, to receive and believe against
all holy scripture that there is a Purgatory, and Roman Pope to be Primate of
the Catholic and Universal Church: whereunto the first general Council had
openly resisted in the time of Constantine the great.

In the said Council of Florence, the Armenians and Indians were also brought
into the union of the Roman Church, and promised to keep and maintain the
Sacrament of Confirmation. Naucler.

This Pope Eugenius confirmed Annates upon all Benefices. Annates.


He Canonized S. Nicholas Tolentin, of the order of the Hermits of S.
Augustine.

Bessarion Cardinal flourished, and his house at Rome was open to every man of
knowledge like a College. Vadian.

Sigismond of the age of 70, years died, and was buried in Hungary, in the
city called Albe. His wife Barbara was without all religion and without God,
insatiable in all paliardize and whoredom. She mocked her damzels because
they fasted and prayed, Albert. 5.
saying; they must live iocondly and merrily, and take all their pleasures
during this life: for after death the soul perishes with the body.

The Council of Basil continued still, and proceeded against Eugenius the
fourth: who after many times cyting and not appearing, was publicly deposed by
the authority of the Council, the tenth of July. Eugenius moved herewith,
incited the Dolphin of France, The end of ^he Council of Basil.
(who after was called king Lewis the 11.) to lead a great Army in to the
Country of Ferrara and Alsarce, and to come to Basil. Wherefore the said
Council brake up, and hereupon came many mischiefs. See Naucler.

Albert the fifth of that name, Duke of Austrich, and second king of the Romans
of that name, son of Albert the fourth, Duke of Austrich, was scant 10.
years old when his father died of poison, fighting against Iosse Marquess of
Morauia: but being yer under Tutors which were his uncles, there was great
strife betwixt them for his tutelage. Therefore Vienna and all the Country of
Austrich endured great calamities till Albert came to age and was dispatched of
his tutelage and planted a peace in Austrich, which was before full of thieves
and of Intestine wars. After the year 1422. he espowsed Elizabeth the
daughter of Sigismond, and had with her in marriage the noble Towns of Maruia.
Hungary and Boheme came both to one.
But after the death of Sigismond* he was chosen king of Hungaria by the
consent of all the principal of the Country, and Crowned the year of grace
1438. After this he was also made king of Bohemia: and that came, because there
was a great alliance betwixt the Kings of Boheme and the Dukes of Austrich:
whereby they had ordained betwixt them, that whenever one of the houses
remained without heire-male of the other, they should create a king. He was
also chosen king of the Romans by the common accord of all the Princes
Electors.

The year 1459. the 17. day of November, in the Council of Basil, after the
deposition of Eupenius, the Cardinals elected Amedeus of Aim, 23 Schism Aim
Duke of Sauoy.
Duke of Sauoy, and called him Felix the fifth: so came into the Church the 23.
schism and division, which endured the space of sixteen years.

Some followed Eugenius, others Felix: some said they were newters, and so
obeyed neither one nor the other. The Kings of France, England, Spain, and
Scotland, obeyed the Pope Eugenius: For although he was deposed, yet held he
good during his life.

This Council of Basil assembled with great authority, was notwithstanding
dissipated and broken by one only Pope. That of Constance deposed three, and
ordained the fourth. This could not bring about to depose one. Fasci. Temp.

In the Council of Basil it was forbidden that secular Princes, Counselors,
and Communalties upon pain of excommunication, should not be so hardy to
greet and submit the Churchmen with tallies and common collection. Fasci. temp.

Augustine of Rome was condemned an heretic in the said Council: The
conception of the Virgin Marie.
and there was confirmed the Conception of the Virgin Marie to be kept as a
solemn Feast: But to the contrary see Epiphanius in his 3 Book, and 12.
Tome, 68. and 69. heresy. See also S. Bernard in the Epist. 154. to the Canons
of Lions.

The said Council then confirmed that the Virgin Marie was conceived without
original sin: it also confirmed her visitation.

In this time was a Council held of the French Church at Bourges in Berry, The
Pragmatike sanction.
and there was published the pragmatike sanction (which is all the marrow and
substance of the Canons of the Council of Basil) to be expressly observed for
ever. John le Maire.

The Duke Aim of Sauoy after the death of his wife Margarite of Bourgongne,
had left his Ducall estate and withdrew himself into an hermitage pleasant and
delightful, called Ripaille,, upon the Lake of Lansanne, which he had caused
to be sumptuously builded, and so left the government of his signiories to his
eldest son Lewis, father of Duke Phillebert of Sauoy. Being then in his said
place of Ripaille, the said Duke Anne with ten knights all hermits, wearing
great beardes and simple clothing, and writhen staves full of knottes, in
great renown of sanctetie of life, Albert.
was by the said Council elected to be Pope, (as is said) the 17. of November,
the year 1439. and the 17. day of December the election was denounced unto
him, and he went unto Basil, and was there solemnly crowned in the presence of
two of his eldest sons. Before this ceremony his Beard was taken from him,
and in a small time he learned the Roman office. He created some Cardinals of
great estimation and virtue. John le Maire.

The Emperor being called to go into Hungary, sound himself greatly
tormented in the month of August with an intolerable heat, which he thought
to have taken away by cold viands, which brought to him a flux of the belley,
even to blood, The death of Albert.
whereof he died, the year 1439. nigh Strigoma, after he had been Emperor
almost two years, He left two daughters, and his wife with child, who soon
after brought forth Ladislaus.

Frederic Emp.
Frederic Duke of Austrich, after Albert, was Emperor of Rome. He loved peace
and rest, restrained and brideled easily them of Austrich which stirred strifes
and commotions. So extinguished he the war already commenced by Matthias
king of Hungary by agreement with him.

Likewise this Frederic making war against the Flemmings to have his son
Maximilian (whom they detained prisoner) appeased and contented them by the
punishment of some, and so taking and receiving his son Maximilian, he gently
buried all occasion of war commenced. He was crowned at Rome, and his wife
Helenor, which he espoused at Naples, in king Alphonsus his Court. At his
departure from Rome, he went to Naples unto the said king Alphonsus, his wives
nigh kinsman: of whom, and after of the Venetians, he was entertained with
great honor and provision: and so ever after he loved the Venetians.

He would often say to his wife (unto whom her Physician counseled to drink
wine to avoid barrenness) that he could better love a sober barren woman, then
one fruitful given to wine. Naucler. Chron. of the Emper.

Printing invented. Frederic. 3.

The noble Art of printing with Letters made in Brass, Printing Invented, in
what time and by whom.
was found out in this time: a very divine invention, worthy of memory and
admiration: yet were it more admirable if it were not so much profaned. The
invention was Germanike, and very strange at the beginning, and of great
profit: John Gutemberge Knight, was the first Author of this goodly invention.
The thing was first assayed at Magunce 16. years before it was divulged in
Italy. One says that John Faustins, called Gutman, invented it, with Peter
Sheffer. Eun. 10.

Dionysius Charthusianus in this time writ upon Daniel.

The Pope Engenius retiring from Florence, came and dwelt at Rome, where he was
welcomed because he diminished their tallies and subsidies. Naucler.

The Swisses (except Berne and Soleure) made war against some of their Allies
called in Latin Duricenses, because contrary to their alliances, they joined
with the Dukes of Austrich: and the said Swisses obtained victory against
their said Allies. Naucler.

Four thousand Swisses were put to death against the Army of the aforesaid
Dolphin, which was of 25. or 30. thousand horsemen, besides footmen, and was
overthrown nigh the Hospital of S. James by Basil.

The said Dolphin having wasted the Country of Alsarce, returned with great
loss of his Camp.

The year of Christ 1444. on S. Martins even the Turk Amurathes gave battle
against the King of Polone, Vladislaus and the Cardinal Julian, who was
president in the Council of Basil.

The said Julian, the Apostolic Legatein Hungary, fled after the battle was
lost: but as he let his horse drink he was perceived and known of the
Hungarians, who slew him, thinking he had had much money about him: and having
dispoyled him, they left him naked. See Naucler.

This Legate upon the exhortation of Pope Eugenius, councelled the King
Vladislaus to break his faith with the Turk and to assail him in his
Country: Note how many evils faith-breaking brings.
the which he did with 30000. combatants; all which unluckily perished in that
war: whereof rose infinite mischiefs, and carnal and mortal wars
throughout all Christendom. The King fell from his horse, and had his head cut
off, which was carried on a Lance throughout all the Country. The blood of
many Princes and Prelates was shead. Two Bishops were cause that the Chrstians
lost the victory. For being willing to pursue the Turk, they kept not the
places which they had in charge. In so much as the Turks as it were
vanquished, returned again into battle, and entered into the Christians Army.

John Huniades fled from the battle with a great number of people, to the
number of ten thousand Hungarians, Francis Caldemonio a Cardinal of Venice,
Nephewe unto Pope Eugenius the fourth, being Legate and chief of the Army by
sea, ordained to keep the straight of the Arm S. George, that the Turks
should not pass that way to go to the succors of their people: and although
he had a great and puissant Army of the Christians, yet upon treason and
cowardice he let pass through that straight an hundredth thousand Turks, with
Amurathes their Prince: and which is worse, he used not diligence to advertise
the Christian Army. A Carack of Genoua led their way: whose patron was of
the house Grimald, and made the said passage upon a covenant with the said
Turks; namely to have a Ducat for every head. The said Grimald of Genoua
Patron, went from thence into Flaunders to employ his hundredth and 60. thousand
Ducats which he had gotten: but he was consumed before he came there with a
Sea-tempest.

Constantine Paleologue, the brother of John Paleologue, was the last Christian
Emperor of Constantinople, and reigned eight years.

Eugenius the 4. died the 20. day of the month of April of the age of 64.
years: he did many good things to the Town of Rome, and in diverse places
caused it to be repaired and paued.

Amurathes the second of that name being Victor, did not pursue the Christians
after the discomfiture, nor showed himself merry as his custom was: being
demanded why he was so sad, not rejoicing at his victory, He answered; I
would not always thus overcome. Amurathes makes himself a Monk.
Soon after he dismissed himself of his dominion and principality, and left
the government to his son Mahomet, he after made himself a Monk of the
straightest religion that was amongst them. See Nauclerus.

Nicholas Pope, fifth of that name, borne at Genes, Nicholas. 5.
ruled at Rome eight years: before he was called Thomas de Sirsone,
Sarresane, in the signiorie of Lucan: Cardinal of Bolongne, son of a
Physician. Suppl. Chron.

This Pope in less then a year was made Bishop of Bolongne, Cardinal and
Pope of Rome: he was elected the sixth of March, and crowned the ninteenth of
the said month, the year 1447. yet ceased not the schism of the Church. For
still lived Felix the fifth, of Sauoy, who accounted himself Pope.

Nicholas was esteemed a great Theologian.

In this time writ Laurentius Valla, Blundus the Historiographer: Trapezontius
the Rhetoritian, and Theodorus Gaza.

The King of France recovered Normandy which the English men held. And
recovered the year after the Country of Aquitaine. The Sea of Hist.

The year of Christ 1448. after some 1449. Felix the 5. Nicholas the true
successor of S. Peter: so was obedience given unto Nicholas, and by that means
ceased the 23. schism. Then brake off the Council of Basil, which for that
purpose was assembled. This treaty and composition of that Session was made as
Lausanna by many Princes of France, Almaine, England, and Sauoy, for the union
of the Church. And this was at the solicitation of the Emperor Frederic, and
the request of Pope Nicholas.

The King Charles the 7. to bring a peace in Christendom, caused a Council to
be assembled of the French Nation at Lions to appease all. John le Maire.

This year brought the first invention of the Francarchers in France.

Nicholas Pope, sent the Cardinals Hatte to the said Felix, appointed him
Legate a Latere, in Saouy, in France, and in Almaine.

This Felix, or Aim de Saouy, was of little stature, a devout man, founder of
the Monastery of Rapaille, under the rule of S. Augustine: wherein he was
sumptuously buried. Fasci. Temp.

Whatsoever he said Felix had done and decreed during his Papaltie, was
ratified and held for good. John le Maire.

A Iubile.
The year of Christ 1450. the Pope Nicholas held a Iubile at Rome, whereat there
was such a multitude of people, that many were stifled as they entered and came
out of Churches: There perished more then 200. persons besides an infinite
number which fell into the flood as they passed over the Bridge of S. Angelo.

This is the reward that such deserve that leaving the truth, follow the
invention of Antichrist.

Amurathes Turk second of that name died, after he had reigned 31. years,
whom Mahomet the second succeeded. This Amurathes took the Lord of Seruia, and
Mesia, and occupied Sophia, etc. Also he took captives three of his children:
whereof two were males, and put out their eyes with an hot Iron, and the
third a maid, he took to wife. He made war upon the Venetians and occupied
Thessalonica, which at this day is called Salonike.

Naucler. or of March after some, Mahomet the second, surnamed the great, son
of Amurathes, by the cowardice of John Justinian of Genoua, took
Constantinople, having with him 300000. fighters. The siege endured 60. days.
Michael Paleologus a Grecian, took it of the French by the help of the
Geneuois. The said Ionh Justinian was made king by the space of three days, as
the Turk had promised him: but the fourth day he was be headed says Fasci.
Temp. The Patriarch and all the Christians were slain without any mercy. They
had sent to demand help of the Pope and the Christians, but no help came.

It is impossible to recyte the horrible cruelty which was there exercised.
Constantine the last Emperor of the last Greeks, as he fled was encountered
and murdered nigh the gates. His head was stuck on the top of a Lance and
carried about the Town. Mahomet also caused to be erected an Image of a
Crucifixe, and did write upon it; This is the God of the Christians: and
commanded to cast dung and other filth against the said Image. The Emperors
wife, with her daughters and the most noblest Damzels there, were brought
before Mahomet, and after he had done them all the shame he could, yea the
greatest villainies of the world, he caused their bodies to be cut in pieces.

Such examples of so extreme cruelty ought to induce us to abhor so
barbarous an enemy: and to detest the Papists Idolatry, which by the
adoration of Images are the cause wherefore the passion of Jesus Christ is thus
slaundered.

The King of France recovered all the Towns which the English held in France,
except the Town of Callais. The Sea of Histories.

In this time flourished Nicholas Perotus, Ioannes de turre oremata, a Iacobin,
Doctor in Theology, Bishop and Cardinal.

Nicholas Canonized S. Bernardine of Senes, a Friar. Chron. Eusebius,

He was a lover of Letters and learned people, and greatly loved such: Books
were also presented and dedicated unto him on all sides. For he stirred such
as were learned to translate Greek Authors into Latin. Naucler.

He covered with lead S. Marie the round, auntiently called the Pantheon: he
repaired the Church of S. Stephen: he also builded the Church of S. Theodore,
repaired the bridge Miluius, paued many streets: he gave to many Churches
vessels of gold and silver, and many Crosses adorned with precious stones.

The year 1455. the 25. of March, Nicholas the 5. died of a Fever, having
been sore troubled with the taking of Constantinople. Naucler. The Sea of Hist.
says he was poisoned; as was found by effect when he was opened.

Scanderbeg so called of the Turks when he was circumcised, (for before he was
called George Castriot) was given in Hostage by his father king of Epire and
Albania, of old called Macedonia, to Amurathes the 7. Emperor of the Turks,
who after he had in many deeds of Arms experimented his prowess, made him
chief of the Army against the Hungarians: unto whom he yielded himself, and
moreover constrained Bassa the Turks Secretary to write Letters to the
Governors of the Town and Country of Croya: whereby was sent in the name of
Amurathes, that the said Town should be delivered into his government. So
subtly recovered he his Country about this time. But Amurathes fell upon
Egypt with a Croya many months, he died of grief.

Calixtus. 3.
Calixtus or Calistus, the third of that name, a Spaniard, called Alphonsus
Borgia, being already of a great age, by the consent of the Cardinals
succeeded Nicholas: a man only learned in the Law or right Canon.

Some say he was first, Secretary to Alphonsus King of Arragon, and was made
Bishop of Valence by Martine the fifth, and under Eugenius was made Cardinal of
the title of four Crowns, as commonly they say at Rome (de Sant quatre) As
soon as he had received the Papal dignity, he published war against the
Turks, according to a vow he had made.

Romans 12.18.
But by the duty of his office he ought rather to have sought peace with all
men: Painims should be taught and not assailed by war.

The Turk Mahomet went into Hungary against Alba and was vanquished, and more
then forty thousand of his people perished. Naucler.

John Huniades a virtuous Captain at the journey of Albe, died shortly after
the said victory.

But the Pope the better to execute so courageous an enterprise, sent preachers
like himself in capacity and covetousness, with Bulls and Indulgences: That
is, Apoc. 9.3.
certain begging Friars garnished with power like the Scorpions of the earth.
The principal of them all were John Capistran and Robert de la lice, of the
order of Friars and hypocrites: which every man received with great admiration.
These men knowing the Popes subtlety, and having no certain hope that they
could gather much money out of the Iubile, did all their business and
trafficked by the the means of feigned prayers full of hypocrisy, of
Letanies, of Images, of crosses, of songs, of ringing of Bells, and of their
pastie God: to the end they might fill all the purses, budgets, and sacks of
their master.

Calixtus ceased not by his Ambassadors to exhort other Christian Princes to
enterprise that war as a thing very necessary and holy. Therefore sent he to
all Priests that as they sung Mass they should pronounce certain Prayers or
Collects against Painimes and Turks.

He also commanded that at noonetime a Bell should toll as there was done at
night to salute the Virgin Marie: Wherefore a Bell was knolled at noone.
to the end that (as Stella the good Popish Theologian says) they which
ordinarily fight against the Turks, might be helped by that prayer. This is
also the reason says he wherefore he ordained the Feast and service of the
transfiguration of Jesus Christ: and commanded it should be celebrated with
like pardons and Indulgences, as that of the Feast of the body of Jesus Christ.
This was for the victory which the Christians had against the Turks the sixth
day of August before Albe in Hungary.

He sent also toward the Armenians and Persians to solicit them to do the
like against the Turks, and caused certain peasants to be hanged and
strangled which mocked and derided these toys and follies.

He placed in the Calendar of Saints one Vincent borne at Valence, of the
Iacobin order, Albert of Dropan Carmelite, and Edmond of Canterbury English.
He ordained also that no person should appeal from the Pope to the Council,
and yet had done more if he had lived longer.

He gave too much license to his followers, and made one Roderic Borgia his
Vice-chauncellor, who after was Pope, called Alexander the sixth. He published
(says Valerius) Letters of pardons which he sold then for five Ducats a
piece, but now they are better cheap) by the means whereof he left unto his
successor an hundredth and 15. thousand Ducates.

John Capistran Robert de la Lice.
John Capistran and Robert de la Lice, above named (as is said) were sent by
the Pope into diverse Countries to preach the yielding of obedience to the
Roman Church, to give some color and appearance to their filthy fooleries,
prohibited pastimes, and other civil exercises, as bankets, daunces, and other
like things. Briefly they acquired such great brute and fame by their
hypocrisy, that afterward they were adored as Saints of many, although they
knew not what the doctrine of Jesus Christ meant.

The world meriteth to have such Doctors since they make so small account of
the truth.

Calixtus died in July the year 1458. being very old, and left great riches.

Frauncis Foscarius was Duke of the Venetians about 36. years, who having
conquered (or rather usurped) many lands and dominions in Italy unto the
profit of the Seignorie of Venice, in the end of his days for a repentance the
Venetians deposed him of his Ducall dignity, without alleging any other
reason but his age and impotencie: Ingratitude of the Venetians.
And constrained him to leave his Ducall Palace, to see a new successor enter
into it, whereof incontinently after he died. After his death his son was
banished, and after called again and cruelly tortured, and again sent into
perpetual exile: although they found nothing in him of that which they laid
to his charge. Chron. Eusebius.

Pius. 2.
Pius the second of that name, a Tuscan by Nation, borne in the Town of
Sienes: whose father was Siluius, and his mother Victoria, before called Eneas
Picolominius: although long time he had been spotted with the vice of ambition,
yet finally he came unto the Popedom.

This poor young boy became so great (as all Historiographers say which have
written of the Popes lives) that he was held one of the learned Popes and
much esteemed, for that he had written many things worthily.

In the Council of Basil he was the Popes Secretary, and by Orasons and
Epistles he purged the authority of Eugenius, a little after that, he was
crowned a Poet Laureate, by the Emperor Frederic the third of that name, and
being called from his Court, he came unto greater estates, and was both his
Secretary and Counceller.

He was sent Ambassador hither and thither unto many Princes, and after
ordained Bishop of Trieste by Nicholas the fifth, and consequently Bishop of
Siennes, and after placed in the number of Cardinals by Calixt.

Finally coming unto the Papaltie, following the examples of his predecessors,
he published a voyage against the Turks: but being prevented by death he
could not put it in execution.

Some there are (as says John Functius) which have left in writing, that he
sought to draw to himself a great sum of silver from the Almaines, under a
color to make war upon the Turks, because he knew well the riches of the
Almaines as he that had long conuersed with them, and that to the end he might
dispend them in pompes and papal dissolutions, and to enrich his parents and
friends.

Under the shadow of warring against the Turks, Popes get store of silver.

Lewis 11. son of Charles the 7. the 54. king of France, Bourgongne, and
hearing news of his fathers death, came straight into France and was crowned.

The aforesaid Pope though before he was Pope, he had with singular diligence
written two books of the acts of the the Council of Basil, yet as soon as
he was made Pope, he sought to suppress it. For as he was very ambitious in
all he did when he was Pope, so he traveled in nothing to lessen the Majesty
or rather Papal tyranny, but rather to increase it what he could. Which to
maintain (says Stella the Venetian) it is found that he spared neither Kings
nor Princes, people nor tyrants: he I say which was more cruel then any
tyrant.

He was a great enemy of Lewis king of France, the eleventh of that name:
because he would not consent to the abolition of the pragmatike sanction in his
kingdom, because it derogated from the liberty of the Clergy. He was angry
against Borge de Est Duke de Mutine, and made war upon him because he
favored Sigismond Malateste, and the French men against Ferdinand. For upon
his own authority and by force of Arms he put in possession of the Kingdom
of Naples, Alphonsus Bastard of the King Ferdinand, to the great disadvantage
of John de Aniou son of King Rene.

He pursued with cruel and sharp persecutions Sigismond Duke of Austrich,
because he had chastised Nicholas de Cuse a Cardinal, for his rapacitie and
covetousness full of arrogancy.

He shead out also the venom of his malediction against Gregory de Hambourge,
a man very learned in the Civil law, as it had been a chased viper (as
Wolfgang de Winsebourge, a Divine of Basil says) and so sharply pursued him
with the Letters of his thundering excommunications, that he was constrained to
remove into Boheme.

He furiously cast out of his feat Diether d' Eisenbourge, Archbishop of
Magunce because (as he said) he had an evil opinion of the Roman Church, and
placed an other in his place. Besides, he deprived the Archbishop of Beneuent
of his Archbishoppricke: because against his will he took in hand new
enterprises.

He caused a day to be given to George king of Boheme, because he favored such
as held the doctrine of John Hus, and that upon the pain to loose his kingdom.

He for his particular profit deposed many Bishops, and added 12. new
Cardinals to such as were alredie before.

He celebrated a Council at Mantua, and abbrogated in France the pragmatike
sanction, The pragmatike sanction abbrogated. Abbreuiators created.
as a pernicious practice against the Roman Church.

He was the first that created the Abbreuiators of the Chauncelerie, and
reducted them into their order. He brought under his government many Towns of
Campania, called at this day Terra de lauoro: the Land of Labor, and
maruellously increased the Churches revenues and rents.

He never granted any thing either to kings or to people for any fear he had
(as his fierce and arrogant Papists say) but he sharply persecuted the enemies
of the Clergy, as if they had been public enemies. As for his friends, he
showed himself very gentle toward them, and greatly helped them.

At the solicitation of Soreth, Katherine de Sienes Canonized.
he Canonized one called Angelus, borne at Jerusalem: and placed in the number
of Virgins Katherine de Sienes, a Iacobin.

Because he was a very curious builder (as the Papists give him that praise) he
repaired the Courts of Vatican: and had sooner achieved a Castle in the Town
of Tiuoli then was thought he had begun. At Sienes where he was borne, he
builded a goodly Porch of wrought stone. At a place called Corfinium he founded
a City, and named it Pientia of his own name, and builded there a vaulted
Temple very sumptuous, and a pleasant house: and besides this, a Sepulcher of
Marble for his father and mothers bones. See what Platina says thereof.

The Kingdom of Bosne.
The kingdom of Bosne stretched even unto Macedonia: It was made tributary
unto the kingdom of Hungary, the year 1415. After it reuoulted from the
kings obedience and made alliance with the Turk. Sigismond King of Hungary
sought to chase away such as occupied it: but the Turk was the stronger, and
retained the Country of Bosne. After the Hungarians got together a great
Army, came into Bosne, and slew the king Itrarch who was a Turk, and
subjected to their power all that Region, and constituted a king there: namely
the first Christian which had yet been.

There was a Prince in Ruscia called George Despot, who had given his daughter
in marriage to the Turk. He had three sons, Stephen, George, and Lazarus.
Lazarus succeeded his father and had but one daughter, who espowsed Stephen
king of Bosne: who soon after his enjoying the principality of Ruscia,
governed with a Turkish spirit, full of great impiety and wicked religion. But
it happened that about the year of salvation 1463. as he had a great land in
the higher Misia, Mahomet Ruscia and Bosne with the greatest part of Seruia,
fell into the Turks obedience.

As the Pope Pius was at Ancone, upon his departing to go to war, he was
surprised with a slow fever, the year of Rome, and buried in the Church of S
Peter. One vice of Ambition says Volaterane, contaminated and defiled all the
virtues of this person: as he that always greatly desired great estates and
honors. And for that cause endured he great trauells, and always maintained
himself in the favor of Princes.

The war called The public Weal, was begun the year 1464. by the
conspiration of the Princes of France, meaning to reform the kings affairs:
who took offices and dignities from such as had long time faithfully exercised
them: He greatly also vexed the Nobles and puissant of the Kingdom by
demands. The Duke of Britain and the Count de Chaelois, the Duke of
Bourgongnes son, persuaded Charles Duke of Berry to be the chief Captain
and Prince of that war and conspiration: which Phillip de Commines handles
at large and truly: therefore see his history.

The aforesaid Pope Pius, as Platina and Sabellicus recyte, amongst other
sentences which he used commonly, left this in writing. With great reason was
marriage taken from Priests: but yet there is a far greater reason wherefore
it ought to have been yielded them again. A sentence of Pope PIus against
singlenes of Priests.
He inserted also this sentence in his second book of Counsels. It may be
(says he) that it were not the worse if a many Priests were married: For many
being married Priests should be saved, which in their barren singleness are
damned. He himself would needs abolish certain Monasteries of S. Brigide and
S. Claire: commanding them out that they might burn no more, and under the
habit of religion they should not hide whoredom, says Caelius Secundus.

About this time there was no small debate in Italy betwixt the Friars Minors
and such as they called Bullists, which of those should guard and govern the
Nuns there: As for the discords which were betwixt the Obseruantins and the
Non Obseruantins, Baptista Mantuanus accords them in his Bucoliques,, in the
tenth Eglogue.

Paul the second of that name, borne at Venice, Paul. 2.
the son of Nicholas and of Polixene, called before Peter Barbe or Balbe,
Eugenius the fourth, on his sisters side, being Cardinal of the title of S.
Mark, was chosen in the place of Pius, and occupied the seat of Antichrist.

Before he was made Bope, he meant to traffic as a Merchant: but hearing that
his Uncle Gabriel was chosen Pope, he gave his mind unto Letters: and coming
to Rome, he was first created Archdeacon of Bolongne after that Bishop of
Ceruio, consequently Cardinal, and as has been said, Ambition.
finally Pope and Roman Antichrist. It was he who first vaunted that he held
enclosed in his breast all Laws both divine and humane.

He was a goodly man and of fair representation, but of a proud spirit and
very covetous to gather riches, and yet more to distribute Ecclesiastical
Benefices for his own gain and profit.

As for his Popish apparel (says Platina) you need not doubt but he
surpassed all his predecessors, and especially in his Mitre, which he
maruellously enriched, buying from all Countries, Diamonds, Saphyrs, Emeraudes,
Chrysolites, Iaspers, Pearls, and other precious stones of great price. Thus
adorned and shining he would come publicly abroad with an exceeding
magnificall appearance. A sumptuous Mitre.
Then would he be seen and adored of each one: and for that cause would he
often stay Pilgrims in the town, deferring the accustomed day to show the
Snaire, that at once he might be seen of more people.

And that he alone might not differ from others in habits and garments, he
commanded by public Edict upon grievous pains that none should wear read
Bonnets but Cardinals: Red hats.
unto which also the first year of his Popedom he gave them a cloth of the
same color for footcloathes for their Horses and Mules when they rode. Platina.

He fought to increase his majesty as well by authority as by force of Arms.
Ariminum wasted by the Pope.
All the time of his reign he stirred great wars in Italy by his devices
and practices. He assailed the Town of Ariminum and others, and miserably
destroyed and wasted not only the suburbs, but even the Towns themselves
with Gunshot.

He greatly hated the decrees and acts of Pius his predecessor: and deprived
also of their goods and authorities such as (for their knowledge and doctrine)
he should have sought through the world and have drawn them unto him by gifts
and promises.

He declared such to be heretics as from thenceforth should but only name an
Academie or University, either in sport or earnest. He was of an heavy and
gross spirit, and therefore loved neither Letters nor virtues. The Pope an
enemy of Letters.
As one that was given altogether unto ambition, dissolution, and
voluptuousness. He employed all the day either in gourmandizing or waighing
pieces of Gold, or in regarding and contemplating the ancient money, precious
stones, or Images and Portraitures.

Gregory King of Boheme was condemned an heretic and deprived of his
kingdom: and after the Pope by his Legate solicited the Princes of Almaine
and the king of Pannonia to invade the kingdom of Boheme, which they did: and
the said George was cast out of one part thereof. Chron. Eusebius.

In the month of September a Legate arrived in France to break the pragmatike
Sanction: unto whom John de S. Romain the Kings Proctor general would not
consent for any menaces of the said Legate: but said he would rather loose
both his office and goods before he would yield to do any thing so greatly to
the prejudice of the Realm and Commonwealth.

The Town of Liege was put to fire and sword by the Duke of Bourgongne because
they had put their Bishop in prison, who was his Nephewe by his sister, as is
reported by the Chronicle of Eusebius. Others say he was his brother by his
wife, the Duke of Bourbon his daughter.

Frederic the third upon devotion went to Rome in winter. Chron. Eusebius.

Pope Paul having made alliance with the Turks, joined in league also with the
Venetians. Chron. Eusebius.

The Pope Paul held Platina the Historiographer in prison wrongfully: but his
successor delivered him.

He destroyed the Abbreuiataires in hatred of his predecessor, who had reduced
the said estate into order. At that time it was a College of learned and
studious people in Divine and Civil Laws, Poets, Orators, Historiographers,
etc. See Naucler.

He set the Iubile from 25. years to 25. years, not for the salvation of
souls: but rather to draw new money unto him, says Fasci. Temp.

There is found in the book of Stanislaus Ruthen, a thing worthy to be noted.
That is, that this Paul having read certain Poesies that were made against him
and his daughter, began to weep, and amongst his friends began to accuse the
rigor of the law of his former predecessors which forbadde Priests to
marry: for as much as he which ought not only to be the head of the Church,
but also of continency, saw that each one had talk of his daughter to his
great dishonor, and had their eyes continually upon her. And although she
were most excellent in beauty, yet did it grieve him that men should think
that he had engendered her in whoredom: Seeing he knew well that there was a
law ordained of God, whereby she might have been borne in wedlock, had it
not been for that singleness (that is the defense for Priests to marry) which
hindered it. Therefore he had determined to have set up again the marriage of
Priests, but he could not execute it, because death prevented him. For as he
persuaded himself that he should live long, he was suddenly taken with an
Apoplexy, and died suddenly, having well supped the night before.

The Popedom fell.
After this time the Popedom fell and decayed more and more.


The Venetians got the kingdom of Cyprus: First the year 1470. they had
established in the kingdom one James, bastard of Cyprus, against Lewis son
of the Duke of Sauoy, and the Queen Charlotte his wife, daughter of John king
of Cyprus, the true heir of that kingdom. But for the better understanding of
the matter, you must know that the said Venetians gave to the said bastard in
marriage, Katherine the daughter of Mark Corrario, a Gentleman of Venice: who
upon their commandment had aided the said bastard in all his affairs against
the said Lewis of Sauoy, and the Queen Charlotte his wife, even to cast them
out of Cyprus: This Katherine was solemnly adopted a daughter by the Signiorie
of Venice: but it was not but for to adopt also the kingdom therewith. But the
said king bastard with his Venetian wife espowsed the cause of their death: for
as soon as she was espied to be with child the Venetians poisoned the said
king, and caused a fame to run, that he died of a Flux of the belley, and
that he had left his wife and the child she was with, his heir, recommending
them unto the Seignorie of Venice. When then she was brought to rest, they did
with the chide as they had done with the father. And they took the said
Katherine which they called Queen, and brought her to Venice, and from that
time they ceased and took possession of the said Kingdom, which they have
held since the year 1470. until this day, says John le Maire. Of this James
bastard and of the oath he made unto the Souldan, see Naucler.

Sixtus or Sistus, fourth of that name, Sixtus. 4.
a Geneuois by Nation, borne in the Town of Sauonne, called before Francis de
Ruere, general of the order of Friars, and Cardinal of S. Sixtus, after the
death of Paul, succeeded in the execrable Chair.

As the solemnity of his Coronation was done, whilst they carried him in his
Litter to the Church of Laterane, he was in great danger of his life in a
mutenie which arose suddenly: in such sort that he was assailed even with
stones, and forsaken almost of all that accompanied his Litter. This Pope was
very liberal toward his, and bore them such an affection, that in favor of
them, he did and agreed unto many things against all right and reason.

He promoted unto the dignity of a Cardinal before all others, one called
Peter de Ruere, one of the same order and Nation, and had been nourished from
his Infancy with a brother of his called Hierome: although it seemed this man
was borne foolishly to spend money. For in two years that he lived after, he
consumed in all dissolution and violence, the sum of 200000. Skutes, besides
many debts he left.

John Textor in his Officine makes mention of this Cardinal, and says, that
in two years he spent in dissolutions, vanities, and incredible luxury,
300000. skutes.

The year 1475. a Citizen of Trent, lost in the week before Easter, commonly
called the passion week, a child of two years old. And having sought him
through all streets in the Town, and not finding him, he suspected he was
carried away by the Jews which inhabited there. Wherefore he got him toward
the Magistrate, making great sorrow and delivering his suspicions. The Sunday
following the Jews told the Bishop that they had found a child betwixt the
flood called Rusch and the house of Samuel, a Jew which the force of the water
had cast up there. Certain men were appointed to visit the child which was
found in the house of the said Samuel with his garments all wette: his body was
marked with diverse pricks. Being asked how this child came there, they
answered they knew not, but that the fierceness of the water had driven him
thither. But as soon as they were put to the Rack they confessed and
rehearsed the case in order: that is to say, how they had consulted and chosen
amongst them one Tobias to steal a Christian child and to crucify him at
Easter, and that this Tobias did take up the said child for that purpose,
called Simon, and having offered him in the full assembly of the Jews in the
house of the said Samuel, they clasped his neck with pinsons to keep him
from crying: then stretched his arms on a Cross, cut off his priuities, after
his right eyelid, then each one pricked him with sharp Instruments even to
death, and lastly cast him into the flood. After information made of this
execrable murder, all they were executed which were attainted about this deed
doing in the said Town of Trent.

The Commonwealth of Florence.
Cosme.
Although in the time of the Emperor Henry the seventh, the Florentines received
Robert King of Naples to be their Protector to resist the Gibellins or
Imperialistes, (so much hated they the Emperors of Almaine) yet about this
time Cosme by surname Medices, flourished in that Town in great pre-eminence,
prudence, and authority: and was held as a Prince and chief of the Town.

He led the Senate at his pleasure, enriched the poor Citizens, builded many
places, for more and more to maintain his authority.

Peter, Lawrence, Julian.
But after that Cosme was dead in the year 1464. he left a son called Peter,
who also was mighty in the Town. Unto whom succeeded in the administration of
the Commonwealth Lawrence de Medices his son: who with his brother Julian
augmented the Seignorie of Florence. And because this greatly displeased
certain Bishops, Cardinals, and other Lords, they made a conspiracy
together, and came to Florence the year 1478. which with one of the noblest of
the Town called Francisquinus de pactis, dissembling their hatred entered into
the Tmple: and as they lifted up the Host they slew Julian, and wounded
Lawrence, who escaped their hands. But the Malefactors thought they had done an
act greatly pleasing to the Citizens to recover liberty, but they were
deceived: for they were all taken, and neither Priest nor Bishop pardoned.

Frodesque Saluiat Archbishop of Pise, who said the Mass, was given to the
slaughter-man and hanged at an high window in his habit: for he had sung Mass
in his coat of Male. The Pope being grieved at these doings, excommunicated
Lawrence de Medices, and stird up Ferdinand king of Sicilie, Alphonsus Duke of
Calabria, and Frederic Duke of Vrbin, against the Florentines to be revenged of
them. But Lawrence seeing he was not puissant enough to sustain such enemies,
by the consent of the Citizens got him to a ship, and secretly came into
Sicilie to the King Ferdinand himself, and promised him tribute if he and his
would leave that enterprise begun at the Popes instance. Which was done, and
the town with all the country by that means was delivered from the
destruction of the enemies.

The Pope heereat was more inflamed then before: but the Venetians gave aid
unto the Florentines against the Pope, after they had made peace with the
Turk: who during these stirs besieged Rhodes and got it, the year 5488.

In this time began the superstition to toll a Bell at noone as a pardon,
called the (Aue Maria pacis) which the King had entreated of the Pope.

The year of Christ 1475. the great Iubile already ordained Paul the second,
was confirmed by Sixtus, and observed at Rome this year.

Charles the son of Phillip Duke of Bourgongne, agrreed with King Lewis the
11. Frederic the Emperor refused to erect Bourgongne for a Kingdom, whereat
Charles was moved, therefore he besieged Nisse, (which is a Town placed in
the territories of Colongne) and held it during a year besieged. He did it to
gain upon the Empire the Diocese of Colongne: but the Emperor prepared a
great power to meet him and to levy the siege. In the end they accorded: so
that Maximilian the son of Frederic should take in marriage Marie the only
daughter of the said Duke of Bourgongne.

After these things the said Charles fought twice against the Swisses unluckily
enough for this cause.

About the years 1460. Sigismond Duke of Austrich engaged to Charles Duke of
Bourgongne his lands which he had, as well on this side as beyond Rhene: namely
Sungaw Brisgaw, the black Forest, and the Towns situate upon Rhene, for
7000. Florents. Great mischiefs came hereupon. For the Duke of Bourgongne
appointed over those Lands as Governor general, Peter de Hagenbach, who
exceedingly tormented them of Mulhuse and Swisses.

About this time Charles Duke of Lorraine died of the pestilence at Nancy,
which gave occasion to Charles Duke of Bourgogne, to see if he could conquer
Lorraine by force, taking the cause against Rhene the successor of Lorraine,
that Charles his predecessor was bound unto him in a certain sum of money: and
by the same means though also to usurp the royal title of Sicilie and
Jerusalem. Peter de Hagenbach Count of Thiersteine, greatly molested the
subjects of Sigismond, Duke of Austrich, who had lately after long wars made
peace with the Swisses. Whereunto they of Strasbourge Sicistad, Colmar, and
Basil had sealed. And the money due unto the Duke of Bourgongne, was committed
into the hands of a Changer or Banquer of Basil, and the payment signified to
the Duke of Bourgongne by an Herald. After they proceeded against Peter de
Hagembach, who being taken prisoner was solemnly disgraded of his order of
knighthood, and publicly beheaded after he had governed the said lands engaged
three years and an half. The Duke of Bourgongne hearing hereof, determined to
revenge the death of his Governor, and assembled an Army, being also aided of
the Duke of Millaine and the Duchess of Sauoy, and took Lansanua a
confederate of the Swisses: From thence he besieged the Town and Castle of
Granson, soliciting them to yield: when they had yielded, the Duke caused to
hang 80. and to drown in a lake nigh the Town 200. Such an act greatly
stirred the Swisses, and not only them, but also whole high Germany: which
with the Army of the Duke of Austrich, (of which the conducter was Herman d'
Extingen) chased from Granson the Duke and slew one part of his Army, lost his
Artillery and his furniture for war, The Dukes first overthrow at Granson.
which was very magnificall. After they took down their companions which the
Duke had hung up, and hanged in their places as many Bourguignons.

Gelatius Maria Duke of Millaine, on S. Stephens day, in Stephen being at
Mass, was slain by a Citizen of Millaine called Andrew de Lupagnano, who
making a show to speak unto him stabbed him in the stomach. He said the
cause was for that the Duke detained from him unjustly certain possessions,
that he kept his wife, and further, hindered that justice could not be done him
touching an Abbey: for which he had paid at Rome during vacation, and the Duke
would have had an other to have had it.

Sixtus cast the Manfrois Lords of the Town of Imola, namely the father and
the son out of the Seignorie, and gave it to one of his household.

Likewise he dejected the Governors of Forliue, and constituted there a
familiar friend of his.

Charles Duke of Bourgongne returned the second time against the Swisses:
Before, he had taken from the Duke Rene of Lorraine Nancy: The second overthrow
of the Duke of Bourgongne nigh Morat.
wherefore the Duke of Lorraine joined with the Swisses. And when the Duke of
Bourgongne was before Morat, they of the Town came out and altogether invaded
the the Army of the Bourguignons, and put them unto flight. In so much that
17. thousand Bourguignons or 20000. after Fasci. Temp. or 22000. after the Sea
of Hist, were there slain. The spoil was there left to the Duke of Lorraine
for recompense, who also after recovered Nancy. See Nauclerus.

The third time the Duke of Bourgongne being grieved to have been vanquished
by so weak a Prince as the Duke of Lorraine was, returned and again besieged
Nancy. The third overthrow of the Duke Charles.
He had 14000 combattants, and still looked for other Bands of soldiers. Upon
this the Duke of Lorraine and the Swisses came upon them, parted in two Bands.
The Bourguignons were discomfited and put to flight: some slain in the woods,
and others drowned. There was also slain the Duke of Bourgongne, having
received three mortal wounds, one on the head, an other in the thigh, and the
last in the fundament. See Naucler.

The Bourguignons would not believe he was slain, but that being escaped he
retired into Almaine, and he had vowed to make his penance there seven years,
There were amongst the Bourguignons which sold precious stones, horses, and
other such like things, to be paid at his return. Yea even in Bruchel in the
Diocese of Spine, there was an old man which men thought to be the Duke of
Bourgongne, making there his penance, whom every one desired to see, and thereby
got he good alms. Nauclerus says he saw the said poor man in the said
place.

The king of France understanding of the death of the Duke of Bourgongne, took
Monididier, Roy, Peronne, Abbenille, Monstraeul, Arras, an Hesdin. See the
Hist. of France.

Maximilian son of the Emperor Frederic the third, affianced Mary the only
daughter of Charles Duke of Bourgongne, with whom he had Bourgongne, Brabant,
Flaunders, Luxembourge, Hainaut, Zeland, Artois, Guelders, with other
Sergnories and lands.

The said Maximilian had of his said wife one son called Phillip; and a
daughter called Margarite. They had two other children Francis and George,
which died in their youth.

Phillip espowsed Jane Queen of Chastile, of whom he had Charles the fifth
Emperor, and Ferdinand, and four daughters, Leonor, Isabeal, Mary, and
Katherine.

Iacobins against the Carmes.
The Iacobins Inquisitors, deputed against heretics (as they call them in
diverse sorts) molested certain Theologians of the order of Carmes, in certain
causes of the faith. Amongst which they said one was called Julian de Bresse,
an excellent Preacher of the word of God, and an other Peter de Neuolaite, for
whom Mantuan writ an Apology containing three books.

But all this was pacified by the Pope Sixtus at the pursuit of Christopher
Martignon, which Sextus (as tutor and defender of Monks (as Stella witnesses
in the Popes lives) that he might take away all occasion of envy and riots
amongst them, Mendicants made equal.
ordained that all Mendicant and begging Friars should be equal in such
privileges, as all Popes had granted unto them.

The University of Tubinge in the Diocese of Constance, by Apostolic
authority was instituted at the instance of the Count of Wittemberge. Naucler.

The Swisses began now to receive wages of the king of France, Lewis the 11.
casheering the French Archers, The Swisses receive the Kings wages.
because they pilled and spoiled, and did many other mischiefs. Naucler.

Platina composed the Popes lives in Latin, and dedicated them unto Sixtus the
4.

Wessalus of Frise, in this time writ against the Pope, his doctrine and
traditions.

Mahomet the second died of poison as was suspected. Naucler. or else of a
Collicke passion, of the age of 50. years, and after Naucler. of 53. Baiazetes
his son succeeded him. Paul. Iou.

Margarite the daughter of Maximilian was brought into France and espowsed unto
the Dolphin Charles the 8. in the month of July at Ambroise, who afterward was
sent back again. Naucler.

Mary Duchess of Bourgongne, Maximilians wife, Madam Margarites mother, being
on hunting fell from her horse and died. Chron. Eusebius. and Naucler.

The Pope Sixtus Canonized S. Bonauenture.

The last of August died Lewis King of France, The death of king Lewis the 11.
a very superstitious man. He pilled the people to enrich Churches. He
worshipped and kissed bones and relickes of Saints, to obtain health. For he
maruellously feared death: In so much that in the end of his days he gave
excessive gifts to his Physician each month, if at the least they might but
prolong his life.

Sixtus made many wars wrongfully against Ferdinand King of Pouille, because
he gave aid unwillingly to his son in law Hercules d'st Duke of Ferrara,
which was besieged of the Venetians, against the Venetians, which he
excommunicated. Also against the Florentines (as is said): although that the
matter better understood he absolved them and restored them to their honor,
and Lawrence de Medices likewise.

Sixtus being detained sick in his bed of a Fever, understanding that a peace
was made betwixt the Venetians and other Potentates, suddenly yielded the
spirit. Naucler.

Innocent. 8.
Innocent 8. of that name, borne at Genes, the son of one Aaron, called
before John Baptist Cibo, of a Cardinal, Priest of the title of S. Cicilie,
was created Pope of Priests and Monks, after of Sixtus. Volaterane says he
was once a poor child, yet fair, and was nourished amongst the servants of
Ferdinand king of Sicilie, where he learned all the fashions of the Court life.

Coming from thence to Rome, he remained long time in the house of Phillip,
Cardinal of Boulongne. After this he was made Bishop of Sauonne, and thirdly
of Melphe by the Pope Xistus and also Dataire, finally Cardinal, and after
Pope as has bin said. He was of a great stature, a white man, and of fair
representation: but of an heavy and dull spirit, and far from all study of
good Letters: In so much that sometimes when he was Idle from public affairs
he seemed as though he slept. Almost from the beginning of his Popedom he
conspired against Ferdinand king of Sicilie, with the Princes of the kingdom.

See how Popes use to recompense the amity of such as nourish and educate
them.

He called one named Robert d' S. Seuerin to be chief and Captain of the
Army which he sent against Ferdinand. This holy man said that for the Churches
dignity and the defense of Saints, it was lawful to take Arms, that peace
might follow of it. Yet seeing himself deceived, he was forced to make peace
upon this condition, that his yearly tribute should be paid him, and that such
as rebelled should not be in danger. But the king Ferdinand kept neither the
one nor the other condition: although he sent one named Peter de Vincence an
hardy and bold man, who was Auditor of the Chamber with his Secretary to
solicit his causes.

After these things Innocent weary of warring, delighted in nothing but a
dastardly idleness, full of sloth: which brought with it nothing but diverse
concupiscences, frauds, pleasures, pompes, gourmandizes, dissolutions,
pailliardizes, and Idolatries. He erected a new College of Secretaries, for
his own profit, augmenting, the number of them which were there before. He
builded a new Palace and an house of pleasure, Towns given to the Popes
bastards.
of a new fashion. He was the first of all the Popes which in an invsuall manner
advanced his bastards unto honor and riches. For he gave certain Towns nigh
Rome unto his bastard Francis, and greatly enriched his daughter called
Theodorine, which he married unto a very rich man of Genoa.

Charles eight of that name King of France, succeeded his father Lewis the 11.
being of the age of 14. years. The three Estates were solemnly assembled at
Tours for the Kings person.

He was very conscionable, yielding unto the King of Spain the Countes of
Roussillon and Parpignant. He conquered the kingdom of Naples: and the
Princes and Gentlemen went thither of their own charge. At Rome the Pope
declared him Emperor of Constantinople. The King Alphonsus and his son
Ferdinand for fear retired into Sicilie, and Charles entered triumphantly into
Naples. Then the Lords and Towns in Italy banded themselves against the King
to enclose him at his return, yet he got through with a great victory over
them at Fonnone, (for he had few people against many) and as vanquisher
returned into France. Naples revolted.
But at the end of the year Naples revolted unto the said Ferdinand.

King Lewis the 11. would not that his son Charles should learn any part of
the Italian tongue, but only this Proverb (Qui nessit dissimulare, nescit
regnare) that is, he that cannot faigne and dissemble knows not how to reign.

A poor lesson, better beseeming a Tyrant then a King.

M. John an English man, a Priest in this time, John the English man burnt at
Paris Corpus Christi.
was burnt at Paris, in the place called the Swine Market: because in the
morning of the day then called Corpus Christi, in the great Church of our Lady,
in the Chapel dedicated unto S. Crispin and Crispinian, he took from a Priest
that sung Mass his Host, and cast it on the ground.

The Pope Innocent absolved the Venetians which had been excommunicated by
Sixtus for acts before recited: and sold pardons and Indulgences as well for
the living as for the dead. He enriched with great presents many Temples
through Italy. He gave unto the Augustins of Bergoine, a Church of silver of
an exquisite and marvelous work.

He by his Bulls permitted to them of Norway that they ought to sing Mass
without wine. Moreover seeing that Pardons, nor the Iubile, nor the war
against the Turks served him any thing to gather silver: he invented a new
manner of gathering silver. For he found enclosed in an old wall, the title
which was set upon the Cross of Jesus Christ, written in three languages,
Jesus of Nazareth, etc. with the Iron of the Lance wherewith Christ his side
was pearsed. Being hindered by a long disease he could not accomplish that which
he purposed in his courage. But the year of our Lord 1492. he deceased out of
this world. There was a Poet called Marcellus, who made an Epitaph in Latin
Verses, An Epitaphe of Innocent.
whose sense is this. What need thou seek witnesses to know whether Cibe be
male or female? Behold only the great troop of his children, they will yield
a certain testimony thereof. He begot eight sons, and as many daughters. It
is not without cause that Rome calls him Father, etc.

The Town of Arras was again taken by the Flemmings in the nigh time. The
keys of one of the Town gates was counterfeited and given to four of the
conspiracy, poor Mechanikes: the one of which was called Grisard, who had an
ordinary guard of the gate, and used customably upon the wall to sing with an
high voice. What hour is it? It is not time. What hour is it? It is not day.
This was to advertise the enemies when they should approach. And when they were
nigh he sung an other Song. Marchez la duron duraine, marchez la duron durean.
So the Town of Arras was by him delivered into the Emperors hand without any
effusion of blood.

Horrible things of Roderic Borgia.
To show the horror of that abominable seat of Rome it shall not be
impertinent to declare how and by what means a Spaniard came thither.

In the time of Innocent the 8. after that Borgia was placed in the number of
the Cardinals and Fathers of the Roman Church, his affection was incessantly
set to mount higher, and to that end he invented each day all the means he
thought good and meet to enjoy the accomplishment of his desires. Finally he
gave himself to the devilish Art of Necromancie: to the end that by the help
of devils and evil spirits he might enter into the way whch he saw shut to
him, as well by the riches as the great credit and prerogative of his
companions. After he had certain time employed his study and diligently
watched about the cursed and dammable Art of Necromancie, Conuention betwixt
Satan and Borgia.
he began to inquire of his devils, (wherewith he proved very familiar) if
they would not savor him so much as in the pursuit of the Papal dignity,
they would give him support and help. Whereunto they readily agreed, but yet
under this especial rescription and covenant, that by certain words he should
deliver an oath to show himself in all things a faithful protector of
Satan. To which this Cardinal of a wicked mind consented: only he required
that when he should come to do his homage and take his oath, the devil would
not appear unto him in any hideous and fearful form, but rather under some
humane form, namely under the person of a Protonotaire: which having granted
him, at the time assigned and established, on a Summers day the Cardinal
being retired into a place called Montcauallus, being alone in a chamber, the
said Protonotaire presented himself unto him, like a man of mean age,
honorably apparelled, who after certain talk held betwixt them, he assured
the Cardinal that he should be Pope. Then Roderic Borgia being very joyous,
began to inquire of him how long he should reign. This Protonotaire delivered
him a very ambiguous answer, (namely that he should reign the space of
eleven and eight) the Cardinal foolishly promised himself the time of 19.
years in his Papal dignity, although Satan's meaning was but 11. years and
8. months.

After Pope Innocent was dead, by plurality of voices he was established
Pope. And because there should be no want at the solemnities, he named himself
Alexander the sixth, before named Roderic Borgia, Alexand. 6.
borne at Valence in Spain, the Nephewe of Calixtus late Pope, third of that
name; As one that long time had had the handling of the office of
Vice-chauncellor, he knew all the estate of the Court of Rome, and knew all
the councels and enterprises of the Princes and Communalties of Italy.

Being then placed where he desired, he subiugated almost them all by the
means of his bastard called Valentin: which of a Cardinal he made a Duke, and
surnamed him. Caesar Borgia the Popes bastard.
Besides this, he exterminated all the mightiest houses that were in the
Town, so that after he feared them no more. In which combat (as Valerius
recites) being munited and strengthened with the succors of the French and
Swisses, he shead much humane blood.

Frederic the third, died at Vienna the 26. of August, upon the eating (as is
said) a great quantity of Pompions as he meant to refresh himself, and was
buried in the Church of S. Stephen.

The malladie of Naples, called the French disease, or the pox, began about
this time.

Maximilian
Maximilian the Emperor Fredericks son, third of that name, held the Empire
alone after his father, and was a fautor and lover of learned people.

The Almaines made a great discomfiture against the French men, nigh Salnis in
Bourgongne.

The Religion and Covent of the observation of Lions upon Rosne, was founded in
the suburbs of the said Town, in the place of two Lovers. The founder was
king Charles the eight, and Anne of Britain Queen of France, and the said
Covent was named Nostre dame des Anges. That is, our Lady of Angels. If they
had said of Asses, they had said better.

The last day of December the King of France, Charles the eight, arrived at
Rome, and made a magnificke entry thereinto.

The kingdom of Granado was recovered by Ferdinand King of Spain, which had
about 80. years before been taken from the Christians.

Batazetes came into Hungary, where were slain 7000. of them that met him.

Alphonsus King of Portugal fell from his horse and died, and in his place
succeeded Emanuel his brother.

The order and Religion des filles Repenties began at Paris, Repenties.
by Friar John Trisseran, Religions of the observation of Lions, borne at
Bourge in Bresse.

Maximilian by an Embassage affianced the Duchess of Britain, which thing
greatly displeased Charles the 8. king of France. Wherefore he made war
against the Britains and had a great victory upon them: and incontinently
after, having repudiated Margarite of Flanders (whom he had affianced (as is
said) during his fathers life) took Anne the eldest daughter of Francis Duke
of Britain: so was the peace made with the Britains. She had by him many
children, all which died before their father.

Maximilian afterward (that is, the 16. of March) espowsed Insprulz Blache,
Marie, an honorable virgin, daughter of Galeatius Duke of Millaine.

Alexander celebrated a Iubile, Anno 1500. whereat he delivered this grace and
favor by his Bulls to such as had made no account to come thither, or such as
could not come, that they might gain and obtain the Iubile by sending
thither. He sought by all means to heap up silver as much as he could to
satisfy his lusts. Wherefore he set us a new College of Abbreuiators, to the
number of 80. of which each place was fold at 750. Ducates. He invited all
Princes unto his Iubile by his Bulls, and ordained that in every Town men
might have Stations.

He created in his time 36. Cardinals, amongst which were 18. Spaniards, and
of his kinsmen three: that is to say, John Borgia, Maximilian.
Valentin Borgia, and Francis Borgia. He received the oath of fidelity of
Alphonsus king of Naples, which he took betwixt the hands of the said John
Borgia, touching the keeping of loyalty to the seat of Rome, and to pay him
his annual tribute.

He fortified at his great charge the Castle S. Angels, repaired and beautified
the Temple of S. Mary Mayor.

That which follows is extracted by John Functius out of the works of
Volateranus. The Cardinals which elected him (he speaks of Pope Alexander)
were the first that felt his ingratitude. For he oppressed them all by diverse
calamities, banishing some, and imprisoning others.

He made war upon the Vrsins, which he vanquished and took prisoners by the
means of his sons.

Alexander sets up his bastards.
After this he desired nothing so much as to life up unto honors his bastards,
as Innocent had done: yea this, far more. For now this began to be held a
thing much honorable, and worthy of great praise amongst the venerable
Fathers. He made the youngest of his sons a Prince in Sicilie. The second
called Caesar Valentin, he made Cardinal. And the eldest he made a Duke in
Spain: who not long after was slain at Rome and cast into Tiber. As for the
Cardinal Caesar, rejecting the order of Priesthood, after his brothers death
came into the kingdom of France with a great sum of silver, where he
espowsed one of king Lewis his kinswomen of the house of Albert, The Duke of
Valentinois.
and there was given him the Duchy of Valentinois in Daulphine. After this by
the kings help and the alliance which was made with him, he acquired many
Seignories in Italy: unto whom also his father gave the hand, who desired
nothing so much in the world, as to see his son so great a Lord.

Lucrece the daughter, wife and daughter in law of the Pope.
His daughter Lucrece whose carnal company himself had (which was an horrible
and detestable thing) was married unto three Princes successively. First unto
John Sforza Duke of Pisance. After being repudiated by him, to Lewis the
bastard son of Alphonsus king of Arragon. Finally after he was slain, she
espowsed Alphonsus d'Est, Duke of Ferrara, Men may easily know (by her
Epitaphe made by John Iouian Poutanus, in very elegant Latin, Verses) what was
the chastity, sanctity, and religion as well of the father as of the daughter
and son. For she was renowned to have company of them both. This also which
follows is drawn out of the book of Hierome Marius, in his book called
Eusebius Captive. What need we to recite the infamous and dishonest deeds of
Alexander the sixth, seeing he made alliance with devils, gave himself
altogether unto them, and subjected himself unto them.

Hermolaus Barbarus a very learned man, The cruelty and ingratitude of the
Venetians.
died of grief in exile at Rome, deprived of his Church and Patriarkship of
Aquilea, by the ingratitude of the Venetians, whom he had served as an Orator
and Ambassador unto diverse Princes of Christendom. The cause wherefore he was
thus handled of the Venetians, was because he had received the Patriarkship of
the Pope without their priuitie. Therefore not content, they banished also his
parents, and confiscated their goods. See John le Maire.

John Picus Prince de Randole, a mirror of true Nobility, Florence.

We find many things written of this Pope by notable Authors of his time: as
certain excellent Latin Verses well worthy to be noted, which recite the
praises of this holy Father. Whereof this is the sense following. Alexander
sells Crosses, and Aultars, yea Jesus Christ himself. He first bought them, and
may well sell them. Rome passes from vice to vice, and from flame to fire
under the government of this Spaniard. Tarquinus was the sixth king of Rome,
Nero the sixth Emperor, and this Pope the sixth of his name: always Rome has
bin destroyed by the sixths.

This was he who for the sum of 200000. Ducats which he received of the Turk
called Bajazet, This act brought great damage to Italy.
poisoned Gemen his brother who fled to Rome. This is he (say I) who being
willing to maintain his tirannie, called to his help Bajazet Emperor of the
Turks, against the king of France Charles the eight: and sought to make the
Kingdom of Naples, yea the very City of Rome, the Frontiers of the Turks
Empire.

Lewis the 12. as the nighest, succeeded to the Crown of France after Charles
the 8. He sent his Army into Lombardie under the conduct of John Jacques
Trivulse, and of Sieur Aubigny, which took Alexandria and Pauie: so that then
Lewis Sforza abandoned Millaine for fear and retired into Almaine. The King
upon these news passed into Italy, Lewis Sforza.
and made his triumphant entry into Millaine: from whence he departed having
diminished the charges of the people and left the said Trivulse as Governor.

Lewis Sforza returned within a year after, and again took Millaine, and
from thence being again chased by a new Army from France, he took his
flight toward Navarre: after his coming from whence, being pursued by the
French, he was taken and led a prisoner into France.

This king ordained in France that (O salutaris hostia) should be sung in the
elevation of the Host.

Friar Hierome Sauanarola of Ferrara, of the order of Dominicains, preached at
Florence. He was burnt at the instance and by the commandment of that monster
Alexander Pope the sixth, because he preached against him, and his more then
notorious wickedness.

He composed certain meditations upon the 50. Psalm and certain others. See
the Book of Martyrs.

Mancinellus.
The Pope caused to be cut out the tongue and both the hands of Anthonius
Mancinellus a learned man: because he had written a very elegant Oration
against the wicked manners and villainous and dishonest life of him.

The war of Maximilian against the Swissers is renowned in this time.

Batazetes the Turk, took by force a Town in Macedonia called Dyrrachium:
and the year after in Morea he took Methone which belonged unto the
Venetians: as also certain time before he had usurped Naupactus in Epire. He
also beheaded the Bishop of the said Town of Methone.

Italy was greatly afflicted by the Turks: as soon as war against the
Venetians was on a flame.

Charles after Emperor, son of Phillip Archduke of Austrich, and of Jane
daughter of the king of Castile was borne at Gaunt on the Bissext day, the 25
of February, on S. Matthias day.

The Marrhans (these were Jews which made themselves Christians fearing to
leese their goods, Marrhans.
such are commonly in Spain, and secretly observe the Jewish ceremonies) are
reconciled with the Pope, having with great sums of money acquired his good
grace. Naucler.

The Town of Basil, the ninth day of June made alliance Swisse, in the Town
of Lucerne: Basil Schaffusen.
And the tenth of August, they of Schaffusen made also a perpetual alliance
with the Cantons of the Swisses, in the said Town of Lucerne.

They of Noremberge were discomfited by Cassimere Marquess Brandebourge, with
great effusion of blood nigh their Town.

King Lewis the 11. took the kingdom of Naples under the conduction of Sieur
d'Augbini, Frederic, The Venetians vanquished.
his wife and his sons prisoners, were carried into France. He recovered
Bolongue, usurped by Bentiuoli, and yielded it unto the Pope: After in proper
person going against the Venetians, which usurped many Lands of the Duchy of
Millaine, valiantly vanquished them nigh Agnadel: took Bartholomew Balnian,
the conducter of that Army, and carried him prisoner into France. He took
again the said usurped Towns and many others, yielding unto the Pope such
Towns as the Venetians had taken from him.

The issue of the Pope Alexander was fearful, and with manifest token of the
just judgment of God, and therefore would diligently be noted. As on a
certain day he had made ready an exceeding great banquet for certain rich
Senators and Cardinals, and had recommended to his son Valentin, that he
should give wine to drink unto one of the said Cardinals wherein there was
poison put: It came to pass that he that had the charge to deliver the wine,
unwittingly gave to the Pope of that flaggon wherein the poison was: who being
of great age, was taken with a languishment and grieuou^ pain.

He had by the space of eleven years and certain months excessiuely
oppressed Italy, and troubled the world. Being then detained in his bed (as
John Baleus says) he commanded one of his men called Madena (which amongst
all them of his Court and house was his most faithful and familiar) to go
into his gardrobe or wardrope, and to bring him a certain little book enriched
with gold and precious stones: which was in an Armorie which he specified. But
this little book contained all manners and kinds of Illusions and Enchauntments
of Negromancie: whereby the old man thought to inform himself, to be
certified of the closure and end of his life.

An horrible illusion of Satan.
The servant obeing the commandment of the Pope his master, and going unto
the place specified: as (after he had opened the door) he was ready to have
entered into the chamber, he saw a certain person sit in the Popes Chair
there, who was altogether like unto his master: At the sight whereof being
surprised with an horrible fear and astonishment, and and as it were half
dead, without taking the book, ran back again toward Alexander, unto whom
he rehearsed what he had seen: namely that in his Wardrope he found such a
Pope as himself set in a Chair.

Alexander after he had understood the thing, and seeing his servant to be
exceedingly affraide, suffered him to rest a while: After he did so much
persuade him, that he returned into the said Wardrope to see if again he
could find the said Pope. The servant then being entered, found in the said
chamber him whom before he had seen: and that more is, being asked by him that
sat there what cause brought him into that place, and what business he had
there, He being taken with a sore trembling, and as it were out of breath, The
devil says he is Pope.
answered, he came to take a certain garment for the Pope. At which words,
the devil being then in the Chair, making an horrible noise siad, what Pope?
I am the Pope.

But after that those things were reported unto Alexander, his evil began to
increase, and death approached.

A short day after, a man apparelled like a Carrier or Lackey, came and
fiercely knocked at the chamber door wherein the Pope was detained sick,
saying he must needs speak with him. The door being opened and he admitted
parley with the Pope, all others drew aside, and the Pope and he spoke
together, as two use to do in secret causes, yet men might see a great and
marvelous strife and debate betwixt them two, and that the Pope was not
content. A strife betwixt the Pope and devil.
For he said unto him. How goes this? my term is not yet accomplished. Thou
know that thy promise was nineteen years, whereof I have lived but eleven
and eight months. Unto which words the Lackey hardily answered: you understood
not well the speech, but are greatly abused. For I said not nineteen years as
you imagined: but I said you should remain Pope eleven years and eight
months, the which are come and passed, and therefore you must needs die.

But although the Pope was very active to require and to pray instantly that he
would have regard to his life, Alexander prays that his term may be longer.
and to the term that he had granted him in his Popedom, yet it was as to
speak to a deaf man, and to plead in vain. For all his alligations,
remonstrations, exceptions, and requests profited nothing: so that they which
were in the chamber and heard this marvelous debate and difference, might
judge that Satan was more expert in the Art of Arithmetike then the Pope was,
and they might easily conclude that Alexander erred in his account.

Finally to close up the matter, even as Satan went and departed from the
place, in like manner also with great cries, sighs, and fearful sobbes, the
Popes soul (as it were following his steps) dislodged and miserably departed
from his body.

Thus miserably and ungodly died this Pope Alexander, leaving to his son his
Seignory, altogether wasted and ruinous, and to the Italians, their Comonwealth
all confused, perverted and wasted: to the end he might be a public example to
all ages, how things evil gotten melt away, and are wickedly and unluckily
spent.

This Pope had with his said son a daughter called Lucrece, with whom both he
and his son lay, as Pontanus and Samazarius have left written.

Phillip Archduke of Austrich, the son of Maximilian and of Mary, the only
daughter of Charles Duke of Bourgoine, took to wife Jane the only daughter of
the king of Arragon, and by reason of her right, going into Spain, passed
through France in the year, 1501. After returning into Flaunders, to appeease
certain stirs of war betwixt them of Gilders and Brabant, he took many
Towns of Gelders, with the Duke of Suffolk a young Gentleman, which he
nourished in his Court with his children. The said Phillip yielded homage unto
king Lewis the 12. for the Counties of Flaunders and Artois, before Guy de
Rochefort, grand-Chauncellor of France, and Lewis de Luxembourge Count de
Ligni, Ambassadors sent for the purpose unto Arras.

Pius. 3.
Pius third of that name, a Tuscan by Nation, borne at Sienna, Nephew of Pope
Pius the second, on his sisters side Laodamie, before called Francis
Picolhomineus, that is, a little man, succeeded the said Alexander, being
elected by the Cardinals after great strifes and debates.

Valentin Borgia having seized upon all the treasures of his father Alexander,
after his death with twelve thousand soldiers occupied Vatican where the Pope
should be elected, tending to this end, to constrain the Cardinals to choose
such an one for Pope as should like him.

Sackageme^t of Borgia.
The Cardinals to shun this danger, withdrew themselves first incontinently
into the Temple of Minerua, where straight they were besieged by him. But as a
brute went through the Town that the Cardinals were taken, and that he
committed many murders and sackagements through the town, they were all taken
with a great fear. After this, the shops were shut, and each one ran to
Arms. The issues and ends of streets were stopped with banks, pieces of
wood, and chains of Iron: no more nor no less then if the enemy had again
been nigh the walls. Borgia then seeing that he had enterprised a thing so
hard to execute: and also being required by the Cardinals to cease from such
doings, promised that, which a little after he obeyed.

After Pius was chosen, Borgia having passed his choler, thanked the
Cardinals that they had chosen such an one, as he had greatly wished. He then
incontinently as he was made Pope, made a co^spiracie against the French which
had occupied a part of Italy; For he took in very evil part that their king
had brought Pouille and a great part of Italy under his subjection. This Pope
hoped that a day would come, when he should do some great damage unto the
French, after he had drawn them into Ambushes that he had laid for them; and
with the help of such as had conspired with him, he hoped to drive the^ clean
out of these Lands. But whilst he went about this, he died, the 27. day after
his election, they year 1503. of an ulcer, which he had in his thigh, wherewith
he had long time been troubled, without doing any thing at al of that which he
had enterprised. For beside the war he purposed against the French, he
determined to have reformed the Church to have celebrated a Council, and have
gotten an Army against the Turks, after the example of his Uncle.

Advertisement.
Note Reader for a conclusion of the precedent Popes, that such as were since
Siluester the second, until Innnocent the fourth, had the key of the
bottomless pit given them: to the end that by the horrible smoke thereof
they might send out the Locusts or Grasshoppers to devour all, Devouring
Grasshoppers or Locusts.
through all Christian Regions, and that they might work the secret of their
Iniquity. As for the last which were after Innocent the fourth, until Julius
the second of that name, they have been permitted to nourish and maintain it,
to obscure all truth: that by their false doctrines, and lying miracles they
might seduce and deceive even the elect of God (if it were possible). For that
great Dragon, which is Satan (that is the Angel of the bottomless pit, and
the king of these Locusts, that is to say of Mendicant Friars, and of the
Massing Priesthood) called Abaddon, which signified as much as destroyer,
saccager, and exterminator, or rooter out. For these by their infernal
doctrine of Popes decrees of Lombardike sentences, of ordinary questions,
determinations, quodlibets, sums, monastical predications, and other such
bables, have drawn into hell an infinite number of people since the said
Innocent the fourth, Apoc. 9. li. 8.
by the space of 260. years. So that those Popes and Doctors are signified by
the pale horse upon which sat death as well of the body as soul, after whom
followed hell. Moreover these Popes and all other wicked persons using the
insatiable tirannie, leese and destroy every day the bodies of the true Martyrs
of the truth of God, by fire, sword, water, halters, and all manner of
punishments, because they would not renounce Jesus Christ, to obey their Prince
Abaddon.

The waining of the Popedom.
But from hence forward, that is, since the year of our Lord 1503. under Julius
the second and his successors, until the last judgment, the Papacy does and
is like to decay. For the power that the devil has to deceive by his
Antichrist is diminished, and from day to day shall decay: but not the power
that he has to exercise his cruelty against the elect of God.

Tokens of the Popes fall.
There have been many signs of the ruin and fall of the Popish kingdom before
the time of Julius.

John the 24. was maruellously troubled and molested by an Owl, as is before
said: And as he was in the way to Constance, he fell from his Chariot. He was
there ignominiously deposed, and there was it concluded that the general
Council had power over the Pope. And therefore from his time, and also from
Paul the second, the affairs of the Papacy have gone ill, and have always
past from worse to worse.

Under the government of Alexander the sixth, the Angel which was placed in the
dungeon of the Castle S. Angelo, was stricken down by a fearful thunder, and
fell into Tiber.

Apoc. 19. d. 20
There is hardly any person which knows not the mischiefs which have happened
since Julius the second, until this present. But according to the sentence of
S. Paul, Jesus Christ shall shortly destroy that wicked Antichrist by the
brightness of his coming. He shall be put alive (says the Angel speaking to
S. John) into a poole of burning fire and brimstone, where he shall be
tormented for ever. So be it. So be it.

Julius the second of that name, borne at Genes, Nephew of Sixtus the fourth,
who had been named before Julian Reuerins, of the title of S. Peter ad Vincula,
was chosen Pope. He was a man of a quick spirit, and very subtle, and as it
were chiefly borne for war.

Phillip, willing again to pass into Spain, by Sea-tempest was cast upon
England, and well received of king Henry the seventh: yet he paid for his
welcome, and redeemed his departure by delivering to the said King, the Duke of
Southfolke, who was of the house of the white Rose, and thought the nighest
heiremale of the Crown of England: who by the said Phillip had been taken in
Guelders, whither he was fled for fear of king Henry.

This Julius plucked away by force, and by excommunications many things from
certain Christian Princes. And in the space of seven years he was cause of
the death of infinite persons: yea this tyrant because of the victories which
he had obtained, (wherein he rejoiced that he had shead so much humane blood)
gave unto the Swisses the title of defenders of the Ecclesiastical liberty,
The Swisses honored by the Pope.
and with a certain number of Ensigns of war, and privileges, confirmed by
his Bulls, a golden sword and an hatte.

He very straightly besieged Rauenna, Rauenna occupied by the Pope.
which the Venetians had occupied: and in the end having taken it, he reduced
it into his obedience. With a little bravery he plucked into his hands from
certain Princes, Setina, Imola, Faience, Boulongne, and other Towns, which
was not done without great effusion of blood.

Philibert the eight Duke of Sauoy, succeeded his father Phillip in the year
1495. He was a magnanimous and virtuous Prince, and full of great beauty, in
so much that he was called Philibert the fair. He was amiable also, and
courteous to every one.

He espowsed Margarite the Emperor Maximilians daughter. But after he had done
many things worthy of memory he died, without leaving any heir issuing of
him: wherefore Charles his brother succeeded him in the said Duchy. Margarite
for a witness of the love she bare him, would never many again: but always
remained a widow.

Phillip returned into Spain, and died in the year 1506. of his age, the 28.

The king Lewis had sent Phillip de Rauestone as Governor Genes. The Town
revolted the year 1507. but incontinently it was taken again by the French.

The Iacobins and Friars of Berne.
The year 1509. there was a great contention betwixt two orders of begging
Friars: that is to say, the Friars, and the Iacobins. And this was because of
the conception of the Virgin Mary. The Cordeliers or Friars said that she was
prevented of the grace of the holy spirit, so that she was nothing spotted with
original sin, and the Iacobins affirmed the contrary, that she was conceived
after the manner of the other children of Adam, and that privilege to be
conceived without sin, was only reserved to Jesus Christ: yet they said
that the holy Virgin which was the mother of the son of God, was sanctified
in his mothers womb, and purged from all original spot, as S. John Baptist,
Jeremy, and certain others were: which by especial privilege were
sanctified, before they came out of their mothers wombes. The said Iacobins
made themselves strong to prove that opinion, by reasons of the holy
scripture: as also they had enterprised to make public disputations at
Heidelberge, touching the conception of the Virgin Mary, but nothing was
executed. Afterward the said Iacobins began to prove that opinion, even before
the people, by certain false miracles and visions, which they themselves had
invented. But these bad people were deceived, and their lies turned on their
own heads. For there was a Lay Friar, simple and an Idiot, which they had
enterprised to seduce and deceive by their Inchauntments, who in the end
revealed all their knavery. There were four brethren of that order taken at
Berne, unto who^ the torture was delivered: which after they had confessed the
matter, were disgraded, and finally burnt for their fraudulent and diabolical
machinations which they had forged to maintain their opinion. For they had
Inchaunted with superstitious charms, a poor Nouice. It was at the great
instance of the Bernois, that Haimo Bishop of Lansanna, (in which Diocese
Berne is) took knowledge of their cause, and after inquisition made thereof,
brought it to this point, that they were disgraded, and delivered unto the
secular arm, and burnt the last day of May in the Meade nigh the River side of
Ar. There were other culpable of this deed, but they escaped from the hands of
the Bernois.

The King Frederic of Naples, and the Cardinal de Ambose died.

In this time happened a great malladie and sickness in France, which they
called the Coqueluehe. The Pope Julius excommunicated the king of France and
John d' Alebret king of Navarre, and gave their kingdoms to whomsoever could
first occupy them.

Masseus in the 20. Chapter of his Chronicles, recites that the king of France
perceiving that the Pope Julius with the Venetians went about something against
him, assembled a Council in the Town of Tours in the month of September: If
it be lawful for Popes to make war.
where he proposed the questions following, namely; Whether it were lawful for
the Pope to make war against any Prince without cause or reason: And if such
a Prince defending himself may not assail the said Pope and withdraw from his
obedience? It was answered that it was not lawful for the Pope so to do: but
that it was lawful for the Prince to do that whereof he had enquired.

Moreover it was agreed that the pragmatike sanctio^ should be kept through the
Realm of France, The pragmatike sanction.
and if he thundered his excommunicatio^s, that they should make no account of
them because they should be unjust.

After these things the King sent to Julius the answer of

The Council of Laterance was begun by Julius this The Council of Laterane.
year 1512. Leo his successor continued the said Council, the end whereof
was the 16. of March, 1517.

This horrible monster died the year following after he had begun the said
Council, that is, the year 1513. having committed an infinite number of
murders and wickednesses unheard of before, he died the year 1513. the 21 of
February, before the Council which he had assembled at Rome was ended. See
Functius in his Commentaries. There was an Almaine called Conrade Garbelius,
who made of him Tetrastike in Latin verses, whereof the sense was this. He
that has for his father a Genoua, for his mother a Grecian, and that is borne
in the Sea, it is impossible he should be good. The Genouaes are deceivers; the
Grecians are liars, and there is no security nor faithfulness in the Sea.
Thou Julius have in thee all these things. We read a certain Comme^tarie of
the Doctors of Paris against the Lutherans, being drawn on by a devilish
rage, had by force the carnal company of two young children of a noble house
which the Queen Anne of France had sent to Roberte Cardinal of Nantes, to
teach.

Melancton amongst others has written certain Latin Verses: how that Julius
meaning to go to war, cast S. Peter's keys into Tiber, and took the sword of
S. Paul, saying. Seeing the keys of S. Peter serve us to no purpose, it may be
S. Paul's sword will do something.

Gaston de Fouex the Kings Nephewe, was sent into Italy, and took Bolongne
and Bresse by force. The Swisses already practiced by the Pope, passed into
Italy.

On Easter day, the year 1512. the French got a battle at Rauenna, and took
the Town against the Pope, the Spaniards, and the Venetians. Gaston died
there, aduauncing himself with too small a company upon his enemies. Julius
practiced with the Emperor and the King of England, to assail the King of
France in diverse places of his Kingdom.

Ferdinand king of Spain, took and occupied against all right under color of
excommunication, the Arrathame of Julius, the kingdom of Navarre.

The King of England being assured of succors from Flaunders, descended to
Calais: but the king of Scotland James the fourth, and the king of France his
Allie, entered into his Country, but lost a great battle, and was himself
slain. They did little in Guien or Normandy, whether they sent two Armies.

Afterward the French and they fought upon the Sea. Two fair Ships well
furnished, that is, the Regent of England, and the Cordelier of France, grapled
one with the other: And the most part of such as were within, were either burnt
or drowned.

A peace was published betwixt the King and the Venetians.

The English men besieged Terwine. At the Journey of Sporrs the French fared
ill. The Towns of Terwine and Tornay were taken by the English.

Anne de Britain the wife of king Lewis the 12. and before the widow of
Charles the eight, dyed at this time leaving two daughters: Claudia which
afterward espowsed Francis de Valois and Renee, at this present widow of the
Duke of Ferrara.

Leo the tenth of that name, borne at Florence, Leo. 10.
of the house of Medices, before called John de Medices, being Cardinal of the
title of S. Mary (in Dominica) beyond all men's expectation was elected Pope,
and succeeded Julius: He had been very diligently instructed in good Letters
in his first youth, and had had learned schoolemaisters: Amongst others,
Angelus Politian, a man very learned as well in the Greek as Latin tongue, and
this was the cause he loved so much men of learning and knowledge.

Being of the age of thirteen years he was chosen Cardinal by Innocent the
8. and in the 30. of his age he was chosen Pope of Rome.

This Leo of his own nature was debonaire, gentle, and peaceable, but he was
too much governed by such as were enemies of rest, and cruel: after whose
wills many things were done very disloyally.

Lewis died the first day January 1514. having reigned 17. years. He was
called the Father of the people, a title which few kings had after him.

The greatest pleasure that Pope Leo had, was delicately to nourish himself in
all things pleasant to the flesh, and such delights as would soonest draw men
into all wicked concupiscences. He took great pleasures in Singers and
Musicians to recreate his spirit at Table, as he drank and made good cheer.
He bare an irreconciliable hatred unto the Gospel of the kingdom of God:
which he persecured in the person of Luther and many others. For as one day the
Cardinal Bembo uttered before him a certain thing drawn from the Gospel, O
execrable blasphemy.
he answered him mocking. It has ever sufficiently been known what profit
that Fable of Jesus has brought us and our company.

This merchant gave hereby sufficiently to be known that he was that
Antichrist which S. Paul called the man of sin, and the son of perdition.

Indulgences.
He spread abroad through the world certain pardons and Indulgences full of all
impiety, yea and ridiculous: to the end to heap up silver to maintain his
pleasures, to nourish his whores, and enrich his bastards. And herein he
served himself with Mendicant beggars, which in infinite number traced and
ran over all Christian kingdoms.

Sampson of Millaine a Friar.
One called Sampson of Millaine a Friar, heaped up by that mean so great a
sum of silver in diverse Countries, that the world was astonished thereat as a
thing contrary to nature. For he one day offered the sum of an hundredth and
twenty thousand Ducats for the Papacy.

This Pope Leo created in one day one and thirty Cardinals, and by that
means pursed up a great sum of silver: And that same day were seen very
horrible signs and wonders, the year 1521. at which time Soliman Emperor of
the Turks took Rhodes. Rhodes taken.
On the day of Christ's Nativity as Leo went out of his chamber to go sing
Mass at the break of the day (after their manner, a marble cover well couched
and laid, fell suddenly down, so that many of his company were there slain,
and amongst others the Captain of the Swisses guard.

By such a presage God showed that the Popedom should shortly perish, because
of the enormeous and detestable wickedness committed therein.

He greatly enriched at other expenses his bastards, and erected and lifted
them up to principalities and dignities, as well Secular as Ecclesiastice. He
created Duke of Mutine, Julian, whom some said was his Nephewe, his sisters
son: and Laurence Duke of Vrbin, and married the one, that is to say Julian,
with the Duke of Sauoyes sister, and the other with the the daughter of the
Countess of Bolongne. But he had deprived the true Duke of Vrbin of the
possession of the Duchy, to the end he might establish one of them in his
place, he sought also to do the like to the Duke of Ferrara, but it was in
vain. As for his Nephewe Julius, he made him a Cardinal.

The year 1421. and the first of December, understanding that the French had
been vanquished at Millaine by the Emperors people, and chased out of all
Italy: which also was not done without his means, drinking and making good
cheer, he maruellously rejoiced at this news, and herein suddenly died as
they say. He which never believed there was either hell or heaven after this
present life. There was a Poet called Sannazarius which made a Distiche, that
is, two Latin Verses of the death of the said Leo, which because they seem to
be well made, are set down.

Sacra sub extrema, si forte requiritis hora.
Cur Leo non poterat sumere: vendiderat.
The sense of these Verses is: If you ask wherefore Leo could not take the
Sacraments being so nigh his death: the reason is, he had sold them before.
That which is above spoken of the taking of Rhodes and of the wonders seen the
same day, that agreement was made to yield the Town into the Turks hands,
cannot accord with that which is spoken of the death of Leo. For it is a
certain that Rhodes was taken by Pope Adrian his successor, and was yielded to
the Turks. Anno 1522.

An Advertisement touching a certain conjecture of the supputation of time.
It would be noted in this place, that the year after the Incarnation of
Jesus Christ, 161. Paulus Samosatenus being Bishop of Antioche, began to
disgorge his blasphemies against Jesus Christ, denying that he was the true and
eternal son of God. Which most dangerous and pernicious heresy of all
others, was afterward augmented by Arrius and Mahomet, and is yet at this day
by that Antichrist the Pope. Moreover, the Monks which began as it were the
same year under Paul the first, here unto have nourished and maintained the
same heresy in their diverse manners of life, and their wicked doctrines whilst
Antichrist reigned in the Temple of God, Apoc. 11. a. 2.
and dealt with preaching and teaching publicly in the Church, namely, by the
space of 42. months, or of 1260. days, which is all one, which days if we
take them for years as they ought, adding thereunto the first number of 261.
years, they will come to the year 1521. after the Nativity of Jesus Christ.

2 Thessalonians. 2. a. 4.
But that you may understand this secret; That year was discovered that great
adversary of God, who lifted himself above all that ws called God, or
worshipped as God. This year then, that error which so long time had been
maintained under the tyrant of Antichrist, began to be shaken and to fall,
because the truth and righteousness of Faith through the spirit of Jesus
Christ were revealed by the means of certain learned persons.

For in the said year 1521. Martin Luther being well fortified by the spirit
of God, in the presence of all the Estates of the Empire assembled at Worms,
confessed and maintained constantly and hardily the true doctrine of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which the aforesaid heretics denied. And since this confession,
the true Church of our Lord Jesus Christ has again begun to renew it self,
and his kingdom to take and gather more greater forces: And the kingdom of
Antichrist has begun to diminish and approaches his ruin. This which
follows is extracted out of the book of Christien Masseus.

The year of the Lord 1515. Frances King of France received of Leo a Iubile,
(that is to say, pardons to sell) to be published through all France: which was
also spread through all Christendom.

This was a bottomless depth of all evils; for under the shadow of fighting
against the Turks, they heaped up inestimable treasures. They which had this
charge and commission, persuaded the simple people, that whosoever would give
ten French souls, should deliver the soul for whom he gave them from the
pains of Purgatory. For they held this for a certain rule, that God would
do whatsoever they would, according to that which is said. All that you do on
earth, etc. So that if there had wanted but one farthing less then the said
ten souls, they said all could profit nothing. Such like merchandise
displeased many good men, and they began to debate this question touching the
Popes power: whereof the old Bishops never heard speak.

Martin Luther was then in Almaine, who then began to cry very sharply against
Indulgences, against whom one called John Bekins opposed himself, and they two
entered into great disputations and contentions touching this matter.

Pope Leo the tenth thundered a great process against Martin Luther, and
condemned him as an heretic, and rejected him from the communion of the
faithful. He straight appealed unto the Council to come. After this, Leo
commanded that his books should be burnt at Rome, and on the other side
Luther burnt at Wittemberge, his Canons and Popish Decretalls, saying: As they
have done to me so have I done to them. Thus far Masseus, The rest of this
history you may see in Sleidon. Baptista Mantuanus had before exhorted the
said Leo to do his office, thus speaking unto him in the fourth book de
fastis. Yet there remains many things for thee to do of great importance
holy Father. If they be great and weighty, thou must enterprise them with
great courage. But there are there amongst others which are most worthy wherein
thou should employ thy self and travel therein. The first is war
wherewith Italy already tired, and the fields thereof bedeawed with humane
blood. An other is; That the Roman Court is infected with a dangerous poison
which spreads it self over all Nations. Lastly, there is a Faith which is
oppressed, and on all sides offered a pillage, unto all cruel and barbarous
Nations. All these things cry after thee, and demand succors of thee: help
them, for the Commonwealth of Christ staggereth, and Faith is sick and already
nigh her death.

Leo having gathered a great sum of silver for pardons which he sold,
enriched his parents bankers, and listed them up into great dignities.

Martin Luther a great Theologian, began to preach the true and pure doctrine
against the hypocrisy of Papists, and from thence forward the Popedom ceased
not by little and little to fall into ruin.

Francis de Valois Duke de Angoulesme as the nighest and meetest to succeed in
the Crown, was King 57. years after the death of Lewis the 12. whose eldest
daughter called Claudia, he married.

Selim having driven away and after poisoned his old father because he lived
too long, was Emperor of the Turks in the year 1510. Unto this wickedness he
added the murdering of his brethren and the strangling of his Nephews. He
vanquished and drove the Sophie away: and in many battles overcame the two
Souldans, Campson, and Tonombeus, with the Mammelus and Arabians: he added to
his Empire, Egypt and Arabia, The death of Selms the year, 1518.
and took the great Caire. Afterward returning the into his Country an Ulcer
engendered in his loins, which still increasing as a Canker, killed him the 7.
year of his reign. See hereof Munster in his Cosmographie, Paulus Iouius, and
Ritche the first book.

Soliman the only son of Selim aforesaid, succeeded him in the Empire of the
Turks, Anno 1518. Soliman three years after took Belgarde in Hungary, which
was the Fortress and defense of the Christians, and from thence about other
three years he took Rhodes by composition, having in his Army 200000.
Turks, and 400. Galleys: and two years after that he destroyed the Country of
Hungary with fire and sword, vanquished the King of the Country, and took
Bude. But the 14. of his kingdom coming to besiege Vienna in Hungary with a
great puissance, he was put back by God his grace, and the force of the
Almaines. By nature he was hautie and glorious, having so great dominions and
victories. He pretended that the Empire of Rome and of the West appertained
unto him: For he said he was the true successor of Constantine, who
transported the Empire from Rome and unto Constantinople. His ordinary reuenew
is of six millions of skutes (some say seven) for each year: and whenever
it pleases him to make war, he gains more thereby then he leeseth, because
of the great store of silver he takes of his subjects. He has more treasure
and precious stones then all other kings together, as Paulus Iouius says: who
also attributes the loss of Rhodes to the carelesnes and negligence of the
Pope.

Maximilian deceased in Austriche the 12. January, after the obteining of the
Empire 27. years.

Charles 5. the son of Phillip Archduke of Austrich, Charles. 5.
of the age of 19. years was chosen Emperor of Rome the 25. June, Maximilian*
The Pope would have hindered his election, because he was king of Naples, and
that the kings of Naples were bound to the Pope to denounce that Empire,
whilst they should be kings of Naples: but it was in vain.

Zuinglius is called from Glarone to Zurich, to read and teach Theology.

The books of Luther are burnt the Popes partakers Almaine: Luther also for
his part publicly burnt at Wittemberge the Popes Canon law, as also a new
decree whereby he was condemned: and after yielded a reason of his so doing.

The Emperor at the instance of Frederic of Saxony, sent Luther, that under
his faith and safeguard he should come to a Journey held Worms, Charles. 5.
whither he came against the advice of his friends: and entering there the 16.
of of April, he came out again the 26. of the said month.

Ferdinand the Emperors younger brother Prince of Austrich, took to wife Anne,
the only daughter of Vladislaus King of Hungary and of Boheme, the sister of
Lewis, the last King of the line of Hungary.

Luther apposed by Eckins the Lawyer at the Journey at Worms, constantly
maintained the truth. The Emperor writ Letters to Princes, Luther
excommunicated and assailed on al sides.
whereby he declared his advise that Luther should be abandoned to whosoever
would sley him. He is excommunicated and anathematized by Pope Leo. The
Sorbonists of Paris assailed him: so did Henry the 8. King of England by his
own writing. Whereupon the Pope gave him the title of Defendor of the Church.

A Decree at Worms published by the Emperors Letters Patters against Luther
and his favorites.

Adrian. 6.
Adrian Pope sixth of that name, borne at Vtrict, in the country Holland, come
from a poor house, passed his youth in study at Louaine, norished and brought
up amongst the poor of the College called du Pourcean. From a Doctor in
Divinity and Doyen of S. Peter de Louaine, he was called to be a Pedagoge and
Schoolemaister of Charles the fifth, after Emperor. Erasmus having been cast off
as a suspected person, because of the doctrine, which after Luther published;
afterward being sent Ambassador toward Ferdinand King of Spain, he obtained
the Bishoppricke of Derthuse.

The Emperor passing into England to go into Spain, made alliance at
Windsore with Henry the 8. to espowse Marie his daughter (then of the age of
seven years) when she should be of full age.

John Rouchlin, restorer of the Hebrew tongue in Almaine, this year died.

The taking of Rhodes.
Rhodes besieged in the month of June by Soliman Emperor of the Turks, the
seventh month following is taken by composition, to the great damage and
dishonor of the Christians.

Christierne King of Danemarch; Noruege and Snede, Maximilian.
for fear Zeland, with his children and his wife Isabel the Emperors sister,
brought unto great necessity.

We may learn by such examples to fear God his judgments, when he
chastises both Countries and Kings for our instruction.

Charles Duke of Bourbon, Constable of France, willingly departed, partly
drawn by the Emperors fair promises, and turned himself against the French
King, to the great misfortune both of his own person and of France.

The books of a Physician and Magician were burnt at Rome, some of which were
brought unto Adrian, whereof he made great account: and they were after his
death found amongst his secret papers. And some thought he came to his
Popedom by an evil art. Paralip. Chron. Abb. Vrsp.

The Pope Adrian after like others, he had persecuted the truth of the Gospel
in the person of Luther and Oecolampadius, died of a death suspected of poison
in September, the second year of his Popedom.

Clement Pope, seueth of that name, a Florentine, Clement. 7.
of the Sect of Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, Prior des Cappes, succeeded
Adrian. He before was called Julius, but admonished by his familiar Cardinals,
he took the name of Clement, Functius. Some write him the Nephew, others the
son of Leo, others his bastard brother, of the house of Medices.

At Zuric there was a disputation three days whether the Mass and Idols
should be abolished.

The 20. of January following, the Journey of the Swisses Lucerne, Zuric is
hated of all the Swisses.
where they wholly confirmed the Popes doctrine, and condemned that of the
Gospel. The Swisses in common complained of them of Zuric.

Bourbon besieged Marceill in vain, from whence he retired into Italy, where
he was pursued of the French King, who took Millaine, and in winter besieged
Pauie upon Tesin.

Charles. 5.
Anthony Duke of Lorraine sharply persecuted such as bare any favor to
Luthers doctrine.

About the end of this year, certain Contrymen or peasants of Snabe
began to rise and rebel against the Count de Loupae their Lord, and after
their example their neighbors did the like, under the color of certain
charges, wherewith they complained to be burdened.

This stir was after very pernicious, and brought great troubles and
effusion of blood.

The Journey of Pauie.
A battle given at Pauie betwixt Charles de Lauoy, a Gentlemen of the Country
of Hainaut, the Emperors Lieutenant, and the French King, wherein the said
King was taken in the combat, and from thence carried by sea into Spain.

Division betwixt Luther and Zuinglius.
Zuinglius agreed not with Luther in an Article of the Supper. He said that in
the words of Jesus Christ there is a figure, such as there is found in infinite
places of the scripture the like.

Luther denies it, and says that the body of Jesus Christ is within the
bread and wine, and that it enters into the mouth. The Saxons follow Luther,
and Swisses, Zuinglius.

Of long time has Satan with his dark clouds obscured the doctrine of the
Supper: and now by contentions and debates he also seeks to take away from
men the true taste thereof.

The sedition of peasants remained not only in Almaine, but spread it self also
in Lorraine, nigh to Sauernes. Duke Anthony accompanied with his brother
Claude de Guise, and of some of the French troop which were at the Journey at
Pauie, fought with them and slew a great number, keeping not his promised faith
unto them.

The Sorbonist Doctors of Paris whilst their king was in, drove out of France
James Faber d'estaples, partly upon envy, and partly upon suspicion of
Religion.

The King advertised hereof, made the cause to be stayed until his return.

Frederic Duke of Saxony dyed, and John his brother was his successor.

Carolostadius writ against Luther, unto whom he answered at large.

The Pope Clement whilst the King was a prisoner writ Letters unto the
Parliament of Paris, grievously to persecute the Lutherans.

Touching the seditions of the peasants multiplied in diverse places. See the
History of Sleidan.

Luther takes a Nun to wife, whereby he receives many reproaches at his
adversaries hands.

In January a peace was made at Madril in Spain, betwixt Luther. The King
after he had seen his two children as hostages, returned into France.

The Emperor espowsed in Spain Isabel the daughter of Emanuel, and sister to
John, king of Portugal.

The Turk departed from Belgrade, and having passed from Danubie and Sauo, he
drew strait into Hungary, and bad battle unto king Lewis, who died in the
fight, and his wife Mary the Emperors sister, saved her self with swift
running.

John Sepuse, Vaiuoda de Transiluania, Wartes between Vaivoda and Ferdinand.
after being allied with the Turk against Ferdinand, was appointed king of
Hungaria, as his vassal and Tenant. Whilst they debated their rights by dint
of the sword, there fell out a very damageable war both for them and their
neighbors.

Francis king of France returned from Spain, allied himself with the Pope
and the Venetians to defend Italy by sea and land, against the Emperor, and
to recover the kingdom of Naples: and published a writing, whereby he showed
his reasons. And the Emperor caused to be published an other to the contrary.

Swisse infected with Anabaptists. At Saint Gaull, one Ioachim Vadian a learned
man, Consul of the said Town, with other Justices, incontinently caused the
head of the said paracide Anabaptist to be cut off.

They of Berne made known to their next Bishops their disputations, touching
the reformation of Religion: and publish Articles.

The taking of Rome.
Bourbon willing to pass for the Emperor into the kingdom of Naples, took
his way toward Rome, which he got by assault, Bourbon was there strooken with
a Bullet as he scaled the wall, and there left his life. The Town was pilled
the sixth day of May. Clement was besieged a long time with his Cardinals in
the Castle of Saint Angelo. And finally the seventh month after, he was
delivered by his ransom of 40000. ducats, after some.

The birth of Phillip, the Emperors son; was this year 1527.

The King of France having made a league with the King of England, sent into
Italy the Lord de Landrece, to succor the Pope: he took Alexandria, and after
Pauie.

The seventh of January, they of Berne held disputation, wherein Zuinglius,
Oecolampartius, Bucer, Capito, Blanrer had by the holy scriptures surmounted
and vanquished such as were of the adverse party. Finally, they confirmed by
the authority of the Magistrate through all their lands, the said Articles,
abolished the Mass, and threw down Images and Aultars.

The Kings of England in France demanded of the Emperor many things by their
Heralds: The King of France his children, offering silver for them. He of
England first three hundred thousand skutes for the borrowing of five hundred
thousand of interest, because the accords made betwixt them, in the year 1522.
had by him been violated and broken. Finally three years pension, which by
paction betwixt them the Emperor was bound to pay him: that is to say, 133000.
skutes by year. If he refused, their Heralds were to denounce war.

At Strasbourge, by the Popes advise every man assembled in his Tribe. The
Mass was laid down, until the Papists should show by the holy scripture,
that it is a service agreeable unto God.

It may then lie down long enough. For contrary it is wholly opposite unto the
Supper of Jesus Christ.

Sedition at Basil, betwixt the Burgesses and certain of the Senators for the
cause of Religion. The Burgesses having taken Arms, cast down the Images in
Temples: which was the cause that the Senate agreed to what they demanded: yea
and that twelve Senators which favored Papistrie should be dejected out of the
Senate: And that from thenceforth, when any question fell out to ordain any
thing, concerning the common wealth, that a Council of 200. should be called
thereunto to have their advise therein. The Mass then was abolished through all
their Seignorie, and Images publicly burned as the Instruments of Idolatry.

Upon a Wednesday which the Papist call Ashwednesday, the Idols were burnt at
Basil.

Lantrec being dead, and Andrew Danre of Genoua revolted, the French King began
to hearken unto peace.

Margarite the Emperors Aunt, and Loyse the Kings mother, assembled at
Cambray, A peace at Cambray.
and dealt for a peace in the month of August in this sort. The Emperor left
to the King, Bourgongne, if he engendered any male child of his sister. The
King gave for the deliverance of his children to the Emperor, twenty hundred
thousand Skutes, the debt of England being comprehended therein.

The Article again is added to extirpate the Lutherans.

The Emperor returning from Genes, and arriving at Ausbourge, denounced unto
the Protestants that they should let their preaching cease, and go to Mass
with him. They refused both he one and the other: showing there was no reason
to constrain them to do it, unless the cause were debated.

The 24. of February after he had sworn, The Emperors Coronation.
namely that he should all his life defend the honor and dignity of the
Roman seat, he is with great pomp and magnificence crowned Emperor at
Boulogne.

Ellenor the Emperors sister and the Kings spowse, came from Spain into
France with the Kings two children, Frauncis, and Henry, after they had been
four years in hostage in their Fathers place.

The Pope Clement and the Emperor besieged the Florentines, because they set
out of their Town such as were of the house of Medices. In the end Ferrand de
Gonzague brought them to composition, and they received for their Prince,
Alexander de Medices: unto whom the Emperor promised his bastard daughter
Margarite.

In this time Tiber at Rome ouerflowed his banks, and the wind so beat back
the surges and waves thereof, that the whole Town was greatly terrified
therewith.

A deluge of waters.
The like and more grievous tempest, came also in Holland and the Countries
adjoining, the sea having burst her banks and leuies, and took away all it met
withal, the length of the flat Country.

Ferdinand the Emperors younger brother, the fifth of January, at Cullen is
proclaimed king of the Romans: And the eleventh of April following crowned at
Aix, notwithstanding the Duke of Saxony protested by his son that he would
not agree there unto.

The Turk returned the second time against the Town of Vienna in Austrich:
but the Emperor and Ferdinand went against him in battle, and forced him to
retire.

The eleventh of October, Zuinglius of the age of forty four years, younger
then Luther by four years, was slain at a battle of the petit Cantons,
against them of Zuric: and about the end of November Oecolampadius of the age
of 49. years, passed also from this life into an other, in the Town of Basil.

Mary, the widow of Lewis King of Hungary, is appointed by the Emperor her
brother in the government of the low Country, in the place Margarite his
Aunte, lately deceased.

A Comete appeared almost through the whole month of August.

Loyse mother of the king of France, and sister to Charles Duke of Sauoy, dyed
this year.

A war recommenced betwixt the Swisses, namely they of Zuric and five
Cantons, but in the end a peace was concluded.

The Town of Munster receive the Gospel.

Christierne King of Denmark now banished from his Country by the space of
ten years: The King of Denmark imprisoned.
hoping to recover his kingdom was taken by sea, and laid in prison.

His son which the Emperor his uncle entertained, dyed of the age, able to
be employed in warlike affairs.

Soliman Emperor of the Turks came with a great Army to Belgrade: and from
thence drawing on the left hand, he besieged the Town and Castle of Giunte:
but Nicholas Iurixe being then within made him leave his siege.

John de Leiden a Cutler an Hollander, secretly, and Harman Minister, Rotmans
companion, publicly began to dispearse about the Town of Munster, the seed
of Anabaptisme. Rotman after he had resisted him in the beginning, and caused
them by the Senate to be driven out of the Town, declared himself to be an
Anabaptist, in a disputation appointed in the Town house. See the History of
Anabap. of Munster.

Who would not tremble at such a judgment of God, to see such as lately
professed the Gospel of the Lord, to fall into so great wickedness?

George Prince of Saxony, Cruelty of George Duke of Saxony.
for the Gospel banished three score and ten Bourgesses of the Town of
Lipsic, because they would not communicate in the Sacrament of the Supper,
unless it were under both kinds, of bread and wine.

The Pope Clement signified the Council unto the Duke of Saxony, that it
should be at Plaisance, or else at Boulongne, or at Mantua, Imperial Towns:
The Duke sent his Ambassadors toward the Protestants about the last of June:
who answered by writing, that they would have a Council free and well ordained
in Almaine, where the difference in Religion might be decided by newter and
equal Judges, yea and that by the books of holy scriptures.

In favor also of the French King he made four French Cardinals: Odes de
Chastillion, Phillip de Bologne, Claude de Gnyuri, and John the hunter.

In the month of March the Emperor of Italy sailed into Spain.

There was a marriage at Marceille dealt in, betwixt Henry the King of France
his son, a Prince of the age of fifteen years, and Katherine de Mecides
Pope Clements Niece, by the King of France his means, and the said Clements.

During the Emperors absence the Lantgraue passed into France, and in the
name of Vlrich Prince of Wirtemberge engaged and pawned unto the King
(borrowing of him ready Silver) the Earldom of Montbeliard, to the end to
restore the said Prince his cousin into his Seignories and Countries: upon
this condition, that if within three years it were not redeemed, it should
remain hereditarie unto the Kingdom of France.

Henry King of England, having put away the daughter of Ferdinand king of
Spain, the said Henry his brothers wife, took Anne Bullen: whereupon the Pope
commanded him to take again the said Katherine. See Sleidan.

The Pope Clement by the counsel of Curtius his Physician, The death of Pope
Clement.
having changed the Regiment and manner of his living, in his age, dyed in the
end of September of a disease of the stomach.

John Baptist Folengius in his Commentary upon the 105. Psalm, speaking of
Pope Clement his death says thus. Some say that in our time Clement the
seventh Pope of Rome, dyed of so dishonest a death as he was eaten with Lice.
Others think he was but poisoned.

In the month of November, at Paris, were many Placarts fixed unto posts in
diverse places against the Mass and other Articles of the Popish Religion:
Whereupon was exercised great cruelty and horrible butchery against such as
they called Lutherans.

Paul. 3.
Paul Pope, third of that name, an ancient man, was chosen the 11. of October,
and created Pope of Rome, and crowned the third of November. He reigned 15.
years, whereof we will handle hereafter.

In the month of January the King of France came to Paris, A bloody
procession.
ordained there a general procession where the Idol Saint Geneuiefue was
carried about in great pomp: there also made he an Oration to the people
against the Lutherans (as they called them). And for a solemn Sacrifice to
appease Gods anger, he caused six poor Christians to be burned, which
confessed the name of God in sundry places of the Town. For this cause was
he ill beloved in Almaine.

In the month of April the Emperor embarking at Barcelonne went into
Affricke, where he took the Town of Thunis, and the Fort of Golete: Thunis
and Golete.
he after made tributarie the king Muleasse.

Barbarosse the Turks Lieutenant, who occupied that kingdoms escaped, and
assembled a certain number of vessels in Argell: And the Emperor retired into
Sicilie.

In the month of July, the King of England beheaded John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, and Thomas Moore his Chauncellor, because they would not agree to
the Edict and statute made for the abolishment of the Popes authority, who
challenged to be head of the English Church. Fisher whilst he was prisoner was
chosen Cardinal, which nothing amended his cause with the King,

About the end of the month of October, Francis Sforce Prince of Millaine,
deceased without any heirs.

The sixth of December the Protestants assembled at Smalcalde. Guillaume de
Bellay, Lord de Langeny Ambassador for the king of France came thither: who
the 19. of December excused the king for the executions he had made of the
Lutherans: saying they were seditious people, and held a far other Religion
then that of the Protestants.

Moreover if they thought good of it, he had a great desire to send
Theologians and learned men into Amaigne: or else if they would they might
send their learned Divines into France to communicate together of certain
points of Religion.

The Senate of Auspurge received the doctrine of the Gospel.

Munster is besieged and by might taken by the Count d'Obersten, Captain of
the Army, and by their Bishop.

About the end of the month of January, John de Leiden Head of the
Anabaptists, Coipperdolin and Chrechring his companions, being tied to posts
were slain at Munster: the Head alone confessing his fault and something
repenting.

Henry King of England had by his wife Anne Bullen, a fair daughter called
Elizabeth.

The Emperor entered into Prouence with his Army, but wanting victuals for
his Camp, he was constrained to retire to Gene. A great number of his
soldiers dyed, and amongst others, his Lieutenant Anthony de Leave.

Francis the King of France his eldest son, dyed at Tournon upon Rosne, of
the age of 18. years. Sebastian de Moncucul, an Italian was drawn with 4.
horses: For giving him poison (as it is said).

Perone besieged by Henry Count de Nassau, and by Adrian d'erouy, Count de Reux.

There arose a great sedition in England against the King: For that be had
plucked down and banished the Popes authority.

Genes over into Spain.

Alexander de Medices Duke of Florence, is slain by Lawrence his kinsman,
promising him the enjoying of a Lady his neighbor of excellent beauty.

James the fifth, King of Scotland, espowsed Magdaline king Francis his eldest
daughter.

The Emperors Army in Artois under the conduction of Florent de Bure took by
force S. Paul, besieged Terouanne, but could not win it.

The eleventh of October was borne Edward, King Henry his son of England, of
Jane Semer, which he took to wife after Anne Bullen.

Anne de Mont-mourancy is created Constabled France, Charles de Bourbon.

The Emperor and the king Francis assembled Nice, where the Pope was to make a
peace betwixt them: and although they accorded not in the principal, yet they
concluded a truce betwixt them for ten yearers.

Margarite the Emperors bastard-daughter, after the death of the aforesaid
Alexander, is married unto Octauian the Popes son in law.

Henry of England caused the Relickes of S. Thomas of Canterbury to be taken
out of his Schrine, and made them publicly to be burnt.

The Emperor and king Francis met at Aignes mortes in Languedoc, and
entertained one an other.

Charles d' Egmond Duke de Gueldres, deceased very old, and William Duke of
Cleues possessed his Country as well by the dead man's will, as by the
Nobility of the Country.

Castelubro a Town of Illyrica, in the gulf of Ambracia, is taken from the
Turk by the Emperor and the Venetians, allied together.

Touching this Pope Paul, amongst a great number of his acts I will recite but
this little following; that the world may know how great their sanctity is,
which the Papists maintain with an his voice to be Peter's succors, and the
Vicars of Jesus Christ.

This Paul was an Astrologian, a Magician, and Divine, and amongst his most
familiars, had one called Denis Seuila a Magician, whom therefore afterward he
made a Cardinal, with one named Gaurice of Portugal, Cecius and Marcell
Negromancians and wicked villains: Of these did he enquire the fortune of
himself and his bastards. He got his red hatte in this manner. He had a sister
called Iulia Farnese, which he delivered to Pope Alexander, that he might be
a Cardinal and Bishop of Hostia, and to find means to pay his debts. For
those good Popes commonly are so inflamed with whoredom, that they make no
difficulty to promise read hats and Bishopprickes to such as will bring them
their sisters, or else that which is more horrible, their young brethren, to
violate. Many by such practices obtain great riches, and fat Benifices. And
(as Agrippa says) there is no shorter way then that to come thereunto.

This murderer poisoned his mother and a Nephewe, to this end that all the
succession of the Farneses, might fall upon him. Moreover seeing the other of
his sisters (whose carnal company he had sometime had) followed too openly the
manners and conditions of them of the house of Farnese, and that she loved more
the company of others, then his, he poisoned her also.

Being a Legate in Mark d'Ancone, in the time of Julius the second, he most
wickedly abused a maid, issued of a noble house of that Town. For he
counterfeited and disguised himself, feigning to be one of the Gentlemen of
the Legates house, so under the color of a promise to marry her, deflowred
her: Who after she knew the truth what he was, and that she was not his
legitimate wife, but his whore (at the least by the Canon law) she became
almost out of her wits. And of this marriage came that great Porteenseigne
and Captain of all Buggerers and Sodomites. Peter Lewis.

As one Nicholas de Chesme found him one day adulterously abusing his wife,
Laurea Farnese, (who was the said Paul's Niece,) he wounded him so well with
his dagger, that he carried the mark thereof all his life. He slew with
poison Bosuis Sforza, the husband of his daughter Constance, (whom before he
had often used as his whore) to the end he might more at his ease, and with
greater liberty enjoy her.

This Dotard very tyrannously oppressed them of Peruse, and drove from the
Seignorie Ascanius Column, a very just Prince. This detestable Robber and
Rouer took and usurped for himself the Town of Camer, after he had driven
away the Lady thereof: which was a woman endowed with a rare and singular
religion and prudence, and did so much with his practices with Cardinals, that
he exchaunged the said City of Camer (which was not his own) with the towns
of Parme and Plaisance, to the end to make his son Lewis, Lord and master of
them. Which act afterward by a just judgment of God was cause of the death of
the said Peter Lewis. He often consulted with his Cardinals how he might
hinder a National Council in Almaine: and commanded his Ambassadors that
they should inflame the hearts all Princes against the King of England.

Anne de Cleues, sister of William Duke of Cleues, is accorded in marriage to
the king of England.

In the month of Maya Comete appeared in the air, A Comete.
and almost the same day deceased Elizabeth the Emperors wife.

In August Castelnouo in Illirica is taken again upon the Emperor by
Barbarosse the great Turks Lieftenant, Castelnouo.
and almost all the garrison of the Spaniards slain.

The Citizens of Gaunt rose up against Mary, Regent in the Flaunders. He passed
then through France from Spain, with great receiving and entertainment of the
king and his subjects.

The Emperor and the King sent their Ambassadors to the Venetians, to join
with them for making war upon the Turk: but without any thing being moved
with that Embassage, they incontinently sent toward the Turk to make peace
with him. Some say they were behind counseled hereunto by the French
Ambassador.

They of Gaunt are punished by the Emperor: many are beheaded and otherwise
punished, and after he had taken their liberties from them, he caused a strong
Forte to be there builded, to bridle them.

The French king seeing himself out of hope to recover Millaine, he began to
contract with the Duke of Cleues, concerning a marriage betwixt him and the
Princess of Navarre.

Vaiuoda.
John de Vainoda king of Hungary died, leaving a little child called Stephen,
borne of Elizabeth, daughter of Sigismond king of Polonia.

Chabot.
Phillip Chabot Admiral of France, is condemned at Melnue Vincenne: but a
little after he was again restored unto all his goods and estates.

The Iouney of Remsbourg
The disputation of Remsbourge, began in April betwixt the Protestants, and
them which they called Catholics. Phillip Melancton, Bucer, Pistorius, and
other Theologians were there on the Protestants side, against Eccius, Iulles
Pffug, and John Gropper.

The seed of war.
Caesar Fregosa and Antonie Rincon (which the French king sent Ambassadors to
the Turk) as they passed the Pan to draw toward Venice, they were taken by
the Imperialists and put to death.

The Marquess Alphonsus Daual the Emperors Lieftenant in Lombardie, is
accused of that murder by the Lord de Langeay. The King dispatcheth his
Ambassadors to the Journey at Reiusbourge, to complain of that wicked act:
After, he stayed at Lions George d'Austriche, bastard son of the Emperor
Maximilian, Archbishop Valence, as he passed through France from Spain unto
the Emperor, who was in the low Countries.

Francis, son of Anthony Duke of Lorraine, espowsed Christierne, widow, the
daughter of Christierne king of Denmark, which displeased the king of France.

Ferdinand besieged Bude, a Town in Hungary, where the Queen Dowairie was
shut up with her little son: Bude falls to the Turk.
but the Turks coming down in great numbers in the month of July, he was
glad to leave his siege. The Turks arriving a little while after, took the
Town of Pest, and discomfited a great part of Ferdinands people. After,
whether the said Dowairie would or no, he forced her to appropriate Bude unto
him: under the color that she could not defend it against Ferdinand. So the
little King and his mother were banished into Transiluania.

The Emperor came to Lupues to speak with the Pope: The Journey Argiere.
And to hinder the Turk of an other side, and to withdraw him from Hungary,
he embarked himself with his Army in the Port of de Venere, and passing by
the Isles of Corseigne, Maiorque, and Minorque, he made sail to Argiere, where
he took land the third of October: but there arose a great and horrible
tempest of the sea, which scattered and dispearsed a great number of his
sails: so that having lost a good part of his Artillery, and almost all his
furniture of war, he was constrained to retire into Spain.

The French after they understood of this loss, took occasion to move war.

The principal Lords of Austriche, even to the number of 24. and with them,
ten Cities, presented a request unto the King Ferdinand the third of December
at Prague: to this end, that according to the decree of the last Journey at
Reiusbourge, they might reform their Churches. Ferdinand answered, that that
that Decree only appertained unto the Protestants: therefore he commanded them
to attend the issue of a general or National Council of Almaine, promised by
the Emperor at the said Reiusbourge.

The beginning of the Council of the Trent.
Paul Pope, published the Council at Trent the first day of

Edicts of extreme rigor were published at Paris against such as they called
Lutherans: namely, Persecution against the faithful.
to bring unto certain deputed Theologians, all such as were any thing spotted
therewith. And that all Stationers and Booke-binders should bring in within a
certain time all suspected books. Priests also had set down a certain form
of Interrogating such as came to confession, if they knew any Lutherans. A
general Procession on is made, and Geneuiefue, the Parisians Goddess, trotted
through the streets in great pomp.

The French king sent the Lord de Longueuil to the Duke of Cleues, there with
Martin de Rossem to leauie people, and to attend occasion to begin their
enterprise. After in the month of July following, war is denounced to the
Emperor. Longueuil and Rossem pilled and spoiled in Brabant all the Country:
but they wanted powder and furniture for Artillery.

Rochell.
They of Rochel in Xantoinge mutined against the king, for a Garrison placed
there against the custom, and for extreme tollages. Gernac is sent thither by
the king.

Whilst the king goes unto Parpignan, Guillame Poyet Chauncellor of France,
is by justice apprehended in the night time in his bed, and lead to prison: who
foreseeing this tempest, made himself a Priest a little before, to shun the
punishments which he knew to be due for his deserts.

The Papal Priesthood serves for a good cloak to cover all manner of
infection.

The Scots about the beginning of December fought very unluckily against the
English. The cause of the war was, because the king of Scotland came to York
as he had promised, to end a controversy which they had together about the
limits of their Countries.

Phillip king of Spain, and gave him in marriage Marie the daughter of John
king of Pontugall.

Sigismond the son of Sigismond king of Pologne, took in marriage Elizabeth,
the daughter of Ferdinand king of the Romans.

Clement Marot retiring to Geneua, set out in French verses, 20. Psalms of
David. He had before published 30. at Paris, whereupon he was persecuted by the
Sorbonists.

Landrecy.
The Emperor and Henry of England, joined themselves to make war upon the
French king, who took Landrecy and fortified it. Nice.


The Haven and Town of Nice taken, and the Castle besieged by the Prince d'
Anguien, after that Barbarossa (conducted by the Captain Poidin) had taken
land with his Army by Sea at Tolon.

The Duke of Cleues chastised by the Emperor, forsook the alliance of France.
The Princess of Navarre, in the way against her will with the Cardinal de
Ballay for her conduction unto Cleues, was stopped with great joy of the
marriage broken.

Trouble in Scotland, by such as demanded that their young Queen might be
accorded unto Edward son of king Henry. The king of France did so much, that
he pacified the Nobility to draw unto himself that alliance.

The Vauldois, a people in Prouence, are put to the spoil Vauldois.
wherefore the History is faithfully described, and at large in the book of
Martyrs which I have set forth.

At the Journey of Carignan in Piemont, nigh Cirisolles, (...) of Ca^^g^^n.
the Emperialists under the conduction of Alphonsus Dauall, are discomfited by
the Prince d' Anguien.

The Emperor takes again Luxembourge by composition, he takes Ligni and the
Castle: after S. Dedier, S. Dedier.
where Rene Prince of Aurange was stricken with a bullet and died, to the great
grief of the Emperor.

Anthony Duke of Lorraine, died not so much of age, Lorraine.
as of grief to see the war so nigh him, yea even as it were in his
Country. Francis his son succeeded him, who married the Emperors Niece.

The King of England laid siege before Bologne, Bologne.
and in the end took it by composition.

The Emperor being encamped upon the River of Marne, the Count Guillam de
Furstemberge was taken by certain French horsemen as he sounded the Watch.

The Emperor being at Soisson made peace with the king of France, the 24. of
September.

In the month of March Lewis Palatin Elector deceased, and had Frederic his
brother his successor.

Henry de Brunswic, a sworn enemy of all virtue, making no account of Marie
the sister of Vlrich Prince of Wittemberge his wife, but giving himself to an
whore, one of his wives Damzells, by whom he had seven children, was accused
by the Protestants in a full Audience of Estates the fifth of April, and to the
end the thing should be more secret, they caused to be made an Image like to an
whore, by certane Apostate women; when this was done, they caused her to be
buried with great pomp and magnificences, after they had made all the Priests
thereabouts say Masses, Vigills, and all the Service accustomed to be done by
the Papists at the burial of their dead. To this he had nothing to answer,
but remained confounded.

France caused a Fort to be built upon the sea bank nigh Bullen, to hinder the
victualling of the Town, holding his Army thereabouts.

Charles Duke of Orleance, the king of France his son, who should have been
son in law or in other alliance of the Emperor, the ninth day of September
being of the age of 23. years, was taken away by a malladie which held him
but few days.

Guillam de Fustemberge prisoner at Paris, after he had paid 30000. Skutes for
his ransom, was set at liberty in the low Country with the Emperor, who
honorably and amiably received him.

The Sorbonists of Paris were assembled at Melun by the Kings commandment, to
determine of Articles to propose at the Council.

After long disputation they thought it best wholly to follow them, which they
had lately caused to be disputed on at Paris.

The Theologians at Louaine, writ 32. Articles of the same subject that they of
Paris.

Peter Bridly, minister in the Church of the Strangers at Strasbourge, was
secretly called unto Tornay by such as were there desirous of the Gospel:
after he had some little while caught there, the 19. of February he was
cruelly burnt with a little fire. See the book of Martyrs.

Francis Duke of Lorraine died leaving a son, a little child. The Bishop of
Mets his Uncle, and his mother, were appointed his Tutors.

The daughter of Ferdinand married to the son of the king of Poland, dies
also.

This Pope Paul had assigned the Council of Trent (as is said) not to remedy
the evils of Christianity for the tranquillity of consciences, or to place
Religion in a good seat and estate, to the honor and glory of God: but to
tread under feet his truth, and to oppress the Ministers of his word. In which
place, seeing that he did not all he would, the year 1546. under color that
the air was there corrupted, he transported himself unto Boulongne, to the end
by that mean he might the better take away all liberty from Christians to
say their opinions, and to hinder the reformation of the Church. This
Antichrist raised horrible and strange wars against the servants of God,
pursuing them by fire, sword, imprisonments, and all other sorts of
punishments. Yea he spared not his Cardinals, namely, Fulger and Contarien,
after they had tasted the savor of the word of God: nor the Bishop of Pontus,
John Baptist: nor his brother Paulus Vergerius, Bishop of Iustinopoli.

The chief amongst the tormentors were his Nephews, the Cardinal Farnese,
and Octaua Duke of Parma his brother: which beyond all measure glorying
therein, the year of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1546. as they were upon their
departure from Italy into Almaine to make war upon the Protestants, they
vaunted bravely and fiercely that they would make such an effusion of the
Lutherans blood, that their horses should swim therein. And the mean while that
good holy Father Paul took his pleasure with his daughter Constance, after the
old manner. They say also that that old man stinking as a Goat, solicited to
whoredom an other his Niece, who was a very honest maid, and no less
laudable for her honesty and chastity, then for her excellent beauty.

This Pope as Baleus says, A number of whores.
had in his Tables the number of 45000. whores, whereof he exacted every month
tribute: to the end they might have liberty to exercise their whoredom: and
as says the book entitled Eusebius Captive, they are greatly esteemed, they
kiss the Popes feet, they talk very familiarly with him, they frequent day
and night with him: But such as trust only in Jesus Christ and embrace the
true doctrine, are held by the Pope for heretics, and of him are banished,
set in prisons and stocks, and punished by fire, sword, and Galleys.

The Elector Palatin reformed in his Country the doctrine and Popish
ceremonies, and received the Gospel.

The Conference of Reiusbourge is held. See Sleidan.

The 7. of January the Council began at Trent.

Alliance against the Gospel.
Alliance betwixt the Pope and the Emperor, concluded the 26. of June, to
reduce the Almaines unto the obedience of the Pantople: The Pope binding
himself to deliver 200000. Ducats into the hands of the Venetians: Moreover to
furnish ten thousand footmen Italians, and five hundredth lighthorsemen, waged
for six months. Moreover permitting the Emperor to sell of the reuenew of
the Monasteries of Spain, to the value of 100000. Crowns.
Crowns, and to take the moitie of all Ecclesiastical livings.

In the end a peace was made betwixt the kings of France and England, upon
condition that Bologne should remain English, until the king had paid the
silver by him promised.

On Satterday the 7. of August, of this year, 1546. the Town of Maligues was
in such sort handled with Thunder and Lightning, that of long time there had
not been seen the like. The Thunderbolt fell upon a Tower called Saderpoort,
that is to say, the gate of Canon powder: where there was more then 800. Barels
of Gunpowder, which being on a flame augmented the tempest, and first laid on
the earth that which was about it: after, it so embraced the Town, that
without abundance of rain mingled with the thunder, it was thought all should
have been consumed by fire.

The next morning, which was Sunday, there was found so many dead bodies
stinking, that in all have of necessity a great ditch was made to bury them
by Cartfulls. Of wounded, there were found more then an hundredth and fifty. A
woman great with child was found stiffled, who being opened, the child
received baptism. A damzel casting her self out of a bed to open a window in
the street, called Blochstranssem, the tempest so cut off her neck, that the
head hung at the remaining skin, a very sad and horrible spectacle. In a
corner of a street where is the Palace Bernard, a Tauerner called Croes,
being descended into a Seller to draw Beer for his ghuests, (of which, one
company were playing at Cards) the house in a moment was thrown on the earth,
and the gamesters overwhelmed with their Cards in their hands: none of that
house remained safe but the Host, by means of the vaulted Cave or Seller into
which he was descended.

Three or four days after this accident, there were many found in Caves and
Sellers which were dead of hunger, others stiffled, others lay in traunses and
swounds, with fear and incredible stench of the thunder. There was a man and a
woman found, that were carried away and hanged betwixt the branches of a Tree.

The Town which before was adorned with exquisite buildings, was now
altogether disfigured, and as it were rent in pieces. The Suburbs of
Neckerfpful was almost all ruinated. The Palace of Bergues, and that of Madame
Margarite, and the Emperors, were clean overthrown.

The house of Lombards (they are they which lend silver to usury) from top to
bottom was ruinated.

The Hosterie of the Postmaister was destroyed, and the stable with the horses,
were all carried away. One part of the Monastery of the Augustines and of the
Temples and Churches of the Town were broosed and broken down: And if the
storm had not broken his forces in the overthrow of the house of the Count
d'Hostrat, there had been no likelihood that any house in the Town, or
thereabouts, had remained whole.

There were found many hewn stones, thrown by the Tempest six hundredth paces
off, to the great damage of the places where they fell. The glass windows
through all the streets were broken. The fall of Tyles, and the cry of
persons, was horrible and fearful.

Thus the Lord sometimes makes men feel his terrible and fearful power.

In June, the Emperor sent the Cardinal of Trent to Rome, The war in
Almaine.
to conclude that co^federacie with the Pope, who had now delivered silver to
the Captains of war, for the war in Almaine.

On the other side, the Duke of Saxe and the Lantgraue, levied people in all
haste. The Emperor being demanded the causes of the war, he answered, it was
only meant against rebels culpable of treason. He sent Ambassadors to the
Swisses, praying them to remain still in their ancient amity. And that he
only determined to chastise certain mutinous people. The Protestants purposed
in August to besiege Seiusbourge, so meaning to fight against the Emperor: but
as they passed leisurely, ten thousand footme^ of Italy came to the Emperors
succors the last of August, and 500. horsemen, whose Captain was Octauius
Farnese, the Popes son in law.

The Count de Bure, who had levied people in the low Countries, passed Phine
in the month of August nigh Mets, and in September joined himself to the
Emperor.

Great troops of the Popes friends of all estates ran unto the Council of
Trent: In the number of which, amongst others were two notable Archbishops, the
one of Vspale in the Country of the Goths, called Olaus the great, and the
other of Armacane in Ireland: They were poor Archbishops which had little but
wind and smoke of Archbishops, and were entertained of the Pope at fifteen
crowns a month, and therefore thought he good they should be at this
Council under those titles, and to take place amongst others, that the world
might believe that there were yet found in far Countries, as Gothia and
Ireland, people which reverence his name, and submit themselves to his
obedience.

Herman Archbishop of Colongne, by the counsel and advice of his Estates, and
of his mere will, surrendered and gave over his estate of a Prince, and his
Electorship: and withal remitted unto the people, the oath of fidelity,
whereby they were bound unto him. Adolp Schauembourge is chosen in his place,
who straight changed Religion through all the Country of Colongne.

At Genes a sedition rose up: The Count Fliscan was Captain of them, who fell
into the sea and was drowned, whereby the fury of the seditious was much
lessened. Yet the Lord Ioanuin d' Aure was there cut in pieces.

The Emperor laid the cause upon the Farneses, and amongst others, upon Peter
Lewis, Duke of Plaisance.

Henry king of England, dyed about the end of January, The death of Henry the
8.
having instituted Edward his son, of the age of nine years: and after him,
he substituted Mary his daughter by his first wife, and after her, Elizabeth by
his second wife.

Under this young King Edward, the doctrine of the Pope was driven out of
England, and the Gospel put in the place by the authority of the Duke of
Sommerset his Tutor, and Uncle by the mothers side, and of Thomas Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Council of Trent divided, some of the venerable Fathers retired to
Bolongne, because a Physician (who was in the Popes wages) told them that the
air of Trent was not wholesome. The other Bishops which were under the
Emperors obedience, remained at Trent.

A sedition at Naples of the Bourgesses against the Spaniards, because that
Peter de Tolledo Viceroy, sought to bring in the Spanish Inquisition concerning
Religion.

The last of March, Francis king of France, after he had reigned 32. years,
died at Ramboillet.

Henry 2. of that name, his son, succeeded him in this year, and the same day
he was borne, that is to say, the last of March.

Anne de Montmourancie, now having been absent from the Court six yearers, was
again called. Constable.
Such as before were in honor and credit, some were laid in prison, others
were deposed, or lost their credit and honor.

Peter Martyr a Florentine, professor of Theology, is called from Strasbourge
into England, and Bernardin Ochinus, P. Martyr.
a man renowned in Ilalie for his eloquence.

Anne the only daughter of Vladislaus, the last king of Hungary and Boheme,
the wife of Ferdinand king of the Romans, a fertile mother for children, died
about this time.

The 24. of April, The taking of the Duke of Saxony.
the Emperor using extreme diligence and subtlety, passed the River of Abis,
and suddenly took the Duke of Saxony: who having but a weak Army was
discomfited: and be himself after he had fought all the day, wounded in the
left cheek, was taken and carried away prisoner.

His condemnation.
The seventh of May the Emperor condemned him to be beheaded: yet at the earnest
intercession of the Elector of Brandebourge, he yielded him his life: and in
the place thereof, imposed upon him laws of extreme rigor: Amongst others,
that he should subject himself to that which the Pope would ordain upon him,
touching Religion. The Duke wished rather to die; whereat the Emperor
maruelling, remitted that condition: but yet he took from him all his goods
saving 50000. Crowns which the Duke Maurice (unto whom that spoil came)
should give him yearly. The 21. of May, Wittemberge yielded it self by that
Dukes commandment: after he had acquitted to his son and his subjects, the
oath of fidelity they ought him: and Maurice took season thereof.

An example of magnanimity and constancy, more then Heroicke, that is,
Christian, which God gives to his in the midst of the greatest afflictions
of this world.

The Journey of Vlme.
The estates of the Empire assembled at Vlme. There the Emperors Ambassadors
purposed to make a league from thenceforward to appease all troubles, if any
such arise like this last: But the pestilence dissipated this conspiration
against the Gospel, and the estates retired to Ausbourge.

The Lantgraue of Hesse, to obey the conditions of peace proposed unto him,
came unto the Emperor at Hale: and after supper as he would have departed, he
was stayed. He complained that he was betrayed, and promises not performed
unto him.

The Emperor before the estates at Ausbourge, declared the cause wherefore he
set him not at liberty to be this: That he exhibited not the Letters and
secrets of the League of Smalcalde. And takes witness unto Maurice and
Brandebourge, that he never meant him less then a perpetual prisoner.

The doctrine of the Papists dispenses herein; namly, that unto Heretics men
should keep no faith.

Peter Lewis, the Popes son, was shine at Plaisance in his Castle, by a Band
of 36. which had co^spired against him. They hanged his body in a chain, on
the top of the Castle walls, a thing much pleasing the people. He was slain
the 10. of September, on the same day whereupon his Father Pope Paul being
cunning in Negromancie, had warned him to take heed.

The end of tyrants are miserable and horrible, and should put us in mind of
Gods judgment.

Certain time after he had been cast into the graves, the Plaisantines
themselves massacred him with the stabs of Daggers. After, Dom Ferdinand de
Gonsague strengthened the town with a Garrison.

The Mass was abolished in England by a decree and judgment

The Venetians after the Emperors fashion, made a very rigorous Edict against
such as are called Lutherans. One called Francis Spiera, of the Citadelle (a
Town of the Territories of Venice) for that in the said Venice before John
Cuse, the Popes Legate, he had renounced the truth of the Gospel which he
knew, fell into despair: and of a vehement and great apprehension thereof, got
a great malladie and sickness, wherein he could no way be comforted: and
whatsoever any alleged of Gods promises of his mercy, he would still answer
that they nothing appertained unto him, because he said, he had sinned against
the holy Ghost. And in that despair finished he pitiously his days.

This is a great good example, worthy to be earnestly thought on.

Maximilian the eldest son of Ferdinand, from Trent arrived in Spain, and in
great magnificence espowsed Mary the Emperors eldest daughter, his
Cousin-germaine.

Jane the only daughter of the king of Navarre, who before was promised unto
the Duke of Cleues, was given in marriage unto the Duke of Vendosme.

The Emperor gives charge to certain traitors of the truth, namely, Iulles
Pflug, Michael Sidonius, and John Islebe Agricula, with a Secretary of
Grauiele, to build a book of Religion, and called it Interim. This book
shook Almaine more then all the grievous persecutions that had bin before. It
was called the Emperors book.

Ellenor the dead king Francis widow, left France and retired into her
brothers low Countries.

The Bourdelois in Guienne mutined against the King because of a subsidy or
taxation, and slew the kings Lieftenant there, whereof they were by the
Constable chastised. He constrained themselves to make the fire, and to burn
all their privileges. He caused a great number of the chief of the town to
be put to death. They were constrained to follow the Funerals of the said
Lieftenant slain, in the habit of Criminalls, carrying Torches in their hands,
and demanding mercy.

Ambrose Blaurer, Minister of Constance, and with him a great number of the
Bourgesses, left the Town because of Religion.

The Princes and Towns of Almain are solicited and forced by the Emperor to
give answer unto the approbation of his book.

The Emperor also caused to be set out a form of Ecclesiastical reformation
for an outward show, which after they had heard recited, they approved and
promised to cause them to be observed in their Churches, with the Popes good
pleasure.

The Duke of Wirtemberge at the alone commandment of the Emperor, straightway
caused the book to be read unto the people, forbidding them to do any thing to
the contrary.

The Duke of Saxony being prisoner, was much solicited to receive the
Emperors book of reformation, but he still remained constant without bowing
or yielding either by threatenings or promises, which was cause that his gardes
began to handle him more roughly and rudely. The Preacher, which he always
till then had with him, fearing danger, found means to escape.

A great diversity of courage betwixt the two Dukes.

The Duke Maurice returning into his Country, proposed the Emperors decree,
and caused the Divines of Leipsic and of Wirtemberge, to assemble and determine
thereupon. Which after they had two or three times assembled, they ordained of
things indifferent, Adiaphores.
commonly called Adiaphores.

In the end they set out in writing at Leipsic, a form of Religion, which all
Duke Maurice subjects should follow.

The Bishop of Strasbourge, summoned the Ministers and Thomas, to receive the
Emperors decree.

Bucer and Phagius with the Senates leave, departed the first day of April, to
go into England, whither they were called by Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury.

Thus the Lord provides for his: After he has taken his truth from one place,
he sends them into an other, to do his work there.

The King of Fesse in Affricke, Fesse in Affricke.
being chased by a certain Zepziphe king his neighbor, who from low estate
was grown unto that greatness, implored help of the Emperor at Auspourge.

Whilst Religion was thus troubled in Almaine, the Pope thought it good to make
his profit thereof. Therefore he sent their Legates into Almaine with an
Indult: by which power was given unto them, to receive all such as they would
into the bosom of the Church: and to permit by the Popes authority to
communicate the Supper of the Lord under both kinds, and to eat all kind of
meats at all times. The Ministers of the Lantgraues Country refused the Indult.

Phillip of Austrich made his entry into Bruxelles where his Father was, and is
received in great magnificence and pomp, the first day of April.

They of Magdebourge opposed themselves with might and maine against them of
Wirtemberge and Leipsic, and taxed and reproved them greatly, for that
concerning indifferent things, they had made a way and entry for the Popes
doctrine.

The 10. of June the Queen of France was crowned at Saint Dennis. In the said
month of June, Henry king of France made his entry into Paris, commanded a
general procession, and dedicated it with the blood of certain poor
Christians, which he made to be burned for Religion. See the book of Martyrs.

Le sieur de Veruin, for yielding Bullen to the English men, was beheaded at
Paris, and le sieur de Biex his Father in law, was condemned to perpetual
prison.

The Cantons of Basil and Schaffuse in Swissia, made alliance with the King of
France, whereof every one greatly marvelled, because he persecuted their
Religion with fire and blood: Zurie and Berne refused that alliance.

Sedition in England, partly for the change of Religion, and partly for common
grounds occupied by Gentlemen for their private use: there was great
bloodshead: In the mean time the King of France took certain holds about
Bologne, whereby he put the English in great distress. The fault of all this
was laid upon the Duke of Somerset, and therefore he was imprisoned at London.

This Pope Paul of the age of 82. years, dyed the 10. of November. On all
sides Cardinals ran to Rome to elect a new Pope.

Julius. 3.
Julius the third of that name borne at Aretio, called before John Maria de
Monte, who was President in the Council of Trent and Bolongne, was chosen Pope
the 10. of February, after that the Cardinals, which were in great number had
long time debated in the co^claue. Some say that this Pope promised by oath
unto the Ferneses to leave Parme to Octauius Bernese.

Whilst the Cardinals were in the Conclaue to choose the Pope Julius, certain
Letters came into the hands of some of them, which were written the 26. of
January by an household servant of the Cardinal of Mantoue, called Cornelius
Olive, to a friend of his called Hanniball Contin: and with them certain
verses made in the vulgar Italian language, wherein speaking of his good
affection toward him, and the desire he had to see him, he uses so infamous
and dishonest words, that hardly can any recite them without shame and
blushing. Hereof came the taunt of such as said it signified that some infamous
and dishonest Pope should come out of that Conclaue, from whence such
proceeded. They which read these Letters said as well in Italy as in Almaine,
they never read any more villainous and detestable.

Hereby (Reader) may thou judge what the spirit is, which the Papists vaunt
so much to have in their Masses and in the election of their Popes.

The 22. of Frebury, Julius is crowned Pope by the Cardinal Cibo, two days
after he had opened the gilded gate with a golden key: and celebrated the year
of Iubile, which his predecessor Paul the third had so much desire to see.

And because of an ancient custom, The Popes little Cardinal.
the new Pope might give his red hat to whom he thought good, he made Cardinal
a young boy called Innocent, whom he had sometimes abused when he was Legate at
Bologne, notwithstanding the other Cardinals approved it not, yea resisted
it. Moreover he received him into his house, and into the number of his
Domestickes and familiars. A brute went through the town of Rome, yea it was
divulged by certain diffamitorie Libells, that Ganymedes was entertained by
Jupiter, although he was not fair. This Pope himself dissembled it not: but
customably in a manner of pastime, would account his follies therein. Paulus
Vergerius has left in writing this History. Pope Julius (says he)
determined to make a young youth called Innocent a Cardinal, who not only came
from a father and mother of base condition: but that was of a most wicked and
dishonest conversation. Wherefore as on a certain day he had made this motion in
the presence of the Cardinals, and that there was no man which resisted it
not: but that more is, as certain Cardinals said freely. I pray you what
find you in this young man who deserves that we should do him that honor?
Julius answered. And I pray you what found you in me to do me that honor,
as to make me Pope without any desert? advance this young man, and he will
merit it.

The Mass which had bin banished Strasbourge the space of 21. years, was set
up again in three Churches the first of February. A great number of children
ran thither to see so strange and new a thing. The Priests were affraied at
it, and complained unto the Emperor.

The Emperor and the King of France, one after the other, made publish each in
their Countries very cruel Edicts against the Lutherans, as they called them.

About the end of May, the Emperor with Phillip his son, departed from
Bruxelles, The Journey at Ausbourge
to come to the Journey at Auspourge, and brought with them the Duke of Baxe
captive, leaving the Lantgraue in prison at Malignes.

In the time of this Pope, was John de Case a Florentine, Archbishop of
Beneuent, and Legate of the seat in the territory of Venice. This man who
made so magnificall a profession of Popish singleness, was not ashamed to make
a Book in Italian Rhyme, wherein he praises and exalts that horrible and
detestable sin of Sodomitry, yea even to name it a divine work: and
affirms that he took great pleasure therein, and that he knew no other kind
of palidiarzing or whoredom. The book was Imprinted at Venice, by one Traian
Naun.

Behold notable Archbishops of the Papal seat: with such Judges do the Pope
and his master the devil serve themselves in their Consistories, to condemn
as heretics such as teach and write the truth with purity.

In a Catalogue of books prohibited which he made whilst he was Legate, he
comprehends no other therein, but such as make profession of the pure
Euangelike doctrine.

Francis Spiera as is abouesaid, fearing the tyranny of tormentors, renied the
verity of Jesus Christ, and dyed in extreme despair. Sleidan also makes
mention of the Sodomitike book above spoken of.

It would be here too long to rehearse the gests and deeds of Julius the third,
concerning the Iubile which was in his time: the Council of Trent, the
confirmation of that Idol de Laureto: the debate which he had with the Bishop
of Aremin his Steward for a Peacock, and many such like things. Amongst other
viands he greatly delighted to eat the flesh of Swine and Peacocks. But his
Physician had advertised him that he should take heed that he eat no swines
flesh, because it was contrary unto the Gowt, wherewith he was often
tormented, but yet he would not abstain therefrom. The Physician secretly
advertised the Clarke of his kitchen that no porke flesh should be served. As
then there was none served, the Pope perceiving it, demanded of his Steward
where his dish of porke was: who answered that his Physician appointed that
none should be served. Then cried he in this manner: Bring me my porke flesh,
Al di spetto di Dio, that is to say, in despite of God. This now is a common
jest, and ordinary amongst rakehells and rascals, ruffians and bawdes,
through Italy, as Also many other speeches as infamous and dishonest.

Blasphemies used in Italy, authorized by the Popes word.
Having one day seen a Peacocke at his dinner which he had not touched, keep
said he, this cold Peacocke for my supper, and spread the table in the Garden,
for I will then have company. As then he sat supper, he saw other hot Peacockes
served upon the table, and not seeing his cold Peacocke which he commanded
to be kept, being exceedingly vexed, he disgorged an execrable blasphemy
against God. At which, certain Cardinals that sat with him at the table,
said. Let not your holiness be so chollericke for so small a matter. Whereunto
Julius answered. If God would be so angry for an Apple, as to cast our first
Father Adam out of Paradise; wherefore should it not be lawful for me that
am his Vicar, to be angry for a Peacocke, seeing a Peacocke is of much more
valewe then an Apple?

As he was about to create Cardinal Peter Betan Bishop of Fano, of the order
of the Iacobins, certain of the Cardinals resisted him, and amongst other
things, alleged that he was infected with the heresy of the Lutherans. Unto
whom Julius answered: Although it be so, should it not be wisely done by
putting a red hat on his head to purge him of that evil, and so retain him
one of ours with such a bond, then to suffer him to fly from us and join with
our enemies that we have in Almaine, as Vergerius did?

The 10. of September, Affrike a Town of Affrike, Affrike taken.
was taken by the Emperors Army, under the conduction of the Viceroy of
Sicilie. Dracut Lord of the Town, withdrew toward the Turk his master, and
the war began again more sharp betwixt the Emperor and the Turk.

A sedition in Ausbourge, because of certain Spaniards which in the month of
August made mockes in the Church, at the Sermon.

A woman also of the said Town mocked a Priest which in his Surplice, walked
through the Town with his host. The Emperor had put the said woman to death,
had it not been that Mary the Governor of the low Country, entreated for her
and saved her.

Maurice and Albert his cousin the Elector of Brandebourg, and Henry of
Brunswic, took Arms against them of Magdebourge.

Nicholas Pernot, sieur de Granuelle, dyed at Ausbourg, about the end of
August, to the Emperors great grief. Anthony Pernot his son, Bishop of
Arras, succeeded in his estate.

About the beginning of November Virich Prince of Wittemberge deceased from
this world, and his son Christopher was his successor.

Stephen Bishop of Winchester was dispossessed of his Bishopprick in England,
and put in prison, because he would not submit himself unto the Kings Edicts
and laws touching Religion.

Bucer.
The last of February, Bucer dyed at Canterbury, and was very honorably buried,
with a great number of Epitaphes, made by learned men lamenting his death.

The Council of Trent was deferred by the Pope from the first of May until
the first of September.

Wonders.
In Saxony diverse prodigious things were seen, as three Suns, and three
Moons, now pale and bleake, or blew, now red as blood.

The king of France caused to be published a very cruel Edict against the
Lutherans, confirming, yea passing all his former Edicts, and left nothing
behind that appertained to extreme cruelty.

On all sides the Papists assembled at Trent on the Council day: likewise from
Almaine resorted the Electors Ecclesiastical.

The Cardinal of Cressentia was President in the Popes place. The Emperor and
the King Ferdinand sent thither also their Ambassadors. But the King of France
by his Ambassador disavowed the Council for general: reputing it but a
particular congregation to the profit of some. His protestation was held for
none, without vouchsafing to record it.

Le sieur, d' Brisac, took in Piedmont and about Turin, a certain number of
Towns, and amongst others, Cheri, and Saint Damian.

The Turks Army after having assayed the Fort of Malta, and rushed upon Tripoly
in Affricke and took it. The Emperor accused the King of France to be the
Author of this loss.

An Edict published by the King of Paris, whereby it was forbidden to transport
any silver out of the kingdom to Rome, because of the war betwixt the King
and the Pope. There came a writing from the Emperors Court, whereby was
declared the cause and original of the war of Parma, The war of Parma.
and wherefore he received Plaisance into his protection. The fact of Duke
Octauius is condemned and detested. The French to the contrary, show also by
writing the danger wherein Octauius was at Parma, the just cause that the King
had to succor it, and that wrongfully the Emperor had taken the Town of
Plaisance.

The Duke of Somerset is again imprisoned in October, by the means of the
Duke of Northumberland: unto whom came the government of the Realm after him.

The eleventh Session of the Council of Trent was in October: where was
confirmed the local presence, transubstantiation, and all that ever was
invented for the Deification of that fair morsel of bread.

George de Martinuse, of Dalmatia, The Monk of Transiluania
commonly called the Monk, a man of great authority in Hungary, was made
Cardinal, who was after slain the 18. of December in his own house by certain
Italians, under color that he dealt with the Turk suspitiously: although
before he had so wrought with the wife of the deceased Vaiuoda, that she gave
over the government of Transiluania to the King Ferdinand.

In November the Duke Maurice agreed altogether with them of Magdebourge.

The end of her evils and calamities, was the entry of a great war, yea of
all ill luck unto the Emperor. For Maurice having practiced with Kings and
Princes strangers, determined with himself by force to deliver the Lantgraue
his Father in law: which notwithstanding he deferred a certain time, because
first he thought it good to prove all by love.

Somerset the uncle of King Edward, was beheaded at London: at the instance of
the Duke of Northumberland.

Complaints of Almaine.
Maurice by a writing dedicated unto the states of the Empire, greatly
complains of the discord of Religion amongst them. Item of the captivity of
Lantgraue, a prisoner by treason, to the great dishonor of the Emperor.

Albert of Brandebourge, complains also of the miserable servitude of
Almaine: and having expressed the causes thereof, he declares that he and his
companions do judge the Ecclesiastical people to be the chief authors of all
the abouesaid evils: And Maurice and Albert allied and joined themselves
together at Rotebourge.

Ausbourge besieged by them, is taken.

The Fathers of the Council at Trent being at discord, the Imperialists against
the Romanists: after they understood that the Princes marched right to the
Alps to gain the straights, incontinently left all and took them to their
feet.

Take counsel and it shall be dissipated: speak the word and it shall not be
established says the Lord. Esaias. 8.

Martin de Rossem conductor of the Emperors Army in the low Countries,
pilleth and burns Picardie and Campaign, and took Astenay.

The King Henry of France published in writing the causes of the said voyage,
and of the war that he enterprised in Almaine: namely to withdraw the Princes
out of prison, to bridle the Emperors ambition, and to remit that Country
into his first liberty. The king himself Protector of Almaine.
He sends to them of Mets in Lorraine, to provide victuals for his army,
which if they did, he promised them favor and amity: but after he had taken
Toul and Verdun, Towns of the Empire, he drew right into Lorraine, and the
third of May came to Sauernes, Strasbourge sent him victuals.

The Prince of Salerne, about some dissension between him and the Viceroy of
Naples, withdrewe himself from the Emperors service, and turned directly unto
the King of France.

King Henry his Army entered Lorraine, they conducted into France the Prince of
the Country. The 10 of April the Constable entered Metz, under the color of
amity, and so laid hold of the Town. The King arrived there certain time
after, and constrained that people to take of him an oath.

The King coming again into France in May, burnt the Country of Luxembourge,
took again Astenay, got also Iouy and Danuil^iers.

The Sennois chased away the Garrison of the Spaniards, and by the help of the
King of France, destroyed the Castle which the Emperor built there, and set
themselves at liberty.

Metz besieged by the Emperor the 2. of October.

Albert not agreeing with the king of France for his estate, nor for his
companies pay, turned on the Emperors side.

The Duke d' Aumaile being come into Lorraine with a great company of people,
assayling the Marquess Albert, was vanquished, wounded, and taken prisoner, by
the said Marquess.

In December the Emperor was constrained by evil weather to remove his Camp
from Metz, and to withdraw himself into the low Country, where the third part
of his Army dyed.

In this time the great Turk Sultan Solomon committed a Soltan Mustapha his
eldest son, Solomon strangleth Mustapha his eldest son.
which he had of a Slave: This man having been sent with his mother from his
first youth into the Province of Amasia, which had been given him, was so well
and carefully nourished, that he acquired and got with his years great
estimation, not only in the said Country, but through all other his Fathers
Regions. This his mother being absent, Solomon called to him an other Slave
named Roze, which was endowed with admirable beauty, accompanied with all
delicacies and entisements possibly to be in a woman. He had of her four other
sons, Mahomet, Baiazeth, Solim, Grangier with the Wenne, and one daughter
which was married unto Bassa Rostan. The said Roze could so well play her part
with Soliman, that he was exceedingly ravished with her that with help of
Muchly, that is the high Priest of Mahomets law, and under shadow of
Religion, she was not only made of free condition, but the legitimate and
espowsed wife of Soliman, unto which no other ever came. Being lifted up into
such honor, and seeing herself entierly beloved and favored, she had no
greater care then to draw the Empire unto one of her children after their
Fathers decease. For she knowing that the singular virtues of Mustapha were so
contrary unto her, and that as long as he lived she should never have rest
(for that he had obtained the love of the people of war, and that all men's
eyes were upon him, for the great hope they had of his excellent courage and
singular dexterity) therefore sought she to make him odious unto Soliman.
Whereunto her son in law greatly aided her, because he governed all
affairs. Her reason was, that Mustapha trusted so much in the love and favor
which he had obtained of all men, by a great liberality, hardiness and
valiancie, that he burnt with such lust and desire to reign: that every one
feared that in affecting the Empire, he would advance the days of Soliman: as
Selim had before done to his Father. Therefore she incited Soliman, and
besought him with tears and lamentations, to take order and provide for his
safety. And although that from the beginning she had profited little, and that
Mustapha had discovered her impoisonments and ambushes which she laid for him
ordinarily: yet left she not to continue it, with the help of a Jew, a
renowned Enchantresse: who having given her certain drugges, she caused the
love of Soliman toward Roze to redouble: Insomuch that she assured her self
to end her purposes, though it were long first.

Finally, after many practices, she found means to suborne Mustapha his
governor, and caused him to write (though falsely) unto Soliman, that his said
son would marry the daughter of the King of Persia. This old man stirred, yea
tired with the continual complaints of Roze and Rostan, easily believed these
news and aduertisements. Wherefore in the year 1552. after he had spread a
brute and fame of the dissent and coming down of the Persians into Siria, he
sent thither Rostan with a puissant Army, for (under the shadow to go meet
his enemies) to seize upon Mustapha, and to bring him prisoner to
Constantinople: with express commandment to sley him if he could not take
him otherwise. But Mustapha who was advertised of all, and knew also that the
Persians were not at all in the field, met him with seven thousand of his most
experienced Soldiers, which made Rostan return without doing any thing.

Soliman being more angered, the year following made such an other brute of the
Persians, and having levied a great Army as if he would have gone against the^,
being arrived in Siria, he sent to his son, to will him come to his Camp.
Mustapha, knowing certainly that it was he alone they would have, although he
was prayed and solicited to withdraw some other where, and to shun the
fury of his Father: yet he trusting in his innocence, and thinking it a
thing more commendable and worthy of his greatness, to dye in obeying his
Father, then living to incur the note of infamy and Treason, yea though he
might have had the Empire of the whole world: thinking also that without
having made any refusal, by his presence he might have appeased his Fathers
wrath, he adventured to go thither to him: and being arrived in Solimans
Camp, he was suddenly taken and strangled in his presence. And at the same
instant, the head of Bassa of the Province of Amasia, was taken from his body.

This cruelty as soon as it came to the ears of Grangier, one of the four
brethren, he manfully rejected the gift and spoil that his Father gave him,
and greatly lamented the death of his brother; saying. A cruel Traitor, The
complaint of Grangier with the wen, over Mustapha.
I say not Father. Take to thy self now the treasures, the Tapistries, and the
Province of Mustapha, and govern it at thy pleasure. Is it possible I should
fall into thy spirit infamous man, without all humanity, against all right to
put to death so valiant a person, as never was nor shall be the like in the house
of Ottoma^s. Ha, ha, I will take good order that thou shall not impudenly vaunt
and glory that thou have done the like to me. And straight drew his dagger and
struck it so far into his own body, that he fell down dead upon the
earth. Which so soon as his Father knew, he made a marvelous mourning, and
yet left not to seize upon all his goods, which caused a tumult in the Camp of
Mustapha: but it was nothing in regard of that they did after they knew of his
death. In such sort that Solomon to the great danger of his life was
constrained to chase away Rostan, and to dispoile him of all his honors and
dignities. Rostan spoiled of all his honors.


This death came well for the Christians: whose great enemy Mustapha was, who
took great delight in sheading their blood. It brought also such great
displeasure unto the Turks, that thereupon followed amongst them this
proverb. Gietti Soltan Mustaphat. That is, all we thought on is ended in
Musthapha. For they thought that he would have enlarged their Empire, which
they looked for at no other hand.

The French took Verceil in the Country of Turin, but seeing they could not
keep it, they spoiled, pilled it, and retired.

Edward. 6.
Edward King of England, being in his mortal bed in the month of May,
Northumberland caused one of his sons to espowse Jane Suffolk, the Kings
cousin.

This King of the age of 16. years, dyed the 6. of July, to the great damage
of Christian Religion.

Marie.
So soon as Mary was peacibly Queen of England, at her arrival at London,
she caused to be took out of prison the Duke of Norfolk, and the Bishop of
Winchester, a pernicious man, and made him Chauncellor.

The Emperors Host after it had raced Terouane, marched into Artois, and
there in the month of July forced Hesden, which the king of France had a little
before taken. There was slain Horace Fernese, the husband of the kings bastard
daughter, and a great number of Gentlemen prisoners.

A battle in Saxony upon the River of Visurge, betwixt the Duke Maurice and
the Marquess Albert: wherein Albert was vanquished, and Maurice victorious,
strooken with a bullet, whereof he dyed two days after.

A dear victory bought with death.
Michael Seruet de Ville-neuisue, a Spaniard, Seruetus burnt.
a pernicious heretic, having of long time written execrable things against
the Trinity, and proudly maintained them at Geneua: after long detention and
the participation of the Council of the Churches and faithful Commonwealths
of Suecia, finally in the end of October was condemned by the Lords of the
said Town to be burned alive. The hardness of his heart was such that being
upon the wood he would never confess Jesus Christ the eternal son of God:
but only the son of David, and the son of the eternal God.

In England by the decree of all the Bishops of the kingdom then assembled,
The Gospel driven out of England.
the Edicts and statutes of the deceased King Edward concerning Religion, were
defaced and made void, and the Popish doctrine approved and allowed.

Albert agreed with Augustus, the brother of Maurice, by means of the King of
Denmark, and of the Elector of Brandebourge.

Jane Suffolk Queen of England, as is said by King Edwards testament, and the
three sons of the Duke of Northumberland, were declared culpaple and
condemned of Treason.

John Alasco, a Polonian Gentleman, Alasco.
with a great number of the French and Flemish Churches, flying from England,
Dispersion of the faithful.
did Denmark and Saxony, seeking a place to dwell in: But they were every
where refused, not only of a place of habitation, but also they were commanded
to get them out, yea in winter time, not suffering them to remain in their
havens. The cause of this inhumanitie and inhospitalitie was their difference
for the doctrine of the Supper of the Lord: whereof we have before touched.

Finally, a place was allowed them in East Friseland, Emden.
in the Town Emden, where a Church was open for them, and granted by the
Countess of the said Emden, a true Christian Princes.

Ferdinand being at Vienna rejected the supplication of the

John Frederick Duke of Saxony, after his deliverance from captivity, agreed
with the Duke Augustus, and he acquitted to him and his heir Males the
Electorship, the Country of Misne, and the Towns where the Mines be, yet he
held unto himself the name and Arms of the Elector.

The 20. of February, Sibille of Cleues, wife of the said John Frederic, dyed
at Vinaine. Eleven days after the said Frederic also deceased happily in his
Country, amongst his children and other friends, and the same day that he dyed
was borne unto the Elector Augustus, a son named Alexander.

Conspiracy against the Queen of England.
Thomas Wiat an Englishman, conspired and rose up against the Queen of
England: because of the strange marriage she enterprised with Phillip the
Emperors son. On an other part of the kingdom, Henry of Suffolk gathered
people against her: The one and the other were declared enemies of the
Commonwealth, taken, and at diverse times beheaded.

Lady Jane beheaded.
The 12. of February Jane Suffolk, King Edwards cousin german and instituted
heir of the kingdom, by his testament was with her husband beheaded. After
them was made a great butchery of heads at London and Westminster, where the
Queen then was: Elizabeth also her sister was imprisoned, upon her suspicion.

Sienna.
Sienna was besieged by the Pope and the Duke of Florence. Peter Stosze which
defended it, made a sallie upon them, and overcame a great number of their
people.

Charles of Sauoy.
Charles Duke of Sauoy spoiled of the greatest and best part of his Country,
dyed, leaving Emanuell Philebert his son heir.

Renty.
King Henry about the end of June took Bouuines, Dinan, Marienbourge, Bius, and
wasted all the Country: besieged Renty upon the Marches of Artois: but the
Emperor coming and skirmishing together, the king departed in the month of
August, removing his siege from thence.

The Kings Army in Tuscane which Strosze conducted, was surprised by the
Imperialists, and for the most part overthrown.

Phillip the Emperors son arruied the 19. of July in England, K. Phillip his
marriage.
the 24. following, the marriage was made between him and the Queen at
Winchester.

The Marquis Albert chased from his Country, withdrew into Lorraine, and after
to the king of France.

The Emperor caused a Fort to be builded nigh the place where Hesden was.

Cardinal Poole in a full assembly of all the Estates of the kingdom of
England, commenced the 12. of November, Cardinal Paul.
was restored into his dignities, goods and honors, of which he was deprived
by King Henry the eight.

The History of the reuoult of England.
To the end the Lord may be known in his judgments which daily happen, and
that he which is to day aloft may take heed he fall not, let us harken unto
that infamous revoult of England, and see how they return to their first
vomit.

The Wednesday the 28. of November of this year, the Parliament of England was
assembled: and in the presence of King Phillip and Queen Marie, the Cardinal
Poole expounpounded his Legation, and exhorted them to the holy seat of the
Pope: showing them how greatly bound they were to God who now enlarged upon
them his divine grace, providing for them such Princes as they had. After he
declared unto them how the holy Father the Pope used toward them his
benignity and clemency by him his Legate, Subtilties of the Roman Court.

Deceits of the Roman court.


greatly thanking them that they had received him and placed him in his Country
and Nobility, whereof he had been long deprived: and that therefore he held
himself more bound to procure, they might be restored into the Ecclesiastical
Court, as his desire was.

This vile Apostate of the truth, calls that stinking Court of Rome, the
celestial Court.

After he had thus spoken be withdrew himself, to the end to give respet unto
the Lords of the Parliament to resolve thereupon what to do. The Chancellor
of England straight took the Cardinals words: and showed how they had cause
to thank God, who had raised them up such a Prophet out of their own seed to
procure their salvation, as the reverend Legate did. Insomuch that all with a
common accord concluded to consent unto the union and obedience of the Roman
church.

Notable mysteries.
The Thursday following they ordained to agree unto that which the Cardinal had
said: so that upon a common accord they presented a supplication: wherein they
prayed the King and Queens majesty's as heads of the kingdom, that they would
pray the Popes Legate that they might have absolute remission of their sins
and errors: promising to make void all such laws, as they had before
established against the authority of the Roman seat: whereunto they would
swear never to contradict.

The King sent the said supplication to the Legate, and the day after assembled
the Parliament in the place where the king and the Queen, with the Cardinal
Legate were set. And the Chancellor rose up, and with great reverence and an
high voice uttered the resolution made by the Lords of the Parliament, praying
in the name of all, that they would accept the supplicato^ written in Latin
tongue, shut and sealed by the said Chancellor.

The supplication being opened by the Legate, was delivered unto the Chancellor
to publish: he red it with an high voice: and that done, demanded of all them
of the Parliament if their wills were according to the tenor thereof: and they
all answered yea. Upon this the King and Queen rose up and presented the said
supplication to the Legate, who red it: then presented he the Bulls of his
Legation, O true Bulls.
which were red also, to make appear unto them the authority he had from the
holy Father to absolute them.

That is to say, to plunge them into the deep pit of hell.

That done (the Reverend) made them an Oration in their own language: showing
penance which pleased God, and that the Angel of Paradise rejoice more at a
sinner repenting his sins, then of ninety nine just persons, and upon that
brought for his examples, co^trarily drawn to furnish out his impudency,
falsely abusing the word of God.

After he had ended he rose up, That is of Satan.
and the King and Queen fell upon their knees before him, calling upon God and
the holy Saints, that he would pardon the penitent people of England, the
authority of whose person he represents. Then the Legate pronounced a
general absolution: which done, they all departed, with the King, the Queen,
and the Legate, toward their Chapel, where was sung (Te Deum) and after the
said Legate had made his triumphant entries, he yielded all power and
authority to the Bishops, the first Sunday of Aduent, (as they call it) on
which day, the Bishop of Winchester, (an other Apostate of the truth) made a
Sermon after a solemn Mass, taking for his Theme (Nunc te^pus adest de somne
surgere) that is; It is now time to awake. As if before in the time of the
Gospel, under the reign of king Edward of England, they had still slept. But
that awaking shall be dear sold unto all such Organes and Instruments of
Satan, which have caused so many murders and bloudshead of Gods children since
that time in the Realm of England. See the book of Martyrs.

A more horrible vengeance of God cannot come to a Country, then when God
withdrawes his light therefrom.

Ferdinand sent out of their Country, 200. Ministers of the Boheme.

Touching the true Martyrs of the Lord, executed this year in England under
the tyranous reign of Queen Mary, and the disputations held betwixt the
Popish Doctors, and them of the true Religion. See the fourth part of the
books of Martyrs.

A Journey of the Empire was held at Ausbourge, and although few Princes came
thither, Ferdinand made a long Oration the fifth of February, of two principal
points. The first of Religion, by reason whereof he said, all the disorder and
destruction of Almaine happened, and that it might be remedied by disputations
and communications of Theologians, as once had been begun. The second was to
help and succor the afflicted estate of the war past, and punish such as
made the troubles.

Melancton and other learned people by their Letters comforted the Ministers of
the Churches of Boheme, which were dispersed over Misnia.

Casal, a Town nigh unto Po, was taken by the French, under the conduct of
Brisac, the 3. of March.

Marcel. 2.
Marcel, second of that name, a Tuscan by Nation, called before Marcel Ceruin,
succeeded, and was borne in a place called the Monte Pelicien, in the
territories of Florence: Of a Cardinal of the title of the holy Cross in
Jerusalem, was created Pope, by the common consent of all the Cardinals which
were in the Conclaue, the 9. day of April, 1555. The day following, he
received the Pontifical ornaments in the Church of Laterane, but he would not
change the name that he received at his baptism.

The Popes Character is to be an enemy unto the truth.
Being come unto the Papacy, he was an enemy unto the Gospel, as before he
was Pope, you may see he was ever. In his youth he had some little profited in
humane Letters, and so kept the schools. Afterward, as Paul the third had
created Cardinal Alexander Farnesius, the son of Peter Lewis his bastard
son, he gave his, this Marcel for a Schoolemaister.

Certain time after, the Cardinal Alexander leaving there the study of
Letters, applied himself altogether to handle the affairs: wherein as well he,
as also Paul his grandfather, served themselves with Marcel, who was their
Secretary. The Bishoppricke of Nichastre being vacant, he was made Bishop of
that Church: yet he always lived in the Court of Rome, and never went to his
Church. Pope Paul sent for Legate the aforesaid Cardinal Farnese, toward the
Emperor and his brother the king Ferdinand, who were then in Flaunders. But
because he was yet young, he gave him Marcel for his conduction and governor in
all the affairs of his legation. Amongst all other things, there was a
question for setting out an Army against the Turk; which the Emperor and his
brother required very instantly. But Marcel Ceruin pulished a writing (which is
yet to be seen) wherein he says it is much better to make war upon the
Lutherans, and that they are much worse the^ the Turks.

The Pope Paul made him Cardinal being absent, Marcel Inquisitor general.
and a while after caused him to come again into the Town, and used his
counsel in all things of great importance. He gave him the title of the holy
Cross of Jerusalem, and created him general Inquisitor against all heretics,
therein making him a companion unto Cardinal Theatin and Cardinal de
Bourgues: which were the rudest and cruellest that ever were. When a Legation
was to be sent unto the Council of Trent, the Pope Paul made him Legate, with
the Cardinals Pol and de Monte. He created Cardinal de Monte chief Legate
of the Council, because he had knowledge in the Civil law. Pol or Poole, the
second, as he that seemed to desire that the Church might be reformed (although
it after appeared that he never stirred it in earnest) and Ceruin for the
third, as he in whom the Pope had most trust. And therefore the Pope had given
him express charge that he should suffer nothing to be done in the Council
which tended to the detriment of the Roman seat. But that he should drive out
all such as enterprised any such like thing.

Therefore as one in the said Council called James Nachiantes, Bishop of a place
called Fossa Clodia, said that he could not allow the Decree, where it was
written that traditions ought to be received and observed with like reverence
as the Gospel: Ceruin caused him to be thrown out of the Council. As also a
certain Iacobin called Guillam de Venice, said that the Council of Constance
was above the Pope, Ceruin calling him, reprehended him sharply. And after that
the Monk had answered that the thing it self yielded witness thereof,
because that Council deposed the Pope, therefore it was above him; It is not
so said Ceruin, but that more is, the Pope gave place willingly: the which I
can well prove by a Bull sealed with lead: and straight commanded this man
to go out of the Council.

About this time Peter Paul Vergerius, was come from Mantua to Trent, who had
many times been an Ambassador in Almaine for the Popes affairs: but because
men held him suspected in some things to accord with the Almaines: although the
two other Legates, namely, Pol and de Monte, liked well to consent that he
should be one at the Council. Also the Cardinal Paciccus and the Cardinal of
Trent; yet Ceruin never ceased till he saw him dejected.

Many Bishops understanding this of Vergerius, determined to have written unto
the Pope, to admonish him not to suffer this: because then many would say that
that Council was not free, Jerome Vida Cremona.
from which Bishops were put back. Hierome Vida de Cremona, Bishop of Alba,
and an excellent Poet, had already indighted Letters, as well in his own name
as others. Which being come unto the knowledge of Marcel Ceruin, he very
severely advertised Vida, wholly to abstain from sending Letters unto the Pope:
for it was a thing of evil example, that Bishops assembled at a Council,
should write such Letters unto the Pope, as though they would impose a law
upon him. Which he said was so great a fault, as a man had need take heed, he
fall not into any suspicion thereof. Vida being vanquished by his teasons,
changed his purpose of sending Letters unto the Pope. Vergerius being then
willing to withdraw himself from the Council, The cause wherefore Vergerius
was put from the Council.
came toward Ceruin, and demanded of him what the Articles were for which he
was dejected from the Council and company of other Bishops. Ceruin answered,
because I understand thou deniest that the Legends of S. George and of
Christopher are true. Is it true said Vergerius? I have, and do yet deny it:
And my opinion is founded upon Pope Paul the third. For he has commanded that
both those Legends should be taken out of the Breuiarie: And in the Preface at
the beginning of the book, he says that he has commanded that all such
should be taken out, which were not true. Ceruin seeing himself surprised,
could answer nothing; but that men ought not to hold such for good men, as in
any manner whatsoever, seemed to agree with the Lutherans, and therefore we
withdraw thee from our Council.

I thought it good to recite this, to the end it might be known, that there
are always some evil affected toward the true doctrine, ignorant of holy
Letters, and stubborn to maintain and defend all superstitions.

Yet as he was a man of singular modesty, and of a life and conversation
reasonable honest, and likewise endowed with good prudence, so was he in great
estimation: In so much that it was verily looked for at his hands, that if ever
he came unto the Popedom, he would correct many things in the Roman Court;
and before all things, that he would shun all dissolutions and superfluities:
but it fell not out so. For after the death of Julius the third, having been
chosen Pope, as already before he was diseased with the Iaundies, it
increassed so upon him, that he died the 22. day after his election, the night
before the first of May. A brute ran that he was poisoned, but it was not so.
A feawe days before his death, he would needs be crowned, but with small
charge, very modestly. The Cardinal Farnese with them of his part, had given
him his voice, although before there had been great enmities betwixt them: but
he did it because he hoped there was none would be more diligent to bring that
to an end, which Paul the third had determined to do. Namely, that he should
do his best to maintain the house of Farneses, to the end they might not be
deprived of the Duchy of Parma and Plaisance. For also the Cardinal Farnese
so practiced with Julius the third, that he made him that promise before he
would favor him for his coming unto the Popedom. Some said he did willingly
elect the said Ceruin, because they saw him already to be sore worn and
weakened with diseases, so that there was no hope that he could live long.

The custom is willingly to choose Popes, such as they hope will not live
long.

Hercules de Ferrare, and Vbalde Duke of Vrbin, arrived at Rome to salute Pope
Marcel, and to Court him after their manner.

Paul 4. of that name, a Neapolitane, Paul. 4.
called before John Peter Caraphe, was chosen Pope the same year, namely,
1555. the 23. day of May, by the consent of all the Cardinals.

This man being in Venice, in his hypocrisy invented a new Sect of Monks,
called Jesuits: as if our Savior Jesus had engendered such Popish Idolaters.
After this, being made Cardinal, as he departed from Venice to Rome, he said
unto his Monks which asked him whither he went. Whither I go, you cannot come
now.

Abusing the scripture and profaning the Lords words, he meant hereby, that
he left them shut up in a Cloister in poverty and misery, and that he went
unto Rome, to come unto an high and mighty estate and dignity, whereunto they
could not come.

Theatin before he was Pope confessed the truth.
He writ a book sometimes unto Paul the third, touching reformation of the
Church: but being become Pope, he cared neither for Jesus Christ nor his
Church. In that book he confirms almost all the points that we use to
reprehend in the Papists: namely, that the Church is so ruinated in Popery,
that it is no more the Church of Jesus Christ, but of the devil: For says he,
Popes heap up Doctors after their own fancies and desires. That Cardinals
and Bishops are cause that the name of Christ is blasphemed amongst people,
which under the color of keys, gather great sums of money. That wicked
people are provided for. That Symoniacke Marchandices are greatly practiced.
That Prelates burn with ambition and covetousness. That horrible sins and
iniquities are committed in Monasteries. That the Town of Rome is full of
whoredoms and many such like.

More enormious and wicked things are committed at Rome, then that which
Theatin rehearses in that book: for he there only touches the vices and
abuses that are found in their common manner of living, without making any
mention of the contempt of the doctrine there used.

A tumult at Geneua.
On Thursday the 16. day of May of this year, there happened a tumult at Geneua,
about 10. of the clock in the night, France, to shun persecutions: And as in
the night time they ran too and fro, they cried as for a false ensign and
token, that the French were in Arms, and the Town betrayed: but the French
men stirred not out of their houses. The commotion was bridled and stayed by
certain Lords of the Town. As for the seditious people, some amongst them
were executed, others saved themselves by flight. But the cause wherefore they
would have driven away the French amongst others was, because lately there were
many of them received for Burgesses, by means whereof their faction was
weakened, and the other part strengthened, by the number of the new Burgesses
which had been added thereunto.

The French at this time raced many Castles by the Count Montferrat, that they
might have victuals in greater assurance: For if the enemy had occupied them,
Vlpian victualled.
Casal had been brought into great necessity. In these parts was there a Town
called Vlpian, which is of great importance. The Spaniards held it then: and it
was revictualled at the coming of the Duke of Albe, who had gathered together
a great number of people. Marie^bourg
Mariembourge also, which the year before had been taken in the low
Countries from the Emperor, was at the same time again victualled by the
French.

In the Country of Grisons there is a Town nigh Italy called Lucarne, The
Lucarnois demanded the Gospel.
which appertains unto the whole communaltie of the Swisses. The Citizens
thereof required that they might be permitted to live according unto the
reformation of the Gospel. But because their Superiors and they, were not of
one Religion, there was upon deliberation, diverse opinions. Some agreed unto
their demand: others sought to hinder it. So that there appeared toward some
intestine and civil dissension: yet in the end they of the Town prevailed,
which wished that they should remain in the Religion of their Ancestors: and
that they amongst them which accorded not thereunto, might go dwell
otherwhere. So were there found a great number which forsook their natural
Country, and withdrew unto Zurich: where they were received joyfully, and much
relieved in their poverty.

A great number of Vessels laden with all kinds of Merchandise, came by Sea
from Spain toward Flaunders: but upon the coast of Normandy they were
assailed with all force by the French, which had espied them.

The combat amongst them was horrible: many ships both of the one part and of
the other were burnt, and many sunk: many a valiant man died there, as well by
the sword, as by burning and drowning. The French in the end carried away some
number of ships which they took, into Diepe Haven, from whence they departed.
This happened in the month of August: in the end of which month, Phillip of
Austrich repassed from England into Flaunders, accompanied with a great number
of English Gentlemen, to find the Emperor his father at Bruxels.

In September, George Count de Montbellard, the Duke of Wittemberge his Uncle,
took to wife Barbe, the Lantgraues daughter.

Dissension of the Supper renewed by the^ of Breme and Hambourge.
The dissension of the Lords Supper, and the presence of Christ's body, which had
continued the space of thirty whole years amongst the learned, renewed again
in this time: and there were published by certain Ministers of Hambourge and
Breme, certain little books, namely, against Calvin and John Alasco. Calvin
after answered them in earnest: so did also Bullinger and Alasco: who
dedicating his book to the King of Polongne, greatly complained that without
knowledge of the cause, that without any disputation or amiable talk, but
only upon a certain prejudice, their doctrine was condemned after the manner
of the Papists: who in lieu of arguments from holy scripture proceed not, but
by force and commandment.

The Marquess of Marignan dying at Millaine, the Cardinal of Trent was sent
into Lombardie by the Emperor and King Phillip, to be there Governor. At
Naples the Duke of Albe was constituted.

About Christmas day, the Pope according to his custom created new Cardinals,
and amongst others, John Gropper, the Archbishop of Cologne his Councellor.
Then also, the Cardinal Poole being made Deacon, Cardinal pressed (as they say)
began to say Mass. For by the Popes law, Deacons have not yet that power.

Saxony, Misne, and Boheme, Thunders and Lightnings, which endaungered many
places, especially Churches.

In the same month at Vitodur in Suetia, a little Town within two leagues of
Zurich, appeared in the night in one of the towers of the Church there, a
sparkling fire, making such a noise, as the Burgesses on all sides ran to put
it out: being come thither, they found no flame: yet it twice appeared: that is
to say, the 4. and 14. of the said month. After this, certain of the Cantons
of Suetia solicited by the Pope, got them to Rome, whereas many marvelled.

King Phillip after he had received of his father the government of Flaunders,
the 18. of January he made a solemn entry into Antwerpe.

In the month of February, Henry Duke of Brunswic espowsed the sister of
Sigismond, king of Pologne.

The 26. of the same month died at Aitsem, The death of Frederick Palatin.
Frederick Count Palatin Elector now very old, and there succeeded him Otto,
Henry his brothers son, who long time before had received the Gospel, and
for that cause was in danger to have lost all his goods. Shortly after he had
received his peoples oath of fidelity, he made an Edict that no person should
sing any Mass, or exercise any other ceremonies any where in his countries.

Mary Queen of England, did what she could that church goods and lands might be
restored: because Pope greatly urged her thereunto: But many Princes and great
Lords held them, and therefore it could not be done. During this Parliament,
many Innectiue and biting books were dispersed in London, amongst which, some
were sufficient to have stirred the common people to sedition against the
Spaniards, and to have with drawn the Queens love from King Phillip. Search
was made for the authors of these libels, but it was not possible to find them
out. Before the Assembly was departed, and affairs dispatched, the Bishop of
Winchester the Chauncelor, died of a dropsy. Thomas Heth Archbishop of York,
who had sometimes been in Almaine with him, before of Canterbury, and once had
knowledge of the true Religion, was come into his place.

About the fifth of November died the wife of Duke John Frederic of Saxony, the
Lantgraues daughter.

The Duke of Venice, Francisco Venerio, was deposed from his estate, for ill
dealing in the charge of victuals, and having much more regard unto his
particular profit, then to the public weal.

A wonder in the Country of Aouste.
About the end of February of this year, the Mo^r^a^^e called Dupetit S.
Bernard on the valley side of Aouste, which is in the subjection of the Duke of
Sauoy, was seen covered with red snow: and certain white snow fell, but the
whiteness vanished away, and the redness remained. This was notoriously
known and seen, and the red snow touched by many inhabitants of the said
Country.

These prodiges and maruels, admonish us to beseech the Lord to turn away the
tribulations and calamities, which the poor world cease not to draw upon it
self by his rebellion.

A frost of three weeks was so sharp in December, that Seine was frozen,
whereupon followed great mischiefs.

Oziander with his new doctrine of Justification, had long time stirred trobles
in Pruse: but after, as it were, al learned people had condemned him by their
writings, the Duke of Pruse, Albert, Pruse receives the confession of
Ausbourge.
declared by a public writing, that therein he would follow the doctrine of
the confession of Ausbourge, and so enjoined the Ministers of the Churches to
teach accordingly, and gave them full license. And to the end the thing might
be so fully and surely accorded, that the wound might no more renew and be
worse, John Albert, Duke de Megelbourge, the Duke of Pruse his son in law (a
Prince very well instructed in Letters) went into the said Country of Prusia,
and by the means of certain learned people whose labor he used, he did so
much with John Functius, John Functius.
(which was he that chiefly maintained the opinion of Ozeander) that publicly
he confessed his fault, and withal, protested that he would never teach but
according to the tenor of the confession of Ausbourge. Others did the like. So
the Theologians were received into favor and the estate of the Church pacified.

Comete.
The 4. day of March began to appear a Comet, which was seen by the space of
12 days.

There is a little Town in Auls^i^, three leagues from Strasbourge, called
Oberene, Parracide of three children.
in that Town a certain Gardener the tenth of April, in the absence of his
wife was the murderer of his own children, of a girl of the age of 7. years.
of a boy of the age of 4. years, and of an other yet in the cradle, not past
six months old.

The 10. of may the Duke d' Arscot who was a prisoner in the wood de Vincennes
nigh Paris, escape and came safe into his Country.

The Bauarois solicited their Prince Albert to have liberty of their
religion, as well as they of Austrich, and almost at one time, the Prince
seeing that Ferdinand his father in law had permitted to his people the same
thing was content to do the like. And because there was then some question for
silver, he suffered his subjects for a time to receive the Lords Supper whole,
and to eat flesh on days prohibited, when necessity drives them thereunto.
Yet he made great protestations that he would not divide himself from the
religion of his Ancestors: and that this should only be, till by public
authority it were otherwise ordained.

About this time certain great Lords of Transiluania revolted from Ferdinand.

There became also great mutinies in England, where diverse Nobles were
imprisoned, others beheaded, and some saved themselves in other Countries: As
for such as died for the truth of the Gospel, we have amply deducted their
estate, and extracted their confessions in our books of Martyrs.

Albert de Bauieres began the Imperial journey at Ratisbone in the name of
king Ferdinand who then was busied in holding the estates in Boheme^ and
Austrich. Journey at Ratisbone.


The Emperor having attend (...) of Septembe^ and from (...) Countries
accompanied (...) * The return of Charles the fifth into Spain.
^^^ior Dowary of France, and Mary Que^^^ of Hungary, (...) cauing all the rule
of the low Countries to king Phillip his son, and the administration of
Almaine unto his brother King Ferdinand.

David George (who after called himself John de Bruck) borne at Delphes in
Holland, The death of David George.
a very pernicious seducer, author and Prince of the vilest Sect that ever was,
making himself king and immortal Christ, died this year, 1556. the 24. day
of August, his wife being dead a little before. He retired with his family which
was very great into Basil, the year 1544. making himself a fugitive from his
own country for the cause of the Gospel. He bought houses in the Town, and
a Castle nigh the Town called Binningen, with possessions of a great reuenew:
It was easy for this man being very cautelous and subtle, and having his eyes
looking on all sides, to gain the hearts of many, and to procure outward
reputation: who was greatly sustained and augmented, by that he had great
sums of money and very precious moueables daily brought him, from base
Almaine and Flaunders. There happened certain prodigious signs before his
death. One of his houses (he had two in Basil) was burned with fire of
lightning: and the other which he had sumptuously builded in the Meadows, was
also consumed by fire, and all his precious moueables which were therein: and
soon after, the chamber floores of his house where he made his residence, fell
down suddenly: yet they say, nothing happened unto him more intolerable to
bear before his death then this, that one of authority in base Almaine, came
to the Town of Basil, and David George knew well, that by little and little he
should be discovered.

His Secretaries and disciples were maruellously astonished at his death,
because they were of opinion he should never have died: Although their hope was
something maintained, by that he had said (as after was reported) he would
again take life, by the space of three years, and bring to pass excellent
things. He held in his house a state almost royal. And for the government of
his house and Castle, it was well ruled, every one had his estate and office in
that family, and the labors were so distributed, that he had no need in any
thing to employ others then his own.

In the government of their common good, they very strictly observed three
things, to the end they might more and more conceal their so pernicious a Sect.

First, that none amongst them should publish the name of David George.
Secondly, that none should reveal of what state and condition he had been:
whereupon many thought he came of some great nobility: others, that he was
some great Merchant, having many factors both by sea and land. Thirdly, that
they should not discover any one article of their doctrine to any of Basil, no
not to any Switzer, neither should they seek to draw any to their doctrine.

The sum of his accursed doctrine was: That whatsoever had hitherto been
given of God by Moses, by the Prophets, by Jesus Chirst himself, by his
Apostles and Disciples, is imperfect, and unprofitable to make us obtain the
true and perfect felicity: and was only given to this use, that hitherto
their doctrine might repress men, and keep them under as young men and
children, and so contain them in their offices. But the Religion of David
George is perfect, and has in it sufficient efficacy and strength, to make
happy him that receives it, he being the true Christ and Messiah, the we
beloved of the Father, in whom the Father takes great pleasure: borne not of
the flesh, but of the holy spirit, and of the spirit of Jesus Christ: having
hitherto been kept in an unknown place, for all his Saints: to restore in
spirit the house of Israel, not by the Cross or tribulations, or death as the
other Christ, but for the love and grace of the holy spirit of Christ.

O execrable monster, or horrible efficacy of error and deception, or
plasphemies drawn out of the deep pit of hell!

In the year 1557. many good men moved with affection Zone, and long time
soiourned in the way, they fell to inhabit in a Region on the South coast,
unknown unto our fore elders, full of Brasill: which before in the year 1500.
had been discovered by the Portugales, and it was called America, of the name
of their Captain and co^ducter Americ Vespucius. The Inhabitants the ear very
savage and wild, without any form of Religion or civility. There it pleased
the Lord in this time to erect a Church of certain French men, which one
Villegagnon had solicited and gathered together: He received the^ also at the
beginning with good countenance and outward joy, seeing his enterprise
commended by many notable persons. But in the year 1557. and 1558. the said
Villegagnon gave sufficiently to know, that he was never touched with any true
zeal or fear of God. For after he had persecuted both the Ministers and poor
flock of that Church, by many tyrannies and impudent writings; with seditious
practices, he hindered as much as in him lay, the advancement of the Lords
glory: who after raised up the Portugales to take the Fortress which he had
builded in the I Will, by him called Collignyen Valois: finding no resistance
within, because the said Villegagnon being retired into France (taken with an
apprehensio^ that the savage people would eat him) had ordained no such
company of people as were necessary for the defense of such a place.

And although in that number there were some valiant and well experimented in
Arms: yet for as much as they were accompanied with such as had no knowledge
therein, and were ill maintained, yea pined away with famine and diseases;
before they would abide the enemies fury, they withdrew themselves with the
savage people. Therefore was it easy for the enemies to enjoy that Castle
which had been builded at the charges of the king of France, and with the
sweat and travel of many good people: and the Artillery marked with the Arms
of France, with certain munitions of war transported to Lisbone, the
principal Town of Portugal, in a trophee and triumph of the victory. The
French retiring to land, received the cruel yoke of that savage people, living
without any form of Religion: a sad and lamentable thing to rehearse.

By all Histories, as well ancient as modern, we my be instructed that.
Hypocrites and Apostates, have in all times hindered the course of the Gospel.

Charles the 5. Emperor, after he had resigned by express Embassage, into the
hands of the Princes Electors, the Roman Empire, having held it about 37.
years, died in his Country of Spain, the 21. of September, 1558. in a
Monastery of S. Just, of the order of the Hieronymies, nigh to Plascencia, a
Town situated betwixt the kingdoms of Castile and Andalonsia. Ferdina^d. 1.


Ferdinand, 1. of that name, succeeded him, and was consecrated Emperor in the
town of Francfort upon Mein, by the Electors and Princes of Almiane, with the
accustomed solemnities.

After great and continual wars by the space of 9. years, at the
instigation and by the practices and means of Popes, John Maria de Monte,
surnamed Julius the third, and his successors and adherents, as well in Italy,
Piemont, Almaine, and France, as in the low Countries of Flaunders, Artois,
and Lorraine, by the Spaniards and French. Finally, there happening great
victories and prises one upon an other, to the overthrow and total oppression
of people and subects, the third of April, 1559. after Easter, at a Castle in
Cambresis, there was a peace concluded betwixt Henry the second of that name,
King of France, and Phillip King of Spain: wherein they promised, to yield one
to an other, the lands that were lately conquered. They also compounded and
agreed of all other controversies and differances in regard of the Kingdoms of
Naples and Sicilie, and of the Duchy of Millaine: upon condition of the
marriage of the said Phillip, with the eldest daughter of Henry: which lands
should appertain to the children coming of that marriage.

By the same treaty of peace, there was yielded unto Emanuel Philibert, Duchy
of Sauoy, and the principality of Piemont, which the French had held from his
father and him, more then 24. years, by the means of a marriage betwixt him
and Dame Margarite, daughter of king Francis, the first of that name, and the
alone sister of Henry: reserving certain strong places in the said Piemont for
a certain time.

The year 1559. the fifth of March, the sons, the sons in law, and all the
family of the dead David George, (of whom we have spoken before) some also
which were not of his family, but adherent unto his Sect, were adjoined before
the Senate of Basil: after information taken of the pernitions Sect which the
said David George had always held whilst he lived. The Advower declared unto
them, that the Seigniorie was dulye informed, that they withdrewe themselves
into the Castle of Binningen, not as they which were persecuted for the
Gospel, (as they falsely said): but for the Sect of David, wherewith they were
already spotted Eleven were appointed prisoners, out of them to draw the
truth. The most part examined by the straightest Inquisition, confessed the
truth of the matter: which finally obtained pardon.

The first of May the Ministers Rector, professors and Masters of the
University of Basil, having all with one voice condemned the points of
doctrine professed by David George: the Senate being fully informed of all,
proceeded the 13. of May, to the indyting and condemning of David George: that
is, that all his writings, as full of impiety and mortal poison, also his
body or his bones, and all that which remained in his grave, should be burnt,
with his Image which was found in his house, lively representing him: and that
generally all the goods of so wicked a man, in what place soever they were
found, should be confiscated and adjudged unto the Seignorie. This sentence was
proclaimed according to the custom of the place: and all the form of law,
and of the ordinances of the Town, was observed in the execution thereof.

The life, manners, and death of such pernicious men, admonish us to watch
diligently, least being deceived with any beautiful appearance, we allow not
evil for good, and contrary: and so fall into the snares of the devil.

A peace (as has been said) being concluded betwixt Henry King of France, and
Phillip King of Ppaine enemies of the Gospel took their opportunity to
persecute such as they called Lutherans. Commissions were dispatched to go
through all the Provinces of France, to attend while the conditions of peace
were accomplished.

King Henry by his Letters Patents on the second of June, sent to all Bailiffes
and Stewards, to aid the said Commissioners: with power to assemble (as they
call them) ban and arrierban: that is as I take it we use to say, tag and rag:
and the Provost Marshals and their Archers, straightly forbidding the sparing
of any, either using any dissimulation or winking at any: otherwise that they
themselves should be first punished.

The Cardinal of Lorraine charged a great number of the Councillors of the
Parliament of Paris to be favorers of heretics: And this was upon the
occasion of a deliverance they made of certain prisoners for the Gospel, by a
simple banishment out of the kingdom. And did so much that the Mercuriall was
held at the instance of the kings Proctor general, wherein a great part of the
Councillors were of advise, that by an holy and free Council all matters of
Religion should be remedied, rather then by persecutions.

The King Henry being at this Parliament, and having heard Anne de Bourge
Counselor reasoning, caused him to be stayed prisoner, with other
Counselors: And the 19. of June a Conjunction was directed to certain Judges
to make these process.

During the marriage Feasts of the daughter of France, and the last of June
King Henry employed himself all that morning in the examinations of, as well
Presidents as Counselors of the said Parliament, and other prisoners and their
companions which were charged with the like doctrine. When he had dined,
because he was one of the sustenants at the solemn Turney which was made in the
street of Saint Anthony, he entered into the Listes: And after he had broken
good store of staves as bravely as was possible (as he was cunning, and a
valiant man at Arms) running against Montgommery, the son of Captain
Lorges, a strong Soldier, they encountered so rudely, that bursting there
Lances, the King was attained with a counter blow, so right in the vizard,
that the shiuers entered into his head: and the blow was as sudden as
violent, so that his brains were wholly astonished, without finding either
succor or comfort: And whatsoever any could do with sending Physicians and
Surgions on all sides, yea from Brabant by King Phillip, nothing profited:
Insomuch that eleven days after, namely the 10. of July, 1559. he expired and
finished his days in great dolor, having reigned 12. years, three months,
and ten days.

To the Christian Readers.
Having gathered from diverse Histories of our time, a sort of the most
memorable things happening about religious matters, and the state of this
world, since the year 1559. until this present year 1581: and perceiving
that this volume handling the Churches affairs was delivered unto the Printer:
I have also given these my remembrances following to the same Imprinter to
join the^ unto the former: that you may have a whole brief and summary from
that time of Christ, until now. There remains: that considering the wonders
of God, especially in the conduction and government of his Church, we should
pray that it would please him to cause us to see more and more the effect of
that promise so precious: that he will be with his until the consummation of the
world, and that we may remain firm in the profession of his truth until the
last sigh, maugre all the forces of Satan, of Antichrist, and of their
accomplices. So be it.

Francis the 2. of that name, of the age of 15. years and five months,
succeeded his Father Henry.

In the beginning of his kingdom the Churches of his realm flourished under the
cross, having the favor of certain Princes and great Lords: yet in such sort
as the faithful endured much in sundry places that same year 1559. The Church
of Paris was one of the chief: but it was exceedingly molested by slanders and
subornations of certain Judges, and especially of an Inquisitor called
Demochares, they were charged, and the Thursday before Easter they procured a
great assembly of men, women and mayds about midnight, where after they had
preached, eaten a cochon in lieu of the paschall Lamb, and the lamp which gave
them light put out, every one committed wickedness with other. Chals Cardinal
of Lorraine governor of the king (who had espowsed Mary Steward Queen of
Scotland, the said Cardinals Niece) impaired and made things worse, by imputing
unto them of the religion, all the pollutions of the ancient heretics;
Insomuch that during the reign of Francis, there was nothing but
imprisonments, robbing of houses, proclimatio^s for banishments, and executions
of them of the religion, with cruel torments: notwithstanding amongst such
tempests, they disco^tinued not their preachings and other exercises of
Religion, although also many were burned at Paris, and executed in other
places. Amongst which are not to be forgotten, Nicholas Guerin, Marin Marie,
Margarite le Rich, called the Lady de la Caille, a young Carpe^ter, Adrian
Panssi, Marin Roussean, Giles le Gourt, Phillip Parmentier, Peter Millet, John
Befferoy, Peter Arondeau, M. Anne du Bourge, a man of great piety, very
learned, and a Councellor in the Parliament of Paris. The death of this last
man, was especially amongst others noted, because of the quality of his
person: his constancy astonished also many of his enemies: who notwithstanding
left not to continue as well in Paris, as in other Parliaments of France, in
that remainder of the year 1559, and in all the year following, during which
the French Church, before being hid because of persecutions, began to show it
self: Insomuch that in all Provinces thoughout the kingdom, they of the
religion had Sermons openly: the zeal of some, surmounting the cruelty of
others.

In this same year 1559. in the month of May, the Lord triumphed over
Antichrist, in the co^stancy and patience of many Christians, Of the Spanish
Inquisition.
executed to death for the witness of his truth in the kingdom of Spain, by
the practices of the officers of the Inquisition, whereof it shall not be
impertinent briefly to touch.

About an 100. years ago, that Ferdinand and Isabelle, kings of Castile,
established that Inquisition against the Jews, which after baptism kept their
ceremonies. Certain years after, the Monks assailed by the doctrine of the
Gospel, did so much, that it was converted and practiced, especially against
such as they could discover to be never so little adversaries of the Romish
traditions. For the better establishing of this tyranny, and to lift it up
above the King and the Council of Spain, the Spanish Theologians made the^
believe that the holy Inquisitio^ could not err: and for the exercise thereof
they had Judges and officers in the most part of the Towns of the realm,
which always had a watchful eye to bridle all the world. But ordinarily they
espied the richest, the learnest, and such as of little began to become great:
for they desired booty of some, they feared ye knowledge of others, and the
last are odious, least they should make head against the Inquisitio^. They
espied and marked very nigh these 3. sort of people, that if there came any
word out of their mouths it should be noted: and though they spoke no word, yet
would the Inquisitors find means enough against such as worshipped them not
sufficiently: for after they had shut them in prison, they would keep them
there a long time without speaking unto them, and at leisure invent Rymes
against them: In the mean while no man durst solicit nor speak for the
prisoners. If the Father showed to have any care of his child, he was
straight imprisoned as a favorer of heresy. No person could have access to
any prisoner which was in any dungeon or other obscure place: neither might he
write: but besides the misery and horror of the prison, the prisoners endured a
thousand outrages and menaces, and after blows with whips, and diverse other
the greatest injuries that can be imagined. Sometimes they are suffered to
escape by infamy, and from some high place they are showed unto the people.
During their imprisonment, their processes and their Inditements go not
forward in course of law: (and for ordinarily a prisoner shall be so kept up
and tormented, two, three, or four years) and if there be any thing done
therein, there are none but the Inquisitors, their officers and executioners,
that know any news of them. After one has tortured and beaten them the space
of many months, he that will have his life, he must divine and guess at his
accusor. If then the accused can divine the name of his accusors, and what is
the accusation, in firmly and strongly denying that which is imposed and laid
to his charge, and after great protestations, to be an hearty and a very
affectioned servant and subject of the Popedom, his life being so saved: yet
he is not thereby set at liberty, but after having endured infinite pouerties
and misery (which they call their penance) they are let go, but yet in such
sort as they make him wear a kind of coat of yealow color, called
Sambenito, which is a public infamy unto him and all his race. But if contrary
the prisoner be an ill diuiner, after diverse tortures he is condemned and
cruelly burnt. They that constantly maintain the truth of the Gospel, are so
ungently tormented and cruelly handled, that the punishments of the greatest
Tyrants which were in the time of the Primitive Church, were nothing in
comparison unto these. But then as soon as many persons of high and base
condition in sundry places of Spain began to see the light of the word of
God, the Antichrist his subjects straight discovered certain assemblies,
insomuch that the Inquisitors imprisoned a great number of them, whereof some
were put to death the 21. of May, in the presence of the kings sister their
gouernesse in her brothers absence, of Dom Charles Prince of Spain, and of
many great Lords which delivered their oaths unto the Inquisition, namely the
Gouernesse, and the Prince, to maintain against all. This done with great
solemnities, the faithful remaining constant were burnt alive, Martyrs of
Spain.
namely Augustine Cacalla late the Emperor Charles the fifts Preacher, Francis
de Biuero Priest of Valledolid, the brother of Augustine, Blanch and Co^stance
de Biuero their sister, Alphonsus Peers Priest of Valence, Christopher del
Campo, Christopher de Padille, Antonio de Huezvelo, Catherine Roman, Francis
Errem, Catherine Ortegne, Isabella de Strade, and Iann Velasque. Many other men
and women were then condemned to diverse honorable amends (as they call them)
and to remain prisoners a certain time.

In the month of September following, the Inquisitors of Siuil caused to be
burnt John Ponceus de Leon, Other Marties of Spain.
son of the Count de Bailen a Gentleman, amongst all Spaniards commendable,
because of his great piety, constancy and doctrine, John Gonsolue Theologian
of Siuile, Isabelle de Vacine, Mary de Viroes, Cornelie, Mary and Jane de
Bohorques, Ferdinand de Saint John, Julian Fernand, and others in great number.
For three years before a goodly Church was raised and set up at Siuile, which
being discovered by the spies of the Inquisition, very nigh eight hundred
persons were imprisoned, insomuch that after that the tormentors did no other
thing, but hang, strangle and burn men and women: yet notwithstanding many
very lively tasted the doctrine of the Gospel, and forsook Spain, the more
freely to serve God, some flying into England, others into Almaine and to
Geneua: Likewise all the Monks of the Covent of Saint Isodore nigh Siuile,
forsook their habit and their Country, and saved themselves at Francford; two
of which, namely John Leon, and John Fernand, were taken in a Port of Zeland,
brought again into Spain, and put to death.

In this same year the Estates of the Empire were assembled at Ausbourge, to
handle affairs of Religion: and it was agreed that things should remain
peaceable: and the funeral of obsequies of the Emperor Charles the fifth were
then made. The Ambassador of Othon Henry chief Elector assisted at that
service but he refused to kiss the dish or pax, offered by the Cardinal of
Ausbourge, who sung the Mass: whereat the Cardinal was so despited, that he
said unto him: If thou will have no blessing, receive a curse everlasting.
Other deputies of the Towns, and Princes of the confession of Ausbourge,
entered not into the Church.

Certain time after, Othon Henry Elector Palatin, left his dignity and
estates to Frederick, who reformed his Country after the pure doctrine,
whereof he showed himself a constant and faithful protector, with an
admirable wisdom and moderation. Diethmarsois brought under the yoke.
The Diethmarsois yielded themselves unto Frederick the 2. of that name, king
of Denmark, about the end of the month of June, after they had courageously
maintained the war, and received diverse battles: before they governed
themselves without yielding any subjection unto any person. But now they
yielded to government about 35. years after the death of Henry de Supphon
minister of the word of God, whom they had cruelly put to death in the Town of
Meldorf: where the truth of the Gospel increased greatly by the preachings of
that man. The first day of January, that Christian king of Denmark, of the age
of 56. years died, and about three weeks after, died also Christierne his
Cousin and predecessor, who for his unjust and wicked dealings, was driven away
of his subjects, straying out of his own kingdom the space of 10. years, and
thinking to come thither again was taken upon these, and after locked in
prison, where he reamined 17. years until his death, being us the age of 78.
Laurence Priarli Duke of Venice. and Heroides Duke of Ferrare, died the same
year, ye one in^^^, the other in Octo.

The death of Paul the 4.
Paul. 4. having bin Pope 4. years, 2. months and 27. days, died the 18 day
of August, 1559. of the age of 85. years* Scant had he yielded up his spirit,
but the Roman people which wished death unto him, because of his wars,
exactions* and (...), brake the prisons of the Inquisition, delivered the
prisoners, fired the whole building, threw down the Popes Image cutting off
the head and right hand (...) which were drawn three days (...): (...) cast
(...) And it was (...) that the Arms of the family of ^^r^ffes should be
plucked down from all places of the town and burst in pieces, which was (...)
the same day: His body was in danger to have been handled as his Images, and
so had been, but that they kept certain days (...) a^^^d and strong hand from
the people. He was also very violent in his Popedom, not only toward his
enemies, many of which were yet in prison, but also toward his servants and
friends.

The 26. day of the said month of August, Phillip d' Austrich king of Spain,
having set in order his affairs in Flaunders and the low Countries, made
sail from the Haven of Flushing into Spain, pretending to set upon the Turk,
seeing he was agreed with the king of France, Elizabeth the eldest daughter of
the dead king Henry, being accorded unto him for wife, and committed unto the
king of Navarre and other, to conuoy her even unto the frontiers of Spain, But
being embarked with a great number of ships, and all the riches which his
father had heaped up out of Almain and Italy, with a great quantity of the
rich Tapistry of Flaunders, as he approached the port of S. James in Galicie,
so great a tempest arose, that of all that magnificall furniture and riches
gotten together with so long time and so great travel, nothing arrived in
safety, but the sea was made heir of those riches, even in the sight of the
Spaniards. As for him, that tempest spared him so little, that scant could he
set foot in any (...) but the vessel wherein he was, was ready to sink into
the bottom of the sea. This loss chafed him so much the more against them of
the Religon, especially of the low countries: which were there persecuted with
fire and sword before, and after his depart^^^. In England the Church got up
under the pe^c^^ble government of Elizabeth. As for Scotland, many came unto
the Gospel and they so multiplied, that soon after they remained masters.

The Papal seat being vacant the space of four months, by the advice of the
Cardinals, John Angelus de Medicis, Cardinal, was chosen Pope about the end
of December, and was crowned the sixth day of January, 1560. naming himself
Pius the fourth: Pius the 4. elected Pope.
he lived in the throne of error five years, eleven months, and fifteen
days. He confirmed the election of the Emperor Ferdinand, which his
predecessor would not approve, he also justified and set at liberty out of
prison, certiane Cardinals and Bishops.

The marriage of Phillip King of Spain, with Elizabeth of France. The state of
France, An. 1560. under Francis the 2. which died in the month of December.
At the beginning of this said month, Elizabeth of France was brought to the
limits of Spain, and delivered into the hands of the Cardinal de Burges, of
the Duke d'el Infantasque, King Phillip his deputies, unto whom they brought
her: and there was great triumphs in the celebration of the marriage, which
they called the firm bond to hold united the kingdoms of France and Spain.
Charles Prince of Spain, received the homages of many Towns, insomuch that
for a time there was nothing but reioycings, Iusts, Feasts and Bankets, through
all King Phillips Countries: but this mirth endured no long time, as shall be
seen hereafter.

For the estate of France, the Churches had many troubles this year. For the
violent and illegitimate domination of the house of Guise, which ruled the king
and the kingdom at their pleasure: the recoyling of Princes and great Lords,
the despising of the states, and other co^fusions brought in by these new
governors, stirred a great part of the Nobility to join themselves together
to get the King out of the hands of such people, and to procure by good order
that things might return into their ancient estate: And because this could not
be executed but by arms, they assembled certain troops under the conduct of
Godfroy de Barry seur de la Renaudie, and other valiant Captains to come unto
Amboise to seize the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorraine, to make an
account of their administration. But having been discovered and betrayed long
time before, they came into the field: this enterprise did but ^^uenome and
make more cruel the Lords of Guise: Insomuch that they put to death a great
number of Lords, Captains, Gentlemen, and soldiers, at Amboise. And because
the most part of them professed the true religion then in France, called
Lutherisme: the Cardinal charged the Churches that they had made this
enterprise: yea they dealt with ye princes of the blood royal, namely with
Anthony de Burbon king of Navarre, and his brother Lewis de Burbon prince of
Conde, after with the houses of Montmorencie, and of Chastillon, determining to
root up churches and houses all at once: to effect which, the Lords of Guise
made infinite preparatiues all this year, both within and without the realm,
they also found means to draw the king of Navarre and the Prince unto the
court, after stared them prisoners, and handled the prince very rigorously. On
the other side their forces assembled on all sides to ouerrun the realm. The
king of Spain should enter into Bearne to ruinate and destroy the queen of
Navarre, and to solemnise the entry of the Estates, the prince should have been
publicly beheaded: afterward straigt upon the conclusion of the Estates, the
Armies marched to sack and spoil such as were suspected, and the people were
suffered and countenanced to run upon all such as were religious, to dispatch
them with out other Inquisition. And to the end to leave none alive, the King
should cause all the Princes, Lords, and Knights of the order, to swear and
seal all the articles of Sorbone, sending to the fire without longer process,
all such as denied it. The Chancellor did the like with such as were of the
order d'la long robe about the court: The Parliaments and Prelates had charge
to do the like with such as belonged to Justice and to the Clergy. Likewise
Ladies and honorable women were not forgotten. This being done, the Inquisition
of Spain entered into France, to begin new tragidies: But as all things were
upon the point to be executed, God cut the strings thereof, striking the king
Francis, with an Apostume in his ear, wherewith after he had languished
certain days he was finally stifled, and dyed the fifth day of December, 1560.
having only reigned 17. months. This death overthrew the disseines and
purposes of the Duke of Guise, and constrained the adversaries of the reformed
Church to yield some relief unto the faithful, who had that year given them
in mockery the Huguenots, (because of their night assemblies) to muse and
devise new subtilties and persecutions: whereof we will (God willing) speak
briefly in the years following: but yet the Churches in that year prospered in
all Provinces, with infinite witnesses of God his favor toward his, and of
his judgments upon his enemies of all estates. Some of the Religion were
publicly executed in diverse places: but for one which died, there came a
thousand to the doctrine of the Gospel: In so much that it was incredible the
great number of persons which this year and that following, forsook the
Roman Religion, to come unto the Christian.

The estate of Scotland.
This year Scotland was troubled with a civil war, by the practices of some
which would needs command all over, under the color of maintaining the Roman
Religion: but they frustrated of their hope, and the reformed religion began
then to set foot in that kingdom by the favor and assistance of Elizabeth
Queen of England. The Queen, widow of James the fifth, died in the month of
June.

Martin Bucer and Paul Phagius, whose bodies had been buried and burned four
years before in England, by the solicitations of Cardinal Poole, were
established in their first honor, and their memory publicly celebrated the
30. of July.

The death of Melancton.
The 10. day of April before, died that very learned and modest person Phillip
Melancton, an excellent ornament of all Almaine: after whose decease, many
wicked spirits troubled the Almain Churches, which during his life they durst
not have enterprised: Ioachim Camerarius a man very learned and his great
friend, has described his life. The month of January before, took also from
this world John Alasco, a Gentleman of Polonia, one very affectionate to the
advancement of the kingdom of Chist, whose memory is precious in all Churches.

War in Piemont.
About the end of the same year, Emanuel Philebert Duke of Sauoy, warred upon
them of the vale of Angrogne, and their neighbors, professing the doctrine of
the Gospel: which after assaying all means of peace to conserve it, offering
their Prince all that good subjects should do, defended themselves (though few
in number) so courageously, and were assisted of God, that after many combats
they were left in peace, which at this present they enjoy: the favor of
Margarite of France, Duchess of Sauoy (amongst other humane means, serving
them greatly both then and afterward.

In the same Country of Piemont, were seen many prodigious wonders: the like
in France, Austrich, Pologne and Almain.

At the begginning, and until the end of this year, 1561. The beginning of
troubles in France.
Katherine de Medices Queen mother, having all affairs in her hand, was
counseled by the Princes of the house of Bourbon, by the Admiral and other
great Lords of the Religion: by means whereof, the greatest of the Roman
Religion entered into league with them, and so made privy preparation for great
troubles and vexations after happening.

In the month of January the Princes and great Lords being assembled at S.
German in Lay, an Edict was made the seventeenth of the said month: which
on the one side gave some release and liberty unto them of the Religion, and
on an other side curbed and brideled them. After the Council assigned, on the
ninth day of September following, was a conference and disputation at Poissy
betwixt the Doctors of the Roman and reformed Churches.

In that same month the Electors and Princes of Almaine being assembled at
Neubourge in Turinge, to take Council for maintaining the confession of
Ausbourge, by them presented unto the Emperor Charles the 5. Anno, 1530. gave
audience about the beginning of February the Popes Ambassadors, which
commanded them to send their Ambassadors unto the Council assigned at Trent;
to effect which, they offered for the Pope their M. such safe conduct as was
possible to desire. The 7. of February the Electors and Princes made answer,
that they found it strange, that the Pope, being the cause of all the
co^fusions then in the Church, should go about to assemble a Council, and to
assign it unto them, whom he had nothing to do to command, that they did not,
neither ever would acknowledge any sovereignty to belong unto the Roman
seat: yea they were assured that it appertained not unto the Pope to conuocate
or call a Council. And after they had showed the orders and filthiness of the
Roman Church, and that it were good to regard and look unto the means to
procure a general and free Council, they sent away their Ambassadors, and
after they writ unto the Emperor Ferdinand, that they all with a common advise
agreed unto the confession of Ausbourge: afterward they published in an
Imprinted writing their causes of reculation against the Council of Trent.
These Ambassadors went into diverse other places to the same effect, but they
received no good answer o any King, Prince, or great Lord, making profession
of the Gospel, but especially the Queen of England would not give leave to
the Abbot Martinengue, who was sent by the Pope unto her, to pass the sea to
come into England.

Notable executions at Rome.
The 5. day of March the Pope caused to be strangled in the night time in the
S. Angelo, the Cardinal Charles Caraffe: he beheaded also in an other prison,
the Count of Palliane, and certain other Cardinals: the next day showing all
their bodies unto the people.

King Charles the ninth sacred.
The 18. day of May Charles the ninth of that name, son of Henry de Valois,
and of Catherine de Medicis, was sacred king at Reimes in Campaign, and soon
after crowned at S. Denis in France. The Churches of his kingdom to the
eyesight flourished, to the prejudice whereof was made an Edict, called of
July: notwithstanding which, they maintained themselves with great testimonies
of the blessings of God. In the mean while the king of Navarre the first
Prince of the blood next unto the kings brethren, sent for Peter Martyr and
Theodore de Beza, to be at the disputation of Poissy, which were sent thither
by the Lords of Zurich and Geneua.

Reconciliation of the Prince of Conde and Duke of Guise.
The 24. of August the Prince of Conde was reconciled by the King and his
Council, with the Duke of Guise: who upon the Princes words, which he spoke on
high. I hold him and them for villains which have caused my imprisonment:
answered I believe so, it nothing touches me. Soon after the government of
the kingdom during the kings minority who was then but ten years old and an
half, was confirmed to the queen mother.

In the mean while the deputies of the Churches and certain other Ministries
with safe conduit arrived at Poissy, presented unto the king a request for the
order of the disputation, and also the confession of their faith: A conference
at Poissy, about matters of religion.
who with good countenance received the^, promising to communicate their
requests unto his Council, and make them an answer by his Chancellor.

In the beginning of September many requests were presented to set forward that
which was begun: and finally the 9. of the said month, in the presence of the
King, Prince, Lords, and notable persons of the kingdom of France, as well of
ye one, as the other religion, Theodore de Beza in the name of all the French
Churches, after public invocation of the name of God, made long oration,
co^prehending a summary of all the Christian doctrine, held and preached by the
Ministers of the reformed Churches: and his oration finished, he presented
their confession of faith: which was received and delivered into the hands of
the prelates, to prepare themselves to answer it. But they opposed themselves
only against two Articles of that oration: The one of the Supper, and the other
of the Church: and pronounced their answer by Charles Cardinal of Lorraine,
who had for his master Claude Despence, a Doctor of Sorbone, who once showed
some seed of religion. This answer having been made certain days after the
oration, the Ministers prayed that they might reply straight way: but it was
deferred to an other day: and audience was given them, but not so notable as
the first: the^ fell there out a sharp disputation, which began an other time
after a third oration. Then entered into conference five of the Roman Churches
side, with five of the reformed Churches: who after a long, disputation upon
the matter of the Supper, retired without according any thing assuredly. From
the end of this month until the end of this year, diverse leagues and factions
were made against the Churches, and seditio^s were stirred at Paris and in
other places, against the Christians assembling to hear the word of God: the
kings council being occupied to provide by some Edict, against the mischief to
come, and to procure rest for the kingdom. About this year died Shuvenckfeld,
The death of Shuvenckfeld.
a very pernicious heretic, who by his wicked doctrine greatly endamaged the
Churches of Almaine. The sum of his principal errors, was to revive and
renew again the heresy of Eutiches. For he maintained that the human
nature of Jesus Christ ought no more to be called a creature: but we must think
that it is at this day swallowed up by the divine nature: by that means
co^founding the two natures. Upon this foundation so badly placed, he
established other monstrous opinions: the fault was in not well considering the
vnio^ of the two natures in Christ, and the communicatio^ of the properties.
But these opinions are not dead with him: but contrary have been renewed and
promoted by such who will needs at this day have the the human nature of
Christ infinite.

The state of France.
In the month of January which was then 1591. because they then began the year
at Easter, (and at this present we begin it the first of January) an assembly
was made of the most notable persons of all the Parliaments, and other renowned
people besides the privy Counselors, which decreed and set forth that
notable Edict, named of January, which permitted free exercise to them of the
Religo^ through all the kingdom of France, providing good security for all
people, and rest for the Commonwealth. Many thought that hereby the Churches
should have rest, when soon after news arrived of the massacre of Vassi,
Frances.
committed by Francis the Duke of Guise, who in his own presence caused 42.
persons of the Religion to be slain, and a great number others to be wounded,
being all assembled to hear the word of God. This was the beginning of the
civil wars of France. For the Duke of Guise and his partakers took Arms on
the one side: The Prince of Conde, the Admiral and others, meaning to
maintain the Royal authoauthoritie, the Edict of January, and the Churches
that were under the protection and defense thereof, opposed themselves against
them by Arms also, and the war began through all the kingdom, where infinite
cruelties were exercised in diverse places against them of the Religion: as the
history of our time makes mention. Many Towns and Fortresses were besieged,
carried away by assaults, sacked and spoiled more cruelly, the^ by the most
barbarous people in the world: diverse encounters and bloody battles, namely
that of Dreux: wherein the two chief Captains of both parts remained
prisoners, many of the Nobility and soldiers, as well Strangers as French,
were slain: Churches dissipated and dispersed in most part of the Provinces,
and a marvelous desolation in infinite Families.

Maximilian the Emperor Ferdinands son, Maximilian crowned king of the
Romans and of Boheme.
was declared king of the Romans the 14. day of November, and six days after
he was crowned: two months before he was crowned king of Boheme.

Peter Martyr, borne at Florence, an excellent Theologian, The death of Peter
Martyr.
and professor of Theology at Zurich, where he writ books full of great and
sound doctrine, died the 12. day of November, being then of the age of 63.
years.

The civil war continued in France, notwithstanding the Conde, and the
Constable. The Duke of Guise slain, and peace made.
The Duke of Guise having laid siege before the Town of Orleance, being kept
by them of the Religion, was wounded in the shoulder with a Pistol shot, the
18. day of February, and died certain days after in great torments. By this
means Orleance was delivered, and a peace concluded the month following, the
Edict of January abolished in the most part of the Articles, to the great
disadvantage of them of the Religion: which notwithstanding took heart, and in
the quarters maintained themselves in their accustomed order.

In the month of July, the English men gave over Hance de grace, or New Haven,
unto the French king.

The same time they of Lubec, and the king of Denmark, The estate of Almaine.
made war upon the king of Snede.

Henry de Brunswic made many courses into Almaine, into the lands of the Bishop
of Munster.

The eight day of September Maximilian king of the Romans, was crowned king of
Hungary.

The 24. of September, Charles the ninth, king of France, The Kings Maioritie.
caused his Maioritie to be published, declaring to the Parliament of Paris,
that he would take upon himself the managing of the affairs of the kingdom.

The 28. was published and affixed at Rome on the part of the Cardinals
Inquisitors, A citation from Rome against the Queen of Navarre.
a monitorie and personal adiournament against Jane d' Albret, Queen of
Navarre: who because of the profession of the Gospel, was cited to Rome, to
answer in the Popes consistory therefore, and for want of appearance, within
six months, her Country to be given unto the first conqueror thereof, and
her vassalls and subjects absolved from their oath of fidelity. This was but a
subtle device tending to an other end: and the king of France took into his
hand the cause of this Princess: so that for that time the Popes thunderclaps
turned into smoke.

The Bishop of Wirtzbourge slain.
The second day. of October the Bishop of Wirtzbourge was slain, his Town
occupied and raunsomed, whereupon followed great troubles in Almaine: and at
that time of Automne, the pestilence was vehement in the quarters about
Francfort, Nuremberge, and in the coasts about the Balthique Sea, which
carried away nigh three hundredth thousand persons.

Battle between the Danes.
The ninth day of November the Armies of Denmark and Snede encountered together
and had a bloody battle, wherein were slain 3000. Snedes, with great loss
of their Artillery and baggage.

The end of the Council of Trent.
The fourth day of December was ended the Council of Trent: Betwixt the first
and last session whereof, were eightteene years. In it all the Articles of the
Popish doctrine were confirmed. There was a great strife betwixt the
Ambassadors of France and of Spain, for the primer seat, but he of Spain got
it at that time.

The death of Musculus.
In the same year, and the 13. day of August, died Wolfangus Musculus, Doctor
in Theology at Berne, a man who by his writings greatly served, and yet does
the Churches of God. He was then of the age of 66. years.

Lithuaniens got a great victory upon the Muscouites, which lost nine thousand
men upon the field with their baggage, and many flying, perished in pooles and
Isy Marshes.

The death of Hiperius.
The first day of February died at Marpurge, a Town of Hesse, Andrew Hiperius,
a very learned Theologian amongst the^ of our time, who left many profitable
books to the edification of the Churches of God. He was then of the age of 53.
years.

In the month of April, Frederick Elector, and Count Palatin, came with
Christopher Duke of Wirtemberge, into the Abbey of Malbrun nigh to Spire, where
by the space of 7. days their Divines disputed, some against others, of two
Articles in the doctrine of the holy Supper; that is to say, of the vbiquitie
or presence of the body of Christ Jesus in all places, and the interpretation
of the words of the holy Supper; This is my body. After long contestations and
strifes, they departed without according any thing: and after that, their
debate waxed hotter, to the ruin of Churches, and to the great contentment of
the Pope and his adherents.

The 27. of May, about eight of the clock at night, The death of Calvin.
dyed John Calvin, a professor in Theology, and a Minister of the word of God
in Geneua a person of singular piety, memory, viuacitie of judgment, and
admirable diligence, of a solid doctrine, wherein he has comprehended the pure
Theology: as his writings read without prejudice or sinister affection, do
apparently show. He was moreover endowed with incredible zeal and prudencie
in all the course of his Ministry, having served to the advancement of the
doctrine of the Gospel, and to the edification of the Churches, amongst all the
excellent persons raised up in our time, to ruinate the tyranny of Antichrist,
and to establish the throne of the celestial verity He was of the age of 55.
years, save one month and 13. days: he was buried without pomp, having left
many books very profitable for such as would seek to advance and go forward
earnestly in the intelligence of the holy scripture, and an honorable memory
unto all reformed Churches.

About this time the Maritimal and Sea Armies of the kings of Denmark and
Snede, A battle betwixt ye Danes and Snedes.
encountered upon Balthique Sea in battle, wherein the Snedes remained
victors, and carried away three great ships of war, with a number of
prisoners, which the king of Snede caused afterward to be cruelly handled. But
about the end of June, they of Denmark and Lubec had their revenge, and
overcame the Snedes upon the Sea, conquering one ship, though inexpugnable
until then, after having sunk many more.

Maximilian.
The death of Ferdinand.
The Emperor Ferdinand, a gentle and peaceable Prince, died the 25. day July at
Vienna in Austrich, having lived 61. years, four months, and an half,
leaving for successor to the Empire, his son Maximilian, who soon after was
elected and crowned.

Europe, and there fell an extraordinary quantity of snow, which being
frozen, and after melted, in the spting time there followed great Inundations.

The Churches of France maintained themselves in some estate, whilst the young
King, guided by his Council, made his voyage of Bayonne.

A war in Hungary against the Turks, with losses and ruins on both parts.

The estate of the Flemish Churches.
The Churches in the low Countries began also to lift up their heads,
especially under Charles the fifth. The increase of the French Churches
encouraged them: they also published their confession of faith. The
Ecclesiasticke Romans that which afterward came to pass;e, amongst other
practices, sought to establish the Spanish Inquisition, and certain years
before made new Bishops, to the end more easily to maintain the Popes
authority. After this erection, by the space of four or five years, whilst
Margarite Duchess of Parma, governed the low Countries for her brother the
king of Spain, some ceased not to contend against others, by remonstrances,
books, and diverse practices, some to abolish, others to give entry and
authority unto the Inquisition.

War at Malte.
The I Will and Town of Malte, was furiously assailed by the Turks in the month
of May, but they were Iustained and pushed back by the knights of Malta, being
assisted with the succors which were sent from many places.

Deluges.
In the months of June and July, were great deluges and ouerflowings of waters
in diverse quarters of Almaine, especially in Thuringe.

War in Hungary.
A very sharp war was in Hungary betwixt the Turks and the Almaines, with
diverse accidents that befell on both sides.

The eight of December, the Pope Pius the fourth, The death of Pope Pius. 4.
died of the age of 66. years, and 8. months, having been Pope about six
month.

Conrad Gesner of Zurich a Physician, The death of Conrad Gesner.
learned in the tongues and humane sciences, laborious and painful amongst
others, and who very diligently writ a perfect and full history of all
beasts, fowls, fishes, and creeping things, died also in the month of
December, leaving infinite other writings in all sorts of litterature, already
Imprinted, and others to Imprint.

About the end of this year, An Edict against the Religion in the low
Countries.
the King Phillip sent from Spain into the low Countries, an Edict, whereby he
ordained that the ancient and new placarts against them of the Religion should
be executed: that the Inquisition should be thoroughly established, and the
Inquisitors favored in the exercise of their charge: that the decrees of the
Council of Trent should be received and observed from point to point. These
Letters Patents were the cause of all the troubles following, and not yet ended.

The 7. day of January, 1566. Michael Gillier a Monk Lombardie, being come
from one degree to an other, Pius. 5.
till he was Cardinal, finally was chosen Pope, and called himself Pius the
fifth.

The 21. day of the said month, the Emperor Maximilian second of that name,
held his first Imperial Journey at Ausbourge, where the affairs of Religion
was handled. Frederick Count Palatin de Rhene, and chief Elector of the
Empire, a Christian and magnanimous Prince, constantly maintained the pure
doctrine and the true reformation established in his Country: by means
whereof, he made himself redoughted of all such is resisted him, either openly
or secretly, and was well beloved of the Emperor, and of the greatest in
Almaine. He was then accompanied with the Prince Cassimere his son, who kept
him good company, and a great company of the Nobility.

In the month of March, and in the other following, The violent death of the
king of Scotland.
happened great troubles in Scotland, and finally the King himself was strangled
in the night, and the chamber wherein he was, overthrown with Cannon powder.
An Earl of that Realm espowsed his widow, but being overthrown in battle
by the Nobility, he fled out of the Realm. The Queen thingking to save her
self in France, was stayed prisoner in England. James the sixth, the son of
her, and her slain husband, at this present King of Scotland, of the age of
fifteen or sixteen years, is a Prince of great hope.

In the same month of March, at the Imperial Journey at Ausbourge, the
Emperor there assisting it, was decreed that the affairs of Religion should
remain in their present estate, but for the affairs of the Empire they
provided, especially for the war against the Turks.

A league in Flaunders against the Inquisition.
In the beginning of April certain great Lords and Gentlemen of the low
Countries, leagued themselves in good number against the Inquisition:
pretending the same to be contrary to the liberties of the low Country. The
people banded themselves, and the Assemblies of them of the Religion began to
increase. In so much that the fourth of May there was public preaching at
Antwerpe without the Town, and five weeks after within the said Town. At the
same time, such as were leagued against the Inquisition, were surnamed les
Gueux. The cause hereof was, for that some of the principalls going to present
a request to the Council of the estate, the Sieur de Barlaimont their
adversary, said to an other Councellor that sat nigh him: Voici mes Gueux.

Great and little after that, took a devise, wearing apparel of gray cloth,
and pieces of money about their neck, having on the one side the kings Image,
and on the other side a beggars dish, with this Inscription; Faithful to the
king, even to the begers dish.

War in Hungary.
In the month of June, July, and the other following, fell a sharp war in
Hungary against the Turks, but the end was not very good, for the Hungarians
and Almaines lost many men in diverse encounters, also many strong holds,
especially at Zigeth, which was besieged by Soliman himself, who dyed a few
days before the taking thereof.

Selim the second of that name, Selim succeeded Soliman.
succeeded his father Soliman, was acknowledged and crowned Emperor of the
Turks in the month of September, and soon after transported himself into
Hungary, to provide for the affairs of that war, and then straight departed
toward Constantinople, leaving one of his B^ss^es called Pertaw, to continue,
who with a puissant Army of Turks and Tartarians, forraged Hungary and
Transyluania, committing very strange saccagements and cruelties.

The Vainoda of Transyluania, called this Bassa to his succors, to recover
certain places occupied by the Hungarians, but perceiving such succors did
wholly ruinate and overthrow himself, he sound means to surprise the
Tartarians, cut them all in pieces, and so dissipated all that Turkish Army:
first himself being well chastifed for drawing such people into his Country.

John Functius a learned Chronographer amongst all them of our time. Matthias
Horst, and John Shnell, John Functius and others beheaded.
Ministers of the Gospel at Conigsprucke in Pruse, were beheaded the 28. of
October, for the crime of conspiracy against the Prince Albert, who had
established the Osiandrisme, that is to say, the dreams and errors of one
Andrew Osiander, concerning Christian righteousness, and other points of
Divinity: which error these three maintained, and would have revenged
themselves of Albert, who had purged his Country of that infection.

The death of Soliman, the great whip of Christendom, gave some release unto
Almaine.

Selim preparing himself to make war upon Venetians: War against John
Frederick of Saxony.
but the Emperor decreed a new war within Almaine it self, against
Frederick of Saxony, son of the dead Elector, taken in battle by Charles
the fifth. The cause hereof was, that John Frederick supported and gave refuge
unto William Grembach and other Gentlemen which were banished out of the
Empire, because of the murder of Melchior Zobel, Bishop of Wirthbourge.

Augustus Elector, and Duke of Saxony, the Cosin-germaine of John Frederick,
had the charge of this war, whereunto he prepared himself in the months of
October and November, and about the end of the year he laid siege before the
Town of Goth, where there was a Citadell or Castle, one of the strangest in
Almaine. John Frederick, Grombach and others, were there, which sustained the
siege certain months.

Images burst in the low Countries.
They of the Religion increased maruellously in Flaunders, Brabant, and in many
other Provinces of the low Countries, and their affairs got so forward, that
the 20. day of August the Images in the Churches of Antwerpe, were broken in
pieces. The Images of other Towns were used incontinently after the like
handling, even with an incredible swiftness by the simple people: with such an
astonishment of every one, that none of the Magistrates opposed themselves
against them. William de Nassau, Prince of Orange, Governor of Antwerpe,
having done what he could to hold things in an evenness, and considering that
it should be impossible for him to withstand the tempest which he saw coming,
gave place to the time, and resolved to retire himself into Almaine,
admonishing other Lords to do the like, seeing men made account to think upon
means to conserve the privileges of the Country, but rather to yield
themselves unto the yoke of the Inquisition.

John Frederick were absolved by the Imperial authority, of their oath
fidelity due to their Lord, and were constrained to promise their obedience
unto John William, brother of the said Frederick. This done, the siege of Gothe
continued.

Troubles in the low Countries.
About the end of the month troubles began to arise in the low Country;
Valencienne was besieged, beaten, taken, and rudely handled by the Sieur de
Moircarmes because of Religion. The Ministers of the word of God, and certain
of the chief of the Town were imprisoned, and after put to death.

Continuation of troubles, and beginning of war in the low Countries.
The 25. of Feebruary Henry de Bredenrode a Lord of great authority in the low
Countries, and very affectionate unto Religion, seeing the peoples hearty
desires to have public exercise thereof, presented a request unto the
Gouernesse in the name of him and his Associates, that she might quickly puruey
for the affairs as they presented themselves. She made such answer, as they
might perceive well, that things took a way unto troubles and confusions.
Indeed after certain goings and commings, from words they fell unto Arms: In
so much, that in the month of March there happened encounters and combats
betwixt them, of the one and the other party. The Town of Antwerpe saw it
self in a marvelous division, and upon the point of her ruin, but by the
prudence of the Prince of Orange, who yet was not departed the affairs, it
remained peaceable for certain months. In the mean while the king of Spain
advertised of those chaunges, gave commission to the Duke of Al^a, an old and
subtle Captain, to tame the Flemmings, and chastise their heads and
principal rulers: that thereby he might bridle the low Countries, appointing
for him a strong Army of Spaniards, which about this time departed by sea, and
so came into Italy, obtaining there a further strength of people which attended
them with a good mind to gather booties in the low Contries.

The last day of March, Phillip Lantgraue of Hesse, a Christian Prince, sage,
valiant, and endowed with all the goodly parts required in a great Lord, having
in his life time executed many valiant and memorable exployts, and especially
for Religion, died at Cassel, of the age about 63. years, leaving four
sons, William, Lewis, Phillip, and George, and four daughters, Agnes first
married to Maurice. Elector and Duke of Saxony, after in her second marriage,
to John Frederick, Anne married to Wolfgang, Count Palatin de Rhene. Barbara to
George Count de Montheliard: and Christine to Adolpe Duke of Holsac.

Two days after, Ernest Duke of Brunswick, The death of the Duke of Brunswick
a Prince fearing God, wise, courageous, and constant, and who bore himself
well in the Protestants war, dyed in his Castle of Hertaberge.

The fourth of April they of Gothe being besieged by the Elector of Saxony,
laid hold of the proscripts banished men, and the 13. of the said month,
yielded the town and the Citadell: John Frederick was delivered prisoner unto
the Emperors deputies, which happened the same day, and 20. years after that,
his father Elector of the Empire, was taken prisoner in battle nigh Mulberge,
by the Emperor Charles the fifth. The Citadell of Gothe was destroyed, Grombach
and certain of his accomplices executed to death, and the Elect or Augustus
being delivered from great trouble, caused to coin Dollers of silver, with
this inscription on the one side: Tandem bona causa triumphat.

At the beginning of May, the Duke of Alua arriving from Barcelone at Genes, to
go into Flaunders, began to give order for the passage of his Army.

Certain Bayliwickes yielded to the Duke of Sauoy.
About the same time, Emanuel Philebert Duke of Sauoy, the Bernois, to yield him
certain lands by them conquered upon the dead Duke Charles his father, after
certain conferences betwixt them, they yielded him three Bailiwickes, namely,
Gez, Ternier, and Chablais, which enuiron Geneua, with certain conditions;
whereof the chief was, that the said Bailiwicke* should remain in the state
they then were in namely with profession and public exercise of the only
Religion, reformed certain months after the Duke was put in real possession
of the said Bailiwickes.

The Duke of Alua comes into the low Country, and his first exployts.
About the beginning of July the Duke of Alua departed Italy with a good army
of foot men, Spaniards and Piemontois: Being entered Sauoy, he made a
countenance to stay before Geneua: but fearing to receive some shame, he entered
into le Franche Comte: where he joined himself with certain new troops
conducted by the Court de Lodron, and straight marched right unto Bruxelles in
Brabant. At his arriual, he published the Edict of the Inquisition, established
the bloody Council, cut off-infinit heads, confiscated the goods of all sorts
of people, about the end of the month of August: And in September he sent
prisoners into the Castle of Gaunt, the Countes of Aigremont, and of Horn: and
to found his bloody executio^s, that request presented by the principal of
the Country to the Duchess of Parma, was declared to be but a coniuration
against the Kings majesty. The Prince of Orange, the Count Ludouic, le Countes
de Berge, de Hochstrate, de Culembourge, le fieur de Brede^^^^* many other
Lords, Gentlemen, guests and merchants, which had signed or assisted the
preachings, or carried arms, were adiourned to appear in person before the
Duke of Alua, within six weeks, and their goods noted. The month of September
following they were improied in taking prisoners, the best they could lay
hands on: And then began confusion on all sides in the low Country. About the
end of October he begun the Citadell of Antwerpe.

In the said time, The second civil war in France.
the second civil war for matters of Religion lighted in France, and a
battle was given betwixt Paris and S. Denis the tenth day of November,
wherein the Constable was wounded to death, and deceased soon after. Many
Lords, Gentlemen, and valiant soldiers remained in the field. The army of the
Religion drew into Lorraine, to gather the succors which the Duke Cassimere
led.

A great deluges of waters was at Verone the two last days of October, where
there were 200 persons drowned, Great deluges in Italy.
and infinite goods wasted and destroyed. Likewise certain other places of
Italy were in like manner so destroyed.

About the end of the year, Cassimere brings succors to them of the
Religion.
the Duke Cassimere with his Army of 7500. horses, and 3000. footmen, joined
himself unto the troops of the Prince of Conde at Pontamonsson in Lorraine:
and there was some conference about a peace, which succeeded not.

In the month of January the Duke Cassimere made many Reisters in France.
for the pacifications of troubles in the kingdom of France. This serving for
nothing, his army set forward: whilst the war waxed hot in diverse
provinces. On the other side John Guillaume Duke of Saxony, brought 4000.
Reisters to the succors of the Catholic Romans in France.

The 18. day of the said month, Phillip king of Spain caused the Prince
Charles his only son, to be kept in a Chamber as prisoner. The Flemings in a
certain request presented unto the Emperor and the states of Almaine
assembled at Spire, declared that that imprisonment was practiced by the
Inquisitors of Spain, because the Prince condemned the dealings of the Duke of
Alua, and the rigor of the Inquisition, and bore great amity unto them of the
low Countries, against which they proceeded with a strange violence, which
continued more and more.

Silver stayed.
In the month of February the Elector Palatin, stayed in his hands a great sum
of money descried in the country of the Empire, which was going unto the Duke
of Alua into Flaunders, by reason whereof there was great notice and
threatenings, but in the end the merchants were feign to pacify and content him.

The sixth day of March the Prince of Conde and Cassimere besieged and assaulted
the town of Chartres, so that their troops made ready to go to the breach,
the king sent to offer a peace, which was incontinently accepted, and the
second Edict of pacification published in the Camp the 30. day of the same
month, of the same tenor as the first. But this accord endured not, for so
soon as the Duke Cassimere was retired, they of the Religion were assailed as
they went homeward, and in their houses: and people were dispatched on all
sides to seize and take dead or a live, the Prince of Conde, the Admiral, the
Lords, Gentlemen, and Captains, professing the Religion: so that in a moment
appeared the third civil war on all sides, what remonstrances soever the
Prince could make to cause the contentions against the Edict to cease.

The death of the Duke of Pruse.
The 20. day of March, died Albert Marquess of Brandebourge, Duke of Pruse, of
the age of 78. years: a Prince right noble, virtuous, learned, wise, and
fearing God. He repurged his Country of the errors of Andrew Osiander. Anne
Mary of Brouswic, his wife by his second marriage, deceased the same day, and
left a son called Albert Frederick, then of the age of 15. years.

The Prince of Orange, and the Count of Hochstrate justify themselves.
The 25. day of April, William de Nassau, Prince of Orange, and Anthony de
Ludain, Count Hochstrate, published their defenses and justification, against
the personal adiornament decreed upon them by the Duke of Alua, at the
instance of the Proctor general, and showed in their writings, unto whom the
cause of all the troubles of the low Countries ought to be imputed, and that
they were nothing culpable of these stirs.

In the month of May, Open wars in the low Countries.
certain people being chased from diverse Provinces, gathered themselves
together, attending the Count de Hochstrate, and other Captains: but they were
overthrown, and the most part cut in pieces, by the troops of the Duke of
Alua. In the same time, the Count Lodowick took Arms, and seized upon many
places in Frise. The Duke of Alua sent incontinently an Army of Spaniards,
under the conduct of the Count d' Aremberge. They encountered the 24. of May,
where the Spaniards were overthrown, their Captain slain in the field: the
Count Adolphe, Lodowicks brother, was also slain as he pursued the victory.
But because the Prince of Orange and others that were adiourned, appeared not
at the day assigned, they were declared criminalls of treason. The first of
June, The Counts d' Aigmont, and d' Horn beheaded.
the Duke of Alua greatly stirred with the death of the Count d' Aremberge,
caused to be beheaded at Bruxells, many Gentlemen, amongst others, the two
Barons of Battembourge: and four days after, the Counts d' Aigment and de
Horn, which had done great service unto the Emperor Charles and King Phillip.
The same day, the house of the Count de Curembourge, where the Lords of the
League assembled when they made their request, was sacked and destroyed, and a
pillar placed in the midst thereof, with a writing, that it was raced for the
execrable coniuration made therein against the Catholic Roman Religion, the
Kings majesty, nor the estate of the Country. At the same time the Count de
Bure, the only son of the first marriage of the Prince of Orange, a Student
at Louaine. was taken, and carried into Spain, against the privileges o^
Brabant, and of the University of Louaine. After, there was an Edict
published, forbidding ^^pon con^^^^^cie (...) any way, The Count Lodowick
overthrown.
or (...) do with (...) the Count Lodowick was always in the field the Duke
of (...) ^^nt an Army to ouerthro^^^ him, who attended (...) resolutely. But at
the joining his soldiers refused to fight, so that he was constrained to save
himself by swimming ou^^ a River nigh unto that place, had leaving many of his
people there, the 21. day of July.

The Prince of Orange takes Arms.
The Prince of Orange seeing that the Duke of Alua continued in his strange and
bloody actions, after diverse sorrowful complaints unto the king of Spain,
whereof there was no account made, published his iustifications, and took
Arms, and conducted his Army with such speed, that quickly he passed Meuse,
resolved to give battle to his enemy: But upon the point to fight, his
soldiers demanded silver, which the Prince not able to do, led a part of
his troops through Brabant and Hainaut, and entered France, where the Princes
and Lords of the Religion called him to their succors.

The miserable estate of the Churches.
Then the Churches of France and the low Countries were very desolate. As for
the low Countries, the Duke of Alua and the bloody Council sought by all
means to root out Religion, to plant the Inquisition, and to ruinate all the
Country, killing publicly, and secretly, an infinite number of innocent
persons. The affairs of France were in no better case: For from the peace
made, until the end of August, there were slain in diverse fortes, more
people of the Religion, in Towns and the fields, without any distinction of
Sex, age, or estates, then there died in all the second war.

The death of the Prince of Spain.
The 23. of July, died in prison Charles Prince of Spain, having attained the
age of 23. years. Certain days after deceased Elizabeth Queen of Spain.

The king of Snede.
The 28. of the same month, John Duke of Einland, was chosen king of Snede, in
the place of his brother Henry, who for his demerites was deposed.

Three Moons at one instant.
Three Moons were seen at one instant in heaven, in egall and sufficient
distance one from an other especially in (...), the ninth day of August.

Treuers besieged.
The Town of Treuers long (...) before besieged, (...) Archbishop thereof (...)
^^^bg^t to (...) by the mediation of the Emperor and (...).

Exercise of Religion in Austrich.
In the same m^^^th, the Emp^^^^^ (...) many times been desired, at last
permitted the Lords (...) Gentlemen of Austrich, profess^^^ the Gospel to
(...) in their Castles, (...), and ho^s^s (...) doctrine contained in the
confession of Ausbourge.

The 23. of the said month, The third civil war in France.
the Prince of Conde being upon the point to fall into the power of his
enemies, saved himself with his wife and children, and departing from Noyers
in Bourgongne, accompanied with the Admiral of Sieur d' Andelot, and of their
train, passed the River of Loire at a Forde, and were constrained to save
themselves at Rochell. Then began the third civil war in France, whereunto
both parties prepared themselves. Jane d' Albert Queen of Navarre, an
excellent Princess, came thither to find her brother in law, the Prince of
Conde, and brought with her, her son Henry, then very young. From that time,
that camp of the Religion, was called the Army of the Princess. They
presented and published many Remonstrances which served for nothing, and
Churches were dissipated and dispersed in the most part of Provinces, and very
rigorous Edicts published against them of the Religion. Henry Duke of Aniou,
and brother of King Charles the ninth, being then chief of the Army of the
Catholic Romans. The Chauncelor d'l'Hospitall, persuading to peace, was sent
to his house and his Seals given to an other. The Almaines and other
Strangers were solicited on both sides to come to their succors. The
Emperor behaved himself very wisely in this behalf.

The 21. day of October, A conference at Aldebourg.
six Theologians of the part of Augustus Elector of Saxony, and as many on
the side of John William Duke of Saxony, were assembled at Aldenbourge, to
agree the controversies happening amongst these Theologians upon certain points
of Christian doctrine. The Duke John William assisted there personally, and
that conference and disputation continued until the beginning of March in the
year following, and there was at large disputed upon Justification, and many
Articles depending thereon. As the acts of the disputation do show.

The 25. of this month, Paul de Ridnend sieur de Mouuans, a brave and valiant
soldier amongst the French Captains, and much affectioned toward Religion,
was overthrown, with his footmen of Prouence and Daulphine, by the companies
of horsemen of the Duke Montpensier, of the Count de Brissa^, and other
Catholic Romans, were slain in the field, with a great number of soldiers,
and loss of many Ensign. Such as escaped, joined themselves to the Princes
Army. The 12. of November, the Captain la Coche, a Gentleman of Dauphine, was
overthrown with his troops, by the Duke d' Aumale, betwixt Metz and Sauerne.
He was taken, and after put to death. About the end of November, the Prince of
Orange not being able to take order in the affairs of the low Countries,
withdrew into Almaine, with certain warriors, attending the departure of the
Duke de Deux Ponts, who prepared to give succors to the Princes. In the mean
while, the French Armies besieged and took diverse places, remaining in the
field notwithstanding the rigor of winter, which killed a great number of
soldiers.

Christopher, Duke of Wittemberge, and Count de Montbelliard, died the 28. of
December.

Reisters in France.
About the same time, 5500. Reisters, conducted by Philibert, Marquess de Bade,
and other great Lords of Almain, passed Rhene and soon after they entered.

The Queen of England took three Spanish ships.
The Queen of England about the 23. of November, took three Spanish ships,
laden with great riches. The sixth of January she made a reason of her action,
in an Imprinted writing. Wherein she showed how little the Duke of Alua his
menaces astonished her.

The Duke de Deux Ponts leads an Army into France.
During the months of January and February, the next Country to Strasbourge
was seen full of people of war, Almaines, ready to enter France. The Prince
of Orange was in great distress, about pleasing of the Reistres: but in the
end he appeased them, and joined himself to the Duke de Deux Ponts, who before
he departed, wrote largely unto the King, the reasons that moved him to
succor the Princes, and them of the Religion: and the next morning mounted on
horsback, and the 12. of March he mustered, where there were found seven
thousand and six hundredth Reistres well mounted, besides the troops of the
Prince of Orange, and of certain French Lords and Gentlemen, and certain
Lansquenets footmen.

The last day of February, the Duke of Alua adiourned by public Edict, all
fugitives of the low Countries, Confiscations in the low Countries.
to appear in person within six weeks after, upon pain of confiscation of
their goods. They doubting his cruelty, thought it better to loose the sleeue,
then the arm: In so much that no person returned: therefore the Duke fatted
himself with confiscations, and continued also to feed himself with the
blood of such faithful as he could catch.

The thirteenth day of March, Lewis de Bourbon, The Prince of Conde slain.
Prince of Conde, fighting valerously in the battle fought nigh to Coignac in
Poictu, amongst the troops and Army of the Catholics, was overthrown from
his horse to the ground, taken prisoner upon his faith, and against all right,
divine, and humane, slain with a Pistol behind on his head, by one called
Montesquian.

The Catholic Romans made great reioycings at that death, thinking to have
gained as much, as if they of the Religion had now no help at all. There were
also great triumphs made at Rome. Many Gentlemen and valiant Captains were
slain with the Prince. The Admiral de Chastillon having gathered together his
troops under the authority of Henry de Bourbon, Prince of Navarre, and of
Henry de Bourbon, Prince of Conde, son and successor of Lewis, both of them
as yet very young, hartned so every one, that the Catholic Romans willing to
pursue their victory, with an inconsiderate boldness, were beaten down before
Coignac, and had other notable great losses after that. The Princes, the
Admiral, the Lords, and Gentlemen, Captains and soldiers of the Army,
renewed their former oath to do their duties in opposing themselves against the
violence of the enemies, to procure a good peace to the glory of God, to the
rest of the churches, and of all the kingdom. The Queen of Navarre brought the
Prince her son into the Army: and after having made many good remonstrances
and reasons to encourage and stir him to the performance of his duty toward
God and his Country, she retired into Rochell. Then waxed the war hotter then
before, with diverse exploits and chances on both sides.

An Imperial Journey.
The estates of the Empire were assembled at Francford the 14. day of April, to
provide for the affairs of Almaine.

The Popes present to the Duke of Alua.
In the same month the Pope sent unto the Duke of Alua as a recompense of so
great pains as he had taken to maintain the Popedom, an helm, and a pair
of gloves, blessed with great ceremonies on Christmas day. Paul the third sent
the like present unto the Emperor Charles the fifth, after he overcame the
Protestant Princes.

The death of the Sieur de Andelot.
The seventh day of May, Francis de Colligni, Sieur d' Andelot, Colonel of the
French footmen, very affectionate toward the maintaining of the true
Religion, a Knight without all fear, and greatly dreaded of the Gospells
enemies, died of poison in the Town of Saints. Many other great Lords and
Gentlemen of the Religion, died in the same manner before and after, by the
cunning art of certain poysoners sent through France, and better recompensed
for such execrable acts, then the wisest, valiantest, and faithfullest servants
of the Crown.

The Duke de dreux Ponts being entered into France maugre the hinderance of
Claude d'Lorraine, Duke d' Aumale, besieged and took Charity, a Town placed
upon the River of Loire, and passing forward to join himself to the Princes
Army, arrived upon the marches of Limosin, where an hot fever took him, and
carried him out of the world, the 11. day of June, leaving for Commander of his
troops, Wolrad Count de Masfeld, who brought his Army nigh to the Princes
four days after this accident, and performed greatly his due, with the other
Lords that accompanied him in all the rest of this war: hereof is a witness
that which happened in the encounter which was the 25. of that month: at what
time, if a great ruin had not come, the Army of the Catholic Romans had
been overthrown: yet they loft a great number of their auantgard, and
afterward the Princes got many places in Poictou: Although the Princes were
strong, yet they never ceased to demand peace: but their Herald was not
suffered to carry their request unto the king: so war was continued, and the
Princes besieged Poiters, where they lost time and many people, by diseases
happening in their Camp.

Whilst things were thus confused in France and Flaunders, the Emperor
Maximilian, the 18. day of August, Exercise of Religion in Austriche.
suffered the Lords and Gentlemen of the Archduche of Austrich, to enjoy a free
exercise of Religion, in their Towns, Villages, and Castles, after the
doctrine of the confession of Ausbourge.

The 27. of the same month, Great Duke of Thuscane.
Cosme de Medices Duke of Florence, was created, and after solemnly proclaimed
at Rome, great Duke of Thuscane, by the declaration of the Pope Pius the fifth.

The Parliament of Paris condemned the Admiral as guilty of treason, An
arrest against the Admiral.
who notwithstanding was of great authority in the Princes Army, courageously
acquiting himself of the charge he carried, without any apprehension of the
dangers whereunto he was still subject, by murderers and poisoners, which were
daily sent to sley him. One of which (who had once been his chamberlain) was
put to death for the like attempt, by the sentence of the Princes, Lords, and
Captains of the Army, the 21. of September.

After the one Army had long time sought the other, The battle of Montco^tour
finally they encountered in the plain of Montcontour the third of October, and
there was a general battle, wherein after great loss of both sides, but
more of the Princes, especially of their Lansquenets, and a part of their
French footmen, the field remained unto the Catholic Romans: which made
great triumphs thereof through Europe. But in lieu of following their victory,
they stayed upon the siege of the Town of S. John d' Angeli, which was yielded
to them by composition at the end of certain weeks: during which time, the
besieged occupied themselves so well, that the Catholics lost many thousands
of men, and that of the most resolute of their troops, by means whereof, the
Princes had means to reassure their people, to gather in their forces, and to
provide for the affairs of war, so that the Catholics found themselves
again to begin.

The sixteenth of November, Pardon of the Duke of Alua.
the Duke of Alua caused to be published in the low Countries certain
Letters of absolution and pardon of the king of Spain, for such as were absent
and would return into their houses but this deceit served for nothing but to
bring in birds too much already tamed with the too much violence of so
bloody a Fowler.

A coniuration in England.
The 24. there was discovered in England, a coniuration or rebellion of certain
Earls, which would have planted Popery in that Kingdom: But the Queen
provided there so well for all things, that their forces remained wholly
unprofitable.

A continuation of war in France.
The third of December, S. John d' Angeli was yielded by composition. Sansac and
other Catholic Romans, were shamefully chased from before the Town of
Vezelay in Bourgongne, after great loss of his brauest soldiers, to the
number of 150. The rest of the year passed in diverse exployts of war, here
and there, to the great hurt of both parts, and to the ruin of the kingdom.

France, desiring peace, had diverse negotiations about it: but at that time
nothing was concluded, but war continued, the Churches then being very
desolate.

Troubles for matters of Religion in Almaine.
The Theologians of the Country of Saxony being then in great contention for
the intelligence of certain Articles of Christian doctrine namely of
Justification of free will, of good works, of things indifferent, and of the
presence of the body and blood of Jesus Christ in the Supper. By occasion
whereof, they assembled themselves in a Town of the Duchy d' Aumale, called
Zeruest: where by the stepping in of a certain Doctor of Tubingue, called
James Andrew (a man then very renowned in all Almaine: through the Provinces
whereof he had not ceased certain years to run to cause that monstrous
opinion of the vbiquitie of Christ's body to be received: by the means whereof,
the errors of Nestorius and of Eutiches ancient heretics, and their
accomplices, are again renewed) there was made a certain agreement, which after
was rejected and controwled by diverse Theologians. Heerevpon afterward happened
greater troubles, which even at this day do endure, by the practices and
slanders of that vbiquitarie Doctor.

Whilst the Christians contended with their voices, with their writings, and
blows of sword in diverse places of Europe, and that the Western Antichrist
sought by all means to maintain his tyranny, the Antichrist of the East did
what he could by means of Selim Soliman his successor, the Turk, to increase
his domination. For Selim sent his Ambassador, The Turks denounce war to the
Venetians.
who arrived the 27. of March at Venice, and denounced war against the
Venetians, if they refused to yield him the I Will of Cyprus. Which they refusing,
there was preparation for war on both sides.

The 4. of April the Ministers of the Churches of Lithuania and Sathogitia,
comprehended in the kingdom of Polongne, A Sinode in Polongne.
held a Sinode in the Town of Sendomire: where they agreed upon certain
Articles touching the Mediatorship of Jesus Christ, and the holy Supper, to the
end they might all agree in one concordance of doctrine.

During this time, the troubles of France continued. Exhortation unto
pacification.
The Electors Palatin and of Saxony, assembled at Heidelberge, with certain
Princes and great Lords of Almaine, for to honor the marriage of Duke
Cassimere, who espowsed Elizabeth daughter of the Duke of Saxony, sent large
Letters to the king, to exhort and induce him to enter into a pacification.

About the end of June, the king of Polongne and the Muscouite, made a truce
for three years. A truce.
The Muscouite was then sore troubled with extreme famine.

In the month of July, An Imperial Journey.
the estates of the Empire were assembled at Spire, to provide for the affairs
and quietness of Almaine. The Emperor was there in person, with his two
daughters, Marie, and Elizabeth, which were affianced unto the kings of Spain
and France, unto which they were sent.

In the month of August the Duke of Alua put to death in the Town of Antwerpe
a great number of soldiers of the garrison of Valenciennes, Executions to
death.
for a mutiny against the Count de Lodron their Captain. After by the space
of certain months, he remained peaceable in his government of the low
Countries, which he forraged at his pleasure, heaping up a marvelous booty to
himself.

The 3. Edict of pacificatio^.
The third civil war took an end in France, and the Edict of pacification
was published in the Parliament of Paris, the 11. day of August.

The death of John Brencius the father of vbiquitie.
John Brencius, a Minister in the Duchy of Witemberge, of the age of 69.
years, and who had begun to preach and write after the first Doctors of our
time, died the 11. day of September. Certain years before his death, he had
published by diverse Imprinted books, a new opinion to maintain the carnal
presence of Jesus Christ in his holy Supper. The sum of this opinion (willing
to attribute to the flesh of Jesus Christ a presence in all places, as well as
to his divine nature) was, that the humane and divine nature being inseperably
united in one alone person, the humane is in each place, as well as the divine.
But in the explication of this mystery, he maintained that the personal union
of these two natures in Jesus Christ, do only signify that they are
together, and not otherwise in Jesus Christ, then in S. Peter and other
servants of God, according to the essence: But as to the efficacy, that all
the properties of the divine nature, are really, and indeed dispersed and
communicated to the humane nature, so that thereby having egall majesty and
power with the divine, the said divine nature works and does nothing without
it. Although the authority of this person served to the increase of this
dangerous error, yet there wanted not for many learned men which opposed
themselves betimes against this error, and proved even to Brencius himself
(without that either he or any of his Disciples could answer pertinently
thereunto) that if such an opinion of the vbiquitie of the flesh of Jesus
Christ, and of the personal union of the two natures, according to the
definition of Brencius, were true, the two natures of Jesus Christ should be
separated even according to the essence, as well in Jesus Christ, as in S.
Peter, and other the faithful: and Christ should be God after the flesh.
Behold a blasphemy which establishes the heresy of Nestorius, seperating the
two natures of Christ, and which on the other side confounds the properties
of those two natures, as did the heretic Eutiches. Notwithstanding that they
discovered to Brencius, the absurdities and blasphemies rising upon his
opinion: yet left not he to maintain it, having a Disciple called James
Andreas, who with certain other that after rose up, added errors unto errors.
And which is worse, Brencius in the end of his life, in the place to humble
himself before God, for so molesting the Churches, in the making of his
testament, thundered against the Churches which approved not his vbiquitie,
being so far audacious, even he alone, who could not unto the purpose reply
to the arguments of certain Doctors which lively refuted him, as to condemn
all the Churches of France, England, Scotland, Suetia, and others. This
testament was maintained by his Disciples, and from that time, till this
instant, has caused great evils, and kindled a fire which cannot be
extinguished, if God set not too his hand in some especial manner.

The last day of October, East and West, Friseland, Holland, Deluges in
Friseland, France, and other Countries.
Zeland, Brabant, and other places thereabouts, were sore tormented and beaten
with a strange tempest of winds: and two days after, the Sea swelled, and
having broken and overthrown her dikes and leuies, drowned many Countries and
infinite people and cattaile, with such an astonishment of all, that it was
feared all the low Countries would have been swallowed up. There happened as
much in the Balthike sea, especially at Hambourge. There was also great
ouerflowings of waters in France, about the end of this year.

About this time the Turk made quick war upon the Venetians in the I Will of
Cyprus with a puissant Army, Nicosia taken
which by assault took Nicosia, one of the greatest Towns thereof, wherein
there was made a cruel and bloody butcherie of the besieged in the month of
September.

The fourteenth day of November, Marriage of the King of Spain
Phillip King of Spain espowsed his Nieco Mario, the daughter of the Emperor
Maximilian.

The 17. of November, Earthquakes.
a great Earthquake happened at Venice, Ferrara, and other places of Italy,
whereupon followed marvelous tuines and desolations especially at Ferrara.

Marriage of the King of France. Deluges in France.
The 26. and others following, Charles King of France, espowsed at Mezieres,
Elizabeth the daughter of the Emperor Maximilian.

The 16. of December, the River of Rhene so ouerflowed, that in 80. years had
not been seen the like: whereupon many discourses published, remembering the
miseries passed, and the wonders happening, teach us every one to fear and
prevent the evils to come.

An Imperial Journey.
The 11. of the same month, the Emperor assembled the estates at Spire, to
provide for the affairs of Almaine, and to give audience unto strange
Ambassadors.

Peace betwixt Denmark and Snede.
The Kings of Denmark and Snede, made peace together the 13. of the same
month, having been at war together 10. years, or there abouts.

The 20. of that month, the Ambassadors of the Protestant Princes, made a long
oration to the King of France, being then at Villers, to exhort him above all
things to keep his Edict of pacification: which he promised to do. The French
Churches lifted up their heads after many storms.

Ieachim, Elector of Brandebourge, died the second day of January, and 11.
days after, deceased also his brother John, Marquess of Brandebourge.

Vaiuoda of Transiluania.
The 13. day of March, John Vaiuoda of Transiluania, suffering himself to be
governed by a pernicious heretic, called Blandrata, one that counterfeited
himself a Physician, was slain by the drugges of the said Blandrata, and died
without heirs, by means whereof, Stephen Bathory was chosen Vaiuoda in his
room.

A disputation against the Anabaptists.
The 28. day of May, began a disputation betwixt Peter Datherius, Minister of
the Gospel, and 15. Preachers, Anabaptists, in the presence of Frederick
Elector Palatin, who had given them safe conduct. The Articles in the
disputation, to the number of 13. touched that which is in chief debate at
this day, betwixt them and the reformed Churches: namely of the authority of
Canonicke books of the old and new Testament, of the unity of the divine
essence, and of the destination of the three persons subsisting therein: of the
one flesh and humane nature of Jesus Christ, borne of the Virgin Mary: of the
Israelitike and Christian Church: of original sin of little children: of
justification: of the resurrection of the flesh: of excommunication and
divorce: of the propriety and possession of goods: of the Magistrate, and of
criminal justice: of an oath: of the Baptism of little children: and of the
communion of the body and blood of Jesus Christ in the Supper. This disputation
was set down in writing, and continued from the 28. of May, until the 19. of
June, without any fruit, because of the obstinacy of the Anabaptists, which
the Elector sent away safe, forbidding them to maintain opinions, or teach in
his countries.

The 25. of May, the Pope, the King of Spain, A league against the Turk.
Raining of corn.
and the Venetians, made a league against the Turk.

The fourth day of June, it rayned great abundance of Turnep-rootes, Peace, and
other kind of corn, at Goldtberge, Lemberge, and Lauben, in Solesia: whereof
the peisants and poor Country people made bread, and were nourished in a
great famine which afflicted the Country. On the other side in base Saxony,
in a little Town called Leubourge, nie to Lunebourge and Hambourge, two Usurers
and sellers of corn were destroyed through a marvelous judgment of God. The
one fell dead suddenly as he opened his barn door, the corn whereof also was
eaten and carried away with vermin: And the other Corne-seller, as he was
going to drown himself, was taken and carried to prison, where he hanged
himself the night following.

About the same time, Rodes of the Muscouites.
the Muscouites made courses and strange forragings upon the frontiers of the
Kingdom of Snede, and meaning to enter further, they were constrained to
retire to go to defend their own country, which the Tartarians put to fire
and sword.

The first day of August, Famagoste yielded.
Famagoste a capital Town in the I Will of Cyprus, having sustained a long
siege, and diverse furious assaults, was yielded by composition, to Mahomet
Bassa, who in the place to keep his promise, caused to be slain all the
Christian Captains and soldiers which came toward him, and certain days
after, caused one Mark Anthony Bragandin, a Venetian Gentleman, Governor of
Famagoste, to be scorched and broyled alive, and so got all the whole I Will for
Selim, whose successors are at this day peaceable possessors thereof.

A strange Sun.
The 29. of September, almost through all Almaine the Sun was seen of the
color of blood. The same day the Town of Revel, the chief Town of Liuonia,
was sucked and spoiled by the Muscouites.

A Nauall battle at Lepante.
The seventh of October, the memorable Nauall battaille in the gulf of Lepante,
in the Mediterrane Sea, betwixt the Army of the League, and that of the Turks:
Selim lost there 15. thousand men, and the most part of his Vessels. The
Christians took a great number of prisoners. This victory greatly abated the
pride of the Turks: yet the Venetians certain time after, perceiving the
estate of their affairs required peace, they sought, and obtained it of Selim.

A conference at Dresde.
The tenth day of October, the Theologians and Ministers of the Electorship of
Saxony, assembled at Dresde to provide for troubles already come, for matters
of Religion, and they agreed to publish a confession of the person and
incarnation of Jesus Christ, of his majesty, ascension, and sitting on the
right hand of God: also of the Supper of the Lord. The other Theologians of
Saxony, opposed themselves by writings Imprinted, against the said confession:
whereupon many debates followed.

The Duke of Nothfolke beheaded.
A coniuration against the Queen of England, was miraculously discovered, and
the Duke of Northfolke Captain of that coniuration, arrested and condemned
upon Letters, and after executed to death.

Almaine was greatly afflicted in many places with dangerous diseases, and
with extreme famine in Snabie, and in Bauiere.

The Churches of France were a good quietness, because of the good countenance
that the King showed unto them of the Religion.

Vistule passing in the Duchy of Pruse, Strange wonders in Pruse.
nigh unto Thorn, was converted into blood the space of three days, to the
great fear of all the people: having again taken his ordinary color, about
nine of the clock at night, there was a strange Earthquake, two clouds rent
and let fall their waters, with so great a force, that forty houses were
carried away by the fury of the River, six Arches of Thornebridge
overthrown, and 300. persons drowned. There fell also from heaven, stones of
ten pound weight, wherewith many people were slain. The 22. of the same
month, the Town of Inspruck was troubled with so terrible an Earthquake,
which endured three days, that the most part of the houses, the Palace of the
Archduke of Austriche, the Church and the Printing House went down: by means
whereof, the Archduke was constrained to retire into a great Park, where were
nourished diverse sorts of savage and wild beasts, every man judging the world
should have ended. Munchen in Bauiere and Ausbourge, had their part of this
fear.

The Castle of Wirtzbourge was burnt the 29. of that month, so suddenly, Fire
in Wirtzbourge.
that the Bishop had no leisure to carry any thing away but his shert. He lost
by that fire, all his Registers, titles, and papers.

The winter having been very sharp, A sharp winter
this month continued all January and February exceeding sharp, and
extraordinary.

In the month of February the Duke of Alua thinking to have come to the upper
hand of all his purposes, Exactions of the Duke of Alua, and resolutions in
Flaunders.
laid upon the Flemmings great exactions: and amongst other, the tenth penney
perpetual. And notwithstanding remonstrances unto him of the impossibility
thereof: and that without the advice of the Estates of the country he could not
charge nor tax them, yet resolved he to put it in execution. But the people,
especially of Bruxelles, sought all means to exempt themselves from it. Such as
were absent, beholding this ouerture thus made, gathered in companies here and
there to busy the Spaniard: as they did soon after. For the first day of
April the Count de la March, sieur de Lumey, arriving secretly from England,
surprised the I Will and the Town of Brielle in Holland, and straight Flusshing,
a notable haven of Zeland and Emchuse, forsook the Duke of Alua his part, who
to remedy it, sent the Count de Bossu with an Army of Spaniards into Holland,
who the ninth of the same month sacked Roterdam, and slew a great number of
the Burgesses. The Count Lodowick, the Prince of Orange his brother, having
obtained a new Army in France, with certain Lords of the Religion, by the Kings
consent suprised Monts in Hainaut, the 24. of May, where shortly after he was
enclosed by the Duke of Alua his troops, houering thereabouts and stopping the
passages. Valenciennes was also take, but straight again recovered by the
Spaniards. Appearance of rest in France.
Then also it seemed that France should have bin peaceable for a long time, and
that the reformed Churches should no more be disquieted in time to come:
namely, in regard of a marriage concluded of Henry Prince of Navarre, with
Margarite the kings sister, as also that then the Admiral seemed in great
credit in the Court, by means whereof the most part of men, especially they of
the Religion, imagined already a Gospel without the Cross, and a worldly
Christ.

The death of Pope Pius the 5. and election of Gregory, 13.
Pope Pius the fifth died the first day of May, and the 13. after his obsequies
ended, the Cardinals elected for Pope, a Boulognois, Doctor of the Canon law,
called Jacques Boncompagne, against the purpose of diverse competitors. He called
himself Gregory 13. and for his entry gave order for war against the
Turks, confirmed the decrees of the Council of Trent, made great a son and
two nephews of his, ratified the promises of marriage of the Prince of
Navarre, with Margarite of France, whereof his predecessor made difficulty,
and carefully and readily provided for the good assurance of his temporal
greatness.

The death of the Queen of Navarre.
The ninth day of June, Jane d' Albert, Queen of Navarre, an excellent
Princess amongst all them of her time, daughter of Henry d' Albert, and of
Margarite d' Valois, sister of king Francis the first, going to Paris to give
order for diverse things requisite for the honor of the Prince her sons
marriage, fell suddenly sick and died, to the great grief of them of the
Religion, and of all persons that loved the rest of France, which this
Princess had procured by all means. The overthrow of the Duke de Medina Coeli.


The 12. of June, the Duke de Medina Coeli, being sent from Spain into
Flaunders, to govern in the Duke of Alua his place, was shamefully overthrown
by them of Flushing, lost 12. hundredth Spaniards, 16. ships, and four of them
were burnt in his presence, he saving himself by flight. The booty was very
great, and almost inestimable.

On the 15. day, an alliance was confirmed at Paris betwixt the King of France,
and the Queen of England, Alliance.
who sent thither the Lord Clinton her Admiral.

The 16. the Prince of Orange published the causes wherefore he again took
Arms against the Spaniards and their adherents, in the low Countries.

The 25. certain Gentlemen of Frise, with good troops, holding the Prince of
Orange his part, seized upon Dordrec and other places of Holland, which joined
themselves on that side. The exercise of Religion was again set up, to the
great despite of the Duke of Alua and the Spaniards.

Three days after, The Prince of Orange justified himself to the Emperor.
the Prince of Orange writ at large unto the Emperor, showing him the causes of
that war. In the mean while, certain Almain Lords levied Reiters to succor
the Duke of Alua.

Sigismond August, king of Polongne, The death of the King of Polongne.
died the first of July without heire-males, which gave occasion unto Katherine
de Medices, Queen mother and Regent in France, to send Ambassadors into
Polongne, to the end to obtain the Crown for Henry Duke d' Antou, her second
son then living.

The 19. of July, War in ye low Country.
the Emperor put the Prince of Orange to banishment from the Empire, and
pronounced him acquitted from all privileges and rights, and all his goods
confiscated, if he continued with strong hand to enter into the low Countries.
This notwithstanding, the Prince pursued that which he had begun. But in this
month of July, 7. or 8. thousand French men marching to the succors of the
besieged at Monts in Hainaut, before they came there, were defeated, their
chieftaines taken, and they of Monts straighter kept in. The Prince passed
Rhene and took Ruremond, the 4. of August. Louaine yielded. Maligues, and
certain other Towns were surprised. After he drew toward Monts to succor his
brother. But the news of the pitious estate of France, brought such a change,
that the Prince was constrained to cut off his way, to enter his troops, and
retier himself into Holland, whether he was called by the estates of the
Country, being accompanied with a small number of people. This retrait so
encouraged the Duke of Alua, having now nothing to hinder him, that the 21. of
September, he made himself master of Monts by composition, and kept promise
with the Count Lodowick, causing him safely to be conducted unto the lands of
the Empire. After this, Maligues was abandoned by them, which the Prince left
there, and all other places before taken, were taken again into the hands of
the Spaniards. From Monts the Duke went toward Malines the first day of
October. Certain Burgesses and all the Clergy met him with Crosses and
Banners, but it served for nothing, for as much as they had received the Prince
into their Town, he gave the pillage and spoil of the Town to the soldiers,
which took their pleasure there three days, slew many men, and violated many
women and maidens.

Horrible murders in France.
Whilst the low Country Churches sobbed thus under such tempests, they of
France which were thought should have enjoyed some long rest, were rudely
beaten, and as it were, flatly overthrown by a marvelous strange accident.
We have before spoken of the death of the Queen of Navarre, as she came to
Paris, about the marriage of the Prince her son. This Prince, afterward called
the King of Navarre, Henry de Bourbon his Cousin Prince of Conde, Gaspar de
Coligni, great Admiral of France, le Count de la Rochefoucand, the Marquess de
Reinel, many Lords, Gentlemen and Captains, which had always borne Arms
against the Catholic Romans, came to the Court about that marriage, at the
kings request. This marriage having bin solemnized upon Monday, the 18. of
August, the Friday following the Admiral was grievously wounded with the blow
of an Hargabush, shot out of a certain window, by a man then not sufficiently
known, called Maureuel, a waged murderer, yea one of the most execrablest
manquellers of the world: who afterward by the just judgment of God, lost the
same arm with which he gave that detestable blow. The Sunday following, the
Admiral was most traitorously slain in his chamber, and cast dead out of the
windows upon the pauement: where he was known of Henry Duke of Guise. After,
they rushed upon the other Lords, Gentlemen and Captains, which were slain
also: some within the Castle de Louuine, others without. This was done betimes
in the morning. All that day and morning was employed by such as they call
Catholic Romans, in sleying men and women of the Religion, many, not sparing
women big with child, no nor little children. They continued this the days
following, but not in so great number, because the murderers found not any more
to sley. The day of the wounding, and the Sunday, the King dispatched Letters
expressly unto the Governors of the Provinces, whereby he advertised them, that
that disorder happened besides his knowledge, and to his great grief, by the
practices and enmities of the house of Guise, and that he determined to take
good order therefore; in the mean time, he would that his Edict of
pacification should in each point be maintained: Briefly, he imputed the
Admiralls wounding and death (whom in the said Letters he called his Cousin) to
the particular quarrels of the houses of Chastillon, and Guise. But mere
contrary, on thursday the 28. he declared and caused to be published, that
that massacre and horrible murder had been done by his express commandment,
and to prevent a conspiration of the Admiral and his partakers: whereof
notwithstanding neither he nor his Counselors made it appear, nor could
produce any profit, although it was much proved and desired of many. Whilst
great and little were thus hungring and thirsting after innocent blood, the same
Sunday the 24. of August, certain Priests by Art made a great Thorn-tree in the
churchyard of S. Innocent, flourish at noone time of the day, and cried, a
miracle, a miracle. This encreated the rage of the people against them of the
Religion. And although the Priests in the mean while filled well their powches
by such an invention, making the people believe that the Catholic Roman
Religion began now to flourish again in France: yet their devise was soon
after discovered, and the tree remained destroyed: but even then when it
flourished, some said that God had showed to all men's eyes the innocence of
such as were slain, and that by such a token he assured his Church that it
should not perish as the persecutors pretended, but that it should flourish
under the cross against all hope of men, as that Tree flourished
extraordinarily. Moreover certain weeks after le Sieurs de Briquemald and de
Caragues, excellent men, and which had done great services to the Crown, the
one by Arms, and the other in affairs of justice, were (in hatred of the
Admiral and of Religion) hanged and strangled within Paris, in the presence of
the king himself, his mother and his brethren. They maintained even to the last
sigh the innocence of the dead Admiral, and of them of the religion, showing a
singular co^stancy in their deaths. Certain years after they were justified
by the Edict of Henry the third the next king, and their names declared
honorable: as also the before mentioned massacre was condemned and disavowed.
But men contented not themselves thus to have imbrued the town of Paris with
blood, but in like sort were all of the Religion handled at Meaux in Brie, at
Troys in Champagne, at Rouen, at Orleans, at le Charity, at Burges, at Lions,
at Romans in Dauphine, at Thoulouse, at Bourdeaux, with so barbarous
disloyalties and cruelties that scarce our posterity will believe it. In few
days with them of Paris were slain more then thirty thousand persons, old and
young, of all quallities, men, women and children, as books in Print do show
every day. The King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, were constrained to
abjure Religion. The Parliament of Paris published a diffamatorie arrest and
judgment against the Admiral, whose body was taken from the gibet, and so
secretly buried that his enemies could not find it out. Many persons forsook
Religion, some upon infirmity, others upon despite: so that so hard a proof
discerned the false from the true Christians. Rochell, Sancerre, Nismes in
Languedoc, Montaubon in Querci, and a few other Towns in the kingdom, after
diverse consultations maintained themselves and kept the exercise of Religion,
which put the authors of the murders and confusions into a new pain, as shall
be touched hereafter.

Amongst so many troubles and commencements of greater sorrows, A new star.
a new Star appeared in heaven as great as the day Star, nigh the Star
Cassiopec, of the figure of a Lozenge. This began the ninth day of November
at night. It stirred not from the place the space of three weeks. It was
thought to be like the Star which appeared to the wise men which came from
the East, to worship Jesus Christ in Bethlehem, straight after his birth. This
Star appeared in seven, the space of nine months or thereabouts. Hereof were
many discourses made by diverse learned men.

Concerning the low Countries* after the Princes retrait above mentioned,
Exploits of war in Holland and Zeland.
the weight of the war fell upon Holland and Zeland, whither the Duke of Alua
sent the Captain Montdragon with twenty Ensigns of Wallons, which to the
great astonishment of every one got the I Will of Suitbeuerland, and constrained
the Princes troops to levy the siege before a Town called Tergoes. In the
mean while the Duke marched with his Army, and the 21. of November took and
spoiled Zutphen, a Town in Holland. And to fear others and draw them to
yield the sooner, without delay all manner of cruelties were executed by the
Spaniards and Wallons in that Town.

Frideric de Toledo the Dukes son and Lieutenant, marched from Zutphen to
Narden, which is an other little Town, whereof the Inhabitants at the yielding
of themselves the 30. day of November, were so cruelly handled against the
rights of reddition and of war, amongst people of any humanity, that men might
judge that this sacking and spoil with that of Roterdam, were the only motive
and cause of the rising of other Towns which then were upon the point to
return under the yoke. After the taking of this Town the Army drew straight
to Harlem, the Inhabitants whereof determined to defend it, rather then submit
it self unto the mercy of people without mercy. Indeed they bore themselves
valiantly, and sustained diverse assaults with the aid of certain soldiers
which were sent them by the Prince, and kept good defense until the 13. of
July the year following.

In the year 1573. the Towns of Rochel and Sancerre were cruelly handled,
Sieges of Rochel and Sancerre.
assailed and bearen by the Catholic Romans, but with a diverse issue. As for
Rochel being well guarded and defended, the news also of the report that the
Duke of Anion should be king of Polongne, were cause that Rochel was delivered,
and obtained peace: yea and remained with her privileges. They of Sancerre
having been troubled with an horrible and grievous famine the space of
certain months, received some favorable dealing by the coming of the
Polonian Ambassadors, which then came into France to conduct away their new
king. These things ended in the month of July, to the confusion of the
Catholic Romans, which lost more then twenty thousand men before Rochel.
Some Churches then began to respire, and many took again good courage to
redress some portion of so many ruins.

The siege and loss of Harle^.
War was also kindled in Holland, especially at the siege of Harlem, where the
besieged men and women, executed maruellously their duties: but not being able
to be succored, oppressed also with famine: finally they yielded themselves
the 13. of July at the discretion of Frederick de Toledo, who drowned, hanged,
and beheaded, more then two thousand soldiers. The Burgesses escaped death by
the payment of a great sum of money, which they straight disbursed.

In the month of April before, they of Flushing obtained a memorable victory
over the Army of the Duke of Alua, and cast into the sea a great number of
Spaniards. After the taking of Harlem, Frederic besieged Alemar, a Town nigh
thereunto, resolving with himself to make a goodly butchery of the Burgesses,
if they could obtain it. But he was constrained to leave his siege after great
loss. The Prince on the other side found means to obtain the strong Castle
of Rameken, and the Town of S. Gertrudenberghe. They of Linchuse overcame the
Nauall Army of the Count de Bossu, and took him prisoner the 12. day of
October, whilst Leiden was besieged of the Spaniards.

The second day of September, the Duke of Alua forsook the low Countries,
making his journey through the Franche Count, Sauoy and Piemont, to embarke
himself at Genes, and so to sail into Spain, carrying with him an infinite
booty from the low Countries, which he left in great heat of war betwixt
the hands of Lewis Requescens, great commander of Castile, a man in appearance
of soft condition, but no less fellonious and cruel, then his predecessor in
that government.

John de Austriche made war in Barbary about the end of this year, and got
Tunes, War in Barbary.
builded a strong Citadell betwixt Tunes and the Goulette, to resist the
Turks: after he withdrew into Sicilie.

The great Commander meaning to drive away the Prince Orange, encamped before
Middelbourge in Zeland, Requescens overthrown, and Middlebourg yielded
armed a puissant Fleet, about 80. vessels, and the 24. of January, 1574. made
sail toward Zeland, but his Army encountered the Princes Army: In so much that
after a long combat, where that Commander commanded not, but looking over the
Dikes, to judge of the blows with more assurance, he saw the Spaniards
ouerthrown with his Wallons, whereof some were drowned, others carried away
prisoners, and almost all their vessels lost. They of Middelbourg wayed with
the siege, and all hope which they had of succors, turned into despair: they
yielded themselves a month after.

In the beginning of February, the war waxed hot in Barbary, betwixt the
Spaniards, Moors, and Turks.

The 18. of the same month, Henry Duke of Aniou, Henry de Valois king of
Polongne.
arriving from France in Polongne, made his entry into Cracouia, and was
crowned three days after, with accustomed solemnities.

About this time, the Venetians being tired with war, Peace betwixt the
Venetians and the Turk.
entered an accord with Selym, whereat the Pope and the King of Spain were not
content.

France entered into new troubles. Troubles in France.
They took them to Arms in Normandy and Poictou. The king in great have
retired himself from S. Germans to Paris. From that time followed great
chaunges in France, there then seeming to be no more any question of Religion,
but of the estate: a thing notwithstanding of longer discourse then I need now
set down, seeing it i^ handled in particular books depending upon the history
of this time.

The overthrow of the Duke Christopher, and of the Count Lodowick.
The war continued in Holland, and the Spaniards encamped before Leyden: but
they were constrained to leave their siege the 23. day of March to go meet
the Duke Christopher, son of the Elector Palatin, and the Counties Lodowick and
Henry de Nassan brethren, which came down in the strength of winter toward
Mastriche, with a good number of footmen and horsemen. These Lords being
advertised that the Spaniards came to find them, advanced themselves, and
encountered in a field of thorns called Morkerheide, where the Lansquenets
crying after silver, refused the combat: insomuch that the Lords were
vanquished and slain all three, upon the fourth day of April.

The death of Camerarius.
Ioachim Camerarius, a learned man amongst all the Almaine, an inward and
familiar friend of Phillip Melancton, dyed at Leipsic, being of the age of 74.
years, the 17. day of April.

The death of Cosme de Medices.
The 21. day, died Cosme de Medices Duke of Florence, and great Duke of
Thuscane, leaving a son, unto whom the state and title of great Duke, was
confirmed by the Pope.

Antwerpe pilled by the Spaniards.
The great Commander thinking to have gained all, by the overthrow of the
Count Lodowick, caused a general pardon to be published in the Town of
Antwerpe, the 23 of April, but none came for it, so that the war continued.
Yet three days after this publication, the Spanish soldiers kindling a
mutiny for want of their pay, entered into the Town of Antwerpe by the favor
of the Castle, constraining the Burgesses to furnish them the sum of four
thousand Florents: to bring this to pass, they used great insolences. They
constrained also the Governor and the Wallon soldiers to avoid the town, with
intent to gorge themselves the more at their ease. They also set farther off,
the ships which had the guard of the Haven. The Princes Navy having discovered
these Ships, got quickly hold of them, and carried them away in the Commanders
view, whilst he and his soldiers took their pastime in sacking of Antwerpe.

The second besieging of Leiden.
The Spaniards prceiuing that during their absence Leiden was not again
victualled, returned to besiege it the second day of May, and held it closer
then before, for in diverse places they made Forts, to the number of 22. upon
large and deep dikes, the most part invnited and strengthened with 2. or 3.
Canons.

A fire at Venice and Bruxelles.
The eleven day of May a great part of S. Marks Palace at Venice was burned,
and two days after a great number of houses at Venice with a notable loss for
many Merchants. There happened as much at Bruxels in Brabant, the 24. of the
same month, and the fire took hold of certain Gunpowder which was in a Tower,
which by the ruin thereof greatly endamaged all the Town, and slew 15.
persons.

A great war was then in France, especially in Poictou, The taking and death
of Montgommery.
and in Normandy. Gabriel Count de Montgommeri, having with a few men
sustained the siege and diverse assaults in the Castle of Danfronc, yielded it
by composition: but he was reserved and carried prisoner unto Paris, where not
long after by decree of the Parliament his head was cut off. In the mean while
the Duke of Alencon the kings youngest brother, and the king of Navarre, were as
prisoners in the Court: and the Churches languished under so many confusions.

The last day of May, Charles the ninth King of France, The death of Charles 9.
dyed of the age of 34. years, in the wood of Vincennes, leaving his kingdom
much indebted, and maruellously full of broils.

Henry of Valois, the third son of Henry the second, born in the year 1551.
the 21. of September, being in Pologne when his brother Charles dyed, and
understanding the news of his death, departed secretly that kingdom, and
took possession of that his mother had kept for him. He passed through Venice,
so into Piedmont, where he visited Margarite the Duchess, his Aunt, who dyed
soon after, and arriving at Lions in the beginning of September, he caused
certain Edicts to be published against them of the Religion, who stood upon
their guard, seeing their new Prince threatened them so openly. A little before
his coming, Henry Montmorency Marshal de Danuile, and governor of Languedoc,
entered in conference with the principals of the Religion, least that province
and other nigh thereunto might come to ruin and destruction by civil wars,
and to procure some rest for France. The Prince of Conde retired into Almaine.
The king descended into Languedoc, having failed to take Liuron, a small Town
of Dauphine. About the end of this year, died Charles Cardinal of Lorraine,
one of the chief instruments of the troubles and confusions of France.

Leyden delivered.
To come unto the affairs of the low Countries. The siege of Leiden having
continued all the Summer, with appearance of extreme confusion for the
besieged, the third day of October following, it was refreshed and victualled
by the prowess of a few soldiers, conducted by Boisot Admiral of Holland,
being helped with the Sea-floud, which the Prince, by the means of pearcing
of certain Dikes, and sluices opening, had caused it to come far, even nigh
unto the Town. The Spaniards after they had fought a little, seeing the water
began to enclose them, abandoned their Forts, left their siege, and retired
away shamefully.

The death of Selym.
Selym Emperor of the Turks, dyed about the 15. of December, after he had
ended the war against the Walaques: wherein he lost an infinite number of men,
and took peace with the Venetians. His son and successor Amurath, at his
coming in, caused five of his brethren to be put to death, and two wives of
Selym, the one of which, who was great with child, seeing the death of her
children, threw her self to the ground out of an high window. Having thus
provided for his estate, he prepared to make war upon the Polonians, some of
which, called Kosaques, had succored the Vayuoda of Watachia.

The aftaires of France.
The 12. of January, 1575. they of the Religion found means to get
Arguesmortes, a strong Town, and of great importance in Languedoc, especially
for Salt that comes from thence, and greatly furnishes the Provinces. The same
day the Marshall d' Danuile made a league with them of the Religion, and a
public and large declaration, containing the causes of his doings. The Duke de
Montpensier took Fontenay in Poictou, and Lusignen yielded upon composition.
This notwithstanding the Churches of that Province, and other nigh unto it, in
some sort maintained themselves even in the midst of Arms. The Duke d' Vzes,
sometimes affectioned unto Religion, took Arms against it, but he prospered
not much therein. The Churches of Languedoc and Dauphine redressed themselves
after the King was retired from Auignon: but their union with the Politikes or
Malcontents, destroyed them within by the wicked lives of many of those
Politikes badly advised. King Henry the third was sacred at Reimes the
fifteenth day of February, and espowsed soon after Louyse, the daughter of
Nicholas Count de Vandemont in Lorraine: So that then and after, there was
nothing in the Court of France but pastimes, such, as there is less evil to
conceal, then profit to describe. In the mean while war continued in
Languedoc, well for the advantage of them of the Religion, being assisted of
the Marshall de Danuille their confederate, unto which part many inclined and
joined themselves daily. In the month of April a negotiation and parley was
made at Paris, betwixt the Kings Council and the Deputies of Churches and the
Politikes, without any conclusion. But contrary the war waxed hot in Dauphine
and Languedoc with loss on both sides: but they of the religion were the
stronger. And since we are upon that point, we will set down in this present
Article that which was done in France during this year 1575. worthy of note,
in few words. About the end of April the Duke d'Vzes besieged Bais, a little
Town upon Rhosne, and got the Town: but they of the Religion which held the
two Castles, constrained him to forsake it after he had lost many of his
people. To revenge himself he burnt a part of the Town, and continued after
such sackings and destructions, that he became very odious. In the month of May
sell a tumult at Marseillis, and in certain other places of Province, against
gatherers and Farmers of the kings demeasnes which were chased away. And
thereupon arose a band of Politic malcontents, which they called les Raises,
shaven: because they caused their beards to be shaven, or some part of them, to
be known by that sign: and in Prouence they of the Religion held certain
places, as Riez, Lourmarin, Siena, and others, some of which soon after were
taken out of their hands. The 17. day of June le Sieur de Monbrun, a
Daulphenois Gentleman, a wife and valiant Captain of war, overthrew le Sieur
de Gordes Governor of Daulphine, who saved himself by flight within Gap, and
left 22. companies of Swisses in the field, which were broken, and nine hundred
cut in pieces straight with Frenlich their Colonel, and sixteen Captains,
with 18. Ensigns carried away by Monbrun and his people, which had a great
booty of Arms especially, and lost on their part but six men. Le Sieur de
Gordes after that, gathered great Forces, and again meeting in the field he
overthrew Monbrun, who meaning to leap a ditch to obtain a meet passage for
his retrait, his horse fell, and he under him, whereby his thigh was broken,
and so remained prisoner, having only lost twenty two men, and thirty eight
were taken prisoners. This happened the ninth of July, and soon after by
decree of a Parliament at Grenople, Monbrun had his head cut off. On the other
side, the Duke of Vzes, destroyed and burnt all the flat Country of Languedoc,
with the loss of infinite Corn. Le sieur de Lodignieres ordained Chieftain of
the troops of Dauphine, in the place of Monbrun, gave order for the affairs
at the beginning of August, and took many places.

Upon these actions, and the sixteenth day of September, Francis Duke d'
Alencon, and brother unto the King, conveyed himself secretly in the night
from the Court then at Paris, whereupon came brutes and discourses marvelous
strange and diverse. Two days after his retraite, he published by writing the
causes thereof, declaring that he meant to procure a good peace and
reformation in France. He writ unto the Princes and Lords of the Religion, to
the Churches, to the Marshall Danuile, and to the Politikes, unto the same end;
Insomuch that each one assured himself soon to see goodly things, and there
remained but very few which feared any hid evil, as discourses after
published do show. In the mean time the Prince of Conde took order Almaine
to levy an Army to enter into France, and by Arms to obtain some rest for
them of the Religion, and for the whole estate: he dealt fully with Duke
Cassimere, of all things requisite for such a good.

The King, the Queen mother, and their Council, were greatly troubled, as if
all had been lost by the retrait of the Duke d' Alenson, writing to all
places, calling as (they say, tag and rag) they made leuies and brought troops
into the field, and yet without any exployt of war. They made fly a report
of soldiers from Almaine and Sueuia, yet none entered France during that fourth
war to do service unto the King, who in the mean while demanded silver of
his Towns, and for the rest he bore himself, as if there had been no
appearance of war. His mother in the mean time got her toward the Duke d'
Alenson, (as some said) to make peace betwixt the two brethren, and for the
quiet of the kingdom. In the mean while the King forbad all the nobility to
come nigh the Duke of Alenson; he sent also certain troops, to hinder not
only that, but the coming of certain Almaines which le Sieurs de Thore and
de Cleruant led, which were overthrown by the Duke of Guise, and Cleruant
was taken prisoner, with certain others, the tenth of October. Soon after was
there a truce made betwixt the Queen mother and the Duke of Alenson, for six
months, wherewith each one was miscontented, but the King accorded them:
whilst the Prince of Conde levied people in Suifferland, and the Army of
Almaine whereof was the Captain the Duke Cassimere, marched, composed of ten
thousand horsemen, six thousand Suissers, two thousand Lansquenets, three
thousand French men and Wallons, six great battering pieces, and sixteen
field pieces. The 22. of December the Prince of Conde published in writing the
causes wherefore he brought that Army into France, in diverse places whereof
in the mean while were courses and taking of Towns, with notable happes and
chaunges, reserved unto the general History of our time. To be brief, the
confusion was extreme throughout all the kingdom, and so much the more as
almost all were blinded, the Churches became very desolate, and such as feared
God and were of some judgment did foresee nothing but new calamities. Thus in
few words was the estate of France this year 1575.

The estate of the low Countries.
The estate also of the low Countries was as follows. In the month of
February by the advice of the King of Spain, the Emperor sent into Brabant
toward the Commander, and from thence toward the Prince of Orange and the
Estates of Holland, the Count Schuartembourg, to consider of the means for
peace. The said Count took so much pains therein, that hostages were sent to
the Prince for suerties of the Hollanders, because assembly was made at Bread
in Brabant, where the Count remained. But because the Prince and the
Hollanders persisted in their exercise of Religion, the Commander unwilling to
consent thereunto, the said negotiation came to no effect. Incontinently that
Town and Castle de Bure appertaining to the Princes son, being besieged by
the Spaniards, was yielded by the cowardice of the Governor. In the month of
August following, the Town of Onde Water was besieged by the Spaniards, by
means whereof the Prince transported himself to Gonde, to cause the dikes to be
cut out, whereof the Spaniards advertised, furiously beat the Town, and after a
breach made gave two assaults, but received lively repulses, so that they
returned the third time, and then becoming masters thereof, they slew all the
soldiers and Burgesses, and burnt the most part of the Town. Amongst those
soldiers there were two companies of Scots, which not being able any more to
stand upon the breach because of the Canon and the violence of the assailants,
retired into the Town nigh the great Church, where they fought the space of
certain hours very courageously, and they all dyed their weapons in their
hands, and never would yield themselves. Four days after the Spaniards
besieged an other Town called Schoonhoue^. The Prince quickly sent thither le
Sieur de la Guard, Colonel of the French companies in Holland, who so wisely
behaved himself that by capitulation he was licenced to go out with all his,
and their Arms and Jewels saved. In the mean while the Commander practiced so
with certain Hollanders that he drew some to his part, so, that to the great
astonishment of all he passed his Army through the straites of the Isles of S.
Anne. Phillip Lanat and Bunenlant, got by assault the Fortress of Bommene, the
twenty eight of September, after incontinently besieged Ziriczeo, one of the
principallest Towns in Zeland.

The King of France was sommoned and required by the Estates of Poland, to
appear in the Town of Steczise, The king of Poland lost his kingdom.
the 12. day of May: which he not performing, they caused to be published that
he was fallen from his kingdom, and from that time was there adjudged an
interreigne, as in the case of death, which was published the 15. day of July
following at Cracouia, and after in the principal Towns of the kingdom, and
an other day appointed for the Estates to provide for a new election.

Henry Bullenger, Minister in the Church of Zurich, The death of Bullenger.
a learned Theologian of our time, who with his writings has greatly served
the Church of God, having attained the age of 76. years, dyed the 17. of
September.

Rodolphe the eldest soon of the Emperor Maximilian, Rodolphe crowned king of
Hungary, Boheme, and of the Romans
having been a year before crowned King of Hungary, was crowned King of
Boheme, in the great Church of Prage, the 22. of September. By the consent also
of the Princes of the Empire he was elected King of Romans, and crowned at
Ratisbone, the first day of November, being then of the age of 24. years.

The estate of France in the year 1576. was such as follows. The estate of
France.
The 9. day of January the Duke of Alenson wrote unto the Parliament of Paris
the causes wherefore an army of Almanes for him entered into France, and by
them mightily threatened his enemies. They meant to astonish the Parisians, to
the end more easily to empty their purses. In the mean time there was sent
messages upon messages to the Prince of Conde and the Duke Cassimere, to keep
them from further entrance with their troops, but they advanced into the
kingdom, and took certain little things of small importance. The K. of Nuarre
withdrew from the Court the 8. of February, which the more augmented the hope
of many touching the repose of the affairs of France. But all things was so
confused and mingled together, as it was no marvel if yet at this present
things so wrinckled and knottedtogether, be impossible (in regard of men) to
be untied and loosed. The men of War were greatly outrayed. Therefore they
of Vuerettes by a common accord leagued themselves notwithstanding the
diversity of their religion, to hold their Province in peace, against all such
as would enter with Arms. The Duke of Alenson seeing nigh him the Almaine
Army, demanded silver of the Churches in Languedoc, but they were sucked by
other horsleaches, so that he obtained nothing there, nor other where: but
that he was aided by the King his brother. Upon these stirs the deputies of
the Churches assembled at Paris, under safe conduct, to advise upon means of
pacification: And on the other side the Duke of Alenson joined himself unto
the Army that Cassimere and the Prince put in his hands the thirteenth day of
March. Incontinently a peace was a making to cause to vanish in the air all
the strengths of them of the Religion, and after many goings and commings it
was accorded, and so was made the fifth Edict of pacification, in the beginning
of May, agreeing upon many things to the advantage of them of the Religion: but
they gained nothing thereby, but rather found themselves new to begin again. The
Almain Army retired without any memorable exployt. The Duke of Alenson obtained
much for himself. Others were contented with promises, and the Reisters in some
sort were satisfied. One of the principal articles of the Edict concerned the
assembly of the States of the kingdom, to take order for all affairs. But it
came otherwise to pass. For that was the means which the enemies of the
public state used to make their leagues, to break the Edict for a new
commencement of wars, and so to leave the kingdom in more confusion then
ever it was, as appeared by the year following. Yet notwithstanding the
Churches were redressed and increased in diverse places, maugre the rage and
devices of Satan, whilst the king called the Estates to Blois, where he made
his entry the 18. day of November, and all the remainder of the year after was
employed upon diverse conferences amongst the Deputies.

The estate of low Country.
The affairs of the low Country bore themselves as follows. In the month of
February 1576. the Prince of Orange obtained a Fortress of great importance,
called Crimpen in Holland, whereby he warranted Suindree, and all other places
thereabouts. During the siege of Ziriczee, the Commander died of the pestilence
at Bruxelles, the 5. day of March. Then the government of the low Countries
was by the king remitted into the hands of the Council of the Estate. In the
month of May following, Ziriczee being not able to hold out any longer was
yielded to the Spaniards, who straight after began to mutenie, under color of
paiments due unto them, and determined to have surprised Bruxelles, and so to
pay themselves. The Inhabitants hereof advertised, provided so well for their
assurance, that the Spaniards found the gates shut: whereat they were so
despited, that without any resistance about the end of July entering Alost, a
Town situate betwixt Gaunt, Malines, and Bruxelles, they used there the
inhabitants as in a place taken by assault. And because they continued their
disorders by the winking of certain of the Council of estate, In the
beginning of September the Captain of Bruxelles well accompanied entered into
the Palace, and in the name of the Estates of Brabant, co^stituted prisoners,
amongst others the Counties of Mansfield, and de Barlaiment, Assonuile
Councellor, Barti, and Scharemberg, Secretaries. Soon after the Spaniards were
declared Rebels, enemies to the King and his country, by an Edict of the
Council of Estate, published the 22. of September. For all this the Spaniards
left not running hither and thither, putting to flight all such as in the field
made head against them, and by the intelligence they had with the Lansquenets
they entered into the town of Mastricht, which they pilled. This done they
joined themselves together and marched toward Antwerpe, and arriving there
they got in at the Citadel or Castle, the 4. of November, and suddenly assailed
the companies of soldiers, and all the inhabitants of the Town, with a
marvelous fiercenes and resolution, during many days, pilling, sacking, and
spoiling the town, one of richest and fullest of merchandise in all Europe,
they massacred and slew many thousands of persons, of all ages, sexes, Estates,
and of diverse Countries, burnt one of the richest quarters of the Town, with
the magnificall and most sumptuous house thereof: briefly they committed there
all manner of wickedness. The Estates of the fifteen Provinces which till then
had been Spanish, having learned to their cost, that they which thus handled
them, looked for nothing so much as wholly to ruinat and destroy them, made a
peace with the Princes and the States of Holland and Zeland, the 8. day of
November, in the Town of Gaunt. During all those tempests God conserved the
reformed Church of Antwerpe, and certain others also, as sometimes in Babylon
he conserved the companions of Daniel in the midst of the burning Furnace,
and Daniel himself in the Lions den. Incontinently after the spoiling of
Antwerpe, the Almaines would needs remove their goods to Valenciennes, but
they were prevented by the Inhabitants, and driven away out of the Town the
10. day of November. They of Groninghe in Friseland maintained themselves in
the like sort, and arrested prisoner their Governor, who meant to have spoiled
their Town. And at this time all the low countries were in arms, ready to
run upon the Spaniards, extremely hated of them all.

The death of Sinder.
Josias Sinder, an execellent Theologian and professor of holy letters at
Zurich, dyed the second day of July, in his age of 45. years. He left some
books which were full of solid doctrine, and especially exceellently refuting
the Antitrinitaries and Vbiquitaries.

A new king of Poland.
Stephen Bathori, Vaiuoda of Transiluania, having been crowned King of Polonia
the first day of May, took order for the affairs of his kingdom, and
prepared himself for the war against the Moscouite. He left the churches of
Poland in peaceable estate.

The death of Maximilian.
The Emperor Maximilian having held his last Imperial Journey at Ratisbone,
dyed the 12. day of October, being about the age of 55. years.

Rodolph. 2.
Rodolphus his eldest son King of the Romans, of Hungary, and of Boheme,
succeeded his Father Maximilian in the Imperial dignity, being the second of
that name. As Soon as he was proclaimed Emperor, he caused the Ambassadors of
Poland, to be released and sent to Amurath, to demand truce, which was without
any difficulty granted, because that the Turk having had advertisement of
the war, which the king of Persia prepared against him, Rodolph. 2.
could not any way assure himself, to make resistance in so many places; his
Empire elsewhere, being sorely weakened, by the just punishment of God, with
plague and famine. Ieronimo Conestagio.

Frederic, Elector Palatine of Rhene, a Prince fearing God, The death of Fr.
Palatine of Khene.
greatly affectionating true Religion, the ornament and true Josias of all
Almaine, died the 22. of October, being 26. years of age. His eldest son
Jews succeeded him, in the dignity of princely Electorship, who changed the
doctrine and discipline which his father had happily established in the County
Palatine.

In the month of January, February, and March, The estate of France.
the Estates France were at Blois, where the last Edict of pacification on was
revoked after infinite practices, and the Duke Alenson forsook the part of
Politicians and of them of Religion. From thence followed in summer next a new
war against them of the Religion, which lost the Towns de la Charity upon
Loire, Issoire in Auuerne, Melle, and Brouage in Guien, with great desolations,
especially at Issoire. The Marshall also Danuile forsook his confederates, and
did the worst he could unto the Churches of Languedoc; finally a sixth Edict of
pacification was treated of at Bergerac, and agreed on at Poitiers, in the
month of September, by the means whereof the former was abolished, and the
Churches more troubled then ever they were; insomuch, that after that they had
nothing assured; yet notwithstanding God maintained them in many places,
against the opinion of great and title.

In old Saxony which we now call Westphalia, Salentinus.
Salentinus Bishop of Padeborne, and Archbishop of Coloine, being the last of
the honorable house of Eisenberge, voluntarily resigned both his
Bishopprickes, and took to wife Antouia, Witelma, the daughter of John Count
of Arenberge, and sister to Charles Arenberge. Whom in the Diocese of
Padeborne, Henry Duke of Saxony Archbishop of Breme succeeded, and in the
Electoriship Gebardus Truchesses, the son of William Lord of Walnogh. David
Chytreus.

John de Austrich, John de Austrich.
the bastard son of the Emperor Charles the fifth, was sent as Governor into
the low Countries. He before he entered into Brabant, confirmed the
pacification of Gaunt, and made an accord with the Estates the 12. day of
February. The next morning the Spaniards forsook the Castle of Vtrich,
according to the accord, and the 20 of March following, they which were in the
Towns and Citadell of Antwerpe came out with their booty. The Almaines
remained in the town under the Colonels Foncquer and Fronsperge, attending
payment: the 2. of April, the Spaniards came out of Mastricht. John de Austria
made his entry into Bruxells by the 1. of May, and took his oath according to
the statutes of the Countries; the eleventh of June, he went to Malignes,
where having performed that he came for, he retired unto Namur, and laid hold
of the Castle the 24. of July: the Estates having discovered the drifts and
practices of John de Austria, stood upon their guardes, and discovering what
he went about against them, got the Castle of Antwerpe, and constrained the
Almaines quickly to dislodge, seazing diverse places, and dismanteling the
Citadell or Castle of Antwerpe, joined it to the City of Antwerpe the 28. of
August, and in the month following, caused their justification to be
published, taking arms for their defense, calling the Prince of Orange to
their succors. Who arrived in Antwerpe the eighteenth day of September, and
five days after at Bruxells, being of all received with great joy: he was
after the 22. of October chosen Governor of Brabant. About the same time was
there trouble at Gaunt and Groine, which after was appeased. Genebrardus.

Mathias Archduke of Austria.
Mathias Archduke of Austria, the Emperors brother, being called to be
Governor of the low Countries, made his entry into the Town of Antwerpe the
21. of November, and the 17. of December, he accepted the government of the
countries, upon the conditions proposed unto him by the Deputies of the Estates.

The Churches of Holland and Zeland flourish, they of other Provinces of the low
countries begin to hope well.

Stephen Bathori King of Poland this year made war upon the Dantzick, but
after certain encounters a peace was accorded upon conditions.

Sebastian King of Portugal, sent Peter d'Alascoua, Sebastian King of
Portugal.
Ambassador to Phillip King of Spain, with commandment to treat of three
point, that is, for aid in the action of Affricke, for the marriage of his
daughter, and for enterview. The Ambassador obtained all three, the promise of
marriage, with one of his daughters, when she should come to years, that the
Catholic king should go to Gradalupa to meet with K. Sebastian: and as for
succors, he should furnish men and galleys to undertake the enterprise of
Alarache, the which was spoken very coldly. Philip confirmed the succors of men
and galleys, so as the Turk should send no me^ into Italy, and that they
should vntertake Alarache in this year, the whole being referred unto their
enterview at Gradalupa.

In the Parliament held at Blois, The Parliament at Blois.
Pierre d' Epinac Archbishop of Lions rose up, and before them all, declared
his reasons touching the Clergy, the Lord of Senscey spoke for the nobility,
and Versoris for the common. The two first by a multitude of reasons and
wonderful speeches, concluded that it was most fit and convenient, that there
should be but one Religion in the realm. The third showed, that the people
wholly desired the reunion thereof, so it might be done by peaceable and quiet
means without wars. But the Clergy and Nobility after many difficulties,
caused the Parliament to break up, so that under the ashes of the last wars,
which as yet were hot, there might be found the sparks of a great fire. For
after many messages (although in vain) sent by the King to the Protestant
Princes, the war began again, for the Prince of Conde rose up in arms, and
swore not to leave them (under whose protestation was placed, Deo and
victricibus armis) until he had brought the realm into her former splendour and
dignity. But the reasons that persuaded peace to the King, got the upper hand
of those that desired war, and thereupon an Edict of peace was made at
Poitiers, with great contentment on both parts, and the Prince of Conde the
same night he received it, caused it to be published by torch-light, although
with less advantage on his side then the first, for it restored the exercise
of the Catholic religion in the places, where it had been prohibited, it
suffered men's consciences to be free, yet without public exercise, but only
in the Towns and places, whereas then it was openly preached, and to Gentlemen
of quality and degree, in their own houses: yet there was some difficulty in
the execution and observation of this peace, which the conference at Nerae
between the Queen mother and the King of Navarre soon avoided; but the wound
not well healed, did still bleed, by means of the furious disorders of those
that were his chief doers: but the year one thousand five hundred eighty
one, it was wholly joined and drawn into a scarre. See the History of France.

Sir Martin Forbisher.
Sir Martyn Forbisher took his voyage by sea about the the end of May, toward
the North and West, discovering unknown Countries, and came again rich laden
into England, about the end of September following.

The Pope forasmuch as this intended war by Sebastian was attempted against
Infidels, opened his spiritual treasures, granting the Bull of the Croisada,
Croisada.
which till that time was not brought into the Realm.

A Comet.
The ninth of November there appeared in the Zodiaque, in the sign of Libra,
near unto the station of Mars, the goodliest and greatest Comet, that has
been seen in many ages, the which happening in the progress of this war,
amazed many, who looking to examples past, said it was a sign of unhappy
success, and that coming from a corrupt air, it did endamage the delicate
bodies of Princes. And for as much as the ancient Captains with their
divines, did interpret it to good, not for that they believed it, but to
encourage the soldiers: the Portugal likewise taking it for a favor, said,
that this Comet spoke unto the King, saying, Accometa: which is to say in the
Portugal tongue; Let him assail them, not having any such belief, but for
flattery, fearing more the Kings choler, by reason of his rough inclination,
then the heavens. Ieronimo Conestaggio.

France, the King having published certain ordinances in regard of policy,
solicited much the Provinces of his Country to get money of them, whereupon
followed great coffeehouse. In the mean while the soldiers being dispersed
in many places, and yet having weapons in their hands, gave them of the
Religion to think they could not long continue in quietness; yet the Churches
maintained themselves in diverse places.

About the end of March the Town of Geneua had great alarums, many troops
appearing in diverse places, to have surprised it: but their coming being
discovered, and the town holding her self upon her guards, there followed no
exployts of war.

The Queen mother made diverse progresses through the Realm of France, to
maintain (said she) the public repose: and so all that year passed in
doubtfulnesse, in regard of the Churches and the estate of France.

War began in Flaunders in Brabant, War and other acccide^ts in the low
Countries.
betwixt John de Austria, and the Estates: he gained a battle the last day of
January, and after he got Giblon, Louaine, Arcscod, Tiltmond, Die, and
Sichem, and in this last, handled most discourteously the officers of the
place. The 8. of February, the Town of Amsterdem by capitulation, with the
Prince and the estates of Holland, reunited themselves with the other Towns of
the Country under the Princes government. The estates at the same time sent
their Ambassador to the Imperial journey, where they showed the justice of
their cause, and demanded succors.

The Duke Cassimire prepared himself with an Army, the Queen of England also
promised to furnish them with men and money.

Cassamire (by the counsel of Imbysa, Cassamire.
Consul of Gaunt and Borhutus, was requested by those of Flaunders to take the
Earldome upon him) came to Gaunt, where he found Petrus Dathenus and others,
the chief of the congregation: by whom the Citizens being stirred up, thrust
out all the Mass Priests and Monks out of the City, and put their goods into
their treasury, to serve afterward for the necessary use of the Commonwealth:
and by a book set forth by them, they drew others to the free liberty, not
only civil, but also to a liberty of conscience and religion. From thence
Cassamire in the beginning of the next year, came to the Queen of England for
money to pay his soldiers.

The Prince of Parma created Duke.
Alexander Farnese Prince of Parma, the son of Octauius, the Nephewe of Peter
and Pope Paulus the 3. his Nephews son, was created Duke of Parma by the
King of Spain, D. Chytraeus.

The Jesuits and certain Friars were thrust out of Antwerpe in the month of
May, and as then, Phillits a Town, yielded it self by composition to the
Spaniard. Kempens was besieged and taken by the estates. A noble encounter
happened betwixt the^ and John de Austria, who had the worst, the first of August.

Free exercise of the reformed religion.
In the month of August, a free exercise of the reformed Religion was permitted
in Antwerpe by Mathias Archduke, chief General and Lieftenant of the Prince
of Orange, and the authority of the estates. So the liberty of Religion was
proclaimed, upon these conditions, that the reformed should not hinder or
trouble, either by themselves or others, the rights and exercises of the old
Religion, nor should offer any injury, reproach, or violence to any one, for
the diversity in Religion, that they should obey the political Magistrates,
and bear the like taxes and impositio^s with other Citizens, that they should
have no Sermons* but in such places as the Magistrates appointed, that the
Ministers should swear to preach nothing scandalous or seditious in their
Sermons: that no man should spoil any holy place, or break any Images, nor
should sell any ballads or libels reproachful to the other religion, etc. These
the Governor, the Deputy of Brabant, the Praetor, and Senate of Antwerpe,
promised to receive into their charge and patronage. This liberty of religion,
they of Gaunt with the Hollanders and Zelanders, embraced. To the which a little
after, the States of Geldria condiscended. But the Hannonians and Artesians
taking in very ill part that the Catholic Roman religion (which they professed
at Bruxelles, they would constantly retain, before the Emperror, the King of
Spain, and other Princes) should now be left and abolished of the^ of Gaunt;
in whose City their protestation was made; separated themselves from the other
estates, who had changed their religion, and by books published, accused them
of their inconstancy and perjury. And therein protest that they will be
faithful maintainers and defenders of the Catholic Roman faith, and true
liegemen to the king, if he would conserve their privileges. These were
presently called Malcontents, Malcontents
who forthwith made war upon them of Gaunt, deadly hating them for this change.

They of the reformed religion at Antwerpe, The reformed Church at Antwerpe.
desired to have their religious exercise, which they obtained with few
Churches; namely, the Chapel of the Castle, the Temple of the Jesuits, of the
Iacobins, S. Andrews, and half of the Friars. Certain days after, the
Protestants of Ausbourge obtained also certain temples. The Emperor and the
King of France, sought to make some agreement betwixt the parties, but it came
to nothing. On the other side, Cassimere having soiourned in the Country of
Zutphen certain time for the muster of his people, being in number 4000.
footmen, and 6000. horsemen, came into Brabant, and joined with the Estates the
26. of August. John de Austria died of the pestilence in his camp nigh Nance,
the 21. of October.

Alexander Prince of Parma, succeeded him in his charge. Prince of Parma.
The Malcontents, made war upon the Gauntois, under the conduct of Sieur de
Montignie, the Cardinal of Granuell his brother. This league did after
maruellously hinder the proceedings of States affairs, and under that
ouerture, the Spaniards who could not long have stood, do hitherto maintain
themselves.

The 20. of November, the Town of Deuentry yielded it self by composition
unto the Estates.

Matthew Hamond, by his trade a ploughwright, An heretic burnt at Norwiche.
three miles from Norwich, was conuented before the Bishop thereof, for that he
denied Christ to be our Savior. For this and many other heresies he was
condemned in the Consistory, and burned in the Castle ditch of Norwiche.

About the end of the year, they of Alenson forsook the Estates, to draw into
France.

The Prince of Orange appeased the troubles which happened at Gaunt.

Almaine was then in quiet, in regard of civil affairs: The estate of Almaine.
but greatly troubled by the practices and factions of certain Disciples of
Brencius, the father of the Vbiquitaries, whereof, after followed many
disputations, without any conclusion of the matter. They which desired a truce
of peace in the Church, attended no other thing by the solicitation of so many
wandering spirits, but some great troubles in both the politic and
Ecclesiastical estates, if God be times remedy not the same by the wisdom
of the Princes and States of the Empire.

Irish rebellion
At this time, the Irish men rebelled in diverse parts of that kingdom,
pretending the liberty of Religion, and complained to the Pope, taking for
their leader the Earl of Desmond, Onrake, and some other of the savage Irish,
affirming that if they were aided, they would easily draw the whole Country
from the Queens obedience. The Pope did communicate this with the Catholic
King, exhorting him to undertake this action, as most godly, and to succor
this people, the which they resolved to do. But for as much as the Queen of
England did seem in words friend unto the King, and did as the Spaniards
supposed, covertly underhand assist the Prince of Orange in Flaunders against
him, Thomas Stukely.
the King would likewise walk in the same path, and make a covert war
against her. They concluded to assist this people in the Popes name, but
secretly at the Kings charge. To this effect they levied certain footmen in
the Territories of the Church; whereof, six hundred were under the conduct of
Thomas Stukely, an English man, who fled out of England for treason: (who a
little before had obtained the title of a Marquess from the Pope) were embarked
at Ciuitauechia, in a ship of Genua, to be transported into Ireland, the which
arrived at Lisbone, in the time that they made preparation for the war of
Affrike. The King hearing of their arrival, and that for want of money he
could have no Italians out of Tuscane, desired to see them, with intent to
retain them, and use them in the war of Affricke, and having caused them to
disimbarke, and to lodge at Oeicas, near to the mouth of Tagus, he went one
day to view them, and having had some conference with Stukely, he persuaded
him to promise to go with him into Affrike. The Catholic king, because he
would not show himself a party, would not contradict it. The Pope was so
far of, that before the news could come unto him, he gave them impresse, and
they remained for his service.

The 24. of June, being Midsommer day, The 2. voyage of Sebastian with his
Army into Affrike.
Sebastian having a prosperous wind, the whole Army set sail, to his great
pleasure and contentment, who young and unskillful, guided by some sinister
star, or by that divine permission, which would punish this people, went into
Affricke, to a dangerous (although a glorious) enterprise, leaning the Realm
emptied of money, naked of Nobility, without heirs, and in the hands of ill
affected governors.

In this most fierce and bloody battle between the Portugalls and the
Moors, three kings died. The death of Sebastian.
The king Sebastian the 4. of August, when both the battles were joined,
fought so valiantly, that those which saw his valor wondered at it: for
although they slew three horses under him, without any whit daunting him, yet
was he never weary to change, strike, and succor all parts of the Army, where
was greatest danger: Many of his Nobility which remained yet on horsback,
seeing the Army in rout, sought the King in all parts to save him: but the
Standard which was carried before him as a mark to know him, was now taken,
and the bearer slain; and being deceived with an other some what like unto
that, which Edward de Moneses carried, they followed the one instead of the
other; so as the king remained as a man lost, with some of his most trusty
servants about him, and one Renegado, who labored to save him: having in vain
sought to fly, being advised to yeeled with his Arms, he would by no means
agree unto it. One amongst the^, holding upon the point of his foot a white
Napkin in sign of peace, went toward the Moors, as an Ambassador for the
rest to yield: but they either barbarous or wilful, took the messenger
prisoner, and charged the rest, who being few in number, wearied, and without
courage, they were all slain. Some say there grew a controversy amongst them
about the Kings own person, and for that occasion they slew him.

They sent afterward to seek his body, and by a notable example of the
inconstancy of this world, they carried it naked upon a saddle pomell, into
the royal Tent of Moluc, where letting it fall to the ground, it was carefully
viewed by the Nobility who were there present, and a public certificate that
it was he, keeping it after at Alcazar-Quiuer. Ieronimo Conestaggio.

Mulei Moluc seeing his men at the first to fly, (although he were sick unto
the death) mounted to horse in choler, going toward them that ran away, to
stay them and encourage them: the shot of the Christians drawing near, he made
show to match himself foremost: but his favorites came about him, entreating
him not to hazard himself. But he persisting his resolution, and they to stay
him, he grew in choler, laying hold on his sword to disperse them, at what
time being seized with a deadly fit of an Apoplexy, he swowned, and fell from
his horse: but being taken down by them about him, he was laid in his Litter,
Molucs death.
where putting his finger into his mouth in sign of silence, suddenly, or (as
some report) before he was laid down, gave up the ghost.

Mulei Mahamet drowned
Mulei Mahamet escaped his enemies hands, but his too great haste to pass
Mucazez, and to recover Azzill, was the cause he was drowned in his passage,
Those whom Idleness had made curious, did note the diversity of these Princes
deaths, for being all lost in one battle, within the space of six hours,
the one died of his natural death, the second by the sword, the third was
drowned.

Hamet proclaimed king.
Hamet was proclaimed King of the Moors. He caused the body of Mulei Mahamet
to be found out, and causing it to be fleied, filled the skin with straw, and
carried it in triumph, to the end to take from the Moors all the hope they had
conceived in him.

Monsieurs voyage into Flaunders.
Monsieurs the king of France his brother, after the example of the Archduke
Mathias, went into Flaunders, there to make work for the king of Spain, where
he made a goodly

Institution of the order of ye holy Ghost.
Henry the third, this year by the example of Lois the eleventh, to unite
great persons in concord and inviolable amity, both for the benefit of the
estate and country: he instituted the order of the holy Ghost. D. Chytraeus.

Of him this Anagrame was made. Henricus Tertius: In te vere Christus.

In this year and the next, the estate of France and of the low Countries,
and of Almaine, remained as before. In France the Prince of Conde retiring unto
Fere, a Town under his government of Picardie, war flamed, which continued
in diverse places by the taking holds on either part, but more slowly then in
former years.

The strongest was in Dauphine and in Guienne, Fere, Mouire, and other places,
having been yielded by composition. These tempests ended by a negotiation of
peace.

In the Augustine Friars at Paris, this also was done in remembrance of his
birth day, and the two Kingdoms of Poland and France, falling to him as upon
that day, expecting as then the third Crown in heaven, of which this Symbol
was made: Manet vltima coelo. He made 26. Knights of the order before spoken
of, and gave them yearly pensions out of Abbeys, and Ecclesiastical livings,
in despite of the Pope.

This year, John Fox, William Wickney, and Robert More, English men, having
been prisoners in Turkey about the space of 13. or 14. years, with more then
two hundred and sixty other Christians of diverse Nations, by killing their
keeper, maruellously escaped, and returned to their native Countries. I. Stowe.

The Town of Maistricht was taken by force of the Spaniards, the 29. of June,
Maistricht taken.
where they slew a great number of people. After the estates sought a
protector, and addressed themselves in the year, 1580. to the Duke of Alenson,
who dealt with them.

The Turks leaving Europe in quietness, The Turks.
after peace made with the Venetians, waged war against the Persians, and
after many battles lost, especially for the Turks, they fell to a peace
about the end of this year.

The Cardinal Don Henry, brother of King Don John the Don Sebastian, was by a
general consent of the Nobles and Governors, chosen and sworn king of
Portugal, who like an other Anius, was made king of a priest, of whom Virgill
says in the 3. of his Aeneiads, Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum, Phaebique
Sacerdos. Of this Cardinal say the Portugalls that he was borne in the Eclips
of the Moon, and in the Eclips of the Moon he died. M. Cyprian. Val.

Almaine.
Almaine was troubled by the cries and factions of the Vbiquitaries, against
whom, certain Princes, commonweals, and learned me^, opposed themselves, both
with lively voice and writing

The faith and obedience of the king of France his subjects began to decline.

The death of Henry King of Protugall.
Upon the 31. of January, Henry Cardinal King of Portugal, departed this life:
he began to die in the Eclips of the Moon, and died with the end thereof, as
if that the celestial sign had wrought that effect in him (being a man of a
weak body) which it does not in strength, or at the least not so suddenly, as
Astrologians do write: neither is the hour to be neglected, being the same
wherein he was borne, 68. years before. This was the last King of Portugal,
in whom ended the right Masculine line. And as the first Lord of Portugal,
although under the title of an Earl, was called Henry, so does it seem the
last should be so termed. He was Bishop, Governor of the Realm, Inquisitor,
Mayor, Legate Apostolic, and King.

An Earthquake.
On the sixth of April, being wednesday in Easter week, about six of the
clock toward evening, a certain Earthquake happening in London, and almost
generally throughout England, so amazed the people as was wonderful, for the
time. This Earthquake endured in or about London, not passing one minute of an
hour, but in Kent, and on the Sea coasts it was felt three times, as at
Sandwich at six of the clock, at Dover at the same hour. These and many
other places in East Kent, the same Earthquake was felt three times to move,
at six, at nine, and eleven. Hollenshead.

The first of May, after 12 of the clock in the night, was an other Earthquake
felt in diverse places in East Kent, namely at Ashford, and great Chard.

King Phillip performed the funeral obsequies of Sebastian, in the Church of
S. Jerome at Madrill, although it was secretly muttered, that the Duke of Alua
should say, the King should have performed it in Potugall, in our Ladies Church
of Belem, where the other kings are accustomed to be interred, inferring it may
be, that Phillippe was successor unto Sebastian, or at the least should assure
himself by force, of the succession after Henry, causing himself to be sworn
Prince. Ieronimo Conestaggio.

In the beginning of June, the Frislanders passing Rhene, returned into their
Country, and meeting the Count Hollocke with 22. Ancients, and two thousand
horsemen, gave him an overthrow, in which were slain of the Counts part, one
thousand and fifty, and on their own side, but fifty and five, by this
encounter the siege was raised at the Groine, and many Towns, Havens, and
holds of Friseland were redeemed. Genebrard.

After K. Henry's death, when Katherine Duchess of Brabant, K. Phillip.
Anthony the bastard son of King Lewis, and others had promised themselves
the next succession, at the last Phillip king of Spain, (who was for that
named of the dying Cardinal) was invested by the consent of the Lords,
spiritual and temporal. Others, chiefly they of Lisbone, did swear to Don
Antonio, but Phillip with a great power both by sea and land (of the which he
made the Duke of Alua General) came to Lisbone and expulsed Don Antonio, and
recovered the City. Who being hotly pursued by Sanches d' Auila, was
constrained to fly into France and England for succor. Chytreus.

In the month of July, Stephen king of Poland coming out of Luchem in
Moschouie, took by force two Fortresses, Vualisium, and Vsuum, and after that
Vuielukim: but having lost many of his men, at the end of the year he
returned. Genebrard.

On the nineteenth day of August, the king of Spaines prescription was
published against the Prince of Orange at Namours.

In these months of July and August, Fera a City in Picardie, was delivered
to the Huguenots.

The death of the Duke of Sauoy.
Emanuel Philebert Duke of Sauoy, died this month, a Prince most famous for
his courage, wisdom, and religion, leaving his son and heir, and sucessor
Charles.

The first day of September of this present year, the Grecians and Muschouites
began to reckon the year from the worlds creation, 7089.

Certain Spaniards and Italians confederate with the Earl of Desmond, and some
of the Clergy of Ireland landed there, and took certain holds and Castles,
but they were soon discomfited and chased away.

The tyranny of the Duke Alua.
Ferdinand Duke of Alua, began to exercise his tyranny at Aquisgrane, a chief
City of the Empire, upon certain Citizens and others that came from Antwerpe
and the low Countries, such as were of the reformed religion: by whose
conference and conversation, very many of Aquisgrane when they had embraced
their profession, desired of the Senate that they might use a public exercise
of their Religion: which when it was denied, nevertheless they met openly at
Sermons and the celebration of the Sacramens. Which being showed unto the
Emperor, certain Commissioners were appointed, to root out the religious,
and only to establish the doctrine and rites of the Pope.

The Emperor himself wrote also unto the Senate, that they should banish
those Preachers forth with, and that they should justly keep the old law,
which was, that none should be admitted of the Senate unless they were
altogether Catholic. D. Chytraeus.

A blazing Star
The eight day of October, immediately after the new Moon there appeared a
blazing Star in the South, bushing toward the East, which was nightly seen
the air being clear, more then two months.

In this year there was great abundance of corn, wine, and all manner of
fruit, and in Autumn in many places Roses did bud again. A great sickness
did follow, spreading it self throughout all Europe.

seven thousand year from the beginning of the world. Genebrardus.

Johannes Martianus, a Millanois, Ambassador for Spain to the Turk, having
obtained a truce for three years, returned from Constantinople into Spain,
but so, as neither desired others friendship; but that the Turk molested by
the Souldan, feared the Christians, and the Spaniard having enough to do at
home, was constrained by war to seek repossession of his own. Idem.

In January, A Proclamation against Jesuits.
Proclamation was published at London for the reuocation of sundry the Queens
Majesty's subjects remaining beyond the Seas, under color of study, and yet
living contrary unto the laws of God, and of the Realm. And also against
retaining of Jesuits and Massing Priests, sowers of sedition, and other
treasonable attempts. I. S.

Queen Anne, the wife of King Phillip, The death of Q. Anne.
fell sick of a fever, the which in few days brought her to an other life,
wherewith the King was much grieved, being a Lady wholly conformable to his
humor, and endued with singular beauty.

This was the year, where in the ships from the Indies, Brazill, S. Thomas
Cape, Verde, and all other new found lands were expected, the which stayed
somewhat long, and put then in some fear, being looked for with greater desire
then ever any were: they were wished, both for the riches they carried, as to
understand by them, how the people of those parts were addicted to the
obedience of the Catholic king, whereof many doubted.

Certain Jesuits being walled up within their Monastery at the Terceras,
Jesuits.
(to whom me at was given but once a week) grieuing to be thus wrongfully
imprisoned, upon a certain day they opened the doors of the Church, and hauig
placed ye Sacrament in the midst, they would try by this means, if they might
remain free. The ministers of justice went unto the covent to demand the reason
of this innovation, to whom it was propounded by the Fathers, that if their
offenses so required, they should punish the^, but holding them as suspect, they
should suffer the^ to depart into Portugal. The resoluto^ was (after some
speeches used beyond modesty) that the Fathers should be walled up again, and
a certain person, who said that in justice they should burn these Priests,
with their monastery, the which they had for the affection they bare unto the
Castillians. He stayed not long to acknowledge his error, for departing from
thence, he fell sick unto the death, and God would have him confess (as he
said) that this grief happened unto him for that occasion. Ieronimo
Conestaggio.

D. of Aniou.
Francis Duke of Aniou, the French Kings brother, and other Nobles of France,
the first of November (having lately arrived in Kent, came to London, where he
was honorably received. The 7. of February he departed out of England, where at
his shipping, a Post brought him word, that the States of the low Countries
were revolted, and namely the City of Antwerpe, whither he presently sailed
with 15. ships, and was there entertained by the Prince of Orange.

In the time of this Pope Gregory the 13. a very strange thing happened in
Valladolid. There dwelled in Valladolid a knight well qualified, who in the
Inquisitio^ had two daughters which constantly perseuering in that religion
that they had learned of the good D. Cacalla, and other Martyrs of Jesus
Christ, were condemned to be burned. The father being a most rank Papist,
besought the Inquisitors to permit them for their better instruction, to be
carried to his house: which things the Inquisitors in regard of the great
credit they reposed in him, granted. And brought thus to his house, the father
endeavored to divert them from their constant resolution: but seeing he could
not convince them, he caused Priests and Friars to dispute with them: but it
was in vain. For the Lord (as in Luke 21.15. he had promised) gave them
utterance and wisdom, which the new Pharisees, Priests, and Friars, were not
able to resist or gainesay. The father seeing then, that all his endeavor not
auailed, The cruelty of a father.
went himself to his Grove, cut down wood, and caused it to be drawn to
Valladolid, he himself kindled the fire* and so they were both burned. M.
Cyprian. Val.

Richard Atkins burned for religion.
In the month of July, one Richard Atkins borne in Hartfordshire, an English
man, came to Rome to the English College there, whom they kindly welcomed,
willing him to go to the Hospital, and there to receuie his meat and lodging,
according as was appointed: whereunto he answered, I came not (my country
men) to any such intent as you judge, but I come lovingly to rebuke the great
misorder of your lives, and to let your proud Antichrist understand, that he
does rob God of his honor, and poisoneth the whole world with his most
abominable blasphemies. When they heard this, a Student in the College caused
him to be put in the Inquisition, but after certain days, he was set at
liberty again. And one day as he was going in the street, he met a Priest
carrying the Sacrament, which offending his conscience, to see the people so
crouch and bow down to it, he caught at it to have thrown it down, but
missing it, he was judged by the people that he catched at the holiness which
(as they say comes from the Sacrament) and so upon mere devotion he was let
pass. Certain days after he came to S. Peter's Church, where many were
hearing Mass of the Priest at the elevation, (he using no reverence) stepped
to the Altar, and threw down the Chalice with the wine, striving likewise to
pull the Cake out of the Priests hands: for which cause diverse of the people
rose up and beat him, and after carried him to prison: where he was examined
wherefore he did it, who said, that he came purposely to rebuke the Popes
wickedness, and their Idolatry. Upon this he was condemned to be burned:
but before that, he was set upon an Ass, without any saddle, he being from
the middle upward naked: all the way as he went, there were four that did
nothing else but thrust at his body with burning Torches, whereat he never
moved, and when he came before S. Peter's Church where the place of execution
was, there was he burned. I. Fox.

Katherine de Medices, mother to the French Queen, The Queen of France
discontented with king Phillip.
was discontented with the Catholic King, for diverse respects, but that she
made most show of, was that he had taken the Realm of Portugal by force,
refusing to submit himself to justice, saying that she had more interest then
he. Whereupon it was supposed, that (moved with this disdain) she should
labor to make war against Portugal, with whom agreed Frances duke of
Alanson, her son, no less enemy to the Catholic king, then the mother,
moved thereunto, for that having demanded one of the daughters of the said
king in marriage, he was refused, for that he required with her a portion fit
for her quality. He was followed by the whole Nobility of France, whom he
might easily have led where he pleased, although it were against the Kings
liking, the which grew, for that remaining the third son to Henry the 2. with
small hope never to aspire unto the Crown, having two brothers, Charles and
Henry, his elders, having a great mind and stirring, he gave care to all such
as were discontented with the king, or desirous of innovation (whereof there
are numbers in France) labored to alter the quiet estate of Christendom, with
whom he had often resolved to conquer himself some new estate out of France.
Ieronimo Conestaggio.

Alanson again returned into England, being already agreed with the Prince
of Orange, D. Alanson.
who was the instrument of all these practices, he passed from thence to
Antwerpe, where the peoples humors being before disposed by the said Prince,
he was received with great joy, and on the eleventh day of February, 1582.
they did swear him Duke of Brabant.

Ouids tomb
In Cyonia, a City of Muschouie, within a pleasant valley, the tomb of P.
Ouidius Naso was found, with this Epitaphe.

Hic situs est vates quem viui Caesaris ira
Augusti, Latio cedere iussit humo:
Saepe miser voluit patrijs succumbere tectis
Sed frustra; hunc illi fatadedere locum.
Genebrardus. The Prince of Orange shot
The 18. day of March the Prince of Orange being in Antwerpe quiet, and in the
greatest fortune that he was ever, was shot in his house as he was rising from
the table, in the midst of all his servants, with a Pistol, by one John
Scarigni; a Biscaine, moved thereunto by zeal of Religion as he pretended,
the bullet hitting him under his right Iawe, passed forth through the window,
and although he was supposed dead, yet was he cured and lived, and the
offender was presently slain by his guard, and all such as were found
accessory, were executed.

Cardinal Albert Archduke of Austria, Cardinal Albert.
was made governor of Portugal. Ieronimo Conestaggio.

Don Antonio departed for France from the Terceres, leaving Emanuel de Sylua in
his place, with 500. Frenchmen, under the charge of Baptist Florentine, and
Charles a French man, their Captain.

In the month of August, the Forces of Don Antonio king of Portugal,
skirmishing with Phillip king of Spain, in a battle at Sea at S. Michaels
Mount, were discomfited. Here Strossius the General of the Forces of France,
with the loss almost of all his Army, was in the end discomfited. Genebrardus.

There was one thing worthy of observation in the fight at Sea. Within the
Gallion of S. Matthew, A Priest died for fear.
a Priest called John de Iaem, Chaplain unto the Marshall of the field, a man
which had seen the wars during the fight, being under lowest deck of the
Gallion, when he saw so much wild fire cast by the French, heauing their
shot, and seeing the hurt which the Cannon did, he died only of fear and
amazement, having received no wound.

Phillip after the death of Diego his eldest son, who was sworn Prince of
Portugal at Tomar, he would likewise that the same oath should be made in
the person of Phillip, his second son, being then sick; and for the swearing
of him, he assembled the estates at Lisbone, resolute to accomplish this
ceremony before his departure.

At that time the Duke of Alua (consumed with a continual fever) died in the
Palace at Lisbone, The death of the Duke of Alua.
in the Kings own quarter, being of the age of three score and fourteen
years. During his sickness he was greatly favored of the king, who did
visit him a little before his death: but after it, the next day the Portugalls
observed that he went publicly to Mass without any show of coffeehouse in
him, contrary to the custom of their Kings, who upon the death of one of less
quality (having done many notable services to the Crown) relied themselves
for a time, the which seemed the more strange, for that King Emanuel upon the
death of a noble Pilot, withdrew himself three days. Ieronimo Conestaggio.

He arrogating too much to himself, caused a statue of brass to be erected
for him in the Citadell of Antwerpe, which the king willed afterward to be
beaten down.

Charles Borgia.
Charles Borgia Duke of Candia, a man of greater virtue then experience,
succeeded in his place.

Upon the 28. of June, Peregrin Bartu Lord Willougbie, was sent Ambassador to
Frederick the second, with the Garter.

The Prince of Orange having recovered his hurt, came abroad. His wife Carola,
lineally descended from the right noble house of Montpensier, with overmuch joy
of his recovery, within three days after died of a plurisie. D. Chytreus.

The new Calender set forth by the Pope.
In this year of our Lord, 1582. this Pope by anticipating ten days in the
year, gave himself to correct the Calender, and to eternize his name; this
Calender he called Gregorianum: and by his decree, all Christian Princes
obeying the Romish Sea, gave commandment to cut of ten days in the month
of October, so as for the fifth day, they should generally write fifteen: the
which was done to fit the means, and principal aspects, wherein the heavens
were, when as our Redeemer Jesus Christ suffered, that they might celebrate
Easter, and the other Feasts upon their proper days. The which they had not
formerly done, for that the true course of the Sun which makes the year,
being certain minutes of an hour less the time, which they until then had
taken for a year. It seemed that in the course of so many years, so small a
difference had mounted unto ten days, so as by this equallitie, it was made
comfortable to the time past. Ieron. Con. D. Chytreus.

Phillip caused the bones of Sebastian, late king of Portugal, to be brought
out of Affricke, the which with king Henry's that were at Almerin, he would
before his departure see solemnly interred in the Church of Belem, near to the
other Kings of Portugal.

At this time were reunited all the kingdoms of Spain, which from the
entrance of the Moors into Spain, 860. and so many years fithence, have been
divided. M. Cyprian. Valera.

D. Saunders the Popes Nuntio and Legate, D. Saunders
who came from Rome with James Fitzmoris in July, in the year 1599. to bear
Arms in Ireland against her majesty, after that he had wandered up and down
three years together with the Earl of Desmond, and Sir John his brother, he
fell sick of an Irish Ague, and a Flixe, and lay in the wood Clennetisse,
which wood is full of withies, briars and thorns, and through which is no
passage, where partly through his sickness, but chiefly through famine and
want, dyed. Hollenshed.

The Earl of Desmond was taken by one Kollie an Irishman, in an old house
alone, and there slain, whose head was sent into England, and set upon London
bridge.

Amias D. of Leneux, Amia. banished Scotland.
so created in the year 1579. was now in this year upon displeasure banished
Scotland, and enforced to return into France: in whose exile was performed an
old prophecy, That a man of five shillings should buy all the Dukes of
England and Scotland: For when this Duke was out of the Scottish kingdom,
there was neither Duke in that Country nor in England. Idem.

Henry King of Navarre, when he understood that the Cullen was in great
distress, The King of Navarre.
and the many traitorous practices of the Pope against him, he sent his
Ambassador to the Electors and Princes of Germany, who professed the true
doctrine of the Gospel; First for the establishing of a general concord, by a
general Synod of the Churches in Germany, France, England, and other
Countries embracing the true Religion. Then that these Princes of the reformed
Church, should by oath, all join their powers against the Pope and his
adherents: which that he might the better persuade, he set down in his
Letters the imminent dangers over the principal kingdoms in Europe, which
professed the true Faith. As many as in Spain or Italy were suspected for the
truth, were put into the Inquisition, and so martyred. In France the
promulgation of the Council of Trent, and the constitution of the Inquisition
was urged by the Popes Legate, against the intercession of the Senate, and the
liberties of the Church of France. That in England by the treacherous practices
of the Jesuits, the hearts of her majesty's subjects were drawn from their
alleagiance. As for the Scots such matters were set abroach even in the Court,
that those of the better sort, and such as studied for the common good and
peace of the realm, by the dissension of some Nobles and the Kings youth, were
banished, which unless it were presently removed, it would hazard the estate
of their Church, and raise war between England and Scotland. The miseries of
Belgia, it being so ouerpressed by the Spanish powers, and they every day
increasing, promise no good success to their Church. In Heluetia, by the Popes
contributions, subtilties, and the most turbulent preachings of the Jesuits
these two years, have been civil wars: Insomuch that the Bernates, imbracers
of the reformed Religion, should be oppressed by the power of the D. of Sauoy.
The Churches of Suecia stand wavering, whilst the Popish ceremonies are there
kept, and Jesuits frequent the Court, and fear least their persuasions should
alienate their King. And for Germany, in the which by the care and sincerity
of the most mighty Princes, the surest and safest harbors are given to the
Churches, the Pope does what in him lies to confound and overthrow. In Coloine
he has stirred up such tragedies against that Princely Elector, the end
whereof, unless it be brought upon his own head, he hops will be the
confusion of all Germany. This Embassage although it was beningly received of
all the Princes to whom it came: yet new disputations and troubles arising in
France about the death of Alanson, the dangers increased. D. Chytreus.

Georgius Ernestus, the last Prince of Henneberge, died this present year.
Idem.

Elias Thacker was hanged at S. Edmonds-Bury in Suffolk, and John Copping for
spreading certain books, seditiously penned by one Robert Brown, against the
book of common prayer, established by the laws of the realm; their books as
many a could be found were burnt before them. I. S.

John Lewis, who named himself Abdiot, an obstinate heretic, denying the
Godhead of Christ, and holding diverse other detestable heresies (much like to
his predecessor Matthew Hamond) was burned at Norwich.

Albertus Alasco, free Baron of Lasco, Vaiuode, Albertus Alasoo.
or Palatine of Syradia in Poland, arrived at Harwiche in Essex, and on the
last of April, came by water to Winchester house in Southwarke, where he
remained for the most part of his abode.

Frances of Valois Duke of Alanson, The death of Fr. D. of Alanson.
attempted diverse exployts Dunkerke toward France, where he fell into so
strange a judgment, that even the Physicians began to doubt him: for a
flixe of blood issued so continually out of his nose, and mouth, that they were
still forced to hold him a Basen whereinto he voyded the clear and pure
blood, whereof he dyed. Some say this happend either by his riotousnesse in the
low Countries, or for grief of the hard success of his affairs there, or by
Salcedas means that was executed. His death weakened the most drowsy heads,
it brake all the bonds that stayed the proceedings of the League, and caused it
presently to waine, at Chalouns, Rhemes, Troy, Dyon and Mezeiuel. History of
France.

The tenth of July, William Nassau Prince of Orange; The Prince of Orange is
slain.
in the one and fifty year of his age, was slain with a Bullet, by Balthazar
Gerardus, otherwise called Serach. See Genebrardus.

This villain being taken alive, confessed that he was neither set on by the
French nor Spanish, but did it of his own mind, thinking that thereby he did
God good service, forthwith he was punished with such a death as the quality
of so heinous a fact deserved. Yet a certain writer of Coloine sets him
down for a Martyr. See David Chytraeus.

H. Earl of Darbie by the Queens majesty was sent Ambassador to Henry the
third the French King, the 30. of January, to inuest him with the order of the
Garter.

Hyperas the eight day of April, and Briges, which next to Gaunt is the chief
City of Flaunders, a little before the Prince of Orange his death, in the
month of May, was recovered by the Prince of Parma, all former offenses
forgotten, so that they would restore the Catholic religion of Rome, and
perform true allegiance to the king of Spain.

As Soon as the League perceived that diverse Towns had made great fires for
joy of her birth, it was presented to the Pope, that he might give it his
blessing, avouch it for his, and declare it to be for the Catholic,
Apostolic and Romish Church. But Gregory the 13. desiring to show himself
the Father of all Christians, and a Pastor, and not, a dispearser of his
flock, considering that the raising of Arms against a most Christian and
Catholic king, was wholly contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, the
examples of Christ and his Apostles, and the laws of policy and state;
certified the Leagues Deputies, that he could not approve their inventions: and
to conclude, sent them back again without an answer. And not long before he
dyed, he said to the Cardinal Est, that the League should never have Bull,
Letter, nor Commission from him, for he knew not what they meant: and that he
would not serve for a firebrand to kindle a war, which he could by no means
quench.

In the prime of this year the first of April, S. Walter Raleigh took his
voyage for the discovery of that land, which lies between Norembega and
Florida in the West Indies, and returned in August following, preparing
afterward for a second voyage.

Sir H. Gilbert.
S. H. Gilbert attempted to discover with intention this country of Norembega,
to settle an English Colonie there, in the year 1578. accompanied with a
company of Gentlemen of good calling, and ten sails of all sorts of shipping;
but the journey took no success, for all their ships enforced by some
occasion, or mischance, made their present return, that only excepted, where
his brother S. W. R. was Captain, who took his course to the West Indies, but
for want of vittailes and other necessaries, when he had sailed as far as the
Islands of Cape de Verde, upon the coast of Africa, he was constrained to set
sail and return for England. But S. H. G. enterprised the voyage the second
time, and set to sea with three ships and pinnases this year 1584. in which
journey he lost his life.

This year also S. W.R. encouraged by the reports of his men of the goodness of
the soil, S.W. Raleigh.
and the fertillitie of the country, which they had discovered the last year
past, and now by her majesty called Virginia, furnished with 8. sails of all
sorts, set them to the sea, S.R. Greenfeeld.
appointing S. Richard Greenfeeld his Lieutenant, enioyning him either to tarry
himself, or to leave some Gentlemen of good worth with a competent number of
soldiers in the Country of Virginia, there to begin an English Colonie. After
they had sailed a certain number of leagues on the sea, by force and violence
of foul weather, they were separated one from the other; so that S.R.G. being
singled from his fleet, all alone arrived in the Island of Hispaniola in the
West Indies, about the midst of June following.

In the month of May, Bruges recovered.
the Prince of Parma recovered the Town of Bruges, which next to Gaunt is the
chiefest City in all Flaunders, all matters forepassed forgotten, upon
condition they would restore the Catholic Roman religion, and become true
leigemen to the king of Spain. They of Gaunt likewise, all their Towns about
them being taken by the Spaniards, and all their passage for provision stopped
up, as also constrained through famine, entered into counsel either of
delivering their town, or else of some reconciliatio^: and the Prince of Parma
offered them the same conditions which they of Bruges had, all which, the
Senators addicted to the Roman religion, and the Citizens thought good to
embrace. And Imbysa who being Consul six years before, was the cause that
their pacification was broken, and the expelling of the Popes Agents,
necessity thus constraining, yielded thereunto.

The Pope daily urged by his Ambassador the Emperor, Rodolphe, The refusal of
the new Calender.
that his Calender might be received and used throughout all Germany. But
although the Emperor commanded it to be kept and observed in the kingdom of
Bohemia, Austria, and other his hereditary possessions; yet the Princes of
Saxony and others, constantly refused so to do, following the counsel of
Augusta. But the Bishops for the most part, and amongst those, Ernestus of
Coloine, Elector, and the Bishop of Monastery, began to allow of it in their
Diocesses. The Senate of Augusta said, that in allowing of this Calender, they
intended nothing against the quiet of Religion, but for policy sake, that they
might exercise their usual merchandise with the subjects of those neighbor
Princes and Bishops which had received it; and that all manner of confusion in
judgments, markets, and other public places in the City, risen by the
difference of the Calenders, might be avoided: the which decree was obtained.
Which when it was published at Augusta, the Ministers of the Gospel wrote to
the Senators, that they would obey the decree in all political affairs, but
in their Churches and celebration of their Feasts and exercises of their
religion, they would by no means obey the Pope. Therefore the 24. day of May,
they denounced to their auditorie the Feast of the Ascentio^ of Christ, the
next day the 28. of May to be celebrated, which the Bishops had finished one
month before. The Senate taking this in ill part, caused the Superintendent to
be carried out of the City, but the Citizens knowing thereof, ran first
unarmed, then with weapons, and at the gate of the City took their Pastor out
of the Cart; but the tumult increasing, the Ministers of the Gospel at the
entreaty of the Senate dissuaded the Citizens from sedition, and appeased
them. When some should be chosen out of the Senate, Patricians, Merchants, and
the Commons, which should determine this controversy. To these the D. of
Wittenberge and the Senate of Vlme joined their Ambassadors, who the 4. day of
June, which according to the Gregorian Calender was the 14. do so arbitrate
the matter, that al faults remitted, they after that throghout the whole City,
should follow the new Calender, which should be kept in policies, and both the
Churches of Religion. Notwithstanding the peace and quietness of it should
remain constant and firm. And that it should be lawful for the Ministers of
the Gospel to protest unto their Auditors, that they had changed nothing, nor
would change any thing in that doctrine which they had hitherto preached unto
them, nor that they did obey the Pope, but the Imperial majesty and
political magistrates, in observing and keeping the new Calender with the rest
in the City. D. Chytraeus.

About the middle of June, Sir I. Perrot Knight, was sent over to be Lord
Deputy in Ireland.

This Deputy by the advice of the Council of Ireland, thought it best to
bring the whole land into shyre grounds, whereby the laws of England, might
have a thorough course, and passage. And what S. H. Sidney had done in few
Countries, that be performed in the whole realm, and to every new County he
appointed and assigned several Sheriffs. Hollen.

Upon the K. of Frances devise when he was K. of Poland, Manet vltima caelo:
the Leaguers made this Distiche.

Qui dedit ante duas vnam abstulit, altera nutat,
Tertia tonsoris nunc facienda manu.
Ericus Duke of Brunswicke, the son of Ericus, The death of the Duke of
Brunswicke.
who spent the better part of his life in Belgia, Italy, Spain, and gave
himself more to the Romish religion then the true doctrine of the Gospel,
embraced of his Nobles and subjects, in the fifty six year of his age
departed this life at Papia in Italy, upon whom this was written.

Papa tibi, Papiaque fuit, non patria cura,
Hinc procul a patria te tegit vrbs Papia.
Whom Julius, founder of the University of Iulia, succeeded in the kingdom.
D. Chytraeus.

Johannes Basilides, the great Duke of Mochouia, Johannes Basilides.
or Emperor of Russia, who for 25 whole years had afflicted and scourged
Linouia with war, this year ended his tyranny with his life. Who after the
manner of Russia is reported to have been very godly. Being ready to die,
he called his son Faedor (so they call Theodore) and the chief of his
Nobility to him, in whose presence, with a godly exhortation he committed the
whole Empire, and joined to him four of his wisest Counselors, who should
have care of him and the Empire, whom he persuaded, that being warned by him
they would abstain from making war, and make peace with their neighbor
Kings and Princes. He commanded also that for ten years space they should
remit his subjects (sore wasted and brought to poverty by his waries) all his
tributes, taxes, and Subsidies, that in this space they might recover
themselves, and to all his Captains he gave free leave either to stay or
depart: after this done, he was shaven, and betook himself to a Monastical
life, and so dyed. Idem.

The Christian Churches at Constantinople.
The same time that Amurathes joined the North part of Tauricus Cherronesus to
the Turkish Provinces, all the Christian Churches at Constantinople (of which I
understand there are about 30 in Monasteries and otherwise remaining) had
almost been converted into denne^ and holes of the religion of Mahomet, by the
earnest motion of the high Bishop of the Turkish Priests (whom they call Mufti)
And when the Grecians, Armenians, and other Christian nations most humbly
pleaded and alleged the privileges granted by Mahomet the second, and other
succeding Emperors to the Christians, for a free exercise of their religion;
the answer was, that they were tolerated by reason of the desolatio^ of the
City, and the small number of Musulmans Now since such multitudes profess the
religion of Mahomet, that they need more Churches, it is meet that the
Christians should yield to them. After this the Spanish Liedger at Venice,
wrote, that Amurathes had spoiled all the Christian Temples, and made them his
own: and had commanded to be done so with them at Jerusalem: his anger was so
great toward the Patriarch, that he caused him to be bound in chains and to
be shamefully carried through the City, and from thence sent him to Rhodes.
One cause of his anger toward him was, that he understood, that he had
received the Popes new Calender into Greece and other Christian churches of the
East, to the great offense of many. An other, for that he pronounced a sentence
of diuorcement against a mighty man in Greece, who the better to be revenged
upon the Patriarch, renounced his faith and turned Turk, living afterward in
Amurathes Court, and continually incyting him against the Patriarch.

Finally when in a Synod, The Patriark of Constantinople.
it was decreed (as the Turk willed) that a company of the Grecians shouuld be
carried into the Deserts, and there erect a Colonie, and the Patriark had said
it was very hard and iniust: Theophilus Hieroneonaclus and Perachonnius, told
the Turk hereof: who abdicated the Patriark, and put Pachonnius in his place;
who being a rude and unlearned man, after he had been in the place one year,
was removed, and Theoseptus succeeded, who was inaugurated the year, 1585.

William Carter of London, at a Sessions in the Old-bayly, was there indighted,
arraigned, and condemned of high treason, for printing a seditious and
traitorous book in English: Entitled, A Treatise of schism: and was for the
same (according to sentence pronounced against him) drawn, hanged, and
quartered. I. St.

Two and thirty Seminaries, Massing Priests, Seminaries banished.
and other late prisoners in the Tower of London, Marshall-sea, Kings bench,
and other places, were embarked in the Mary Marlin of Colchester, to be
transported over into the coasts of Normandy, to be banished this Realm for
ever, by the virtue of a Commission from her Majesty, before specified.

In the beginning of this year, at Riga in Liuonia, An insurrection about the
new Calender
a great hurly burly happened amongst the Citizens about the Popes new
Calender, which presently burst out into open sedition. D. Chytraeus.

Henry Archbishop of Breme, Osuaborge, Padeborne, Duke of Saxony, the son of
Frances the elder, a Prince endued with virtue, wisdom, clemency, and
learning, in the flower of his youth, being of the age of 35. years, was
called out of this World. Idem.

Pope Gregory, the thirteenth of that name, a Bolonist, The Popes death.
called before Hugo Boncompagno, being of the age of eighty years, dyed at
Rome the eleventh day of April, when he had ruled in the Sea the space of
thirteen years and a little more.

This Pope renewed the hatred of his predecessor Pius the fifth, against the
Queen of England: and so practiced by all manner of means, one while by
force, (as it appears by the great Armada sent into Ireland, and had a
miserable end) an other while by craft and deceit (as was seen in the great
traitor Parry, and others by him sent) who had also miserable end.

It was the common voice and fame in Rome, that this Gregory before he was
Pope, and also being Pope, had his concubine, of whom he had also title
sons, which said unto him such Graces as made him to laugh: and being Pope,
such was the grace that Phillippicus his son said, that the Pope his father
gave him 5000. crowns a year. M. Cyp. Val.

Sixtus. 5.
Felix Pereto, called Sixtus 5. was borne in a Village called Montalto, near
to the City of Firmo, which is in the Marches of Ancona: he was of the order
of the Franciscans, and Cardinal of Montalto.

In this Pope the common saying of Spain was fulfilled: Rex por natura, y papa
por ventura. A King by name, a Pope by adventure: for so poor was his father,
that he was a Swine-heard. Felix in his childhood was very poorly brought up,
but showing some sparks of wit, a gentlewoman for Gods sake clothed him with
the habit of S. Frances, and entreated the Warden to receive him into his
covent, where he studied the liberal sciences and school divinity, and in
those sciences he much profited. In the end, being now of age, he was made
Inquisitor. In which office such was his carriages, as feawe could abide his
cruelty: and so it happened, that he called before him a Magnifico of Venice,
(who being come) he entreated discourteously and inhumanely. This gentleman
unaccustomed to h^^re such injuries and disgraces (as by that which after he
did for revenge to the L. Inquisitor appears) stomacked the matter. A feawe
days after, this Gentleman encountered the Inquisitor; and when he saw him, he
commanded his servant with a good cudgel which he carried, to abate the
fierceness of the unhappy Pereto. Felix being thus cudgelled returned to
Rome, and recounted his mischance to Pope Pius 4. The Pope hereat disdaining,
sent him back to Venice with much more authority and power then before. A
notable act of the Seignory of Venice.
When he was returned to Venice. he presented his commission to the
Seignorie. The Seignory being wise, and knowing the quarrelous humor of this
man, and well perceiving that he came with a desire to be revenged,
commanded a Wax candle to be lighted, and Felix, if he were wise, precisely
to depart their dominion and jurisdiction, before that candle were consumed.

This Felix unable to do otherwise, returned eftsoons to Rome, and complained
to the Pope. The Pope seeing this man meet for his service, made him Master
of his Palace.

After this, when the Spanish Inquisition (of all men how high so ever feared,
and liked of none) held the Archbishop of Tolledo for suspected of heresy;
the Pope sent Felix into Spain to hear this cause. The General of the
Franciscans, the chief dignity among them, now happened to die. This dignity
gave the Pope, whom a feawe years after, the same Pope made Cardinal. In the
conclusion, when Gregory was dead, Felix by the means of his good friends in
Spain was made Pope, and called himself Sixtus the fifth.

This name he took in memory of Sixtus 4. who was as he, a Franciscan Friar.
M. Cyp. Val.

This Pope talking one day of his base birth and parentage, said that he came
from a most illustrious house: for (said he) the upper part of the roof
thereof being always torn and uncovered, the Sun daily made it most
glorious with his beams. Anthonius Ciracella, de vitis pontificum

The Princes of the Empire, with the K. of Denmark, The Prince of Saxony
prisoner.
sent their Ambassadors in the month of March to the Emperor at Prage, to
entreat for the enlargement of John Frederick Prince of Saxony, whom he held
in prison the space of 18. years: which although the Emperor condiscended to
in word only, yet he bound the captive Prince with such hard conditions that he
had rather have been a continual prisoner, then to be delivered after such
manner. D. Chytraeus.

The League.
Two things gave an alarm to he League: one, the assembly at Mountauban: the
other the voyage of the D. d'Espernon to the K. of Navarre, which it took as
brands to kindle her fire, and began to send out Commissions in all places in
the kings name, who disauouched them, and prohibited the raising of soldiers.
The K. Edict 18. of March, 1585. against raising of men
The first point of their disliking, showed the reason which moved the
Cardinal of Bourbon, the Princes, Lords, Towns and Commons, being
Catholics, to oppose themselves against the heretics. Secondly, because they
were offended that the Parliament which they would have had to be holden
concerning wars, to be made against the Huguenots, had been revoked.
Thirdly, to break the Edict of pacification. Fourthly, because they stood in
fear, that if the King should die without children, there would rise great
trouble for the succession of the Crown: whereof the King of Navarre had great
hope since the death of Monsieur the kings brother, by the practice of his
friends, and favorers of the king. Fifthly, because of the great preparations
of war, made both within and without the Realm, that should be ready by the
15. of April then next ensuing, to execute that which they said had been
concluded in an assembly at Magdebourge the 15. of December, 1584. against ye
religion, the king, and his subjects: by the which it was agreed, that the
Queen of England should furnish 5000. Rutters, 4000. Switzers, 12000. English
Count Palatine, Prince Cassamire, and the D. Pomeranie, each of them 4000,
Rutters. The Lantgraue of Hesse, two thousand and 500. The Duke of Wittemberge
2000. The Lords of their League besides the Queen of Englands Forces 5000.
Switzers. The Kings Protector and Consul of Scotland, 2000. Scots. The King of
Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and their Associats, twenty and five thousand
Harquebusiers, and 4000. horse, that had sworn never to make peace with the
King of France, but with all their consents to maintain the Prince of Orange
in the low Countries against the King of Spain, and to help the Emperor to
get the Domaines of the Empire, withholden by the Pope, and to send their
deputies from all places in the month of March, to Basil and Switzerland,
there to determine the differences of the Lords Supper. Sixthly, because those
of the religion would not yield up the Towns by them held for the assurance of
the execution of the Edict of peace. Seventhly, because of the universal abuse
suffered in placing of Officers, in leauying of moneys, and by invention of
excessive oppressions laid upon the people: And lastly, against such as at
abusing the Kings favor and authority, had in a manner seized upon his
person, impeached the ordinary access of honest men unto him, consumed the
Kings treasures, braued the Nobility out of the liberty of justice, spoiled
the Clergy of their Tithes, and persuaded the King that it was necessary for
his service, to weaken and diminish the authority of the Catholic Princes
and Lords. Upon these just occasions, they said they were forced to meet in
arms. H. of Fr.

The League made war against the Huguenots, seazing upon the best Towns of
the Catholics in all the Realm. Religion was preached in Guyenne, and they
went to drive it out of Picardie: the Huguenots were Rochell, and the Leagues
Army marched straight to Paris, they were at Mountpellier, and the League set
upon Marsaille: which by means of the second Consul of the Town they took,
who afterward was hanged.

Antwerpe, a City Brabant, Antwerpe yields to the king of Spain.
the most famous Town of all Belgia and Europe, after Alexander Farnese Duke
of Parma had stopped their passage by the River by the space almost of an whole
year: constrained by famine and the daily tumult of the common people, who
desired peace, returned to the obedience of the king of Spain, and yielded to
the Duke upon very mean conditions.

On the 26. of June, arrived at London, Deputies for the Estates of the
Netherlands or low Countries; and on the 29. of the same, they came to
Greenwich, where by virtue of their commission from the united Countries, they
presented to her Majesty the sovereignty of those Countries, to wit, of
Brabant (but the commission for the siege of Antwerpe not fully authorized) of
Gelder, of Flaunders, Holland, Friseland, Zeland, and Vtrick. I. Hooker.

The Queen of England, of her most gracious compassion and mercy, took into
her protection and defense, the estate of Poland and Zeland.

S.F. Drake.
Sir Frances Drake, General of the English Navy, took his voyage to the
coasts of Spain and America, that thereby he might weaken the power of king
Phillip: he took the green Promontory, where the ships that are to go to
America lie at Road. Then came he to Hispaniola, an Island of S. Domingo, in
the beginning of January, where he stirred up the slaves of Africa and
Aethiopia (who had there their Colonies, and were so cruelly handled, that many
times in despair they offered violence to themselves) to fight for their
liberty, who being armed by the^, killed the Spaniards, and delivered up the
I Will. He took all their gold which was ready shipped for Spain: 254. pieces of
Ordinance, and returned richly laden with gold into England, before Autumn,
with 23. ships. D. Chytraeus.

At this time was the conspiracy of Anth. Babington, Salisbury, Tytchbourne,
Abington, etc. against our most gracious Sovereign, incited thereto by Mary Q.
of Scots: who for this traitorous attempt, were arraigned, convicted, condemned
and executed, according to the law made for traitors.

A great victory happened to the Queen in Ireland, against the E. of Arrane and
L. Feruhurst, who were banished out of Scotland. These practiced with the Guise
and the Spaniards, and brought with the^ 3000. Scots into Ireland, and at
Conocke they were put to the sword by S. Ri. Binga^, governor of that province.
Chytraeus.

Upon the 8. day of September, Robert E. of Leicester, accompanied with diverse
honorable personages, Captains, and soldiers, with a train to the number of
50. sails of ships and hoyes, set forward toward Flushing, where he was
princely entertained by Grave Maurice, second son to the deceased Prince of
Orange. I. Hooper.

The Pope excommunicated the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, declaring
him incapable to the succession of the Crown of France: The Pope
excommunicated the king of Navarre and ye Prince of Conde.
abandoning his person and his Countries, for a pray to such as could obtain
it: but they sleigthly regarding it, opposed themselves against it. The K. of
Navarre complained himself to all the estates of France, in that they had
caused the succession of a king being yet alive, to be decided in the Court of
Rome, made the title of a Prince of the blood, to be judged by the Pope: and
suffered the Consistory to give that which belonged not unto them: he sent his
Letters to the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Commons.

The Princes of Germany, that sought to aid such as were of their religion,
perceiving France to be a body wounded to death, sent their Ambassadors to the
K. desiring him to open his eyes to the tears, and his ears to the complaints
of his poor subjects, to hear the requests of his neighbors for his own
good, the quietness and honor of his faith, his name, and reputation. The K.
answered, that he knew what was necessary for himself and his subjects, and
that according to the cause, and for their good and tranquillity, he had made
and changed his ordinances, as all Princes in Christendom use to do: and that
for his part, having the fear of God, and the love of his subjects lively
engraven in his heart, he would do nothing against the honor of his
conscience, nor the fatherly care he had of his people. With which answer they
returned not well pleased.

This year, Augustus Duke of Saxony, one of the Princes Electors, The death
of Augustus.
being of the age of 60. years, and was buried at Friberge. Genebrardus.

There died likewise at the same time, Margarite of Austria, the base daughter
of Charles the fifth, and mother of Alexander Duke of Parma, and Governor of
Belgia.

Charles Count Palatine married Dorithie the daughter of William Duke of
Brunswick, at Cella. D. Chytraeus.

On the fourth day of June, L. Edward, Earl of Rutland, went Ambassador into
Scotland, for a ratificatio^ of a firm bond of peace between Elizabeth Queen
of England, and James the sixth, K. of Scots, upon certain causes necessary and
important, which was confirmed at Barwicke the 19. of June, where the
Ambassadors of Scotland were likewise present. I. Vowell.

The 16. of July, not far from Barwick, the borderers of both the Nations of
England and Scotland assembled to determine for recompense of all such
injuries, as each people offered to other, at what time the Lord of Fernhurst.
Warden of the Scottish borders, James Steward, Earl of Arrane, then
Chauncelor, and Sir (...) Russell Knight, Lord Russell, and Sir I. Forster
Knight, Warden of their middle Marshes. came with their company. When the
Wardens were set upon the bench, there did suddenly arise amongst the people a
contention, whereby followed at the first, some small fray, which being
perceived by the Lord Russell, The death of the L. Russel.
he arose from the bench, and called for his horse, who meaning to appease the
matter, went amongst the prease, at what time a certain number of shot coming
on him, he was suddenly (but most unjustly) slain with a piece amongst the
rest, discharged against him by a Scot, borne about that place (suspected by
the most, to be the Lord of Fernhursts brother) The loss of which noble
Gentleman, being of so great a hope, was much lamented, and that especially for
his untimely death, so injuriously by the Earl of Arrane (as the common report
went) procured and so suddenly performed, he in the 35. year of his age, did
bereave the Realm of England of a goodly young person, well stayed in
government, bountiful, wise, and virtuous, whose death happened the day before
that his honorable father the Earl of Bedford, departed this world. I. Hooker.

Heluetians.
Fourteen thousand Heluetians who were Catholics, and commanded to appear
by the King of Navarre, went to the aid of the holy League: but before they
took their journey, they all received the Sacrament, and swore that they did
bear Arms only for the defense of the Catholic faith: but if the king
should be found to do any favor to the Heluetians, they promised to lay down
their weapons and return. Anth. Cicarella.

A Parliament was held in November, both for the continuing of the defense of
the low Countries against the King of Spain: and as for the determining of
the treacherous practices of the Queen of Scot, she was forthwith conveyed to
Foderinghay Castle, in Northampton Shire, The death of the Queen of Scots.
which sometimes belonged to the Dukes of Lancaster; where being tried by the
Nobles of the Realm, she was found guilty, and afterward beheaded.

She was crowned Queen of Scots when she was but 18. months old, and after in
the sixth year of her reign called into France, where at 15. years she was
married to Frances the second: then the Dolphin of France being 14. years of
age, with whom she lived three years. After whose decease, she returned into
Scotland, and was married to Henry Arlye, at the age of 22. by whom she had one
only son, Ieames the sixth, now king. This husband dead, she was married the
third time to the Earl of Bothuell, who died in prison; after this, she lived
18. years in England. Genebrardus.

Gulielmus Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua, departed this life, whom his only son
Vincentius succeeded, being of the age of 25. years. Idem.

Sir F. Drake returned out of America, came into Zeland, the other fleet went
toward India, who took two ships out of S. Thomas I Will, and the Governor
thereof. The one of them perished, the other was brought home a rich prize.

This year at Zutphen in Gilderland. S. Phillip Sidney, The Death of S. Ph.
Sidney
Englands Mars and Muse, was shot in the thigh with a Musket, whereof he died.
His body was conveyed into England, and honorably buried in Powles. I. Vowell.

Frederick king of Denmark, solicited by the king of Navarre for aid against
Guise, sent his Ambassadors to Henry king of France, who should entreat that
the peace of the reformed Religion, granted before by the king, and confirmed
by oath, might be kept with the king of Navarre and his followers D. Chytraeus.

At Augusta, after the superintendent was cast out, Augusta.
the estate of the Ministers of the Church, waxed every day worse. For after
that, the Gregorian Calendar was received of them, the pontifical Magistrate
assured to himself authority and right of choosing and calling the Ministers
of the Church, which privilege the Elders and Governors of the Church had
before, with the Ministry, and held it by the authority of the Emperor, who
sent Commissioners to that end into the City. But when the Ministers of the
Church would not agree to them, they were all commanded to depart the City
before Sun set, and others of the same confession were called from Noriberga
and other places, and substituted in their places. Whom when the people could
not hear, nor use their service, the pontifical Magistrate besides the
garrison that was already in the town, brought more soldiers, thereby to
terrify them, and bring them to obedience. D. Chytraeus.

Julius Bishop of Wurtzeburg began to use great cruelty toward them of the
confession of Augusta, in his Diocesses, banishing many of them, and
constraining them to sell their goods in so short a space that they left the
third part to him. William Lantsgraue of Hesse his neighbor, dissuaded him
from this cruelty; but following the example of Balthazar Abbot of Fulden, who
greatly persecuted his subjects under the praetext of Religion: he not only
incurred the hatred of all men, but was deprived of all titles and dignities.
Idem.

Bathorus dies.
This year upon the 27. of September, Stephen Bathorus King of Poland, Prince
of Transiluania, died when he had reigned 10. years.

Him followed in this way of all flesh, Mahomet (the servant of God) King of
Persia, who all his reign held war with the Turk with equal fortunes. And
in Saxony Frederick Duke of Saxony.

James K. of Scots, besieged and taken.
The 20. of October, James the King of Scots was besieged by his subjects, and
taken in the Castle of Saint Damian. Those Dukedomes and Seignories which many
years before John Basilides Prince of Moschouites had taken from the
Polanders, the aforesaid Stephen recovered again, and annexed them to the
crown, he showed himself of a dauntlesse spirit against the Turk, for when
according to the ancient custom, he demanded certain Forces to maintain his
wars against the Sophy of Persia, he denied him, saying that the white Eagle
of Poland which before was unfeathered, and of no force, was now become young
again, full fledged, and had whet and sharpened her bill and talents. Anch.
Cicar.

This year Master Thomas Cauendish began his voyage about the world, upon the
twenty one of July, M. Caue^dish voyage about the world.
entering in at the straight of Magellan, and returning by the Cape bona
Speranza; Which voyage he finished to the space of two years, and less then
two months, arriving at Plimmouth the ninth of September. 1588. Master
Richard Haklnit.

In the beginning of this year, Sir William Standley traitorously yielded up
those Towns of the which he was made Governor by the Earl of Leicester.

After the death of Stephen King of Poland, Contention about the election of
the king of Poland
the Polanders were careful for the election of a new. Some thought it best to
offer it to the Emperor, who had succeeded without any other election his
Father Maximilian, the chosen King of Poland, If he had come to the possession
thereof. Some proposed the Duke of Parma, because he was a wise and valiant
soldier, and for that he was the Nephew of Cardinal Farnese, who when he was
Protector of this Realm, was very kind and liberal to the people. Many had
liking to the Prince of Transiluania, and to Cardinal Bathoraeus, and the Duke
of Ferrrara. Nobles likewise were desirous of it, amongst whom Samoscius the
high Chancellor (whom Stephen had preferred to such height of honor that
nothing was thought wanting in him for the perfection thereof but the title of
a King) was thought most fit. But all these were excluded, and there were yet
two other competitors, Sigismond Prince of Suecia, and Maximilian Archduke of
Austria, and brother to the Emperor.

Maximilian is chosen of the one part; Maximilian. Sigismond.
Others proclaimed med Sigismond, a young Prince of twenty years of age, or
there-about.

These two were both called to the possession of a kingdom, who hearing
thereof made speedy haste thereto. Maximilian first came with his Army,
consisting of sixteen thousand horse and foot, and pitched his Tents in a
field near the City of Craconia, and sent to the Citizens that he might be
crowned. The Cracouians would by no means admit him, but sent Letters to the
Prince of Suetia, that he would come, who with great joy was received and
crowned. Now the Polanders thought themselves strong enough for the
Muschouites, whose Duke they called the Dragon of the North, and against whom
they bear an innated hatred. Chytraeus. And. Cicarell. Genesis

D. of Guise.
The Duke of Guise perceiving the Army of Rutters to be a body dispearced,
having nothing but the legs and Arms, executed upon them that, which he had
determined from the first day of their entry, which was upon the Generals
lodging, and so by striking the shepherd, divided the flock, as Caesar did at
the battle of Pharsalia.

The Pope, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Sauoy, made fires of joy, and
pronounced the praises of the Duke of Guise. The Pope sent him a sword engraven
with burning flames. The Duke of Parma had sent him his Arms, saying: that
among all the Princes of Europe, it belonged only to Henry of Lorraine to bear
Arms, and to be a commander in the wars.

Max. taken prisoner.
After many broiles between these two elected Kings of Poland, Max* was
constrained to leave Poland, but he was pursued by Samoscius the Chauncelor,
and at Pitscha he besieged him and took him prisoner.

Maria de la Visitatione.
In this year, 1588. Maria de la Visitatione, Prioresse of the Monastery de
Annu^ciada in Lisbone, was held for wonderful holy: whose hypocrisy and false
miracles were discovered, and publicly condemned. Her the fond people called
the holy Nun. Another Franciscan (I should have said a Dominican) a feawe
years since, rose up in Lisbone, who they said had the five wounds of Christ,
as had S. Francess: and many other things they say of her. One Stephen de
Lusignan, a Dominican Friar, who collecting all he could get to extol her,
compiled a book in French, and dedicated the same to the Queen of France,
Imprinted at Paris by John Bessant 1586. In the beginning of the book, she is
pictured like a Dominican Nun, with a black mantle, and a white roll, a
coat, and white loose habit upon the Mantle, and on her head a crown of
thorns: the Crucifix on high set over her, and falling toward her, with rays
from the wounds which reach to the feet and hands of the Nun, that out of the
same comes a heart, which she holds betwixt the fingers of her right hand:
a Dragon she has under her feet, a Dominican Friar before her kneeling, and a
secular man and woman: and at her left side, a pair of Beads hanging. The
title of the book is this. The great miracles, and the most holy wounds, which
this present year have happened to the right reverend mother, now Prioresse of
the Monastery de la Anunciada, in the City of Lisbon, in the Kingdom of
Portugal, of the order of preaching Friars, approved by the reverend Father,
Friar Lewis de Granada, and by other persons of credit M. Cyp. Val.

So famous was the holiness of this Nun, that Cardinal Albertus of Austria,
sent information to Pope Sixtus the fifth. To whom the Pope wrote this Letter.
With great joy have we read that thou have procured to be written, the
virtues of the Prioresse of the Monastery Anunciada, of the most holy Virgin.
And of the great benefits which God has showed her, we pray thy divine
goodness from day to day, to make her more worthy of his grace, and to enrich
her with his heavenly gifts, for the glory of his name, and joy of his
faithful. Given in S. Mary's at Rome, with the little Ring of the fish.

Frederick the second, king of Denmark, the 30. year of his reign, and 54.
of his age, departed this life at Arderfoa in Zeland: whom Christian the
fourth, of eleven years of age succeeded.

In the month of April, K. Phillip asks counsel of Maria de la Visitatione
1588. Phillip the second of that name, King of Spain, pretending to send his
invincible Fleet for the conquest of England, made choice by the advice of the
Prioresse of the Monastery of the Anunciada, whose name was Mary of the
visitation, as most worthy for her holiness, to bless his Standard royal,
the which she did, with using diverse other ceremonies, and in the delivery
thereof to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, who was appointed the chief General,
she did pronounce openly good success and victory to the Duke, in saying he
should return a victorious Prince. This standard was carried in procession by
Dan Francisco de Gordoua, who was a Spaniard, and the tallest Gentleman that
could be found, he being on horseback, to the end it might be better
seen. At the solemnizing whereof, there was such a number of people assembled,
that diverse of them perished in the thro^g. There was present the Archduke
Albertus, Cardinal and Governor of the kingdom of Portugal, the Popes
Nuncio the Archbishop, who was head Inquisitor, with diverse other Nobles,
Prelates, and Gentlemen. This solemnization dured so long that Albertus fainted
with fasting, and his holy Nun to comfort him, caused a mess of the broth
which was for her own diet to be brought, who presented it to him, which he
accepted most willingly, coming from the hand of so holy a Nun: but the next
year all her holiness false miracles, and great dissimulations was then found
out, and she condemned and punished for the same. M. Cyp. Val.

The Spanish Navy.
The Navy of the King of Spain three whole years in furnishing, was 125.
great ships, with 20000. choice soldiers out of Spain and Italy, 10000.
soldiers, 2000. pieces of Ordinance, with all manner of furniture and
provision for six months, at the end of May set out from the haven of Tagus,
and slowly proceeding to the Western coast of Spain, the 30. of June it came
to Coronis, a Port of Spain, toward the farthest North in the bounds of
Gallicia and Asturia, which Ptoloney calls the haven of the Artabrians. The
chief General of the Navy was Alphonsus Peresius, Duke of Medina Sidonia.

The Admiral by sea was Johannes Marsinus Recaldeus of Cantabria. But when hey
had hoisted their sails, scarce out of the sight of the Spanish coast, A
tempest divides them.
a tempest suddenly rising, they were divided and scattered, and with contrary
winds driven into the same and the neighboring havens of Asturia and Biscay.

The King when he understood that the whole Navy met together at Coronis,
commanded that forthwith it should go for England, joining with the Duke of
Parmaes ships in Belgia, and to set the soldiers upon the continent.

S. F. Drake Vice Admiral, followed them close, S. F. Drake.
and took the hindermost that slowly sailed after, and in her, Petrus
Valdesius. The Navy of the Duke of Parma partly by adverse winds hindered, and
partly by a Navy of Zeland, that lay before Dunkerke, in vain any longer
expected of the Spaniards, the Duke of Sidonia cast Anchor near unto Callaice.

Sir Frances Drake the next night filled eight old ships with pitch, brimstone,
and other matter for fire, A strategem.
a great wind blowing on their backs, drove them upon the Spanish Navy. Who
fearing least their ships likewise had been burnt, cut their Anchors and
departed. Whom S. Frances by this stratagem so dispersed and put to flight,
pursued with his balls of fire, and by reason of the greatness and height of
the Spanish ships, feawe of them missed. Of this great Fleet 32. were sunk
and taken by the English, and in them, 10000. soldiers, the rest of the Navy
were thus scattered: two were driven to Flissingam all to beaten and wrackt:
the other after long sailing, returned into Spain. The D. of Parma dismissed
his fleet, cashiered his Mariners, and sent some of the soldiers to the siege
of Bergam Vpsome. D. Chytraeus. M. Gall. Anth. Ciccarella

This year the Duke of Bullen died at Geneua of the age of 25. years.

The most Christian Prince of Conde, The Prince of Conde poisoned.
whom Sixtus the fifth excommunicated and cursed, died of poison.

In the same year, H. of Lotharing, D. of Guise, by the commandment of the
K. of France, was slain at Blois, The Duke of Guise slain.
where the Parliament was held: and the day after the Cardinal his brother. The
Duke was 42. years of age, and was slain in his Clymactetic year.

If Plutarch had lived in these times, he would have compared him to C. Julius
Caesar. Genebrardus.

This is that wonderful year of the which Johannes Rhegiomontanus the great
Mathematician wrote a Prognostication or Prophecy, almost after that of
Sibilla. Post mill expletos. Idem.

The general troubles and tumults in this year.
The like Johannes Stofflaus a famous Astrologian, and in our time that noble
Gentleman Johannes Rantzoutus, foretold in his book of Climacterike years,
and the fall of Empires. Whose Prophecies have sorted to try events, which we
have seen this year.

Poland.
First the kingdom of Poland was most miserably troubled by civil and intestine
wars, by reason of four Kings they had at once in this year. Sigismond of
Suecia, Maximilian of Austrich, Henry Valois, and Stephen Bathor, as then
unburied. So likewise Suecia was vexed by sundry tumults; Frederick the second
being dead, four Protectors governed the kingdom during his sons minority.
Q of Scots. England. Turks.
The Queen of Scots was beheaded. England obtained a wonderful victory at sea
over the Spaniards. The Sophie of Persia dyed. The Turk had ill success in
Hungary against the Christians. The Hungarians likewise suffered great losses.
Italy.
Maximilian taken captive by the Polanders was committed to prison. Italy was
sore molested by the Bandetti. France was incombred with civil broils.
Germany brought to sleep by her old religion, imbraceth now that face of
religion. And to be brief, from the rising of the Sun, to the setting
thereof, there was no place in the which somewhat happened that was not worthy
to be wondered at. See Genebrardus.

Guise.
The death of the Duke of Guise and of his brother, caused many, and the most
principal Cities of France, as Paris, Roan, Lions, Tholous, and others, to
rebel against the King. M. Cyprian. Val.

After that the King of France had commanded the D. of Guise to be slain, The
Pope angry with Henry the 3.
and his brother Cardinal to be strangled, he committed likewise to prison
Charles Cardinal Burbon, Legate Apostolic, Peter Archbishop of Lions, and
heir of the Duke of Guise, which when the Pope understood, he took it
grievously, and in the highest Consistory, made an oration thereof to his
Cardinals. About this matter, not long after he sent an Ambassador to H. of
France, to entreat for the delivery of the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the
Archbishop of Lions: to whom was answered, that for the Cardinal, he might by
no means be delivered, for that his enlargement would stir sedition: and as
touching the Archbishop, that it was not in him to do, when that Guastius, who
had charge of the Castle of Ambois, and the prisoners, now being treated Lord
thereof, no prisoner could be dismissed without paying his ransom, When the
Pope had often in vain solicited the K. and was denied, he thus decreed, He
threatens excommunication.
that if at a certain time the King did not deliver them, and thirty days
after their enlargement, certify it to the Apostolic Sea by his Letters,
under his own hand and seal, that forthwith he was excommunicated, and did
incur all Ecclesiastical censures, which are read in the holy Canons, in the
general and particular constitutions, and in the Bull of the Supper of the
Lord. This also was determined against all those which were of his counsel or
aid, or any way had assisted him in the premises. Besides, he cited the King
himself, that within the space of 60. days, which should begin from the day
of the notice to the king: that he in his own proper person, or some one
especially in his place, should come to Rome, there to yield reason wherefore
he caused the Duke of Guise to be slain, and held in prison the Cardinal and
Archbishop: and that the rest that were sommoned, should come themselves
without deputies: to this also he added, that none of them, nor the king
himself, no not in case of conscience, the hour and days of death excepted,
and not then to be absolved, unless he obeyed, and satisfied the Church in
all things which he was enjoined to do. Without this promise he might not be
absolved, not in the full Iubily, or the holy mark of the Cross, any
indulgence, power, or privilege whatsoever, to him or his predecessors before
granted notwithstanding. Anth. Cicarella.

The Huguenots in their writings published at that time, Huguenots.
acknowledged not that action of the thirteenth of December, as a clap of
thunder, that makes more noise then it does hurt, nor as a disgrace of
fortune, whereunto the greatest personages are most subject* but as a work of
God, and as one of the most notable works that he had wrought for them,
thereby beginning to work their revenge, for the massacre of S. Bartholomewes
day, and to relieve them out of the miserable state wherein they stood.

Rodolphe, treated with the Polanders about the delivery of Max. Archduke of
Austria, in the territories of Silesia and Polonia at Beutena. Where upon
certain conditions to be by him performed, he was enlarged without ransom.
D. Chytreus.

The death of the Queen of France.
Upon Twelfe eve, Katherine de Medices, the daughter of Laurentius de Medices,
D. of Vrbin, and Magdelen the daughter of the E. of Bononie and Auerina, the
wife of H. the 2. King of France, and mother of the French K. H. 3. in the 70.
year of her age, and fifth day of her sickness, died at Blois. Genebrardus.

This year, 1589. the holy Nun before spoken of, was found to be a
counterfeit. Wherefore the Lords pronounced sentence against her, in the
Monastery of the mother of God, of the order of S. Francis, in the City of
Lisbone. And for that she had not dealt with, nor inuocated the devil, they
adjudged her to perpetual imprisonment. M. Cyp. Val.

The king of France excommunicated.
The Pope Sixtus 5. excommunicateth the K. of France. The K. came upon Paris,
and besieged it straightly. The Parisians. seeing themselves in that estate,
resolved of no other remedy for deliverance of their present misery, but to
kill the king. To him that would kill him, they did promise great rewards.
Amongst all these, was a Iacobine Friar, called Jacques Clement, borne in a
Village called Sorbone, near Seins, having passed through the hands of certain
Confessors, and conferred with some Jesuits and others, was for a kind of
dexterity in him observed, found meet to strike so great a stroke. He was
urged and put forward therein; and in the end the D. Demaine, the sister of
Montpensier, and other, had conference with him in diverse places, they
requested him to persevere in this good determination, which they knew to rise
in him by extraordinary inspirations to perform so renowned a service to the
holy union, the Catholic Church and his Country. They caused the zealous
Sorbonists and Jesuits to preach, that the people should yet have patience for
7. or 8. days, and they should see some wonderful matter come to pass, that
should make well with the union. The Preachers of Roan, Orleance, and Amiens,
preached the like at the same time, and in semblable terms. The Friar having
taken order for his complot, departed from Paris, and went toward S. Clouis. He
being presented to speak to the K. the 1. of August, said that he had Letters
from the President of Harlay, and credence on hs part: the K. caused him to be
called into his chamber, where there was no other but the L. of Belle-good, and
the procurer General, The K is slain by a Iacobin Friar.
whom he procured to retire a part. The Friar perceiving himself alone, and
opportunity put into his hand, confirming his countenance more and more, drew
out of one sleeue a paper, which he presented to the K. and out of the other,
poisoned knife, with which, violently he sheathed a thrust within the kings
small ribs: who feeling himself wounded, plucked the knife out of the wound,
wherewith he struck the Friar above the eye, and thereupon some gentlemen
rushing in, could not contain, but murdered the murderer, although the king
commanded the contrary. This Friar after, for his bloody deed was canonized a
Saint.

In the annagransme of his name, Friar Jacques Clement, The Death of the king of
France, H. the 3.
were found these words in so many letters: C'est l'enfer quim'a cree: which
signifies: It is hell that created or brought me forth. The K. died ye next
morning following: but before his departure, he named the K. of Navarre his
brother, lawful successor to the Crown, exhorted his subjects to obey him, to
remain united, and to refer the difference of religion, to the convocation of
the estates general of the Realm, who would think upon convenient remedies
for the same, to have a care of religion and piety, and pray to God for him:
upon these words he gave up the ghost. Hist. of France. D. Chytraeus.

He lived 37 years, 10 months, and 11. days, he reigned 15. years and two
months, in this Prince failed the Kings of the race of Valois, which had
reigned in France from the year, 1515. to the year, 1589. under their
dominions, almost all the wonders of former ages had been renewed. Whom H. the
4. of the race of Bourbon, succeeded. Genebrardus.

This is worthy of special note. In the month of May, 4. months before he
was slain, a certain learned man being asked by his friends what he hoped of
this H. the third K. Per sorts Virgilianas inquirens, The book of Virgill
being opened, and the 7. verse, which number he chose in his mind* he found,
Olli dura quies oculis, and ferreus vrget
Soninus, in aeternam clauduntur lumina noctem.


The victory of Harens.
After his death, wars began a fresh, betwixt the confederate Catholics, and
the king of Navarre, many hot skirmiges were, at the length, on the tenth of
March, a battle was fought at Harens, where the king had the victory, but not
without the loss of many of his Nobles. The D. Demaine presently repaired his
Host, but the K. converted all his Forces against Paris, The siege at Paris.
and besieged it, where was so great a famine, that a bushel of wheat was sold
for one hundred and fifty crowns, a mutton for 26. pounds. This siege was
raised by the Duke of Parma: in all this space the Pope sent no succor to the
confederates. Anth. Cicarrella.

Phillip displeased with the Pope.
Phillip K. of Spain, was much displeased with the Pope, for that he would not
aid the confederates, nor excommunicate those Princes and Prelates which
followed the K. of Navarre. The K. therefore urged that there might be a
protestation made thereof against the Pope. But the Pope justified his cause
before the Cardinals, showing that he always behaved himself uprightly in
the French affairs wherefore certain Cardinals were appointed, who should
understand both the causes of ye Popes, and the kings, so that no protestation
might be made. A little before, some difference happened between the Pope and
Count Oliver, the kings Ambassador: for that cause the K. sent the D. of
Soisson for the French businesses, but what time this Legate came, he was
fallen very sick, so that no conference was had about so weighty a cause.
Anth. Cicarr.

This Sixtus was very covetous, for he sold many offices which before were
given gratis.

When news came to him Rome of the King of France his death, he made a solemn
oration in the Consistory of Cardinals the 11. of September, 1589. where he not
only compared the treason of this cursed Iacobine Friar, with the act of
Eleazar and of Judith, but said also that it surpassed the^. Of Eleazar is made
mention 1. Machab. 6. who seeing an Elephant more mighty then the rest, armed
with the Arms of the king, supposing that King Antiochus was upon him, to
deliver his people, and purchase eternal glory, he adventured himself, and
ran courageously to the Elephant, through the midst of the squadron, killing
on the right hand and on the left, and all sides throwing down, until he came
under the Elephant, and placing himself under him, slew him: the Elephant fell
to the ground upon him, and there he died, Judith cut off the head of
Holophernes. The war that Antiochus and Holophernes made against the people
of God, was most unjust: the war which H. the 3. made against the League which
had co^spired against him, to kill him, was most just, so that herein was he no
tyrant.

This Pope likewise not thus satisfied, forbad that any obsequies and honors
accustomed to be made for the dead, should be made for him; and commanded
also, that they should nor pray for him. M. Cyp. Valerian.

This year in the month of April, A Fleet for Lisbone.
the Queen of England commiserating the wrong of D. Antonio, the exiled King
of Portugal, sent a well appointed Navy to Vlisbone, under the conduct of Sir
F. Drake, and Sir I. Norris. Where they took many Spanish ships, richly laden
with all manner of Merchandise. The^ landing their soldiers, they took
Cascais, a neighboring Town to Lisbone, and a Suburb. But the plague
increasing in their ships, they went no further, but returned for England: and
by the way forbidden the coasts of Germany, by reason of their contagious
sickness, many of them died miserably.

This Pope through the devotion and request of the most Catholic K. of
Spain, Friar Lewis de Baltram.
ordained to be made the process of the miracles of Friar Lewis de Beltram in
Aragon, one of the order of the Friars of S. Dominicke, to put him in the
number and Catalogue of the Saints. M. Cyp. Val.

Priests recanted.
William Tedder and Anthony Tirrill, Seminary Priests, recanted their erroneous
opinions at Paul's Cross.

This year in Italy fell such store of rain, as never was remembered the like
before. And at Rome was a great abundance of waters, that Tybris could not be
held within his bounds, but twice breaking forth, so ouerflowed the City, that
they went up and down the streets in boats. At Venice (which contains in
circuit 8. Italian miles, 25. Islands, Parishes 62. Monasteries 41. and 400.
common bridges, which every year receives only out of custom and toll,
twenty hundred thousand Ducats, which is a City in the midst of the Sea,
built upon piles, without walls, and most famous throughout all the world) the
Adriatique Sea did so arise, that the channels of the city with the abundance
of the water fallen, did so rage and swell, that they had no other thought but
the whole City would have bin drowned. Genebr. After this, followed a great
dearth. Cicar.

Anne, the sister of Christian the 4. K. of Denmark, daughter of Frederick the
2. is married to James the 6. K. of Scots. D. Chytr.

In the higher Germany, Johannes Starmius Rector of the University of
Strasbourge, a very learned and studious man, departed this life the 92. year
of his age. Idem.

The Popes great treasure
Pope Sixtus, the first year of his Popedom, laid up in the Castle of S.
Angelo, ten hundred thousand Ducats, with this decree, that no part of this
treasure might be expended, or errogated, unless it were in the recovery of
the holy Land, or a general expedition against the Turk; and not then, till
the Armies were over the Sea, and upon the Turkish shore. Or that there were
such an exceeding dearth and scarcity, or pestilence, or some Christian
Province were in distress, or like to fall into the hands of the Infidels, and
enemies of the Church, which cannot be recovered without money. Anth.
Cicarrella.

An heretic burned.
Frances Ket, M. of Art, of Wimondham in Norfolk, was conuented before Edmund
Bishop of Norwiche, for holding diverse detestable opinions against Christ our
Savior, and was therefore burned nigh the City.

This year died Johannes Sturmius in high Germany, being of the age of four
score and two years: he was Rector of the University of Argentine, a very
learned and religious man.

In the same year, and for the same use, the Pope laid up ten thousand
Ducats more, for the recovery of some kingdom in the possession of the
enemies of the Church of Rome: to these two treasures he added thirty hundred
thousand more, so that after his death were left about five Millions, 1.500000.
Crowns. Anth. Cicarrella.

In the month of January, The marriage of the King of Scots.
the marriage of the king of Scots Anne the daughter of Fred. the 2. was
solemnized with great and royal pomp at Crouebourge. Genebrardus.

All Saxony this year was in quiet.

In the beginning of March, the Duke de Maine with all his troops came to the
River of Seine, thereby to pass over the bridge of Mante, whereof the king
being advertised, The battle at Yurie.
provided for his affairs, and the 12. of the same month, he set forward to
meet his enemies: and at Yurie he did many notable exploits, and had the
victory. Of the horsemen there were about fifteen hundred slain and drowned,
and about 400. taken prisoners. Amongst the dead was known to be slain, the
E. of Egmont, who was Colonel of the troops, sent by the Duke of Parma: one
of the Dukes of Brunswicke, Chastegueray with others. More then 20. Coronells
of horsemen was at this time won by the K. among the which was the white
Cornet, the chief standard belonging to the Spanish General, and to the
Flemings: the Cornet of the Rutters, and more then 60. Ensigns of footmen,
besides the 24. Ensigns of the Switzers, which were yielded presently after
the slaughter. In this battle of Yurie, all the footmen of the Leaguers were
overthrown.

The King lost the Lords of Cleremount, d' Antragues, Captain of his Guards,
the Lord Scliomberge, de Bongualuay, de Crenay, Fesquieres, and 15. or 20.
other Gentlemen, a few soldiers, and a few hurt. D. Chytraeus.

The 10. of May, Charles Cardinal Bourbon, The death of Carls Bourbon.
proclaimed K. by the co^federates of the League, by the name of Charles 10.
died at Fountnay, being in prison. The same learned man that prophesied of H.
the 3. his death, being asked likewise by a friend, whether this Charles should
be K. of France or no, he opened his Virgill again, and pronounced this verse
which was next at hand. Cedat ius proprium regi, patriaeque remittat. This was
done the 19. of August, 1589. Genebrardus.

The death of Sixtus. 5.
The 27. of August, whilst the Parisians did strive with famine and death, Pope
Sixtus the 5. died at Rome.

This Pope made a Decree that there should not be above 70. Cardinals at once,
and amongst them, 4. Doctors of Divinity, who should be chosen out of the
Regulars Mendicant, and that the Cardinal should be created in the month of
December. For from Clement 6. this custom began in December, and continued in the
church above 600. years after Christ. This Pope notwithstanding brake this
decree when he created Cardinals, Allen and Morosine, who he made out of this
time. Besides, he decreed that the number of 70. should never be full, but there
should always be some void places. He made many new holy days in the Church,
as the presentation of the glorious virgin Mary, of S. Frances, of Paula, S.
Nicholas, of Tollentius, S. Anthonius, of Padua, S. Placid, and his fellow
Martyrs, Eutichius, Victorinus, brothers of those Cardinals, and his sister
Flauia, whom he commanded to be put in the Roman Calender. Anth. Ciccarella.

A dissension happened between the Legate of Spain and France, about the Popes
canonizing of Didaco in the Church of S. Peter. Idem.

Whilst the Sea was void, by reason of some who would have pulled down a
statue, which was erected to this Pope in the Capitol; the Romans decreed
that no Pope afterward should have any statue set up during his life.

Urban. 7.
Urban Pope, the 7. before called John Baptist, borne at Rome, of the house of
Castagnea, which was one of the noblest houses in Genoa, Sixtus always loved
this house well, and greatly approved his judgment, which he used in all his
serious affairs. A little before he died, when Pears were set upon the table,
he took one of them and cut in the midst, and found it rotten, likewise an
other, and found it so too, then he said, these Pears are loathsome, let them
be changed for Chest-nuts; by the Pears signifying himself, for that he
issued from the stock of the Piretts, and in his Arms did bear Pears: by the
Chest-nuts he meant the Cardinal, who descended from the house of Castagnea or
Castanea, and bare in his Scutcheon a Chestnut in chief. This Pope would be
called Vrbanus, either for that he much affected the precedent Popes of this
name, or that he might signify, that he was borne at Rome, for Vrbs with the
Romans per Automasiam, signifies Rome. Or for that he had determined to use
all sorts of men gently. Anth. Cicce. Genebrardus. D. Chytraeus.

Upon the day of his election, there happened a wonderful Earthquake at Vienna
in Austria, and in many Towns of Morauia and Bohemia.

This year dyed Iacobus Andrens, Chauncelor of the University of Tubing, who
reformed many Churches of the Princes and Cities in Germany. And Hieronimus
Mencetius a reverend old man, when he had governed the churches of the County
of Mansfeeld thirty years. Likewise Paulus Mathias Bishop of Roscilda in
Denmark, a most learned man and religious. And Johannes Areuarius, who set
forth the Hebrew Lexicon.

The next day after his election he fell sick, wherefore he determined in the
evening to remove his Court to the hill of Quirinus, as to a better air; many
Cardinals therefore, Prelates and Lords, came to attend upon him, but when he
was told, that it was against custom to go abroad before he was crowned, he
would not go. The death of Pope Urban.
But his disease increasing so violently upon him, that the 17. of August he
departed this life, having continued in the place 12. days, and in the 70.
year of his age: and was buried in S. Peter's Church. Anth. Ciccer.

The same day that Vrbanus was chosen Pope, there was a great Earthquake in
Vienna, Morauia, and Bohemia, Prage. D. Chytraeus.

A truce was taken for 10. years between the Emperor of the Turks
Amurathes, and the King of Persia. Magus Bragadinus.


Marcus Bragadinus a Grecian borne, first a Franciscane, then a Capuchine a
notable cosoner, was executed at Monaca in Bauaria. This fellow professed at
Venice the art of making gold, neither did his art or cunning deceive him, for
he made so much gold that he gave away whole wedges to his friends, making no
more account of gold then of brass or Iron. He lived princelike, and kept a
great train, and by his excellency in the art Magic, drew the hearts of
many of the greatest Nobles in Italy to him, so that he was called an other
Paracelsus. When his name was thus spread far and near, at the length he came
to Monaca, the D. of Bauaria his court. Who soon finding out his deceits and
devilish arts, cast him into prison, and when the D. commanded that he should
be examined upon the rack, he desired that he might not be tortured, saying
that he would confess all he had done voluntarily; with request that it might
not be published. He likewise said that he had deserved death, but desired that
his concubine Signora Caura and her family might be conveyed safe and harmless
into Italy. This sentence then was pronounced upon him: First that a couple of
dogs whom he had abused in his diabolical art, should be shot, and himself
to be hanged. The next day a new gibbet was set up covered all over with
copper, and in the midst of it an halter, likewise wrapped with copper, by
which sign his cosoning in making Gold might be signified. Near the gallows
a high scaffold was set up and covered with black cloth, upon it a chair
where Marcus Bragadinus was placed, and after a speech made he was executed. M.
G. Belgicus.

D. de Maine
The Duke de Maine being in the D. of Parmaes court, writ diverse Letters to the
borderers of Picardie, that shortly they should see a puissant army for the
deliverance of Paris. Afterward the D. de Nemours being the Popes Legate, the
Ambassador of Spain, the Bishop of Paris, the Archbishop of Lions, the Bishop
of Plaisance, those of Remes, Senlis, and others, Bellarmin and Tyceus,
Jesuits, with many more of the Roman Clergy, caused solemn processions to
be made, double fastings, brotherhoods, visitations of Temples, vows and
supplications, and all to entertain and hold the people in a vain hope of
deliverance; but all this while famine made war against the Parisians.

Gregory 14. before called Nicholas, was borne at Millaine, Gregory 14
his fathers name was Frances Sfondrate, of an ancient and wealthy family. He
was elected Pope in the place of Vrbane.

The 8. day of January he instituted a Iubily, and commanded Anth. Cicca. A
Iubily.


After this he made Gcnerall of the Churches army, Count Sfondrate his nephew,
and sent him with an army into France, to the maintenance of which war, he
contributed five hundred thousand ducats, besides other 40000. pounds of his
own. He created his nephew Duke of Mount Marian, the which state, for that the
great D. of Florence for his conspiracies and rebellion against the church was
put to death, was now void by confiscation, and therefore the Pope said he might
bestow it where he thought good.

A great and dangerous tumult happened at Cracouia, A tumult at Cracouia about
religion.
(the king himself being there) under the name of religion, chiefly by certain
scholars, who egged on by their masters the Jesuits, assaulted violently
such houses where the exercise of religion different from the Popes were
celebrated. This was soon appeased by the magistrates, but the third night
when they thought all had been quiet, they gathered their companies together
and set fire on the house. D. Chytraeus.

The Princes and Roman Catholic Lords which were the Kings partakers,
persuaded with him to frame himself to the exterior profession of the
religion, and by the D. of Luxembourg, who had before made a voyage unto Rome
in their name, they practiced with the Pope to that end. On the contrary side
the Protestant Lords, beseeched the king to have them in remembrance, who were
so faithfully employed for him. Other of his Council pressed upon him, to
provide for his peaceable subjects, as well of the one as of the other religion.
Also that he would prevent the new attempts of the Pope and his adhaerents
against France. And these solicitations begat an Edict for the upholding of
the two religions in his kingdom. D. Chytraeus.

An act was made by the high Court of Parliament at Chalouns and at Tours,
against the Popes Bulls, his Nuntio, An act against the Popes bulls
and his Legate in France. This likewise was proclaimed; We have proclaimed,
and do proclaim Pope Gregory the 14. of that name, an enemy to the common
peace, to the union of the Roman Catholic Church, to the King, and to his
roial state, adhearent to the conspiracy of Spain, a favorer of rebels,
guilty of the most cruel, most inhumane, and most detestable parracide,
traitorously committed on the person of Henry the 3. of most famous, most
Christian, and most Catholic memory.

Christian Duke of Saxony, Prince Elector, died of the age 31. years. D.
Chytraeus.

The death of Gregory 14.
Gregory the 14. fell now sick of a quotidian Fever, he was also troubled
with a continual flix and the stone, whereof he dyed, and was buried in the
Chapel of the Gregory's in S. Peter's Church. He sat in the seat ten
months, and as many days, and it was vacant 15. days. Anth. Cicca.

A Dearth.
In this time there was a great dearth through the most part of Italy, and
other Christian Provinces: after which followed a great plague. There dyed in
Rome from August 1590. unto the end of August the year following 1591.
threescore thousand. Idem.

Innocent 9.
Innocent the 9. before called Antonius Fachiuertus, Cardinal of the 4. holy
Crowns. He was borne at Bononia, and before he was Cardinal, by Pope
Gregory made Patriarch of Jerusalem.

Fredericus Wilelmus Duke of Saxony, and Johannes Georgius Elector and
Marquess of Brandebourge, had the Protectorship of Christians son: these no
further urged his mandates concerning Religion, and recalled home many
Ministers of the Church and Superindents who had not obeyed them, and therefore
banished by him, a little before his death. D. Chytraeus.

The escape of the Duke of Guise.
The Duke of Guise by a cord which was given him, wherewith sliding down out of
a window, escaped out of prison, and fled to the Lord de la Chastre.

The great Chancellor of Poland Zamoscius, rebelled against his liege Lord, with
an Army of 30000. men.

The death of Innocent. 9.
Pope Innocent the 9. being 70. years of age, and having ruled two months and
odd days, dyed. So that in the space of fourteen months 4. Popes dyed:
Sixtus, Urban, Gregory and Innocent; and it is to be thought, the most, or all
of them dyed of poison. For Brazuto is not dead that gives them poison. This
Brazuto killed 6. Popes with poison, (as it is to be read in the life of
Damasus). The seat was vacant one month, and a day.

Edmond Coppinger and H. Arthington, conferring with one of their sect called
William Hacket, they offered to anoint him king; but Hacket taking Coppinger
by the hand, said: You shall not need to anoint me, for I have been already
anointed in heaven by the holy Ghost himself: then Coppinger asked him what
his pleasure was to be done: Go your way both said he, and tell them in the
City, that Christ Jesus is come with his Fan in his hand to judge the earth.
Which they did in diverse streets, crying also, repent England, repent: and in
Cheapeside got up into a Cart, and preached how this Hacket represented Christ,
that they were two Prophets, the one of mercy, the other of judgment, sent,
and extraordinarily called by God, to assist him in this great work, and were
witnesses of these things. For these misdemeanors and spreading of false
prophecies, as also for his traitorous words against the Queens Majesty,
Hacket was hanged. But Coppinger dyed in Bridewell, and Arthington long after
was reserved in the Counter in Woodstreete, in hope of repentance. I. Stowe.

Hippolitus Aldobrandinus Cardinal, was elected Pope by Clement the eight.
Clement 8.


When Sebastian King of Portugal went with his Army into Africa, he
requested hostage of Muhameth, to whom he delivered his son Mulei Xeques;
him, Sebastian sent Magaza; Xeques Mulei his son becomes a Christian.
but they both being slain in the battle of Alcazar, 1578. Xeques was sent
into Spain, and brought up under King Phillip. At the last this year (having
before by degrees persuaded to become a Christian) was baptized with his
kinsman and other of his Nobles, in the most famous Monastery of S. Laurence,
and vowed ever after to continue true Christians. Genebrardus.

The 16. of January Cassimere Duke Palatine, to the great sorrow and discomfort
of the Church of Geneua, departed this life.

Ladislaus King of Hungary and Boheme, died of the age of 18 years.

This year Amurathes Emperor of the Turks prepared for war against the
Christians. The cause was this. The truce taken was yet kept between the
Emperor and the Turk, to the great quietness of both their subjects. But in
the mean season a peace was concluded between the Turk and the Persian.
Wherefore many of the Turkish Bass^es persuaded their Emperor to make war upon
the Christian, and so forthwith he dispatched a puissant Army into the confines
of Hungary.

The Emperor Rodolphe, although he had this opinion that Amurath would deny
that the truce was broken by him, notwithstanding knowing that it is the Turks
custom not to restore those Cities which they had once taken, makes all the
power he can to resist his Forces. M. G Belg.

William, Lantgraue of Hesse, a most wise virtuous and learned Prince, being
70. years of age departed this world.

William Duke of Brunswicke, the son of Ernestus, a Prince of most sincere
Religion, dyed likewise, leaving behind him seven sons, whom he had by
Dorithie the daughter of Christian, the third King of Denmark. D. Chytraeus.

At this time deceased likewise Johan 3. King of Suetia, the Father of
Sigismond, the 3. King of Poland.

As the Leaguers were promised great things, by the Estates of Paris and the
partakers of Spain; held it for a most certain troth, that the Duke of Parma
would return yet the third time with puissant Forces to do some notable
exployt, thereby to cover the shame of his two former voyages, and so to assure
the K. of France to King Phillip, or to the Princess his daughter. The death
of the Duke of Parma.
But death cut off the thread of his life, together with his enterprises: the 2.
of December, 1592. His body was carried to Parma, and buried without any great
solemnity in the little Chapel of the Cappuchins, with this Epitaphe.
Alexandr Farnesius Belgis diuictis, Francis obsidione leuatis, vt humili hoc
loco cadauer eius reponeretur manaauit 3. nonas December. 1592. Et vt secum Mariae
eius coniugis optimae ossa iungerentur. Genebr.

The Senate and the people of Rome caused his statue to be made and set up in
the Capitol. M. G. Belg.

After much conference, commings and goings, Letters and answers from the
deputy on each side, the supplications of those which desired, in such sort,
that the king who since he withdrew himself from the Court of France, for 15.
years before, had made open profession of the reformed religion, contrary to
the advice of his Ministers, went to see and hear Mass sung in the Cathedral
Church of S. Denis, the 25. Sunday of July, where he was received of the
Archbishop of Bourges, and other Prelates, with certain peculiar ceremonies,
peculiar receiving, which was incontinently published throughout the Realm,
with diverse censures as well of the Catholic nobility, as also of those of
the religion, whereof not one followed this example. The Preachers belonging to
the League, public and privately, before and after the truce, their discourses
at Paris and other places were, that the Mass which they sung before the king,
was but a deceit. That the Pope should not recatholize him: that it was lawful
for the people to rise against him and his officers: that it appertained to the
Sorbonists, to judge whether the Pope ought to receive him as King. And if
peradventure he should do it, nevertheless he might be held for an
heretic, and one excommunicate: that it was lawful for any particular man to
kill him that should say, he was united to the Catholic Roman Church. D.
Chytraeus.

The Parisians, and other Towns, that held for the League, desired that the
King of Spaines daughter might be married to the Duke of Guise, and so be
crowned King and Queen of France.

Ernestus Duke of Pomerian a Prince endued with singular virtues, most
bountiful to the Churches and Universities departed this life, leaving his
successor Philippus Julius, of the age of seven years, who was committed to
the custody and protection of Bogislaus. Chytraeus.

In Poland the marriage of Sigismond the 3. king thereof, The end of the year
1592.
and Anne of Austrich, the daughter of Charles the Archduke, was solemnized.
Idem.

In Belgia Maurice Count Nassau the son of William Prince of Orange, and
Governor of Holland, took the Mount Gertrude, a Town well fortified,
bordering on the confines of Brabant and Holland; when for three months he had
besieged it, and they by force and famine were constrained to yield: although
Petrus Ernestus Count Mansfeeld, (to whom after the death of the Duke of Parma
the king of Spain committed the government of the low Countries) labors in
vain by his forces to raise the siege.

Dissension in Religion.
At Aquisgrane the dissension in Religion raised great tumults: but they of the
reformed Religion had the worst.

The Turk spoiled and delivered many Towns in Hungary and Croalia; but
coming with his Forces to Gomorra, he was most valiantly resisted.

He not only presecuted at this time the Christians, but the Persians also,
(upon some cause unknown the truce being broken) and invaded them with two
hundred thousand men, where he made great havoc sparing none.

The Turks overthrown.
After this the Christians had a notable victory over the Turks in Hungary,
and did kill in fight and put to flight more then five thousand of the Turks.

D. of Guise.
Charles Guise, and Duke de Maine, under the color of restoring the Catholic
religion in France, were confederate with the Pope and the King of Spain,
against Henry the 4. K. of France and Navarre, therefore out of every Province
of the kingdom elected certain Ambassadors to hold a Parliament at Paris,
there to determine and set down for a Catholic king. Pope Clement the eight,
sent Phillip Cardinal of Plaisans. And the King of Spain his Ambassadors. At
this time the King of France was again excommunicated. Afterward the Duke of
Guise, the son of him that was slain by Henry the 3. being of the age of 25.
years, was nominated and elected King by certain of the confederates, but the
Senate and Parliament of Paris not admitting that any one should be King,
unless he were of the blood royal, he was not proclaimed, neither would the
Guise bear the city thereof. D. Chytraeus.

Upon this the King of France as before is declared, barefooted, with a candle
in his hand, went to the Temple of Saint Denis, and being confessed to the
Archbishop of Bourges, The King of France converted.
and absolved of his heresy, had solemn Mass, and removed the Preachers of
his late professed Religion out of his Court.

At Riga in Liuonia, the Kings Commissaries, A motion for recalling of the
Jesuits into Riga.
amongst their affairs of the Estate, urged them for the restoring of the
religion to the same estate it was, determined with king Stephen and the
Churches likewise, that the Jesuits should be again admitted into the Temple
of S. James, and Mary Magdalen, whom the year before the incensed Citizens had
expulsed: So by these means that the Senate and people of Riga should hold all
the other Churches within the City and the suburbs, with all the goods,
profits, and revenues belonging to them. But the Senate and Citizens refusing
to entertain the Jesuits as being most unquiet and turbulent spirits, and the
very brands of discord and sedition; as also the better part of them desirous
to keep and continue in their City one only religion of the confession of
Augusta: Or if they should altogether obey the Kings authority, and the
present necessity of the time and fate; thinking it better the secular
authority as King Stephen had set it down, to be admitted again into the
City then the Jesuits: the matter as then was left in suspense and put over
to the K. and the Parliament of the realm. But the Jesuits being importunate
upon the king, the K. the year following sent one Johannes Ostrouius into the
City, who instructed by the kings commandment, demanded that all those that
were spoiled and eiected of the seditious communaltie, might be put into
possession of their Churches, whose Oration was forthwith answered in the name
of the City and the Senate, by David Hilcheuius their advocate.

The 26. of August, Peter Barrier, alias Bar, Peter Barrier.
borne at Orleans, was prisoner at Melena, where he confessed that he was
seduced by a Capuchin Friar at Lions, by the Curat and Vicar of a certain
parish in Paris, and also by a Jesuit, closely to follow the king, and to
murder him with a two edged knife, the which was found about him: he further
confessed, that two Priests by him nominated, were also come from Lions for the
same intent: and that he set himself the forwardest in the execution thereof,
to the end he might get the greatest honor thereby. For the which he was
executed. At this time was the Duke of Nemours within Lions, from whence he
would not stir, to go to the Estates of the League, although the Pope had
given him commandment: the other chief Captains thought it meet, and his
friends and servants desired him to go, he vouchsafed not so much as to send
unto them, knowing that the Leaguers cast their eyes altogether upon the D of
Guise, and that the D. de Maine his brother by the mothers side, crossed all his
purposes, and would work all means for his death.

A certain bold Friar of Lions, perceiving well that this young Prince
pretended to bring some new matter to pass within the League, whereby he might
at least have some great hand in the government, by the advice of two or three
Counselors, who were of his accomplices, he compassed Lions, with many
Fortresses, which held on his side at Toissai, Vienne, Montbrison, Chastillon,
de Dombres, and other places.

Quilian forsaking him, he bought it with a great sum of money, at the hands
of the Lord of S. Julian, who was Governor thereof. This done, Lion was
enclosed, as well by water as by land. The Lyonnois did not withstand neither
his prodigallities, nor his Counselors, nor his men of war, which forraged
the plain country, receiving the guerdon of their revolt from the kings
obedience. In the end acknowledging themselves, they rose up against the D. of
Nemours, assisted by the presence and counsel of the Archbishop, sent by the
D. de Maine: and the 18. of December. they took hold of Nemours, who was seen
three times at deaths door, committing him to close prison, where he
continued certain months, and at last escaping by cunning means, spoiled of
his succors, chased from his Fortresses, The death of Nemours.
he went and dyed far from France, in a little Town called Aueci situate in
Sauoy, in the Country of Geneuois.

After the solemn funerals of Henry the 3. late King of France were performed
in the Cathedral Church of S. Denis, Henry the 4. King of Navarre, was
publicly proclaimed king. In the mean season the Popes Legate with the
Ambassador of Spain, urged the election of the D. of Guise at Paris, and
cursed the K. of Navarre, for that he s often had fallen, and those Bishops, with
the Archbishop of Bourges, by whom he had bin reconciled to the Church, and
absolved. Likewise at Rome, the Agents and Ministers of the K. of Spain,
solicited the Pope, that he would confirne the excommunication pronounced by
his Legate at Paris: nor would admit any Ambassadors from the hypocritical
king: If he did, they vowed as his Ambassadors came in at one gate, they would
go out at the other.

The 26. of November, the Duke of Neuers came to Rome, sent by the K. of France
for his absolution, whom the Pope entertained with all kindness: but a little
while after, he dismissed him, not denying simply absolution to the K. but
deferring it until he saw more manifest signs of penitence. D. Chytaeus.

The K. of France deliberated to assemble at Mante, certain of the chief
Nobles of the Realm, to take counsel of diverse matters at that time needful.
The deputies of the reformed Churches were there present about the end of
November, whom the king caused to be called together the 12. day of the month
following: and having given them audience, and heard the great sorrow which
they made upon the infinite co^tradictions of his decrees, and the complaints
of the wrongs done unto them through all his Provinces* he answered, that the
change of religion had not any way changed his affection from them; that he
would redress their griefs, and make peace and concord among his subjects.
He received their Bills of complaints, to have them perused. But these
affairs were driven to such length, that the distance of many years has
buried all. And the Captains of the League having plunged the Realm into new
miseries, those of the religion almost in all parts of the kingdom, continued
as grievous under the cross as before.

Sigismond K. of Poland, was persuaded to embrace that religion Sigis. K. of
Poland.
and the confession of Augusta, as it had flourished in ye later time of
Gostauus, and the former days of John the 3. king of Poland: and as it was
received by the States of the land, in the Council of Vpsalem, the year,
1593. by a solemn testification, for the confirmation and defense of the same
religion, he voluntarily offered his oath, which remains upon record.
Chytraeus.

The same day that Sigismond K. of Poland and Vpsalem, was invested with the
crown of Suetia, James the 6. K. of Scots, had a son by Anne his wife, the
sister of Christian the 4. K. of Denmark: to whose christening, the K. of
France, the Q. of England, the K. of Denmark, Count Maurice, H. D. Brunswic,
Vtricus Duke of Magapolis, were invited.

The 9. of April, Ferdina^do E. of Darbie, deceased at Latham.

H. crowned K. of France
Henry the 4. king of France and Navarre, was with great solemnity crowned
king at Chartres. When the last year he sent to the Pope, the D. of Neuers,
for absolution: Pope Clement the eight then answered, that he stood in need of
three fold benefit from the Apostolic Sea: first of absolution in Court of
Conscience: secondly in a lower Court of Conscience, from public
excommunication: thirdly, in the Court of Rehabilitation (as they say) to the
kingdom, for the which before, by reason of his heresies he was held unfit.
Paetrus Mathaeus.

Mathias Archduke of Austria.
Mathias Archduke of Austria, was by the Emperor his brother, chosen General
of the Forces against the Turk, and went to Vienna. Idem. The same time, the
Pope promised to send to the Emperor 5000. footmen, and 500. horsemen; for
the leuying of which, six Tents were gathered of the Clergy throughout all
Italy: which amounted to 600000. crowns. Paetrus Mathaeus.

An expedition against the Turk.
The Princes likewise of Italy, sent their aid to Caesar, every one as they
were able: the great D. of Hetruria 70000. Genoua 40000. the Duke of Ferrara
50000. Luca 20000. Parma 25000. crowns: the Dukes of Mantua and Vrbin, offered
their own persons and forces, against the mighty enemy of Christendom, the
Emperor of Constantinople. Ionsonius.

Note.
At what time many uncertain rumors were spread abroad throughout ye Turkish
kingdoms of the happy success the Christians were like to have in these
wars; Beglerbegus of Greece, whether to know the event, or that he desired
to train the Turkish youth in martial affairs, he gathered together 600 of
them, some of eleven, some twelve and upwards of age, these he armed with
little staves, and brought them into an open field, where he divided them
into two Battles, of the which he commanded one to be called the
Christians, the other the Turks: The one in their fight, to cry Jesus, the
other, Hala, Hala. He willed them both to fight courageously, and promised
rewards to the hardiest. The signal given, both Armies ran together, and
fought so eagerly, that many on both sides were so beaten, that they were
carried away half dead. But they, that called on the name of Jesus, got the
victory, and put their enemies to flight, driving them into the City before
them. Beglerbegus took this as a very evil sign, and as many as were with
him, and greatly feared that the Christians after this would be victors.

Henry King of France, having newly recovered Camerake a Town in Picardie, he
entered into it with great pomp: whom Balignius the Governor of the same
entertained with the Senators and Citizens all armed, on their knees: and to
him they delivered the keys of the City; First the Clergy men did swear,
then the Senators, Nobles, and Citizens, that they would ever become faithful
and obedient to God, the King, and the Christian Catholic Church.

Ernestus Archduke of Austria, offered a peace to the Estates of Holland and
the united Provinces, by his Letters and Ambassadors, protesting therein his
love to Belgia, and his desire for the common tranquillity thereof. But when a
little before a certain privy murderer an Elder of Nemours, that was suborned
by Count Barlymount, by commandment from the Court (as he said) to kill the
Count Maurice of Nassau, was prisoner with the Count of Hage; the States of
Holland and other confedarates, thinking they were not well dealt withal, set
down in writing at large, certain conferences and dealings of the Spaniards
with them concerning peace of late years, but all tending to a fraudulent and
deceitful end; besides they complained that the Spaniards did no way seek
the quietness of the subjects in Belgia and other Christians, but that they
might be Lords, and tyrannize over all as they list. D. Chytraeus.

D. Lopes.
Doctor Lopes a Spaniard and a Physician, practiced in England toward the
Queen, by the instigation of the Earl of Fuentes his countryman, and the
promise of 50000. Crowns, to have poisoned her majesty: but (God be thanked)
in the attempting thereof he was apprehended, with his companions and
associates in the treason; who were Emanuel Lois, and Stephen de Ferera, for
which they were hanged, drawn, and quartered. The aforesaid Earl dealt with
one Emanuel Andrad, to kill the King of France, with the odious smell of a
poisoned Rose.

This is worthy to be noted. The Estates of Holland and the united provinces,
this summer set forth 4. ships well appointed for munition and victual, with
skillful Generals and Captains, toward the North and the East, that leaving
upon the right hand Norwege, Moschouia, and Tartaria, that so they might pass
to Sinae, or the kingdom of China; the Indians, and the Isles of Moloccus. They
having past beyond Condora and Obdora, Regions of the continent to the new
Island, Sembla and Wigatz, and passing through the straites of a narrow sea
(which was 5000. miles long, and but one in breadth, they came to Oby, which is
a Frontier of Tartaria. That narrow sea they called the sea of Nassau: to one
of the Islands they gave the name Holland, to an other of Euchusa, and to the
rest other names. And being commanded to return this summer, they did so, but
the next year determined to go the same voyage and better appointed, for they
hoped to turn the traffic of Spices and other Eastern merchandise, by the
which the Spaniard is so enriched, an other way, by the Northern sea into the
low Countries, and other Provinces of Europe. D. Chytraeus.

The Turks overthrown.
This summer the Turks had a notable overthrow by the Christians.

The Spaniards being desirous to continue the fire of dissension in France,
instantly solicited the Duke de Mercaeur, one of the chief of the League, and
an usurper of a part of the Duchy of Britain, always to continue war. His
sister Loyse d' Vandemont, King Henry the thirds widow, did all she might to
make his peace.

Certain troubles happening in the mean time, brake all that was done. The
Spaniards who were masters of Blauet, a Fortress almost invincible, had
builded during the summer of the year 1594. a strong Fort near unto Croysil,
to stop the entrance to the Port of Breast: which would have bin better for
them, if they had made an other right against it, and on the other side of the
Haven. To hinder them came the Marshall of Aument, and Sir John Norris,
General of the English men, to whom was sent a supply by sea, under the
conduct of Captain Furbusher, they soon became masters of Quinpercouincin,
and of the Town and Castle of Morley. Soon after they assailed the Spaniards
new Fort, and slew four hundred soldiers that kept it, not without loss of
their own men, among other, Captain Frobisher. The King on the other side,
deliberating to make war out of his own Realm against the Spaniards, agreed
with the states of Holland and their confederates, to begin in the Duchy of
Luxenbourge, where the Marshall of Bouillon, who married one of the daughters
of the deceased Prince of Orange, and E. Philip of Nassau, assaied to enter in
the month of October, where they found all the passages shut up, and Earl
Charles of Mansfeeld making head against them, especially on the troops of
Holland. The King on the other side, sought to ouerrunne the Frontiers of
Picardie, and gave the Estates of Artois and Hainaut to understand, that if
they favored him so little, to suffer the Spanish Forces to molest Cambray and
Countries adjoining, that he should make war upon them incontinent. P. Math.

The 27. day of December, as the King was returning from Picardie to Paris
ready booted and spurd within a chamber at Louure, having about him his
cousins, the Prince of Conde, the Earl of Soissans, the Earl of S. Paul, and
30 or 40. other Lord and Gentlemen of his Court. There came also in, the Lords
of Ragne and Mountigni, who had not as yet taken their leave of his majesty.
The King of France wounded.
And even as he was receiving them for his farewell a young stripling named John
Castil, of 18. years of age, a Drapers son of Paris, who was got into the
Chamber amongst the preace, drew near unto the King, before he was almost
perceived of any body, and suddenly would have stabd him into the body with a
knife, but by reason that his majesty was very ready to take up the Lords,
which were on their knees before him, in his stooping he struck him on the
face, on the upper iaw on the right side, therewithal cutting out one of his
teeth. Whereupon he was apprehended by the Captain of the Guard, to whom the
King commanded, after he had thrown his knife to the ground, to let him go:
saying that he freely forgave him. But afterward understanding that he was a
Scholar to the Jesuits, he said, and must it needs be, that the Jesuits
should be confounded by my mouth?

This villain being brought unto the Bishops prison, freely declared the
circumstance of his traiterous intent, and that he was persuaded thereto by his
master a Jesuit: who said that it was lawful to kill him, that he was
excommunicate of the Church, that he was not to be obeyed, nor to be taken for
the King, until such time as he was allowed by the Pope. For this he was
executed, and the Jesuits of Claremount with whom this fellow was brought up,
and all other throughout the whole Realm of France, were commanded within
three days to depart their Colleges, and after 15. days to leave the realm.
D. Chytraeus.

The death of Amurath.
In the beginning of this year, Amurathes the third Emperor of the Turks, the
son of Selim, in the 48. year of his age, ended his life and Empire with
much blasphemy, and impatience. Whom Mahomet the third being thirty years
of age succeeded: who before he performed his Father; Funerals, he caused
eighteen of his brethren borne of diverse Concubines, to be strangeled and
most honorably to be buried with his father in the same monument. He suffered
his 27. sisters to live in Teragliuun. And that no more might be borne, he
commanded ten of his fathers wives to be thrown into the Sea, and having
richly furnished his own mother, he sent her to dwell in a far Country.
Genebrardus.

This Mahomet is the thirteenth Emperor from Othoman. Mahomet.


Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, the son of Ferdinand the Emperor, and
brother of Maximilian the second, departed this life. The one and twentieth of
February likewise dyed Ernestus his brothers son, Archduke of Austria,
Governor of the Provinces in the low Countries, being 42. years of age. Idem.

Some of the Deputies of the Court which were sent to search Cleremount
College, which belonged to the Jesuits, having seized upon many papers, found
among them certain written books made by a Jesuit Priest, named John
Guiguard, since the general pardon given by the king at Paris: there was
written in these books many vile matters, as well against H. the 3. as against
H. the 4. now living, containing nothing but traitorous practices: for the
which the Jesuit being sent for, avouched, by means whereof he was found
guilty, and therefore executed.

The K. of France proclaimed open wars against Spain, Wars proclaimed
against Spain.
and the Spanish Army is overthrown by the Marshall of Bouillon, in the Duchy
of Luxembourge.

The King after two years suppliant entreaties to the Pope, The king of France
is absolved by the Pope.
at the length was absolved by the Pope at Rome, and received into the lap of
the mother Church, and declared the most Christian king of France.

The conditions propounded were these. That the king should receive the
Council of Trent, and give commandment that it should be kept throughout all
his Realm: but and if in some of his Provinces he could not do it without
danger of new seditions, he should ask leave of the Pope. That he should
within the compass of one year, remove the young Prince of Conde, being 9.
years of age, from the company of heretics, and to bring him up in the
Catholic Apostolic Roman religion. That he should restore all the
revenues and goods which he had taken from his Bishops and Abbeys. Lastly,
that he should by his Letters certify all Catholic Princes, of his
conversion and detestation of all heresies. After this, the Church of S. Peter
which before was shut, was now opened. Then the Pope said to the Orators of
France, that as he now opened again to their King, the door of the Church
Militant upon earth, so should his Majesty endeavor likewise by a lively
faith and good works, to make his way into the triumphant Church of heaven. D.
Chytraeus.

Upon the Church door were placed the arms of the K. of France, with this
inscription: Henricus 4. Galliae, and Nauarrae Rex Christianissimus.

Arbertus the Cardinal, made general
Whilst Camerac is besieged by the Spaniards, Phillip king of Spain, created
Albertus Archduke of Austria, and Cardinal of Toledo, General of all his
Forces in Belgia: He was the son of Max. 2. Emperor, and Mary the sister of
Phillip King of Spain, the fifth in order after Rodolphus the Emperor that now
is, borne in November, the year, 1559. Genebrardus.

The D. de Maine restored to favor.
The D. de Maine seeing the Spaniards take other course then was accustomed, his
Forces slain, his credit cracked, and his destruction at the door, though
late, yet at last he sought by mediators the kings favor, which he obtained:
upon this received grace, the D. wrought the yielding up of Soisson, Pierfont,
and other places, to the King.

The Duke of Aumale.
The Duke of Aumale, who only remained among all the chief Leaguers, law
being prosecuted against him in the Parliament of Paris, he was found guilty
of treason in the highest degree; so that his Image of likeness being made, it
was drawn in pieces with four horses, and his goods and lands confiscate to
the King.

The most famous Poet and Orator of all Italy, Torguatus Tassus, died this
year at Rome.

The Garrisons of Peronne, Amiens, and other places that he held for the king,
began again in January their former courses against the enemies Country,
still killing and sleying certain Spaniards and Wallons.

Marseill is brought to the kings subjection.

George, Lantgraue of Hesse, the son of Phillip, a virtuous, wise, and
religious Prince, departed out of this world, leaving his son Lodowicke to
succeed him.

Albert Archduke of Austria, Archduke of Austria.
and Governor of the low Countries, entered Bruxelles with great pomp,
accompanied with the Dukes of Fere and Aumale, and Philippus Wilihelmus, the
Prince of Orange his son. Before his coming, there was great hope of peace,
but after his arrival he made no mention of peace, for that he foresawe there
would be none granted. D. Chytreus.

In the beginning of March, the Cardinal gave such order, that the besieged
within the Town of Fere, were succored with some munition, and for his first
exployt against France, in the beginning of April, did so dispose of his Army
(at that time most mighty) so pollitikely and secretly, He wins Callais.
that in few days he besieged, assailed, and with plain force, won the
Town and Castle of Calais, in spite of all the Kings Forces, and the
resistance of the besieged. There dyed in the taking hereof, a great number of
the Nobility of France.

The Cardinal following this new won victory, Fere yields
besieged the strong Town of Ardres in the beginning of May, and became
master thereof the 23. of the same month, seven days before Fere was yielded
to the King upon composition. Chytraeus.

The Emperor appointed Alphonsus, Duke of Ferrara, General against the
Turks: who thirty years before in the time of Maximilian the second, the
father of Rodolphus, had waged war against them at his own charges. But he
being the last Duke that was of his house, and having had no issue by his
three wives, was very desirous to leave a certain successor before he
departed, and therefore he desired the Pope that Cardinal Est might be his
heir, and to that end offered him a great sum of gold, but the Pope stiffly
denying to do it, the expedition for Hungary was intermitted by the Duke of
Ferrara. D. Chytraeus.

Christian, the fourthking of Denmark, the son of Frederick the second, of
the age of twenty years was crowned King.

An English Navy for Spain.
In the month of June the Queen of England sent a Fleet of 16. sails, well
appointed with munition and vittaile, under the conduct of Robert Earl of
Essex, into Spain, who with a prosperous gale having passed the bound, of
France and Portugal, the 20. of June arrived near Gades, and lighted upon the
12. Apostles of the king of Spain (of the which S. Phillip carried 900.
soldiers, and 62. pieces of Ordinance) and 57. Merchants ships, bound for the
Eastern Indies. But when in these straits they had fought with them valiantly,
and happily, and had set S. Phillip on fire, the rest conueying themselves into
the deep, the Earl came on land with part of his company, and when he came
near the City, the governors and knights of the City, to the number of 400.
came out, who seeing the English so well appointed, drew back into the City:
but such was the courage of our men, that following, some of them got into the
City with them: some at the assult got upon the walls, and recovered the
Market place, although they were much troubled by the Citizens from out of
their houses and house tops. The same evening the greatest part of them got
into a Castle, the lower part of the City was spoiled, the upper part was
ransomed for 12000. Ducats. The Fleet for India burned.
And for the Indian fleet they offered great store of gold. But the Duke Medine
would not let it be redeemed, and therefore set it all on fire. The loss of
which, was 12. Millions of crowns. The English Navy in August following,
returned to England. D. Chytraeus.

The Spaniards seek revenge and are crossed.
The Spaniards greatly incensed with this daring enterprise of the English, of
their own free will gave a great sum of money to their king, whereby to make
new ships, and levy new forces against them, and in the month of October, the
Fleet loosed out of the mouth of Tagus, into Corouis, a Haven in Spain,
toward the farthest North, in the territories of Gallicia, which Ptolomey
calls the harbor of the Artabry, a people by the Promontory Artabrum, which
is in Portugal. But when the Navy came near the coasts of Gallicia, by night
it ran upon the Rocks, where 30. of the Spanish ships perished, the rest
went forward to Corouis, and attempted nothing else this winter.

The Emperor appointed Arnold Baron of Echwartzenberge in Belgia, Marshall of
the field in Hungary against the Turk, in the place of the D. of Ferrara,
whom the Pope Clement the 8. would not grant, that his adopted heir should
succeed him.

Anne, Q. of Poland, the widow of Stephen, the sister of Sigismond Augustus,
died this year, being 70. years of age: The death of Anne Q. of Poland.
leaving great store of treasure behind her, which she gave to her sisters
Catherines children, Q. of Suetia, Sigismond the 3. king, and Anne his sister.

The last of April, deceased Sir John Puckering Knight, Lord Keeper of the
great Seal: he died of a dead Palsy, and was buried at Westminster.

In Prussia, a Province in the kingdom of Poland, the chiefest Bishops, armed
with the kings decrees against the true Churches of the Gospel, removed many
Preachers out of their Parishes into the Country, and upon S. John Baptists
day, took possession of the chief Church in the City of Turon: the like was
done at Meua and Stargardia: besides, The Church troubled.
they earnestly desired that the Church of S. Mary's which was near the Market
place, might be delivered to them, with the Monasteries of S. Briget, and that
therein their religion might be freely exercised, and all their causes
belonging to the Consistory to be referred to their Officialls in the City,
and to be judged by them.

Iacobus Fabritius Governor of the College, Iacobus Fatricius.
was peremptorily cited to Subcouia, for that he allowed, preached, and
maintained publicly, the doctrine of Calvin, and as they inferred against the
express privileges of the City, the constitutions of the Commissaries, and
the decrees of the Senate, concerning religion. But the Senate excusing him,
said that the Citizens were not bound to appear out of their City: the
Bishops sent their Commissaries into the City, who with their Officialls
should there proceed against him. The King himself likewise commanded that the
Senate should deliver up the Church to the Bishop of Subcouia within certain
days, or should agree with him. But Agria, a near neighbor to Poland, being
newly taken by the Turks, and the Court was busied in counsel how to avoid
new dangers: the Dantiscanes were quiet till Easter, the year following.

The estate of the united Provinces of Belgia, Geldria, Zutphen, Holland, and
Westfrizeland, Zeland, Vtricht, Friseland, the Groine, etc. with the Q. of
England, and the K. of France, entered a league of defense for themselves, and
offense of their enemy, the K. of Spain. None of these could make peace with
him without the consent of all. Which was also agreed between the king of
France and the united States of Belgia, that the kings of Scotland and
Denmark, should be united to the society of this league.

The 22. of July, the right honorable H. Carry, Baron of Hunsdon, and Lord
Chamberlain to the Queen, deceased at Sommerset house in Strandstreet, and
was honorably buried at Westminster.

The second of June, the Emperor Rodolphe, caused all the Princes Electors,
and others of his dominion, with the Ambassadors of those that were absent, to
come before him in the Palace of the Bishop of Ratisbone: who all appeared the
next morning and accompanied him to the Church, and from thence, to the Court;
where when every one according to their calling had taken his place, Philippus
Ludouicus stood up, and made an Oration in the name of the Emperor Rodolphus
Caesar: wherein he showed how the Emperor of the Turks Sultan Amurathes had
broken the truce, which was made in the year, 1591. by Haly Bassa in Bosua,
who had forraged diverse of their frontiers, and had spoiled and wasted Crotia,
and the fertile Region Tyropolia, leading away many Christians captives, and
that this Bassa being thereof explained to the Turk, he was therefore
bountifully rewarded, and set in greater place and authority then he had
before: but at the siege of the Castle Zisekna, he was driven to fly, and
there received by death a just reward for his treachery.

This making the Turk more incensed, he made war upon the Christians, and
sent Beglerbegus of Creece, who besieged the aforesaid Castle Ziseckna, and
forced them to yield it. At this time also he sent diverse of his choicest
Bassaes to invade Hungary, and took there two Cities, Vesprian and Palotta.
Besides, he imprisoned the Emperors Ambassador and Orator at Constantinople.
Caesar's request therefore was, that greater defense might be made against the
Turkish powers, and that all the Christian Princes of his Empire would conioyne
to the resisting of this great enemy of Christ and Christendom. Which
forthwith was agreed unto.

But in this Session a great dissension arose amongst the Protestant Princes:
the reason was, for that the Elector Palatine did not so strictly and precisely
keep the confession of Augusta, as the rest of them did: that is to say, Duke
William Frederick, Administrator of the Electorship of Saxony, who in the
administration of the charge of the Electors in their minority, recalled and
brought in the opinions of Flaccus Illiricus, and Iacobus Andreas (approved of
the aforesaid Electors) and all those that withstood them, or opposed
themselves against either, in Universities, Schools, or any place whatsoever,
he cruelly persecuted and banished them, as Caluinists and Zuinglians: so that
at Lipsia and other places, under the pretext and color of his execution
against the Caluinists, much spoil and hurt was done. Many of these being let
out of prison, were received by the Elector Palatine: and for this cause the
Protestants of Saxony would separate themselves in this Session, in the common
petitions and propositions from them that held of the Count Palatine: but the
greater part of them desirous of peace, did not consent thereto. But when it
was objected to the Prince Palatine, that he was of a contrary religion to his
father, he before them all made an orderly and modest confession of his faith
and religion, in this manner.

I have not anyway digressed from the religion which my worthy father
professed. He whilst he lived, believed not in S. Martin or S. James, but in
Christ. The same belief, the same grounds and principles of faith I do
constantly hold, and ever intend to do. My father condemned the errors of
Arrius, Nestorius, Eutychius, and the Anabaptists, and so do I his son; not
only condemn them, but with my soul detest and abhor them. The errors in
the Sacraments (which are two fold; some of them who make Idols of Sacraments,
and worship and reverence the signs for the thing signed, not observing nor
considering the signification of the Sacraments: other some that understand
them for naked and simple signs) my father detested, and so do I his son. I
come nearer: My father rejected Caluanisme and Zuinglanisme, and so do I his
son. If so be it be true, that the Vbiquitaries and Flactians do feign, that
is to say, if truth, or omnipotency, or the whole presence of Christ should
be denied upon the earth. But in this error I am happier then my father, in
that I know the true and right religion under the name of Calvin, to be
defiled and scandalled, by certain seditious and ambitious persons in
Germany: which my father had known if he had lived longer, as now the two
mighty Electors of Saxony, Augustus his son, and Christian do understand.

In this Session great consultation was had, for composition for peace in the
low Countries.

This year the Italians made great tumults in Brabant: the reason was, for
that they were not so much esteemed of since the Duke of Parmaes death, and
that the Spaniards were preferred before them: that they had pay daily, and the
Italians not regarded. For this cause they left the Kings Camp, and took the
Town of Sidien in Brabant, and fortified it. In this space no pay was sent,
wherefore they made great havoc throughout all Brabant, even to the gates of
Bruxelles. Complaints were made hereof to the Governor the Archduke of
Ernestus, that he was feign to send certain companies of the Spaniards who
had authority to bring them into order, and make them obedient, or drive them
out of the Country. This more incensed the Italians, but the Spaniards drove
them out of certain of their holds: And Grave Maurice fearing least they of
enemies, should become friends, went to the Italians, and politikely praised
them and their dauntlesse spirits, extolled their worthy acts, and great
victories that they got under their famous leader the Duke of Parma, that the
Spaniard, had offered them such an injury and disgrace as the like was not to
be borne, and therefore it behooved them to look to their safety, and that
there was no better way but to serve under the King of France, as long as they
might be well paid.

The Italians moved by his persuasion, the last of November wrote to the King
of France, humbly desiring him, that he would receive them into his charge and
defense, being in number 1023. footmen, and 200. hosemen. But the King
commended the determining of these business to the States of Holland.

The Archduke Ernestus died at Bruxells, as some say, of a melancholy, for
that he might not marry the Infant of Spain, and that the names of his house
of Austriche against the Turks, and his own against the confederates, had no
better success, that he was not only despised of the enemy, but of the
Spaniards, and that he had received no Letters a long time from the king,
amongst whose Council he had many enemies: he died of the age of 42. a very
modest and sober Prince, who was seldom seen to laugh.

This winter dyed Amurathe the 3. the 14. Emperor of the house of Othoman, and
the very best thereof, The death of Amurath. 3.
being not so cruel as the other: he was much given to pleasure. His eldest
son succeeded him in the Empire, being of the age of 29. years.

The Castle and City of Strigon by Ister, after it had been three and fifty
years under the tyranny of the Turkish Emperor, by the valor and industry
of Count Charles Mansfield, was delivered to the Christians: which victory he
saw not, for he died at the siege thereof, of a lingering disease.

This Prince was from his childhood brought up in martial affairs, and showed
himself a good subject to the King of Spain his master.

The King of France having got absolution from the Pope, sent by his
Ambassadors, Letters and thanks to him, and in them, promised all obedience to
the Apostolic Sea of Rome.

Christopher Mountdragon a Spaniard, Governor of the Castle of Antwerpe, and
Captain of the Garrisons, dyed at Antwerpe.

The Estates of Holland and the united Provinces, that they might more
establish and make strong the Commonwealth, which they had already instituted
and begun, An Edict against Jesuits.
published a new Edict, against those that rashly go into the Provinces and
Cities, of the adverse faction, or should come out of them into theirs: also
against the Jesuits, against such as were in the Universities, subject to the
king of Spain, and against those who were preferred to promotions under the
oath of the mainteinance of the Roman religion.

Further, it was decreed that all the favorers and adherents of the pernicious
and bloody sect of the Jesuits, should be excluded out of all the confederate
Provinces, and that by no means they should be again remitted.

It was likewise enacted that none of the same Sect, whether borne in the same
Provinces, or a Stranger, do at any time come into these united Provinces
either by Sea or land, upon pain to be taken for an enemy, and so to be
presently executed, although in this case he come with testimonial by Letters.
Furthermore, that within the space of two months they depart out of these
Provinces, nor return again into them during the present wars, unless in
that space they go to the Governor and Magistrate, and satisfy them in every
point, and renounce their oath and fealty to the K. of Spain. Besides, that
all his subjects beware that after the publishing of this Edict, they do not
frequent any school of the Jesuits in Belgia. Of the Academies, they
determined, that none inhabiting the Provinces, should study in any of the
Universities which are subject to the king of Spain: willing also that within
six months after this Edict published, they should depart from those
Universities.

Against those that have sworn to maintain and uphold the Romish religion,
and to othersome that were promoted to dignities, this punishment was set
down, that hereafter they should have no dignities, officies, or public
ministeries in the confederate Provinces. Whosoever after six months next
coming, shall be preferred under the oath of the defending the Romish errors
and superstitions; and that they have already got this promotion, or in six
months after shall get it, and are now admitted to offices, or shall be
hereafter admitted, shall first desire that they may be absolved from this
oath, and in that stead shall swear alleagiance to their Country, and shall
utterly renounce and abjure the government of the K. of Spain. And this
absolution of oath, and exaction of the new, to be made before a Judge, to
whom full power thereof and authority is given. If they do not appear and
satisfy this Edict, they shall not execute their offices. Those that do not
obey, they shall presently depart the Countries: which if they do not the
first month, they shall be fined at discretion, the second time the penalty
shall be doubled: but if at the end of three months they shall be found to
stay within the confederate Provinces, they shall be banished for ever.

The 24. day of August the Cardinal came to Antwerpe, where he was received
with great pomp. And the next month following, the English Navy and certain
ships of the Hollanders and Zelanders, returned out of Spain richly laden.

In Hungary the Christians recovered against the Turk, the City of Hattawan,
where except some few, they put all to the sword.

On the 20. day of September, the Turks laid siege to Agria, by which the way
lies open into Transiluania, Bohemia, Morauia, and Silesia, and with fair
words and promises, desired them to yield: but the governors of the City, for
that by reason of the continual battles, they could not possibly any longer
hold out, set fire on the City, and got them to the Castle. The Turks then
entered, and through covetousness of the spoil, saved most of the houses.
Then did the Emperor of the Turks request them to yield, but they denied it,
and bravely resisted the fierce assault made against the Castle. In the end,
being so far ouermatched, they were constrained to their great grief and
loss, to yield up the Castle, where the Governors and diverse Captains were
in most cruel manner put to the sword, for the slaughter which they made of the
Turks at Hattawan.

Maximilian comes to Agria.
Maximilian leaving off this, came down with an Army consisting of 60000.
horse and foot. The Christians then marched toward Agria, where the Emperor
of the Turks was. The first encounter was with light skirmiges, but when the
maine battle was joined, the Christians got the better part, and having
slain certain thousands of the Turks, they put the rest to flight, and were
masters of their Tents. But whilst they too greedily intended the spoil, the
enemy recovered his scattered troops, and upon the sudden killed a number of
the Christians in their Tents, the rest being daunted with this unexpected
overthrow, betook themselves to flight. This so amazed the Christian Host,
that they were all dispearsed: and Maximilian himself accompanied with a small
number, came to Caschoccia. Thus the victory that was thought happy in the
beginning, sorted to this unlucky end.

King Phillip determined to marry his daughter to Cardinal Albert, and for her
dowry gives the Provinces of the low Countries.

On Sunday the 8. of August, great triumph was made at London for the good
success of the two Generals and companies in Spain, the winning, sacking,
and burning of the famous Town of Cadiz, the overthrow and burning of the
Spanish Navy, and other accidents.

The 29. day of August the Duke of Boloine arrived in England, and came to the
Court at Greenwich, and there by her Majesty's oath, confirmed the league of
amity and peace betwixt the two Realms of England and France, and shortly
after, soldiers were sent over to aid the French in their wars against the
Spaniards.

Presently upon the departure of the Duke of Bulloine, the right honorable
Gilbert Earl of Shrewsburie, was sent Ambassador into France, to take the oath
of Henry the fourth, the French King, for the confirmation of the said league,
as also to inuest the King with the order of the Garter. I. Stowe.

This Summer arrived here an Orator from the King of Polonia, and had audience
at the Court then at Greenwich, whose Oration was in Latin; the which was
presently most learnedly and eloquently answered by her Majesty, in the same
language.

In the Parliament at Roane, the reformed Churches desired France, wherefore
concerning the controversy of the two Religions in the Parliament at Paris,
these Articles following were set down.

1 First, that an heretic fallen, and by name excommunicated by the holy Sea,
shall not loose the right of the crown. 2 That he is a lawful king, sent and
appointed of God. 3 That the Church cannot deprive him of this right, nor
generally any Princes of their dignities, or succession of their kingdoms, for
any heresy whatsoever. 4 Nor release their subjects of their alleagiance to
their Princes. 5 To withstand these sentences, and that they do not bind the
conscience. 6 That they must look into the actions of the Prince or his
conscience. 7 That by the Christian religion, no order may be appointed to the
Salique law, that the king be constrained to be a Catholic. 8 That an
herelike by divine grace is a Christian. 9 That it is not lawful to resist a
Prince that is an heretic. 10 That a Catholic king may permit and suffer two
religions in his kingdom. 11 Not to punish heretics, nor to compel any to be
Catholics. 12 To pray for those that are excommunicated, as well the living
as the dead, and that publicly in Churches: and to perform this, the Clergy
to be bound upon pain of departing the Realm. 13. That Confessions may be
revealed for justice sake.


This year Arnald Whitfeeld, Chauncelor of the Realm in Denmark, came
Embassator into England, and Christian Barnice his assistant: they had audience
at the Court then at Tiballs.

Turnbaut is delivered up to Grave Maurice. And this year Belgia was in
reasonable guietnesse.

The States of the united Provinces entered a mutual league with the Queen of
England and the King of France, defensive and offensive against Phillip the
King of Spain, their common enemy. The king of France with often excursions
and assailes, had troubled and vexed the confines of Artesia and Hamonia.

The Cardinal Albertus being at Bruxells, and thinking of repairing his Army,
found great difficulties for want of money; for king Phillip refused to pay the
Italian Merchants, and those of other Nations their money, who took monstrous
usury of him, so that he complained that by this means his kingly patrimony,
his annual revenues, and extraordinary subsidies, were consumed. Yet that he
might keep his word, and show himself to be of a good conscience, he turned
the controversy into religion, and appointed two of his, and his sons
Confessors, to dissuade these Merchants from taking this unreasonable usury,
and to tell them what danger their souls were in, if they did not remit it:
in the mean season, certain of the creditors became bankerupt, the rest by
their example were afterward afraid to lend the King any money. D. Chytraeus.

The Emperor Rodolphus promised Sigismond Duke of Transiluania, new supplies
of soldiers and money, and with great solemnity received him into the
fellowship of the golden Fleece.

Maximilian again was made General by the Emperor. The Pope by his
Ambassador Johannes Franciscus Aldobrandinus, promised to send ten thousand
Italians into Hungary at his own costs and charges, and made the D. of Mantua
their General. The higher Saxony sent a thousand horsemen, and the lower
Saxony as many. Francouia, Bauania, Suenia, and the other Countries, Bohemia
and Austria, sent in their aid likewise. These all marched toward Pappa, the
which after eight day siege they took: from thence to Raba, which yeeded
without any assault: but hearing that Mahomet Bassa was coming toward them,
and finding themselves too weak to bold out that place against them, they went
back over Danubie, into Scythia, toward Gomorrha. The Turks eight days
after besieged the Castle of Totes, whilst the Christians Army lay Idle:
which went down to Watsia, and there hearing that the Turks came toward
them, they went to Strigonia.

Alphonsus Duke of Ferrara, whom the year before gone, The death of Alphonsus.
the Emperor Rodolphus determined to make General of the Turkish expedition,
departed this life: whose Dukedom Caesar Est bastard (being in his life time
appointed his heir and cessor) presently possessed.

The Pope was much discontented with this, and forthwith struck Caesar with
the thunderbold of excommunication, and made war upon him.

Christian the 4. king of Denmark, was married to Anne the daughter of
Ioachimus Fredericus, Marquess of Brandebourghe, by the Archbishop of
Magdebourghe.

This year dyed in the higher Germany, Johannes Postius an excellent Poet,
and the chief Physician to the Count Palatine.

Grave Maurice made a bridge upon Rhene. Berke was besieged of him, and yielded
within twelve days: which he fortified.

Sir Robert Cecill principal Secretary, Master Harbert Master of the
Requests, Sir George Carewe Lieftenant for the Ordinance, and others, prepared
for their Embassage into France, and set sail from Dover the ninteenth of
February. Sir Robert Cecill returned the fifth of May out of France.

Johannes Georgius Marquess of Bradenbourghe, of 37. years died, leaving
behind him, six sons and four daughters.

The same month of January, died Richard Count Palatine of Rhene at Sinouerne,
where he kept his Court. Him followed Theodorus the great Duke of Muschouia. In
the lower Saxony died Henry Duke of Brunswicke and Luzemburge, the son of
Ernestus: and Clare the wife of Bogislaus, Duke of Pomerian.

The last of January, Anne Queen of Poland, the daughter of Charles Archduke
of Austria, departed this life.

This month the Pope Clement the 8. made war upon Caesar Est Duke of
Ferrara, for the Dukedom, but the matter was taken up: and the Duke yielded up
Ferrara unto him: but all the other Cities and Towns he enjoyed, and by the
Emperor Rodolphus, was created Duke of Mulina.

The Pope annexed this to the Popedom.

Sigismond Prince of Transiluania, who hitherto had held out with an invincible
courage against the Turks, in the beginning of this year changed the course
of his life, and surrendered the Province of Transiluania, to the Emperor
Rodolphe and his heirs, least it should fall into the hands of the Turks.

A peace was concluded between the Kings of France and Spain, in the low
Countries at Veruini, in the beginning of May: Pledges sent into France from
the Spaniard, were Philippus de Croy, Franciscus de Mendoza, the Admiral of the
kingdom of Arragon, Charles Prince and County Aremberge, Ludouicus de
Velasco; the Popes Ambassadors that made the peace, were Alexander Cardinal de
Medicis, and General of the order of the Franciscanes, Bonauentura a Sicilian.
The King of Spaines deputies, were Johannes Richardotus President of the
Council, Johannes Baptista, and Ludouicus Verreiken the K. his Secretary in
the low Countries. Amongst the conditions of peace, this was the chief: That
former injuries and unkindness forgotten, these Articles of peace that were
set down in the year 1559 at Camerac, between Henry the second, king of
France, and Phillip the 2. king of Spain, might be kept. The whole
pacification was comprehended in 35. Articles, and printed at Paris and Poloine.

Calice, Capella, Ardea, and other Cities of Picardie, were restored to Henry
the 4. K. of France, by the Spaniard.

The Queen of England persuaded the Hollanders to peace, who notwithstanding
preferred war before a treacherous peace with the Spaniards. Therefore
Albertus Archduke, going into Spain to be married, Franciscus Mendoza
Admiral of Arragon, chief General of the Spanish Forces, having brought his
Army to Rhene, prepares it against the Hollanders and the united Provinces.

They of Aquisgrane two years before condemned by the sentence of Caesar were
now exposed to the spoils and slaughter of all.

Sigismond Prince of Transiluania, repented him of his change of life, and that
he had given up his government, wherefore he came out of Silesia through Poland,
into Transiluania, and desired of his subjects that their oath of allegiance
to him might be renewed, and persuaded Maximilian Archduke, (whom the Emperor
had made Governor of Transiluania) that he would lead his forces against the
Turks toward the recovery of Agnia, then against Transiluania.

Upon the fourth of August, Sir William Cecill knight of the Order, Lord
Burghley, Master of the Wards and Liueries, high Treasurer of England, a
famous Counselor to ye Queens Majesty all her reign, and likewise had been
to Edward the sixth; who for his singular wisdom, was renowned throughout all
Europe, departed this mortal life at his house by the Strand, his body was
conveyed to Westminster with solemn Funeral, and from thence secretly to
Stamford in Lincolnshyre, and there buried. I. Stowe.

The second of October, George Earl of Comberland, returned from the Seas,
having made spoil of the strong Town and Castle of S. John de Portanoico in
Spain.

This year died Phillip the 2. king of Spain, being of the age of 72. years.

Clement the 8. created 13. Cardinals, amongst whom was Robert Bellarmine,
Jesuit.

Phillip the 3. the son of Phillip the 2. succeeded his father in the
kingdom of Spain. He took to wife Margarite of Austria. And Albert
Archduke of Austria, married the Infant of Spain, the kings sister. Both
these marrriages were celebrated by the Pope Clement the 8. at Ferrara.

The 7. of February, the right honorable Charles Blunt. Lord Mountioy, having
taken his leave at the Court, departed toward Ireland, as Lieftenant there.
Soldiers out of diverse Shyres were sent before him, and also after him, in
this month of February.

Richard Lord Bishow of London, with two other Commissioners, to wit, Doctor
Perkins, and Doctor Swale, were sent in Embassage to Emden, there to treat with
the Commissaries from the King of Denmark, and returned the eight of July
following.

On Tuesday the 5. of August, Charles James king of Scots, in Scotland escaped
a strange and strong conspiracy, practiced by the Earl Gowrye and his
brother.

Ambassadors from Marocco.
About the 8. of August, arrived at Doner certain Ambassadors and assistants,
16. in number, sent from the king of Marocco in Barbaria. I. Stowe.

Ambassadors from Moschouie.
The 18. of September, certain Ambassadors came from Moschouie or Russia, and
the 14. of October, the said Ambassadors rode to the Court, and had audience
before her Majesty.

FINIS.
A brief Discourse of the Churches estate from the death of Jesus Christ,
until this present.
ALl which has been succinctly said in this book touching the estate of the
Church, Three times of the Christian Church.
should remember the Reader of three diverse times in the consideration of the
government of the house of God, the better to mark things as they came, and to
have thereof a certain abridgement in his memory.

We take the first time of the Christian Church, The first from the preaching
of the Apostles until Phocas, distinguished into three periodes.
from the beginning of the Apostles preaching until the Empire of Phocas: which
is ordinarily distinguished into three periodes. 1. The first of about 70.
years from the Lords Ascension, until the death of the Apostles, and of their
first Disciples. 2. The second began at the Empire of Traian, and stretched by
the space of 200. years until Constantine: which time also was honored with
the presence of certain of the Apostles Disciples, and other excellent Pastors
of the Church, and faithful Martyrs of Jesus Christ. 3. The third from
Constantine until Phocas, which is the last periode of the first time of the
Church, about 300. years: during which, the Church had many great Doctors,
Greeks and Latins.

As for the first periode of the first time, Of the first periode of the first
time of ye Church.
it is very certain that never Christian Church was more happy the^ during
that time, whether we consider the doctrine taught by the Apostles and their
first successors, or we contemplate all the parts of the Ministry, and of
the Ecclesiastical discipline.

Now for the doctrine we have by a singular grace of God, the Apostles Epistles
whereby it is easy to gather a body and summary of all that which every
Christian ought to know touching his salvation. And that which is more, if they
which came after the Apostles had continued to build upon the foundation which
they had laid, the Church had remained in his first spiritual splendour and
brightness: the simplicity then being such and so great in doctrine, in the
manner of teaching, and in ceremonies, that the sheepheards and sheep, were
altogether eliuated unto the heavenly Father through Jesus Christ; living
moreover in such charity and concord, as truly this world might be well called
the golden world. For although that in the Apostles time and their next
successors, there rose up certain mutinous persons to trouble the happy rest
of the Church, this hurt not much, the majesty of the spirit of God
discovering it self in such sort in the preaching of the Gospel, that all the
world was constrained to acknowledge in this infirmity of the servants of God,
an admirable efficacy, to biing all wisdom and humane power captive under
the obedience of Jesus Christ. True it is, that already Satan thought upon
his affairs, and brought forth his practices with greater force then ever
before, building his Sinagogue nigh unto the Church. For even when the Apostles
themselves lived, certain Jews and Gentiles making the same profession of
Christianisme, fought against Jesus Christ in diverse manners, as S. Paul his
Epistles do witness. And what diligence soever the servants of God used to
eradicate and root out the tares which the enemy did sow: yet remained there
the seeds thereof in the bosom of the Church during the periodes following:
God meaning to humble his, and to show them that truly they had and would
always have cause to fight in this life, but that the triumph thereof was
reserved for the other world. For as for the strength of the persecutors since
the Apostles time, it has always showed it true, that the blood of the
Martyrs is the seed of the Church.

But let this be said in a word, only to awake the Reader and to prepare him
to a diligent meditation of the Ecclesiastical history. Now something is to
be said of the second periode of the first time. The Apostolic men, Of the
second periode of the first time of the Church.
armed with the virtue and power of ye Lord, maintained constantly the truth,
amongst all the tempests and storms of persecution, and in despite of
Gentilisme, and of diverse heresies which boldly began to left up their heads.
In so much, that great marvel it was, that so soon after so great light, men
should see the East in many places covered with so deep darkness, many goodly
Churches ruinated, and the doctrine of salvation transported otherwhere. Yet
the greatest evil was in the bowels of the Church it self; many Pastors
whereof, not being so attentive as of reason they should have bin to conserve and
keep the purity of the Evangelical doctrine, but suffering to take root (I
know not how) that which tasted of carnal wisdom: in so much that in the
place of the true end and mark which the Gospel proposes unto us, men began
to establish unto us, all the perfection of Christianity in sufferings and
afflictions for the Gospel, and in arresting and abiding a little too subtly,
upon the stay of certain fantastike persons, springing from the school of
Philosophers, so fell by little and little, to that unhappiness, as to
transform the holy scripture into allegorike interpretations, a marvelous
bait for the curiosity of humane understanding, and a fountain of infinite
mischiefs in the Church. True it is that the first inuentors of such things,
thought nothing less then that which came after. So much then did the Lord
humble his people. But about the end of this periode, evil was seen to
advance, and ceremonies increase in such sort, that men inclined unto Indaisme
and Paganism, the love of solitude and Munkery, the abstinence from marriage,
and from certain viands and meats on particular days, many Feasts and other
seeds of superstition after succeeding, took a marvelous root. So the
commencement of prayers for the dead, and of the sacrifice of the Mass, did
then discover themselves: not that the intent of such as made mention of the
dead, to encourage the living constantly to serve God, and which brought of
their goods into the company of the faithful, for the comfort of the poor
after the celebration of the Supper, was to bring in the execrable Idolatry
which long time after sprung up. There were also introducted and brought into
Baptism, certain ceremonies, yet not such as the ridiculous superstitions
which since have bin forged. Finally the good intent began to show it self,
and from thenceforth to lift up the head, until at the last upon the end of
the second time of the Church, it rose up above the word of God.

Of the third periode of the first time of the Church.
As for the third periode of the first time, herein it was happy, in that God
during that time, raised up diverse learned persons, Greeks and Latins, to
oppose themselves with lively voice at Sinodes, as also by their books,
whereof we have some number at this day, against the impiety of infinite
heretics.

Amongst other, S. Augustine was an excellent Doctor of the Church: who
notwithstanding is not always so clear as is to be desired. Amongst the
Latins this time also brought forth other great persons, yet men also, which
yet is more seen in the Greek Doctors, less pure then the Latins,
especially in the right knowledge of the merit of Jesus Christ, and all was
the want of a pure and native intelligence of the Lords language in the
Prophetike and Apostolic books. Their allegorike interpretations had as it
were gotten the upper hand, ceremonies maruellously increased, Monkeries began
to take footing, the true means to divide the Church, and to forge a new
service of God: afterward, the veneration of the Martyrs Sepulchers, paintings,
and after Images glistered in Churches. The pure doctrine of the Lords Supper
began to be falsified for want of right understanding the manner of
Sacramental speeches, and the virtue of the alone sacrifice of Jesus Christ.
Bishops, especially that of Rome, thrust into the world, and the mystery of
iniquity formed it self as it afterward should come into the light. For
Arrianisme having served for a seed to Mahumatisme, and the dispising of the
celestall verity, with corruption of manners maintaining the audacitie and
boldness of the Bishops of Rome* this periode finishing, gave entry unto
strange evils, wherewith the Church was overthrown a little space after.

Let us now say something of the second time of the Church, which we divide
into two periodes. The first, The second time of the Church from Phocas until
Charles. 5. The first periode.
from Phocas about the year 600. until Charlamaine by the space of 300.
years. The second from Charlamaine unto Charles the fifth of that name,
Emperor, about 700. years.

In the first periode of this second time of the Church, as the Antichrist of
the East thrust himself well forward, that of the West established his Throne,
and then was the door open to all errors: which notwithstanding entered not at
once, but came by little and little into the Church. Above all, the opinion of
purgatory, fire, and of the sacrifice for the dead, were the foundation of the
Papaltie and of all that vermin of their Clergy and infinite Sects of
Monks, which like Grasshoppers from the deep pit, came to spread themselves
through Europe. But it was in the second periode of the second time, The second
periode.
that Idolatry and superstitions obtained the upper hand. Insomuch that the
poor Church as it were buried, had no more any spring, neither appeared there
any token whereupon to cast her eye, but only the invocation of the Father, of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost in Baptism. And although from time to time,
the Lord made shine some flames and torches in the bowels of that darkness,
to redargue and weaken such as rotted in so heavy and palpable ignorance: yet
was their blindness so lamentable, and their sleep so deep, that for one
which lifted up the head, and to whom Antichrist gave no release nor leave to
approach, witness all such as during this periode opposed themselves never so
little against his tyranny, an infinite remained liuelesse and altogether dead.
The Lord making himself admirable in the mercy which he showed upon some, and
renowned in horrible and just punishment of their ingratitude, which loved
better lies then truth. Who can here recyte the superstitions and Idolatries
of Antichrist, and his crafts and subtilties, to establish his kingdom and
tirannie upon bodies and soul? He had his servants and instruments of all
sorts, to lean, fasten, increase, and multiply his Throne in the Temple of
GOD, carrying in his browe the name of misery, sitting in the Temple of God,
calling himself God, yet unknown of such as called themselves Christians,
which he put off until the end of the world, and to I know not what fancy and
dream of an Antichrist which should be borne but a little before the second
coming of the son of God. Briefly, the great spiritual Babylon, the
murdresse of souls, had her kingdom during this period, tyrannizing the
Israel of God, hid and dispearced in a little number and by her impostures,
blasphemies and impieties, mocked the true God, and Father of Jesus Christ,
whose name auowed with the mouth, she trod under her feet, by her abominable
error.

The third time of the Church from Charles the fifth, til this present time.
But the Lord willing to make his work admirable, which was to ruinate Babylon,
to destroy the man of sin by the breath of his mouth, and by the brightness of
his coming, presented himself in the third time, and by the ministry of
people, feeble and of small appearance, yet driven and drawn on with the zeal
of his glory, first brought in ye knowledge of tongues, then the celestial
truth, maugre all the strengthes of the world, and in sixty years has made
us again see all the maruells of the worlds passed in the government of his
Church, as well in the efficacy of his word, as in the virtue thereof, to
maintain it, to fortify his servants, against all sorts of enemies, within
and without, and to repress tyrants, Apostates, heretics and hipocrites:
which we hope he will pursue more and more, and we pray him to do it for the
love of Jesus Christ his son, until that great Savior appear in the
clouds, to judge the qucke and the dead. Amen.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal things contained in this book.
A.
ABbey of S. Denis in France, builded by Dagobert. 190 Absimarus Emperor. 206
Abbreuiataries created 465. destroyed 487
Acarius an heretic, murdered. 69 Acephali heretics. 82 Acolites. 91 Achaia
and other Countries brought into Provinces. 73 Acchio D. of Millain from whose
helm fell the serpent. 114 Adamites heretics in Bohemia. 81 Adiaphores. 130
Adrian the Emperor changed the name of Jerusalem. 34 Adrian the 4. angry
because the Emp. held his right stirrup 130 Angry because he placed his name
before the Popes. 136 He is choked with a fly. 140 Albertus Alasco. 145
Aluaes tyranny. 636 His death. 641 Amais banished Scotland. 643 A Priest dies
for fear. 641 A notable act of the Seignory of Venice. 653 Antwerpe yields.
655 Augusta. 659 Augustus D. of Sax. dies. 657 A Fleet for Lisbon. 671 A
Iubiley. 677 An act against the P. Bulls. 677 Albertus made General. 692 He
wins Callais. 693 Articles concerning controversies in religion. 703
Aemilian Emp. 65 Aim D. of Sauoy, became an hermit. 89 Albarit Marquess of
Toscane, chaseth away the Sarrasins. 55 Alban martyred. 49 Appellation of the
Mass. 141 Albert first author of the Carmes. 106 Adrian Pope a buggerer, yet
worshipped as God. 36 His death. Ibid. Aeli^s Pertinax. 45 Alexander Seuerus
Emp. 53 Albigeois, or Albiois, opposing themselves against Transubstantiation
are overcome. 112 Albinus first K. of Lombard is slain. 67 Alcoran of the
Mahomatists. 190 Alcibiades Martyr, of a scrupulous life. 42 Almaine followed
the fashion of the Roman Mass. 94 Almaine changed by civil war. 91 Alexander
Bishop. 13 Alexander ordains new ceremonies. 36 Alexander martyred. 42 Alex.
Bishop of Jerusalem. 58 Alex. 3. sent unto the Soulda^, the Image of the Emp.
Barbarossa. 103 He fled in his cooks attire. 109 He treads upon the neck
of Frederick Barbarossa. 117 Alexander 5. poisoned. 122 Alexander 6. poisoned.
129 Ambrose being sick, receives the Eucharist. 73 Anacletus 28. Martyr. 29
Auicetus Pope. 28. Martired. Ibid Antonius Pius Emp. 37 Amurathes Emp. of the
Turks. 452 Anastatius commands to worship a quaternitie. 145 Anastatius the
Emp. dies with lightning 99 Annates imposed upon France. 451 Confirmed. 460
Antichrist in his full tyranny persecuteth the faithful after the year, 130.
according to Sybilla Erithred, and makes war upon himself. 153 Anthonius and
his cohaeritikes. 96 Anthonius Bishop of Nicomedia Martyred. 73
Anthropomorphits. 268 Antinous. 36 Antioche shakes and tre^bleth. 91 Sinketh
in an Earthquake. 100 Taken by Boemundus the Norman. 111 Antiphones and the
Introite of the Mass. 145 Apollonius beheaded. 44 Apostles govern Churches.
11 False Apostles. Ibid. Apostles and their charge. 9 A fabulous apparition of
S. Michaell. 61 Arabici heretics. 19 Arcadius and other martired by Genseric.
83 Archilaus Herod's successor. 31 Archpriests and Cardinals. 54 Arrius and his
adherents excommunicated. 103 Could not be reunited with Alexander. 105
Purges himself by oaths. Armacan publishes conclusions against the Friars.
116 Armenia again receives the faith. 70 Arnoldus de noua villa, a true and
faithful man. 399 Arnold Brira opposes himself against the Clergy,
usurping the temporal sword. 329 Arnulphus Bishop of Lions slain. 322 Arrius
Antonius persecuteth the Christians. 33 Articles of the doctrine of the
Valdois. 339. Of the Bohe. Ibid. Artois erected unto an Earldome or County 227
Asia loses 13. Towns by earthquake. 6 Asia the less, has flourishing
Churches, 8. Persecuted. 49 Attyla spoyseth Aquileia and all Italy. 153. Takes
Rome. 224 Besieges Orleance. 227. Is discomfited by Meronee. 244 Aug. S.
dies. 151 Athanasius. 109 Aubriot accused of heresy, is condemned to
perpetual prison with bread and water. 128 Augustines drawn from their
Hermitages to preach in good Towns. 367 Auigno^ the seat for the Roman Court.
394 Auriflame the French standerd. 343 Ausbourge delivered from the Barbarians.
72 Augustus Caesar. 1 Aurelian Emp 64. His death. 70
B
Babylon has a Church. 10 Battle of Lepante. 602 Baiazeth 4 Emp. of the
Turks, slew his brother Soliman. 486 Baia. is put in an Iron cage. 447
Baiazeth gives 200000. Ducats to Pope Alexander the 6. to poison Geme^ his
brother. 451 Basilides heretics. 26 Bauier conquered 223 Beda the Venerable
118 Bellisarius makes Africa tributary 123 Beneuent given to the Pope 326
Bennet the younger cast into a furnace 190 Bere^garius smothered the truth under
certain errors 294 He speaks against himself. Ibid. Benet 1. Pope 176
Beginning of leaden seals 200 Baron 366 Berillus heretic 33 Barnard Monk
poisoned H. the 7. 223 Bishop and Priest all one. 14 Bishops married. 68 Bishop
of Rome made universal 92 Bishop ought to be convinced by 12. witnesses
before he be condemned. 129 Bishops make of a Council a conuenticle and a
monopoly 248 Blasphemy new of the Popes keys 313 Blondus the Historiographer.
300 Boheme tamed by Charlemaine. 156 Is erected into a kingdom. 302 Brought
into the obedience of Otho 307 Bohemians communicate under both kinds 315 Make
no account of the Pope. ^19 Withdraw from subjection. 334 They propound 4.
articles in the Council of Basil. 351 Boniface Pope. 116 Boniface an English
man, preaches in Frise and is there Martyred. 221 Burgraues. 366 Bruno the
first Chartreux, with Hugh Bishop of Grenoble. 307 Bulgaria made subject to
the Roman Church. 221 Bull of gold. 249 Bull of the Stigmates of S. Frances.
110 Bullist and Friars minors do strive for the government of the Nuns. 226
Burchardus compileth the ancient Canons. 121 Bells in use. 30 Bell tolls at
noone-tide. 461
C
CAligula afflicts the Jews. 6 Calyphe the great, comparable to the Pope.
366 He dies of famine in the midst of his great riches. 371 Calvin. 579
Charlemaine first called Treschristian. 226 Canons observed by the commandment
of Caelestine. 153 Canonization of Saints. 346 Cardinals name now in use. 282
Cardinals alone to wear read hats. 468 Cardinals named as principalls of
the Clergy. 54 Cardinals exalted against heretics. 58 Carmes called the
brethren of the Virgin Mary. 378 Carpocrates heretic. 35 Carus Emperor died
being stricken with lightning. 62 Cataphryges heretics. 35 Catechumenes.
101.43 Cathares heretics, called Nouatians. 101 Chapplers invented. 362
Cassimere. 627 Carmelites. 341 Conrade Emp. 263 Celsus heretic. 35 Caelestinus
Pope. 150 Cerdon a stoicke heretic. 38 Ceremonies invented. 52.180 Cerinthus
heretic. 40 Caesar Valentine, Alex. the 6. his bastard. 482 Chaldeans afflict
the Jews. 76 Chanons regular or irregular instituted. 307 Calixtus Bishop of
Rome. 52 Carus Emp. 74 Caius Emp. of Rome. 75 Caracalla Emp. 51. slain. 161
Charles K. of Naples, sleyeth his sister Jane at the Popes instigation. 397
Chartreux order founded. 370 Castle of S. Angeto builded. Chiliastes renewed. 67
Chorepiscopi particular Bishops. 91 Christian liberty. 19 Church of Antioche
in great fame. 16 Church in Babylon. 10 In Affrike troubled by Gensericus. 78
Roman declared principal. 111 Church called Sancta Sanctoru^ builded. 63
Churches flourishing in Asia the less, governed by the Apostles. 8 Churches
oriental communicated but once a year. 227 Churches oriental and occidentall
appeased. 244 Church of Aquilegia reduced. 89 Christians persecuted the first
time by Nero. 19 The second under Domitian. 27 The third under Traian. 28 The
4. under M. Aurelius. 40 The 5. under Seuerus. 41 The 6. under Julius Max. 55
The 7. under Decius. 58 The 8. under Galius. 60 The 9. under Aurelian. 70 The
10. and most cruel, under Dioclesian. 76 Christ exercises his ministry,
suffers his passion. 6 Clergy, Clerks, and their signification. 90 The
Clergy augmented. 112 Clergy Roman usurps the election of the Pope. 149
The temporal sword. 201 They will have no reformation 232 Except from common
collectors. 241 Clerks enjoy immunities. 39 That they ought to meddle with
secular affairs. 160 Clouis baptized and his Nobles. 108 Collation of
Benefices. 209 College of fair women. 194 Comet seen three months together.
397 Commodus strangled. 45 Co^municants take the wine and bread in their hands.
238 Council at Jerusalem. 192 Counsels touching Easter. 162 Clerus Bishop. 26
Clement the first. 27 Claudius Emp. 69 Counsels of Philadelphia. 56 At
Antioche. 68 At Nice. 96 Councels provincial every year. 98 Council
Affrican. 107 Council of Carthage. 109 Ephesus. 112 Of Chalcedon. 120 Of
Orleance 132 At Tara in Spain. 136 Tolledo 141 Constantinople 155 Council at
Auuergne 161 At Orleance 171 At Lions 177 Paris 197 Civil 200 Tolledo 222
Counsels the four general to be kept as the Gospel 223 Council at Rome 128
Councels cannot prescribe laws to the Roman Church, but from thence has her
virtues and perfections 243 Cornelius B. of Rome 60 Council at Reius 335 At
Tours. 33. Lateran 349 Council in France, against the K. thereof. 359 Council
general at Vienna. 371 Council National in Frace^. 430 Council general at
Vienna. 444 At Parpignan 445 At Pise 459 At Constance 460 Cardinal Albert. 641
Christian Churches of Constantinople. 650 Charles Borgia. 642 Clement 8. Pope
679 He makes war upon Caesar Est 760 Confession taken away by Nectarius 92
Confession annicular instituted. 346 Conon Pope 88 Conrade 1. of that name
Emperor 250 Conrade the second 261 Conrade the third 272 Conrade a Merchant of
Milain, disposes the Sect of the Fratriceilli 384 Conrade the lawful K. of
Sicilia, beheaded by the Popes council 409 Consecration of water mingled with
wine 98 Constance sister of William King of Sicily a Nun, was dispended with
for marrying 335 Consta^tius Emp. an heretic. 226 Constance pilleth Rome 161
Constance Emp. abiureth his heresy. Ibid. Constance slain at the Bathe, 20
Comodus Emp. 44. His death. 45 Count or Earl. 366 Constantine the great,
Emperor, desired to be baptized in Jordan. 83 He caused a Tabernacle to be
carried in war 87. He burns the libell of the Bishops. 92 By his humillitie
he raises up the pride of the Popes against his successors 31 Constant. the 4.
Emp. 198 Constant the 5 Emp. 215. He commanded Images to be cast out of
Churches. Constant 6. Emp. 222 Constant. Pope, 2. of that name, has his eyes
put out 220 Constant. Paleologne the last Emperor of Constantinople. 421.
murdered at the taking thereof. Costa^tinople builded in the midst of Byzantium
89 Is fired. 112. Is besieged 3. years of the Sarazins and Arabia^s, recovered
by the Grecians, 211. Besieged of Baiazeth. 222. is taken. Cosroes K. of Persia
destroys Syria. 185. He would abolish Christianity. Ibid. He is overcome by
Heraclius. Coronation of Clement the fifth troubled with the deaths of many.
2018 Cresselius punished for his ambition 334 Croisades take their beginning.
299 Cruelty of Pope Pius the fourth. 300 Cyrus reedifieth the Temple. 4
Custom upon wine and salt in France. 112 Cyprian S. his death. 64
D
DAgobert instituted a College of fair women. 194 Damasus 2. of that name
Pope. 2^5 Denmark with his K. converted to the faith 121 Danes and Normans do
return into France. 156 Darfosa martyred. 89 Darius Histaspes ends the
Temple 12 Dauphin sold to the K. of Fr. 129 Decadence and fall of the Pope. 259
Decretalls from whence forged. 60 Decretalls examined 61 Decretalls gathered
together by Raymond the Monk. 352 Decretalls attributed to Lucius. 71 Degrees
Ecclesiastical 59 Denis Bishop of Alexandria, and his death 119 Denis B. of
Rome and his Decretalls 68 Denis a Roman Abbot, made the great paschall Cicle.
173 Denis the woman of great Constantine, martyred 116 Deus Dedit or Dorithe
Pope. 186 Deacon and his signification. 14 Didier last K. of Lombards. 221
Dydius Julius Emp. 45 Dydinus a blind man, a famous Regent in the School of
Alexandria 244 Digna a noble matron in Aquilea, cast her self headlong into
the water 153 Dioclesian caused his feet to be kissed. 76 Dioclesia. and Max.
depose themselves of the Empire. 78 D. Saunders. 642 Duke Alanson. 640 His
death. 645 Duke of Guise slain. 666 Death of the L. Russell. 658 Death of the
Q. of Scots. 659 Dissension in religion. 682 Duke of Parma dies. 680 Death of
Sixtus the 5. 674 D. de Maine. 676 Death of Chapter Burbon. 673 D. of Neuers. 685
Dissension amongst the Protestant Princes. 627 Death of Amurathe. 690 D. Lopez
executed. 688 Dioclesian dies in a rage. 79 Division of the kingdom of Judea.
3 Divorce permitted for the long sickness of a woman. 257 Doctrine
Evangelical received at Valence in Dauphine. 177 Domitian Emperor. 26
Domitian slain. 37 Domitius Nero. 28 Donation of Constantine. 89.405 Death of
the Duke of Guise. 577 Decius Emperor. 58 His death. 59 Diaconesses. 92
Deodatus Pope. 199
E
EAster ordained on the Sunday. 39 To be celebrated in one day in all places.
Ibid. Ebion an heretic. 18 Edmond the last King of the Eastern English men,
slain by the Danes. 271 Edward the 3. King of England elected Emperor. 411
Election of the Pope given to Charlemaine. 253 Given to the people and Clergy
of Rome. 256 Usurped by them the To. people. 271 To the Popes Elders. 5
Election of the Emperors given to the German Nation. 277 Emperor kisseth
the Popes feet. 219 Empire Western ends. 153 Empire Roman decays. 141.187
Empire of Constantinople transferred into France. 218 Empire divided betwixt
two Emperors. 79 Empire of the West divided. 262 Empire in discord. 303
England first keeps the Lent fast. 194 Euensong of Sicily. 362 Estate of
France. 619.623 Estates of the low Countries. 620 Estates of Almaine. 692
Evangelists which. 14 Euaristus martyred. 74 Eucharist called oblation 37 Given
into the hand of the receiver. 91. carried to such as were nigh dead. 80. A
book touching the Eucharist generally received 245 Elutherius Bishop of Lions,
and his dreams 78 Eugenia daughter of Phillip king of Alexandria martyred 76
Eutalius Priest, cause of the 4. Schism 137 Euaristus B. 30. Martyred. Ibid.
Elutherius Pope 43 Eutichian K. of Rome. 71 Eutychians and Arrians rejected
from Constantinople 79 Exarches in Italy 176 Exarches cease in Italy. 211. Is
given to the Pope 218. and asked again by Constantine. Excommunication
converted into abuse 257 Excommunication written with Ink mingled with wine in
the Challice. 239. For temporal goods 329 Exorcists 91 Eusebius Bish. of R. 18
Euerguacenes 143
F
FAbian Bishop and his election miraculous 56 Martyred with his wife Darfosa
Ibid. Fable of the Stigmates of S. Frances. 389 Fausta maintains her husband
Costantine in superstition. 100 Faelix Bishop and his Decretalls and martyrdom
82 Faelix Bishop of Rauenna has his eyes put out 202 Faelix and Elephandus
condemned for heresy, which they repent 226 Faelix 5. renounceth the Popedom
480 Ferrara usurped by the Venetians 110 Feasts denounced to the people. 93
Feasts of all Saints instituted. 112 Feasts of the Sacrament called Feste Dieu
121. Confirmed. 149 Fastings 139 Feast of the spear and nails. Feast of the
transingration. Feast of dedication 716 Festus governs Judea 19 Flagellers or
whippers 117 Flaunders made a County. 290 Flower-delyce of France. 426
Forbidding to eat flesh annathenized 235 Florentines buy their liberty.
Florentines interdicted 440 Absolved by Urban the 6. 446 Florian brother of
Tacitus. 70 Usurped the Empire, and is slain Ibid.
Florus moved the Jews to war. 18 France follows the fashion of the Roman
Mass 207 France divided into certain kingdoms 197 France agrees in their
Ecclesiastical singing with the Romans 256 Frances Dandalus D. of Venice 425
Frances Curiario Vicar of the Empire, taken of the Venetians and slain in
prison 452 S. Frances canonized 383 Frances Petrarke 420 Fratricelli condemned
and persecuted 384 Fredegunda sleyeth Chrisperic. 203 Fredegunda flaine in the
Church Ibid. Frederic Barbarossa goes into Italy 329 He is excommunicated of
Alexander the third. 344 Felix Bishop of Rome 71 Formosus Pope 258 Ferdinand.
1. 554 Frederic Barbarossa is surprised by the Souldan, and set at liberty 273
Trodden under foot by Alexander the third 348 Frederick the 2. declared an
enemy to the Church 389 He is constrained to lead an Army into Siria 390
Frederick the 2. excommunicated and deprived of his Empire by Innocent the 4.
393 Frederick 2. being angered at the Pope, made many notable persons die 363
Frederick D. of Austrich beheaded at Naples, with others. 399 Frederick Count
of Misne, elected Emperor 441 Frederick D. of Brunswic elected Emp. slain by
the Count de Waldec 317 Frisons receive the faith 266 Frodesque Saluiat
Archbishop of Pise, hanged 479 Fulco succeeded Baudwin in the Kingdom of
Jerusalem. 363 Fuscus overcome by Derpains. 300 Fulbert Bishop of Chartres,
made Stirps Iesse 322
G
GAmma invented 284 Galeaze Duke of Millaine 456 Galerius Max. eaten with
worms 80 Gallien Emperor 72 Gallus Emp. he and Vclutian are slain Ibid.
Ganclon betrayeth the Peers of France 257 Gantier Diuelot slain in the Church
78 Gautlier d' Annoy an adulterer, scorched and hanged 430 Geneua and Orleance
founded by Aurelian, Geneua ordaines a Duke 80 Geneuiefue the Parisians Diana.
179 Gregorian Calender 642 Refused 647 Gregory 13. Pope dies 651 Gregory the
14. 677 Gerard Brazut Hildebrands instruments to kill Popes 537 Gibelins set up
357 Gnostiques 35 Godfrey of Bullen king of Ierulem 353 Gratian persuades 3.
Popes. 19. to depose themselves. 306 Greeks grant Purgatory, and the Pope to
be primate of the Church 427 Gregory one of the four Doctors of the Church 206
Gregory calls himself the servant of servants 79. And will not judge an
universal Bishop Ibid. Gregory celebrateth the Supper in the vulgar tongue
Ibid. Gregory the 2. Pope, opposes himself against the ordinance to burn
Images 190 Gregory the fourth accepted not the Popedom unless the Emperor
allowed the election. 221 Gregory Alias Hildedrand defended Symonie and single
life. 345 Gregory the seventh cast the Host into the fire Ibid. Gregory the 7.
a lively picture of Antichrist Gregory the 7. after his death tormented in
hell, does great miracles 340 Guelphes the Popes fautors, and Gibelins the
Emperors. 390 Guilbert Archbishop of Rauenna taken up again 16. years after
burial 256 Guido Aretine the first inuentor of the Gamma and the notes 284
Guillaine Pion Duke of Aquitaine, founder of the first Monastery of the order
of Augustine Friars 219 Guillian Orseure showed that the Pope is Antichrist 227
Guillaine Count de Holland chosen Emperor against Frederick the second. 257.
Is slain. Ibid. Guiniard Bishop of Nantes martyred 294 Guisards audition 300
Guy de Lusingam last king of Jerusalem. 357 Gaul began to be called France.
188 Gordian Emperor 56 Grasshoppers out of the bottomless pit 461 Guns
invented. 432
H
HAalon K. of the Tartarians, overcomes the Persians 177 Helchesites
heretics 25 Henry the 8. Emperor, invented the combat of tournies. 65 H. the
3. upon his marriage day drove away all Morris-players, and such like 284 H.
the 4. Emperor, shows a deiection of heart unworthy an Emperor 130 H. 4
poisoned by his son, unburied by the space of 5. years. 315 H. the 5.
resigneth the inuestitures to the Pope 334 H. La^tgraue of Thuring, elected
Emperor, dies 361 H. the 6. will needs be crowned at Rome 349 H. the 7
poisoned in an Host. 357 H. the 1. K. of England, deprived of his right by an
Archbishop 223 Henry Carperell Provost of Paris, a false Judge, condemned. 422
Heliogabalus Emp. 51 Hilary 1. Pope 157 Herculian Bishop of Peruse has his
head sawne. Heresy of Ebion. 29. Nicholaits. 29. Menander. 29. Basilides. 35.
Saturnine. 35. Cerinthus. 40. Valentine. 35 Marcian and Montanus. 35
Carpocrates Gnastici. 35. Cerdin. 38. Cataphryges. 42. Apalles. 42. Talianus.
142. Fratricelli. 420. Seuerians. 43 Theodorus. 57. Proclus and Berillus. 62.
Noetus and Sabellius. 64. Of the Manichees. 71. Arrius. 95. Pelagius. 82.
Acephales. 84. A quaternitie 47. Of many Monks. 22. Of John Bishop of
Constantinople. 302. Athenians and others. 89. Prifallian. 30.12. Monothelites.
214. Of Constantius. 363. Of Paul the successor of Pyrrhus. 249. Of Peter the
successor of Patriarch. 223. Constant. by him abiured. 229. Of Machoris Bishop
of Antioche, Monothelite. 215 Heresy of a Council 309 Heresy pernicious of
Transubstantiation 359 Herman of Saxe elected Emperor 257 Herod stirs
persecution. 2. And dies by a horrible judgment Ibid. Herod Antipas beheaded
John. 4 Herod Tetrarch banished to Lions 6 Herodes Agrippa beheaded James. 9.
His death 15 Herodias wife of Phillip Herodes 4 Hours Canonical sung by note.
357 Hildebrand causes eight Popes to die 427 Hildericke king of the Vandales,
restores the Catholics. 461 Hirene assembleth a Council at Nice. 222.
Causes her sons eyes to be put out 223 Holland erected into a County. 259
Homousis and Essence 99 Hungary and Boheme become one kindome 371 Honorius
King of the Vandales persecuteth the Christians, and dies of vermin 472
Hospitalls 164 Hospital of the holy Ghost builded at Rome. 474 Hospitaliers
called the knights of S. John of Porsale 321 H. K. of Navarre. 643 Heluetians
658 Huguenots 667 H. the 3. K. of France 669 H. 4. King of France crowned. 686
He is absolved of the Pope. 691 Hussites do reject all humane traditions. 221.
Are assaulted by Sigismond Emperor and the Pope. 691 Hypona besieged by the
Vandales 346
I
IAcobius founded upon Pope Honorius his dream. 351 Iacobius of Berne. 494
Idolatry finds the Pope a defender thereof 209 Idolatry of them of Gaunt. 228
Idolatry of Chaplets 362 John Baptist preaches 4 John Apostle and Evangelist
dies 27 John of Antioche heretic and a Jew, compiled the Alicoran. 190 John
king of England subjected his Crown to the Pope. 227 Ignatius cast to beasts
31 Innocent the first 146 John the 1. Pope. 167.2.169 John surnamed Teutonicus,
opposes himself against the Popes demanding of tenthes in Almaine. 421 John
Duke of Britain slain with a wall 262 John 22. an heretic 392 John de
Roquetaillade martyred. 421 John Colunban and Frances Vincent the first
Jesuits 417 John Wickliffe 443 John Gerson 443 John Hus commends the
doctrine of Wickliffe to the people. 426 John Hus and Hierome of Prage go to
the Council and are burned. 442. Their death. Ibid. John 24. saluted of an
Owl, is much troubled. 440. He flies from the Council of Constance. John
Paleoleauge Emp. of Constantinople 400 John Guttenberge inuentor of Printing
455 John Pusters Called Gurman, and Peter Sheffert sell their printing Ibid.
John Huniades escapes from the battle. 372. Dies. Ibid. John Justinian of
Geneua beheaded 391 John an English man burnt. 479 John Fissers author of the
repentants order 364 John Picus Prince of Miradula. 297 Johan of Orleance a
maid, burnt 448 Jerome died 149 Jerome Sauanaroll burned. 229 Julius Max.
Emperor slain. 54 Just. of faith 147 Julius Philipp. Emperor. 57 Jerusalem
divided into 2. Sects. 4 Is in sedition. 6. Left of the Christians, is
besieged. 22. Horrible famine 23 Jerusalem taken 23 Jerusalem changes the
name. 34 Jerusalem taken by Cosroes king of the Persians 121 Jerusalem taken by
the Mahometists 282 Jerusalem taken by the Christians 299 Jerusalem raced eue^
to the foundations 92 Images broken. 57. Taken out of Churches. 29. Restored
Ibid. Taken away and burnt, forbidden to honor them upon pain of death. 54.
Thrown down by Sabin K. of Bulgaria. Ibid. Images and paintings abolished in
Churches 223 Images set up by Hyren. 223. Impugned by Charlemaine. Ibid. Imbert
Dauphin of Vie^na, makes himself a Iacobin 426 Indians brought to the Roman
Church, promise to keep the Sacrament of confirmation. 439 Indulgences do
penetrate even to such as are in purgatory. 498 Invention to pray for the dead.
122 Inuestatures agreed to Henry, revoked 239 Inuestatures resigned to Pope
Calixtus 25 Ionathes high Priest, slain by Joseph 49 Joseph the
Historiographer. 26 Iouinian a Christian Emper. 122 Jesuits original 417
Ireneus is slain 50 Isaach Exarch ratifieth the election of Stephen 123 Italy
and Burgoine subjected to Arnulphe 100 Italy the sea of seditions. 224 Italy in
great factions 427 Italy governed by three Cardinals, having the power of
Senators 361 Italy afflicted by the Turks. 373 Iubile first 299 Iubile
remitted to fifty years. 412 Celebrated at Rome Ibid. Iubile of 25. years,
to 25 years. Iubile celebrated by Alexander the 6. 371 John de Austria 623
Johannes Basilides 649 James king of Scots besieged and taken 660 Innocent. 9.
678 His death Ibid. Irish rebellion 630 Jews and Leonards punished for
poisoning waters 406 Jews crucify a Christian chude. 466 Julian Medices
slain in hearing Mass 396 Justin Emperor 166 Justin the Pelagian dies out
of his wits 225 Justinian seduced by Antsenius to depart from his error. Ibid.
Justinian compileth the Roman laws. 171 Dies of phrenzie Justinian Emperor
breaks his faith given to the Sarasins. 222 Sent inta exile. Ibid. Kisseth
the Popes feet. 230. His head is cut off. Iul.an Emp. 100. His death. 122
K
Kingdom of Cyprus. 473. Of Aragon made a pray by the Pope.
King of Bulgaria does receive the faith 251 King of the Romans Emp. diverse
names, but of one substance. 460 King. Phillip. 2. 635 King of Navarre
excommunicated 657 King Phillip displeased with the Pope* 670 He dies. 708
King of Er^ excommunicated. 668 King of France converted. 683
L
LAntgraues 366 Lambert Bishop of Liege rebukes Pepin for adultery 274 Lewis
184 Laudo Pope 264 Lansrancus the first author of Transubstantiation 285
Laurence Deacon of Rome suffers Martyrdom. 68 Laurentius Valla 245 Laurence
de Medices excommunicated 333 Legends of Saints forged 182 Ledger Bishop
martyred. 320 Leo Emperor burns Images. 257 Leo Emp. of Constantinople slain
in his Palace 343 Leontius and Tiberius Emperors beheaded 376 Letanies the
great instituted. 154 Levites 5 Liberty to preach the Gospel in France 215
Liberius the Arrian canonized. 256 Lombards reigned in Italy. 262 Lombards have
the Empire converted to the faith. 279 They occupy the Exarchate. Linus. 20.
His death. 25 Libraries 95 Licinius Emperor 81 Longin Gracian the first Exarch
in Italy 176 Lotharius dies a Monk. 277 Lewis Debonaire gives power to the
Roman Clergy to elect the Pope 345 Lewis son of king Phillip first, came
to Artois 301 Lewis S. marketh blasphemers with an hot Iron 299 Lewis
Emperor declared heretic by the Pope 297 Crowned by 2. Senators of Rome Ibid.
Gives a reason of his faith. 390 Lewis Archbishop brake his neck in a dance
154 Lewis Duke of Orleance murdered at Paris 453 Leo the 10. Pope 153 Lucian
the Apostate 30 Lucius king of England received the faith 44 Lucius B. of Rome
martired. 564 Lucrece daughter, wife and daughter in law to the Pope 484
Luitprandus king of Lombards, besieges Rome 297 Leopold D. of Austriche takes
the King of England prisoner. 322 Lupus Bishop of Troy approves Letanies 167
Luquois entreats the liberty of their commonwealth. 312 Liuonia or Lisland
converted to the faith 362 Le^t attributed to Telesephorus. 35 First Lent in
England 194 Lotharius Emperor 233 Liberius Emperor 113 Luther. 106.
Excommunicated 504 Lewis Beltram Friar 671
M
MAhomet an Arabian a false Prophet. 189. Adored after his death. 221 Mahomets
Alcaron 190 His Paradise laws and ceremonies Ibid. Mahomet and the Pope
conferred together 192 Mahometists take Jerusalem. 282 Master of the
Synagogue. 52 Mancinellus 486 Manes heretic, broiled alive. 99 Manichees books
burnt at To. 27 Manicheus again condemned, are cast out of Rome 151 Mantell
episcopal 253 Mark preaches in Egypt. 15 Mark the Evangelist dies. 19
Marcelline offers a grain of incense to Idols 203 Marcian heretic 40
Marcion heretic 38 Margarite Queen of Navarre condemned to perpetual prison
for fornication 375 Marriage public 30 Marriage forbidden to Priests. 91 Mary
the mother of our Lord dies 15 Martian Emperor slain. 149 Martine Empress,
has her tongue cut out 216 Marcell Bishop of Rome 78 Massacre in France 606
Marcus Bishop of Rome 108 Martirs suffer diverse torments. 58 Martyr the word
when used. 89 Martirs of the Pope differ from them of the Church 315 Martyrain
builded in Jerusalem 89 Maxentius drowned in Tyber 82 Maximian chooses his
own death 83 Maximilla and Prisca Prophetess^^ 219 Maximin has his hand and
tongue cut off 200 Matild the harlot of Gregory the 7. is called S. Peter's
daughter. 305. She gives all her goods to the Pope 319 Marquess 366 Maurus
the Roman, and Faustus the Italian, teach the Monastical life. 175
Malcontents 629 Maximilian dies 622 Moluchs death. 632 Mulei Mahamet drowned.
632 Monsieurs voyage into Flaunders 632 Mariade lauisitatione 666 Max. taken
prisoner 666 M. Cauendish voyage 661 Marcus Bragadinus 675 Mauricius beheaded
with his wife and children 182 Macrin Emperor 56 Mena^der Disciple of Symo^
Magus 14 Max. Emperor 483 Mendicant Friars 384 Mess the word, how it was
used. 87. His Introite. 150. Augmented. 163. Called the Gregorian office. 167.
Invention of the word. 181. Song after the Roman manner. 112. Celebrated in
Latin. Ibid. Augmented with Gloria in excelsis. 220 Metropolitanes and
Archbishops 90 Michael Emperor of Constantinople 213 Millaine taken, made
subject to the Empire, reuoulteth. 35. After a siege of 7. years, is sacked.
564. Reedified and called Alexandria 365 Ministers 14 Miracles lying 200
Miracles and apparitians forged. 322 Mytre of the Pope 468 Monkery planted 192
Monks heretics, banished from Rome 181 Monks black privileged 185 Monks
of three sorts 124 Monks may not carry to baptize 182 Monks may not be kept
in Monasteries against their wills. 218 Monks rents 226 Monks voluptuous.
242. Commanded to marry. Monks of England have by gift the 10. part of the
kingdom. 265 Monks privileges 143 Monks, Venetians, and of the Mount Olive
437 Monasteries founded 146 Montanus and his heresy. 17 Moses brother of
Calapine. 451 Marcus Aurelius 40 Meldriades king of R. 84
N
NAples conquered by Charles the 8. 443 The disease of Naples 436 Nero
persecuteth the Christians and kills himself 21 Nicasius Bishop of Rhemes
slain 178 Nicholaites 314 Nichomedia the seat for the Eastern Emperors 287
Names of dignities 252 Nuns and invention of their habits 337 Nuns
dispensed with to marry. 344 Normanes receive the faith. 290 Norway receives
the faith. Ibid Has a privilege to sing Mass without wine Ibid. Notaries and
Protonotaries. 54 Nerua Emperor 27 Nicholas 1. Pope 241
O
Observation of days. 154. Of betters Ibid. Ocham and Dantes held for
heretics 428 Office of a king 83 Office of a subject Ibid. Office of a Bishop
91 Office of Priests 93 Office of Deacons 95 Olympus Bishop of Carthage,
suddenly burnt 89 Order of the holy Ghost 632 Ouids Tomb Orange receives the
Gospel. 125 Orange sacked 227 Orchanes 2. Emperor of the Turks 409 Ordinance
of Bigamies 166 Of orders 167 Of extreme unction 174 Of protections 185 To say
Mass toward the East. 187 To celebrate prayers of Baptism and the Supper with
an high voice. 188. Of the feast of Candlemas. Ibid. Of punishing heretics.
20. Of the 7. Canonical hours. Ibid. Commemoratio^ of the dead at Mass. Ibi.
Of Lent not universal. 213. To sing the Creed on high. 205. Of offering bread
and wine. Ibid. Of lamps burning in Churches. 184. Altar coucred with clean
clothes. Ibid. That the Corporal should be kept clean. Ibid. That a Bigant
should not be made Priest. 290. Of the exaltatio^ of the holy Cross. 287. Of
the sign of the Cross. Ibid. Of burial out of Churches. 223. Of Organs. 231.
Of supplications against thunder. Ibid. Of bearing children to baptism. 274.
To kiss the Pix or Mass. 275. That Popes should be made with consent of the
Emper. 28 That Clerks should bring up no dogs nor hawks. That a lay man
should not lay hands upon a Clarke 292 Ordinances humane made equal with the
word of God. 3018. Ordinance of Pope Urban 2. 331 Ordinances execrable 318 The
order of Clugny 256 Of the Carmes. 399. Of William Hermit. Ibid Of the
Trinity. 362 Off the brethren of the hospital. Ibid. Of the Iacobins
confirmed. 372. Of the Caelestines. 391. Of the Pawlines in England 400 Order
of the Jesuits 406 Four new orders of such as were crossed. 318 Orobite
heretics in Bohe. 463 Organs first in use in France. 221 Origines. 54. His
fall, his end. 64 Ostragoths made war with Belizarius. 185 Otho the first 267
Otho the second 274 Otho the third. 300. He causes his wife and the Adulterer
to be burned. 318. He is poisoned 321 Otho the 4. excommunicated of the Pope
365 Othoman the first, Emperor of the Turks, by little and little usurps upon
Europe. 388.
P
Paganism 216 Palace of Auignon burnt. 209 Paleologue Emperor. 399. He is
excommunicated. Ibid. Palladium carried to Constantinople 103 Pantheon builded
27 Pantheon burnt 26 Pantheon dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and to all Saints.
459 The Papaltie returns to Rome 437 It decays. 444. It was void 2. years
447 Pope ratified by the Exarche. 224 He is elected without the Emrours
authority. 235. Consecrated with a new ceremony. Ibid. Pope defender of
Idolatry. 232 The King of France holds his bridle 224 Pope authorized of the
devil, bestows the kingdoms of the world 224 Pope condemned by a Pope. 220
Goes on Procession on foot. 212 Abuses the Emperor. 226. Cause of schism,
in the Empire. 233. Transgresses his own laws. Is called God. 236 Deposed
and again restored. 266. Enters by devilish Art. 221. Slain in adultery.
300 Disgraded and after banished. 310. He studieth Necromancie. 399. Appeared
after his death. 301. A Symoniake. 312 Chosen by corruption. 317. Is an
Apostate Ibid. Pope elected at Rome, an other at Senes. 319. Recouereth S.
Peter's Patrimony by Arms. Ibid Called Prince of Sodom, servant of the
servants of God 179. He is showed to be Antichrist. 138. He will be judged of
no man. 290. He may be deposed by the Council. 293 Popes imitators of
Doiclesian. 296 Excommunicated. 298. Rise against Emperors. 301. Do crown
Emperors, sell public benefices. 317. Change their names: proved by the
shame fast parts 277 Popes schismatikes ane Simoniniakes 326 Three Popes at
once. Ibid. Make war with one another. Excommunicate one an other. 327
Papists run to false miracles. 243 Papinianus slain 57 Paternus Monk, burnt
in his Cloister for the vow of obedience. 323 Poulian Pope 54 Probus Emperor
70 Paschal 1. Pope 250. Patricke Bishop of Soissons. 302 Gives the Country
thereof to the Church of Rome Ibid. Patrician 226 Paul his parents, and place
of his birth 8 Paul converted. 9. Led to Felix. 18. Sent to Rome Ibid. Paul
Samosatenian. 68. Condemned by the Council of Antioche Ibid. Paul heretic 98
Paul Patriarhe condemned. 114 Parma created Duke 628 Prince of Orange shot. 640
He is slain 645 Poland troubled 666 Patriarch of Constantinople. 65 Prince of
Sax. prisoner. 653 Prince of Conde poisoned. 665 Priests reconciled 672 Peter
Barrier 683 Peace between Fr. and Spain. Phillip the 3 king of Spain. 708
Pentecost 83 Palatines 386 Persecution under Herod. 2 Persecution in Flaunders
371 Persecutions at Paris. 457 Petrarke 420 Peterpence 238 Peter Lombard 327
Petrus Comestor 327 Petrus Bercoris Ibid. Phillip preaches in Samaria 89
Phillip Bishop of Alexandria martyred with his daughter. 66 Peter whether he
were at Rome. 14 Peter in bonds past thereof. 9 Peter de Bailard heretic
Pelagian 79 Peter de Ruere spent in 2. years 200000. Skutes Pilate cyted to
Rome 10 Peregrin a Philosopher, cast himself into the fire. 42 Pilgrimages
began 111 Printing 455 Pelagius. 147 Phillip de Anioy, the Queen of Nauarres
adulterer, broyled alive 34 Phillip Emperor a Monothelite 357 Pientia builded
by Pius second. 200 Platina writes the Popes lives. 141 He is imprisoned Ibid.
Plurality of benefices began. 291 Polycarpus 40 Polycarpus burnt 41 Pomeriana
receives the faith. 322 Porphyrius 53 Pragmatike sanction. 453. Abrogated 495
Priest and his signification. 14 Priests communicate under both kinds 231
Priests cannot communicate alone 243 Priests of Greece might marry. 195 Priests
rents 217 Priests married in France about 900. years after the Apostles. 219
Priests married in England, are condemned. 271 Prayers of the Church 92 Prayers
for the dead 213 Primacie of the Church established by an homicide and a
traitor 185 Pius the first 39 Privilege of the Temple. 17 Privilege of the
Roman Church 124 Probus brings Germany into a Province 121 Prophets and
their interpretation 14 Purgatory invented 239 Pyrrhus Patriarch, dies
shamefully Penitentiaries. 408
Q
QVadratus governor of Syria. 201 Quadratus Bishop of Athence Ibid. Quatorrian
heretics 47 S. Quintin in Vermendois founded 245 Quintilianus 21 Quintilius
brother of Claudius the Emperor 69
R
RAbbi Masters 14 Rastrix D. of Cleue, has his eyes put out 290 Reliquaries
sold and given to the poor 227 Red hattes 468 Relickes invented by Satan. 131
Repertory moral 433 Reservation of benefices 414 Rodolph. 2. Emperor 622
Reformed Church of Antwerpe. 629 Riga 683 Rodoaldus K. of Lombardie slain in
adultery 198 Rome set on fire by Nero. 19. Given to Syluester by Constantine.
82. Taken again by Genseric. 144. Taken of the Hunes. 161. Of the Goths the
second time 172 Rome and Italy return from the obedience of the Emperor Leo
191 Rodolphus a child, martyred by the Jews 209 Reconciliation. 45
S
SAcrament of the Altar. 287 Saints lives are forged. 182 Saladin kills the
Caliph. 203 Occupies Jerusalem Ibid. Salike law 283 Saladins 343 Salve Regina
282 Singing received into the Church 140 Sapor king of the Persians 56
Siluester Bishop of Rome 88 Scanderbeg, Seuerus Pertinax. 46 The house of Sauoy
made a Cou^tie 100 Schism for the Feast of Easter 223 Schism in the Papaltie.
208 232 Schism in the Empire. 400 Serena Empress Martyr. 77 Sergius Pope 205
Seruians kills Amurathes. Sigismond Emperor 439 Simon Magus. 14. Simoniakes.
13 Scotland receives the Gospel. 163 Scotland allied with France. 252 School
of Caesaria 121. Ethnike of Laodicea 130 Schools of two sorts 95 Seuertists
154 Stephen stoned. 8 Spain follows the manner of the Roman Mass 301
Stephen K. of Bosne roasted alive. Smyrna destroyed by an Earthquake 385 Swisses
called defenders of the Roman liberty 416 Sinagogue has his master. 73
Sebastian King of Portugal. 625. His death 631 S. Martin Frobisher 626 S. W.
Raleigh 647 S. R. Greenfield Ibid. S. H. Gilbert 646 Seueniaries banished 651
Spanisp Navy 664 S. F. Drake 665 Sixtus the fifth 652 S. Ph. Sidneys death. 619
Sigismond King of Poland. 685 Sinode twice in the year 29 Of Bishops at Rome.
440 Touching Images, Soter Pope. 41 Stephen king of Rome 61
T
TAcitus Emperor 70 Taborites heretics. Tancredus 123 Tartars 94 Talianus
heretic 99 Titus 25 Temple of Jerusalem ended. 2 Burned. 4. Templers began.
307 Templers abolished 396 Tertullian reuoulteth 47 Theodorus Pope 260
Theodocius Emperor 130 Theology scholasticall 201 Theophilus 41 Tymothe
Martyr 22 Thomas Stukeley 630 Tumult at Cracouia 677 Treasure of the Popes 672
The Church troubled 695 Turks overthrown. 682. 688 Transubstantiation
invented. 275 Is forged 285. Decreed. Practiced by Gregory the seventh, and is
made the 10 Article of the faith. 345. Honored with a feast 361 Tyber
ouerfloweth 309 Tyranny of the Duke of Guise. Tyberius 3 Traian Emperor 28
Telesephorus Bishop of Rome. 35.
V
VAlentine heretic 438 Valerian taken, and his misery 63 Venice is builded
149 Venetians have a Duke 297 Victorinus a Rhetorician. 109 Urban 7.674. His
death. 675 Valence Emperor 125 Valentinian Emperor 124 Vigills observed 86.
133 Vincent the Historian 127 Vlpianus Ibid. University erected at Paris. 223
At Pauie. 292. At Prage 415 At Vienna. 420. At Lipsia. 423. At Thuring 500
Unction forged by Popes. 48.816 406 Victorian martyred 159 Vandales take end in
Affrike. 152. Come into Mauritania. 169. Are excommunicated. Vespasian 20
Vicegothes converted 170 Urban Bishop of Rome 53 Victor Bishop of Rome 45
Virgin what 248 Victor. 2. 290 Vigillius Pope 171 Vitalian Pope 198
W
Wars proclaimed against Spain 691 Waldois 339 Wencelaus Emperor 42
Willielmes hermites 341 White Mantles 450
X
XIxtus Bishop of Rome. 67 Xeques Mulei his son, turned Christian. 679
Z
Zachary Pope 215 Zenon Isaurike Emp. 158 Zephirim B. of Rome. 50 Zimglius 56
Zuric. 505.
FINIS.

