THE LOVER or A Discourse of NUPTIAL LOVE Written by Robert Crosts To please
himself
(...)

Virgil. Ecloga. 10. Omnia Vincit amor, and nos cedamus amori. Boethius metro.
8. lib 2. Hic and coniugij sacrum Castis nectit amoribus. Omne tulit punctum,
qui miscuit vtile dulci (...) W. Marshall. sculp:


THE LOVER: OR, NVPTIALL LOVE.

WRITTEN, by Robert Crofts, To please himself.

LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop and T.F. for Rich: Meighen, next to the middle
Temple in Fleet Street. 1638.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, if you ask me, to what intent I publish this Treatise, I
may answer, to please you: A well resolved man cannot please himself, but he
desires to please others also, and endeavors in all good ways so to do. And
I am not out of hope, but that this discourse, will profit some men also, since
I have made use of many and diverse Authors in the composing thereof. But I have
endeavored to digest the same into such a new manner, method style and form,
as was most pleasing to my self; adding thereunto such Inventions, Raptures,
observations, Poems, Alterations, and experiments, as met with my meditations:
so as the Treatise may seem and be even as pleasing as if it were all new.
Which to do, often times requires well nigh as much Art, as wholly the Invention
of new matters. It is true, I know the world is cloyd with books and many
there be perhaps more then needs of this subject; but this is a breife and
Compendious discourse; and therefore I hope will neither cloy the world or the
Reader. It was written for Recreation, amidst more serious occasions; and so I
desire it may be read. I know there be many malicious, envious, male contented
and malign Spirits in the world, who will pine, greive, and grudge at the
prosperity and pleasures of True-lovers, as they do at all happiness, and
that there be many carping Readers who usually read all (especially pleasing)
books, in a sneaking manner, and endeavor to find nothing so much as faults;
and by their juggling and cunning art of detraction, can make one or a few
faults, seem to devour a multitude of good Actions, endeavoring nothing so
much as to discourage and hinder all good, pleasant and happy ways. But for
the censure of such men, I shall endeavor not to regard, or else to contemn
them. Yet truly I shall think my self much obliged to such, as in good will
shall tell me of my faults, Errors, Ignorances and negligences. However knowing
that all things in the world are imperfect, it shall suffice to please my
self, that I have done as well as I could for the present time. But I had not
so easily nor so soon bin persuaded to be, a fool in Print as the proverb
goes, and as the Carping and barking Reader is especially like to say, if I had
not had some enemies (as well as many friends) who have provoked me rather to be
ce^sured by many, then abused by a few. But if I did not think and hope that
this discourse would be pleasant and profitable to some in reading, as it has
bin to me in writing, and if that I had not bin greatly encouraged herein by
many men, I should still have bin content to have suffered the aspersion of a
Pocket Author, ashamed to show himself abroad, fearing to be a fool in Print.

Farewell.
The Contents.
THe first Section, treats of the Excellency of Nuptial Love. The II of the
miseries of the loss and want of such Love. Section III. of a good choice in
Love. IV How to Enjoy our wishes, please our Lovers, and increase Love. V The
Art of Love, discourse. VI An instance in this Art concerning Loves Excellency.
VII Showing further the use of this Art of discourse. VIII Showing breifely how
to attain the same. IX Answers to some objections. X Remedies against the
loss of Love. XI Remedies against an oversottish and doting Love. XII Remedies
against unlawful Lusts. XIII Remedies against discontents after marriage.
XIIII A breife persuasion to marriage. XV The good use of this Nuptial Love,
and so concluding, with a breife discourse of Divine Love.
THE LOVER OR A Compendious Discourse of Nuptial Love.
SECTION. 1. Of the Excellency thereof.
THe Difinition, Divisions, Pedigree, kinds, object, causes, symptoms and
effects of this subject, Nuptial Love, has exercised the pen of many and
diverse Authors; they are Common and well known, I shall therefore begin with
the excellency thereof.

The Excellency of this marriage Love, may first appear by the Author thereof,
which is God himself.

In the beginning of the World, the Lord God said it is not good that man
should be alone I will make an help meet for him. Genesis 2.18.

Our Savior says, from the beginning of the Creation God made them male and
female, for this cause shall a man leave his father and mother and shall cleave
to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. Mark. 10.7. Mat. 19.

And in his Sacred Word, by St. Paul he says, Husbands love your wives as
Christ loved his Church; so ought men to love their wives as their own bodies,
for he that loves his wife loves himself. Ephesians. 5.25.28.

The excellency of this Nuptial Love, may further appear in respect of the
object, which is Woman, who is the image of God as well as man. Genesis 1.27. An
help meet for him, 2.28. A part of himself. 31.

Wine is strong, Kings are strong; but a woman is stronger. Women have Dominion
over Kings, says Zorobabell. Esdr. 4. All men submit to Love.

When that Hermits boy, who had always bin brought up in the wilderness came
first abroad in the world, being asked what sight pleased him best therein,
readily replied. Those things which you call Women.

A virtuous woman is a Crown to her husband, says King Solomon. Prove. 12.4.

Loves excellency also appears in respect of the parties affected; The
bravest, the most noble, generous, and gallant spirits, are commonly most and
best taken and possessed with this Love: wherefore it is called Heroical Love.

And the parts of man affected also, are his most excellent parts, as the
Heart, liver, blood and brains; and consequently, the imagination and Reason.

I say Reason! for want of Love commonly shows want of reason; either
stupidity or peevishness in a man. It is most certain that divine Love is
infinitely more excellent and above humane Love; And such men as are of a
Divine temper, may easily overcome the same. But all of us have bodies as well
as souls, we are composed of humanity as well as divinity, and he that never
felt the power of this love may be esteemed as some Eunuch, or sot, or else of
a super-humane temper

And on the other side, excess of love, shows weakness, dotishnesse, and
folly; and then these excellent parts of man are misaffected. Such Love is
without Reason, but true love is most agreeable thereunto and therefore
Excellent.

And further, the excellency of this Nuptial Love appears by the effects
thereof, which are very many. To instance breifely in some few of them.

This Love preserues and increases mankind in a perpetual generation, and
unites familiar Provinces, and Kingdoms.

It causes abundance of felicity to such as are indeed true lovers, such who
live together like Abraham and Sara, Isaac and Rebecca, Paetus and Arica,
Seneca and his Paulina, Rubenus Caelar and his Ennea, Cato and his Portia, and
the rest of those who are regestred in the list of true and happy Lovers.

It is said, there is no pleasure in the world like that of the sweet society
of Lovers, in the way of marriage, and of a loving husband and wife. He is her
head, she commands his heart, he is her Love, her joy, she is his honey, his
Dove, his delight.

They may take sweet council together, assist and comfort one another in all
things, their joy is doubled and Redoubled.

By this blessed union, the number of Parents, friends, and kindred is
increased; It may be an occasion of sweet and lovely Children, who in after
times may be a great felicity and joy to them.

And these may remain as living Pictures to show their memory, from generation
to generation; Lysippus, Mento Polycletus, Zeuxis or Parthasius, had never the
skill to engrave or paint the father and mother near so well and lively; and
great is the Pleasure that loving Parents enjoy in their Children.

A multitude of felicities, a million of joyful and blessed effects, spring
from true Love.

And indeed this Nuptial Love and society sweetens, all our Actions,
discourses; all other pleasures, felicities, and even in all Respects,
Increases true Joy and happiness.

SECTION. 2. The Miseries of the loss and want of such Love.
THis blessedness and excellency of love will be the more apara^t if we
consider the miseries either of the loss of such love before marriage, or of
the want thereof after marriage.

It is wonderful to think how many Lovers, for want of enjoying their wishes
in this kind, plunge themselves into a multitude of cares, fears, sorrows,
blindness, dotage, servitude, slavery, mischeife and miseries.

Many men will venture their goods, fame, lives, and (as King John for Matilda)
Crowns if they had them, to enjoy their Loves.

Sorrow, deiection, much waking, sighing, Neglects, Peevishness, restless
thoughts, brutish attempts, want of apperite, palenesse, and leanness, are
common effects and Symptoms of the want of enjoying, and of the loss of Love.

And millions of men having lost their Loves, for this cause, become
Melancholy, discontented and dejected, all their lifetime after.

Many there be (says Zorobabell) that have run out of their wits for women,
and become servants for their sakes. Esdr. 4.26. These things are commonly
known; Bedlam has bin full of examples.

Many also have perished, have erred, and sinned for women. Esdr. 4.26.
Examples hereof have bin common in all ages. Histories are full of them.

And how many have we known and heard of in our ages, who have consumed away
and dyed for want of enjoying and loosing their loves, yea some for grief have
bin their own executioners and for this cause have made away themselves.

And after marriage it is strange to think, what Iealousies, Contentions,
Fears, Sorrows, strange Actions, gestures, looks, bitter words, outrages and
debates, are between men and their wives for want of true love and discretion.

These things have always bin and are so common to all men's view, as they need
but little disquisition.

An evil woman (says the wise man) makes a sorry countenance and an heavy
heart, and he had rather dwell with a Lion then keep house with such a wife.
Eccl. 26.27. And he that has her is as if he held a Scorpion, verse. 14.

SECT. III. Of a good choice in Love.
But that we may truly love, obtain our loves, enjoy them and live well
together; First let us make a good choice in Love.

A good wife is from the Lord, says King Solomon; Let us then first go to him
by prayer for such a one, and invite Christ to our wedding, let us take Saint
Paul's counsel, to marry only in him. Whatsoever ye do, says he, let all
be done to the praise and glory of God.

Let Piety and Virtue be the first mover of our affections, since therein only
consists true and permanent felicity. And no lovers live more pleasantly and
happily together, then such as are of gracious and virtuous conditions.

Whereas among such as are of vicious and impious conditions, what is to be
seen, but strife, tumults, disorder, suspicion, confusion, and misery in the
end. A virtuous and well given lover, is much better to be esteemed, then a
fine fair face with ill conditions,

Let us not then be so sensual, as to love only the corpse, but look higher,
and see something in our lovers of an Angelical nature; That is, a free
virtuous and gracious mind, which to an understanding man appears to be a
divine essence, and to which he mingles his soul in love, which (if truly
thought on) will appear to be a far more excellent and permanent love then
that of the body, and consequently more pleasant.

So then let us sphere our loves, and seek beauty rather in a mind then in a
countenance.

In the next place after Piety, virtue, and good conditions, it is very good
and requisite to look after corporal and external respects.

And as near as we may, to choose such as are of equal years, birth,
fortunes, and degree, of good parentage, and kindred, of such a countenance,
complexion and constitution, as best agrees to our love and disposition.

Inconsiderate and unequal marriage, are commonly very pernicious and a
multitude of mischievous and miserable effects spring from such marriages.

An old woman is a very unfit and unpleasing companion for a young man, and for
an old man to dote upon young wenches is very unseemely and hateful. Ecclus.
25.26. And commonly much strife, suspicion, jealousy, discontents, and
miseryes ensue such marriages.

It is a good time, as some say, for a man to marry between five and twenty
years old, and thirty, and for a woman between her age of eighteen and two
and twenty.

That young fine wife of old rich Faelix Plater of Basil, being married to
him against her will for grief hanged herself.

Such as marry foolish light Phantasticke adlepated, brainsicke, Pieces, and of
contrary conditions, are like to find but peevish, jealous, froward and
untoward things of them.

If a sound and healthy person marryes one that is diseased and impotent, It is
like to be an occasion of much discontent.

And so in all respects such as marry unequally and unfitly, what better
success can they look for, then Vulcan had with Venus, Menelaus with Hellen,
Theseus with Phadra, Minos with Pasiphae, Claudius with Messalina; Suspicion,
Jealousy, Strife, Shame, Sorrow, Discontent, and Misery.

Let us then as near as we may conveniently, choose such as are of fit and
equal years, birth, fortunes, degree, parentage, constitution, and of like
virtuous, and gracious conditions.

And especially such a one as from our hearts we can truly love. From such a
loving, fit, equal and good choice is like to spring abundance of most sweet
delights and felicities.

SECT. IIII. Showing how to enjoy our wishes, please our Lovers, and increase
love.
HAving made our choice, now comes a question.

How shall we do to obtain our wishes, and please our lovers. It being such
an excellent felicity to enjoy our loves, and such a misery to loose them, as
is said; this matter therefore is very requisite to be peept into.

The ordinary and usual Arteficiall means prescribed, and used to obtain and
increase love, and to please our Minnions, Mistresses, and Madames, are such as
follow.

Pleasant and well composed looks, Glances, Smiles, Countersmiles, plausible
Gestures, pleasant carriage, and behavior, affability, complements,
salutations, a comely gate and pace, dancing and the like, will greatly please
and increase the love of some female creatures. Also time, place, opportunity,
conference, importunity, and sometimes (I know that) neglect and scorn does in
some of these female kind, much increase love, for some of them are of such
Imperious conditions, as they will insult over, and scorn such puny Lovers as
will be pind upon their sleeves.

Hence it is, like women are compared to shadows, if we follow them, they
will go from us; If we go away, they will follow us again: wherefore
sometimes to neglect is better then opportunity, and whetteth Love.

There be diverse love-trickes, and devices also to stir up and increase love;
as tokens, favors, letters, valentines, merry meetings, and many others,

All these fore named occasions, allurements, and love devices, are usually
practiced and even natural to lovers, and need little disquisition.

I might now imagine a Wedding day, wish to all true-louers, joy, and proceed.

Yet because me thinks I see many young lovers in a deep study, very pensive
and melancholy, surely the matter is, they are plodding and devising what to
say to please their mistresses at their next meeting.

And forasmuch, as heretofore at idle times, to recreate and please my self, I
began to study the Art of discourse.

I now think it not amiss (out of the same) to take a little pains, or
rather a little pleasure to recreate my self (amidst more serious occasions)
and give an instance only, concerning this matter of Love.

SECT. V. The Art of Love-discourse.
ARteficiall discourse being added to the other love devices, if any good
means, will, this may effect our desires, and to such as are already agreed,
the same may be most pleasant and delightful, much increase love and add a
greater joy and pleasure to all other Love-sports, devices and pleasures.

We know, that even common and frivolous discourse being spoken in the way of
love, will much please and take these female lovers, such as are idle
Compleme^ts, Players ends, News, tales, Love-stories, Lascivious Jests, Songs,
and the like, though very idle and frivolous, and though spoken and acted by
some Apish gull-Pot Poet, or swaggering idle companion, so as (especially light
Phantasticke things, such as many women are) will be over head and ears in
love.

But now if some well given, fair conditioned young man (for to such I
cheifely direct this discourse) shall withal add a sweet pleasing, convincing
heart-striking and material discourse to his Lover, whom I will imagine to be
a like virtuous and well conditioned young creature, it will be indeed
sufficient to captivate sweetly, charm and overcome them, and being spoken in
the way of love, and mingled with other honest pleasant love devices, to fill
their hearts full of joy and pleasure, and so to enchant them as they will be
joined together with an indissoluble bond of true flaming Love.

For the manner and matter of our discourse, I have always thought it vanity,
and lightness rather then courtesy, to discourse (according to the gallants
fashion of our times) by mere complements, congies, apish gestures, and mere
finicall words. To say, sweet mistress, or Madame, I honor your
shoo-strings, the ground you tread upon, am proud to kiss your hand, it is my
ambition to be your servants servant, and the like, to present and offer not
only our service, but life to the command of our mistresses, as we use to
call them, though God knows we never mean to be their servants.

Or, on the other side to study and talk to them high strains of wit, and
figurative exornations lest they be not understood or laughed at.

But in this respect a plain yet arteficiall moving and peircing way is best.

I intend not to perscribe a set method to discourse in, for why methinkes a
premedicated set discourse shows something a barrenness of wit though not of
judgment. And is commonly uttered with little passion or feeling (which is in
some measure taken away by premeditation) and consequently not so freely,
lively and with such a grace as otherwise, unless we can counterfeit (like a
Player) our passions, and have wit enough to come out and in upon all occasions
of discourse.

On the other side, we are not strayted in this subject for want of matter to
discourse on all occasions, even in an extemporeall manner, for every smile,
Action, Object, Event, or speech, may afford a lover matter of sudden
discourse, and indeed love of it self, if it be fervent, whets the wit and so
stirs up the spirits, as we may say of lovers; As of fine wits, they can
make use of any thing.

But neither of this extemporeall discourse is my intention to write of, but
rather a mixture of both, which I will call a habit of discourse, or; an
extemporeall Method. A method not so much to discourse in, as to discourse by;
in such sort as a man may be furnished with continnuall abilities of discourse
in an extemporeall method (as I may say) or a sudden and well composed manner,
without brainsick, light, idle, frivolous, prating on the one side, or too much
pumping for wit on the other side, but with a ready yet perswasiue and
material discourse on all occasions.

But this Art of discourse in general, concerning all matters will not easily
be given to weak novices (yet the mere observation thereof even to such may
do them some good concerning this matter of love) but in general, it will
rather require that a man be well learned and experienced in the liberal
Sciences, especially such as he shall have most occasion to discourse of. So as
he may readily on all occasions dilate the matter of his discourse by the Rules
and grounds of this Art, which are:

By Number, Particulars, Arguments, Examples, Comparisons, Similitudes,
Contrarieties, Appendances, Circumstances, and the like.

I shall first give an instance in this Art of discourse very breifely
concerning this matter of Love, and that only concerning the excellency
thereof. And then a taste what is to be done to attain to this Art.

SECT. VI. An instance in this Art of Discourse concerning Loves excellency.
FIrst, for instance in this Art concerning the excellency of Love, which
though I have already given a taste of, I shall now speak more thereof in
another manner, method, and to another purpose.

For this purpose, let us imagine a man to be well skilled in this Art, that
we may guess what such a man can do, and imagine this able skillful man in
this Art have occasion to discourse of the excellency of Love, he can readily
even Raptim, discourse thereof in diverse ways and manners, as for example.

Either from the number of benefits and excellencies, flowing from thence as
from a fountain, such as are sweet and pleasant thoughts, looks, smiles,
kisses, discourses, songs, tales, jests, sports, embraces, dalliances, mutual
kindnesses, comforts, helps, society, pleasant meetings, mirth, increase of
parents, kindred, friends, riches, sweet and pretty children, and mutual
enjoyme^ts of all the blessings and pleasures that can be thought upon, and as
he pleases, can apply all or any of these to his love, and when he sees
occasion can sing to the same purpose.

We Will sometimes sit and sweetly chat,
And pretty tales and stories tell,
We Will sometimes sing, and jest, and laugh
In all delights we still may dwell.
We Will sometimes lovingly embrace
And sometimes sport and sweetly play,
Yea all delights that can be thought
Like truest lovers we will enjoy.
And also, he can from these felicities and benefits springing from love,
conclude the excellency thereof, apply it, and if he pleases, sing -- It Is sure
a pleasant
most excelling thing,
From whence such, and
so many joys do spring:
The rarest Jewels
are not half so precious,
The sweetest honey
is not so delicious.
Oh, then dear Love!
let us true lovers be:
That we such joys,
may feel, may taste, may see.


And also if he pleases, can discourse of any particular of this number, yea
even of the least of them; As for example, of a kiss, telling, that the Rose,
Gilli-flower, Musk, Nectar, Balsome, Ambrosia, are not half so sweet as these
loue-dropping kisses, or in the like manner; and this he verifies on her lips,
and can when he sees occasion mingle therewith pleasant songs and Poems.

O that such sweet joy,
Should so soon pass away
and so suddenly wast,
That such excellent blisses,
As are thy sweet kisses,
No longer should last.
So sugared, so precious,
So soft, so delitious.
So dainty, so sweet, and so fine,
As the honey from the Be:
Is not half so sweet to me,
As is one sweet kiss of thine.
Or, from a very thought of Love he can tell the excellency thereof, showing
that even such a thought is enough to fill the heart with joy, drown all
sorrow and make us think our selves even in Paradise, to imagine what
pleasures we shall enjoy hereafter.

Dear, let us ever be in Love.
Let still such thoughts our fancy move.
And so of the like, concerning any other Particular of this number.

He can further Argue, and conclude from any particular of this number, the
excellency thereof, diverse ways; as for example, from the lesser to the
greater.

As from a thought of Love, he concludes a necessity of greater excellency, in
greater matters.

If but a thought of Love
be such a treasure
To enjoy the same is sure
far greater pleasure.
Or, from particulars to the number in like manner. If from one or a few
particulars of this number of excellencies, and benefits, flowing from Love,
spring so much felicity; How much more, does then proceed for them all.

When such so many sweetest joys
Shall all at once within us meet,
Oh, how we shall be rapt therewith
And filled with pleasures, extreme sweet.
And likewise concerning Time, as for example, To enjoy such pleasure but one
hour, or a day, were enough to possess the heart with mervellous Joy, yea
though that hour or day were half a year hence, yet the very imagination of
it in the mean time is sufficient to possess us with sweet pleasures till
then. Much more may a longer time delight us.

To enjoy such pleasures but one day,
It were enough to ravish even
Our hearts and minds, with such sweet joy
To think our selves almost in heaven.
If but one day, be such sweet joy
Such rarest pleasure, such delights,
What pleasures may we then possess,
Perchance a thousand days and nights.
Or, otherwise in diverse kinds. But to proceed.

Further, he can discourse and set forth the excellency of Love, by examples;
as of Seneca and Paulina, Orpheus and Euricide, Mansolus and Artimesia, Mark
Antony and his Octavia, Argalus and Parthenia, and others. Histories are
replenished, with examples, and can show how such Lovers think themselves,
even in the Orchards of Adonis, or the Elizian fields, when they enjoy their
Love, they are so taken with pleasure.

If others in their Love do find
Such joy, such pleasures, in their mind:
Why should not we, let thee and I
Enjoy such sweet felicity.
Or, by comparisons, by way of Interrogation, or otherwise, did ever any Lovers
enjoy such pleasures, and shall not we; Then will we sport, play, laugh, and
sing,
And live as merrily, as a King.


Or, beyond comparisons, Chaereus never took such pleasure in his Pamphila, as
thee and I will in one another; He thought none living, so happy as they two,
but we may swear it of our selves, Cupid nor Venus, Jove himself.
Shall never know what we may tell:
What heavenly pleasures, what delights,
Within thy heart, and mine may dwell.


Or, by contrarieties, That the power of Love is of so great force, as the
loss of it, often causes extreme melancholy, sadness, grief, madness,
and sometimes death it self, as appears by the examples, of Queen Dido,
Queen Artimesia, Portia, Triara, Panthea, Medea, Parthenia, Juliet, and Romeo,
Pyramus, and Thisbe, Antonius, and Cleopatra, Coresus, Calirhoe, Clorus,
Amyntas, of Mareus Lepidus, Plantius, Numidius, and many others. It must needs
be a most excellent felicity, the Loss whereof causes such misery.

If it be death,
to loose a loving wife,
To enjoy her then,
is sure more worth then life.
Or, by similitudes, diverse ways, and in every particular, as for example; The
pleasure of Love, may be likned to fire, an ardent and flaming joy, to water,
a fountain of pleasure. Gold, Pearls, Amber, the Rose-muske, Nectar,
Ambrosia, or whatsoever is most pleasant, is not so precious, so sweet, so
delightful, the Elizian-fields, or Turks Paradise, is not more pleasant. This
Nuptial Love, is often used as a Resemblance between Christ, and his Church,
the Canticles, is wholly, a Love-song to this purpose; And it is to be
thought, that no humane earthly joy, represents that of heaven, more then this
of true Love, though there be no comparison, between terrestrial, and
Celestial happiness, either in worth or duration of time, these being as
nothing, as dross in respect of the heavenly; yet in respect of our weak
Apprehension, such comparisons often are, and may be made.

For some do think,
that Love is even,
A joy Divine,
a taste of heaven.
Or, by the effects of Love, To instance among many, and diverse in a few; Love
quickens the Spirit, and wit, and makes a man become pleasant, neat, spruce,
lively, a Poet, a Musician, a dancer, a man of fine behavior, it makes us
enjoy all things in the world, with a sweeter pleasure then otherwise, for why;
it possesses the heart with joy, and a joyful heart takes pleasure in all
things, sweetens all our Actions, Discourses, Riches, and all pleasures; A
million of joyful and blessed effects spring from Love, if we love truly.

So, if we love we still, shall find,
A joyful pleasure, in our mind:
Whether, eat, talk, think, work or play,
True Love, will turn all into joy.
Or, by Additions, Appendances, and Circumstances, as for example. That Love,
is more splendent, and excellent, when it is seated in its Throne, and attended
with Riches, honors, and other pleasures, who seem to be Loves handmaids,
who graces, and sweetens all the rest. And as a Circumstance, he can discourse
almost of any thing, and set forth the excellency thereof, as by the
Attendants, Riches, honors, and pleasures; by the object Women, by the Parts,
and Parties affected, which are the most excellent parts of man, and commonly
the bravest, noblest, and most generous men. By the Author which is, God
himself; for Love, is a daughter of heaven, yea as some say, a little heaven
upon earth, by which we may spy and spell Glympses of heaven, and be the
more inflamed to seek and possess it, so as it seems we may enjoy two
heavens.

In highest joys, that can be thought,
Weel sweetly pass our time away;
What pleasure is in Earth, or heaven,
That thee and I may not enjoy.
Thus have I given a taste of Loves excellency by way of instance in this Art of
discourse.

But I pray remember, it is but by way of discourse, and I hope you will pardon
what is amiss; for you know men will talk somewhat largely, to please their
Lovers, and yet say they have given but a taste when they have done. But I
proceed.

SECT. VII. Showing further the use of this Art.
BY which order, or Art of discourse; we may discourse of any other particular
whatsoever, as for example; Of the contrary to what has bin dilated, to wit,
the misery of Loves Loss. Which may even readily be dilated, and expressed by
this Art, in this manner likewise.

Either, by the number of miseries, the misery of each particular of that
number with observations, in respect of matter, time, place, and other
occasions. And each particular demonstrated by diverse examples, Reasons,
Arguments, Comparisons, Contrarieties, Similitudes, Circumstances, or
otherwise. And set forth by apt expressions, and particularly applied, and
passionately enforced and uttered, according to the nature of the subject.

In this manner also, we may discourse of any other subject upon occasion,
whether of Riches, or of honor, of health, of Prudence, Temperance, fortitude,
or of any virtue, of Poverty, disgrace, or sickness, of Covetousness,
Ambition, Intemperance, or of any other vice, or misery; yea of Religion, and
divine Matters.

And in truth, there cannot be a better way of Love discoursing, then a
Religious way (however, seldom practiced, but rather despised, by many of the
blades, and gallant Dames, of the world (as well as the sottish, and blockish
sort of people) who think and esteem all things above their phantasticke, and
vain humors, folly, and madness.

But indeed, what better way of Love discoursing, can be, then a laudable, and
pious insinuation into the mind, of such as we discourse with, whether friend
or Lover, by heavenly discourses, which also may be done by some such like
Art, as has bin dilated.

In so much, that if both parties, be of a divine temper, their hearts may be
filled with heavenly, and glorious thoughts, but these things I know will seem
folly, mystical, strange, and as very Riddles, to such whose mere natural
minds are not raised to the knowledge of supernatural, and heavenly things.

But such Lovers, and friends, whose minds are Elevated to a supernatural, and
divine temper, their hearts can be filled with heavenly Joy in such
discourses, and by the eye of Contemplation, see one another in respect of
their minds, like Angels, Divine creatures, and so love one another with a
heavenly, as well as earthly Love.

Both which, being united, do tie their hearts together with an indissoluble
knot, and fill them with sweet fountains of joy, and delight.

SECT. VIII. Showing briefly, how to attain this Art of discourse.
NOw to give a taste (as I said) how to attain to be a skillful Artist, in
this or the like Art of discourse.

Which because it may be said in general, almost in as few words, as
particularly of Love, I shall endeavor very briefly, to show the same in a
general way, which is:

First, by often and serious meditations, to imprint into our minds, the
grounds and heads thereof.

As Numbers, Particulars, Observations, Arguments, Examples, Comparisons,
Contrarieties, Similitudes, Circumstances, Appendances, and the like, as
perfectly, as we do our A, B, C. Whereby we may as readily call to mind
those grounds, as we can letters, to spell words with, which is, as fast as
we can speak.

Or, as in the Art of Brachygraphy, or Short-writing, we readily know, at
which end, side, or place of the letter, to set the tittle, dash, or ensuing
letter, whereby we know, what vowell, dipthong, or word it signifies, even as
suddenly, as we can think of any thing; or as Preachers do, especially take
notice and imprint into their minds, the heads, divisions, and grounds of their
Sermons.

Secondly, having thus imprinted the grounds in our minds, we ought to be
furnished with sufficient learning, and skill, concerning the matter of our
discourse.

And in general, to be skillful in such Arts, and Sciences, as we shall have
most occasion to discourse of, whether of Divinity, Physic, Law, Philosophy,
History, Poetry, or other; so as I might instance also in this Art, concerning
the Divine, the Lawyer, the Physician, the Gentleman, and diverse others, as well
as the Lover, in their several ways of discoursing, and also concerning
diverse usual occasions, if my skill would attain thereunto, but this Treatise
will not admit thereof.

That so by observation, reading, or otherwise, we may be furnished with
sufficient Learning, matter, examples, and skill to this purpose, in such sort,
that we may (as some ancient, and well furnished Orators, Lawyers, Physicians,
and others can in their several ways) readily discourse, even Raptim, upon
any Maxim, ground, or Rule in their Scicences.

So then impressing the grounds of this Art in our minds, and furnishing our
selves with a ready ability, to discourse upon these grounds, is the way to
attain to this Art of discourse.

And although the perfection thereof be very difficult to attain unto in such
a ready manner, yet even the mere observation or reading thereof, may lend us
some light, and in this matter of Love be an occasion of increasing the same,
and possessing our selves and Lovers with most pleasing joys, and delights,
(unless we have to do with some brainsick, foolish, Phantasticke, light
things, better lost then found,) and consequently dispossess the young
melancholy Lover of that pensive humor, fearing not to enjoy, or please his
Love.

Thus much concerning the Art of Discourse.

SECT. IX. Containing answers to some objections.
ANd now me thinks I cannot but imagine, that some too severe Cato Churlish
Timon, or Carping Momus, will esteem this Love-discourse, too light and wanton.

And I know there be many in our times, so Stoicall, and Rigid, as they will
scarce allow moderate and lawful Recreations, (for this discourse was chiefly
written, for mere recreation amidst more serious occasions, and so I desire it
may be read.) And they esteem honest, and harmless Love sports, pleasures,
and discourses (though in the way of marriage) profaneness.

But we may know that it is good and commendable, for such as do, or intend
to live in that honorable and blessed estate of marriage, to be possessed with
conjugall Love, and consequently such honest love discourses, devices, and
pleasures, as increase the same, are to be esteemed good and commendable.

And I conceive, that no well conditioned happy man, none but envious,
malicious, male-contented Spirits, will hinder, dislike, or grudge True-lovers
of such honest, and harmless Love delights, and pleasures.

And I am not so Cynicall, but that I think a modest expression, of such
amorous conceits, as suite with reason, being free from obscaenity, will yet
very well become my years, in which not to have some feeling of Love, were as
great an Argument of much stupidity, as an oversottish affection, were of
extreme folly.

But what need I excuse my self in this, when it is well known that many whole
volumes, have bin written of Love, and that diverse famous and worthy
Philosophers, Physicians, Historians, Poets, and others, have written as
lightly, and more wantonly, then I have done of this subject.

But says my Grandsire, it seems to me, that such vain Love discourses, are
unnecessary, and of little persuasion.

Yet if we think of the Parties, to whom these things are spoken, that is, to
female creatures, and to Lovers; Such things as are a great deal more
youthful, vain, wanton, and not of such a serious, and solid substance, as my
Grandsire is; we shall know that such discourse are most apt and pleasing, and
much more perswasiue, than other more grave and solid.

And we know that these female Lovers, esteem every word of their Sweethearts
discourse (though peradventure but slight matter, as if it were spoke) like, an
Angel, and if withal such Arteficiall discourses, such pleasant
Heart-striking Reasons, be mixed, it is even sufficient to enchant, and
inflame a Saint with Love, and Joy.

In so much, I know that if there be a reasonable simpathy, between the
Parties in Age, degree, fortunes, Countenance, Constitution, and Conditions,
and a willing consent of Parents, and friends at first, (though afterward great
and strange opposition should happen in many respects) it would be a
marvailous hard matter (if not impossible) to part and disunite their Love.

And that sometimes even such great opposition, quickens and increases such
true Love and joy, which often flames the more, when it is blown against and
stirred up. And then such Love and joy after crosses are past, is most pleasant
indeed.

If such discourses then, be of such strong effect and operation as to join
hearts in true Love, and increase joy, notwithstanding many crosses, and great
opposition, much more is it when those are past, when both parties, and their
friends are well pleased, when all their thoughts are composed of kindness,
Love, and Joy.

Medea's ointment, Helenaes bowl, Circes cup, Phaedras Ring, or Venus girdle,
cannot so inchant a man, so sweetly move and please his mind, as such
discourses will a female Lover.

SECT. X. Containing Remedies, against the Loss of Love.
But now here comes a question, what is to be done if we loose our beloved.

Indeed, many Lovers for want of enjoying their wishes in this kind, become
extreme melancholy and sorrowful, and some betake themselves to ill courses,
as whooring, and Taverne-haunting, and sometimes spoil themselves.

But indeed it is a madness for a man to grieve, melancholize and run into
dissolute courses; because he cannot obtain his desires in this kind, perhaps
some unworthy creature; For if he have not placed his Love too high above his
deserts, or too unequally and unfitly, and if he have used good means to
gain her, if this will not, he may justly think that she is some light
fantastic thing, not worth his Heroical, and Noble thoughts.

A wise man, will not Love a mere Corpse, or which is worse. A body with an ill
soul in it.

Some Remedies usually perscribed against this malady the loss of Love, are;
To withstand beginnings, to avoid all occasions, as the company of the party
beloved, discourse with her, sight of her, place where she lives, and the like.

Or, to go to some other Mistress of better fortunes, birth and degree, if it
may be, or if such cannot be attained, yet let us know. That of all necessary
evils (such as men say wives are) any may serve for necessity, and because they
are Evils, perhaps it is better to have none at all.

Though we Batchellors perhaps think wives fine things, yet such as have
tried, will tell us otherwise, as that there are many Thorns amidst the Roses
of marriage, which hinder the pleasures thereof, and cause much sorrow.

That married men's shoes wring them, but we know not where. That many of
there foreheads are forked and we are blind.

That the Love of the body is at the height, and will fall when once it has
gotten admittance into those hidden and worst parts thereof. And that so it is
of the mind; Though our Lovers show us their best conditions forward, yet when
those hidden and worst parts of the soul which they dare not show the world,
are bare and detected. It Is like we shall find them much worse then we
expected.

So may we observe by the carriage of most men after they are married; They
are commonly more sullen, dull, sad, and pensive then before. Many of them love
not their wives, Nor perhaps have they any great occasion, for as much as we
see many of them prove sluts, Scolds, idle, infirm, Proud, Jealous,
Scornful, Arrogant, and so imperious not to be endured, light, peevish,
froward, sad, lumpnish, prodigal, discontented.

And yet these men when they were Batchellors, thought these pieces fine
things, and imagined a Paradise in gayning them, and many husbands also (it is
true) are as bad or worse then their wives, insomuch as many married people
live a very miserable life; scolding, brawling, grieving, and always
discontented.

We may read in diverse Philosophers and other Authors, of many wise and witty
speeches and opinions against marriage, and they tell us many tales and stories
to this purpose; Some sad, and some merry ones. They are very common, and for
brevity I omit them.

Some men are Cornuted and father Children which are none of their own; Their
Children prove undutiful, disobedient, and prodigal servants, stout and
careless. A multitude of hindrances, charges, cares, crosses, and annoyances
are incident to married people; what wise men would marry.

Besides, I might to this purpose, tell how happily we Batchellors live
without wives; How freely, securely, merrily, pleasantly, and without control.

Saint Paul, preferres a single life before marriage, and I hope you will
believe him. Yea but says the married man you had better marry and live honest.

To answer this Cavil. It is observed, that Batchellors are as honest as
married men; for many of them are seldom content with their own wives, which
is a greater shame and evil in them. But to let that pass, Batchellors can
live honest without marrying, Such as are of a very unruly temper may use a
moderate spare cool, and dry kind of diet, and other Physical Remedies, to
allay the fire of Lust.

They can fast, pray, be always busy about some good occasions and thinking
on good matters.

But the most excellent Remedy is, Divine Contemplation; for certainly those
Spirits which are truly raised to the knowledge of divine things, and do well
know the Art of heavenly Contemplation, are elevated above all the pleasures of
the earth; in as much as Eternity is above time, and infinite felicities above
vanities.

And not being able to find any thing on the Earth worthy of their desires,
They do set out their pleasures and their felicities in the Empyrean heaven.

So as they do in part, taste before hand of the sweetness of those pleasures
which they pretend to receive at the end of their life, which makes them very
graciously to tread under foot all the pleasures of the Earth, while their
souls are in such contemplations, directing their Aims to heaven.

And while they are in these divine Ecstasies, their Spirits are so strong, as
they do overcome their bodies, so heavenly, as they do then esteem the
chiefest pleasures of the body (as this of carnal desire and love) but as dung
and dross in comparison of those more heavenly pleasures which they enjoy in
their souls. And in such comparison they rejoice more in Contemning these
bodily pleasures and in being above them, then in enjoying them.

What need we care for farthings who may have gold enough. But as St. Paul
signifies; Marriage hinders this heavenly pleasure; He that is married, says
he, cares for the things that are of the world how he may please his wife.

And certainly there be many married men in the world, if they did but truly
know the Excellency of such a contemplative heavenly life, and and did
seriously consider how freely and joyfully we Batchellors may life; They would
even run through fire and water to be so happy.

But now least married men should be too much displeased, let them know or
think; That we Batchellors when we speak against married men, mean only
of unfit and ill marriages. Such as that of Spungius and Philtra; They would
swear, curse, quarrel, fight, etc. Let such be always scoft at and remain
miserable, till they mend their manners.

And least Batchellors should be too averse from marriage. And such as loose
their first Love, should forbear a second choice which always drownes the
Love of the former in oblivion, and is the best remedy against Loves loss, for
here they may find it again in another. Let us still say, as Saint Paul
says; That marriage is honorable in all men, and that it is good to marry,
though for such as can contain themselves better to live single.

And that a Consonant, Equal, and fit maariage, when both parties be loving,
kind, wise, constant, and of good conditions, is a Terrestrial Paradise; and
from thence (as has bin dilated) proceeds a marvailous deal of happy and
blessed effects.

SECT. XI. Remedies against an over-sottish and doting Love.
HAving formerly viewed, and seeing the excellency of Lawful Love, and the
many sweet and blessed effects springing from thence. Let us take heed that we
do not (as many men in the world have done) plunge our selves beyond the
bound-markes of Reason and discretion, into an over-sottish and doting
affection.

Many (other wise famous and wise) men, as Sampson, David, Solomon, Hercules,
Socrates, and many others. Have not uniustly bin taxed of folly and
indiscretion in this matter.

And the Poets feign, that Jupiter himself was turned into a Golden shower, A
Bull, A Swan, A Satyr, A Shepherd, and committed many gross dotages for Love.

For Remedies whereof, and to the intent that we may be contented if we
cannot enjoy our wishes. And that if we do Enjoy our Love and desires, the
same may not hinder us from seeking and enjoying Divine beauty and pleasures,
which are infinitely better. Let us also view the vanity and insufficiency of
this External Loveliness and beauty which is the object of our Love in this
kind.

It is altogether vain and uncertain; Sickness, care, grief; The scratch of
a Pin; The Sun, or any thing may deface it. It ofttimes prooves dangerous,
makes us forget God, bereaves us of grace, and of divine pleasures. And is many
times an occasion of unlawful Lusts, and the miseries thereof.

And many men by reason hereof, in spite of friends, parents, credit and
fortunes, have bin wilfully and foolishly carried away to shame, disgrace and
misery.

So that immoderate ouer-sottish Love, is no more a virtuous habit, but a
vehement passion and perturbation of the mind. A Monster of nature, a destroyer
of wit and Art.

This external Loveliness and beauty, sometimes bereaves us of all manliness
of Spirit, dejects our otherwise Nobler thoughts to vanities and toys.
Insomuch that hereby we are sometimes ready to become foolish, doting, weak,
brainsicke, Inamoratoes, and sometimes to fall in Love even with painted
vanities, mere outside Creatures, Things Empty of virtue and grace, And
composed of Pride, Vanity and wickedness.

If we Love such as have no other beauties but their bodies, what do we but
love as irrational creatures do; Reason tell us, we love that which a Pin
may alter. That which is subject to above 300 several diseases, That which is
all loathsome within, And that which shall be nothing hereafter but putrified
and Rotten Corruption.

And yet many of us forsooth, are no wiser then to fall in Love with such
creatures of mere vanity and corruption, quite depriving our selves of Reason,
comparing their eyes to Stars, thinking them the only wonders of the world,
and telling them they are like Angels, divine creatures, And what is most
excellent, and so even Idolatrize to these creatures of earth and vanity.

You Courtiers and others, who think it a trim piece of glory to get a
Mistress, and a Ladies favor forsooth, you who esteem and call your
Minnions, Goddesses and divine creatures; And would like Adam give Paradise if
you had it for an Apple, and venture heaven to satisfy your base and unlawful
Lusts, you that adore these Victimes, and think your selves most happy when you
can tempt the Pudicity of these female creatures and overcome them to your
Lusts, what do you but act the Devils Stratagems which he teaches you, what
do you enjoy and adore but a Crust of Plaster full of corruption, a piece of
flesh that must Rot and turn to Putrefaction.

What a thing is this; A piece of Clay quickened with life adores a Snowy
dunghill. There shall come a time when the Crust of your pleasures shall be
broken, and you shall see what misery lies within; think what faces you shall
make at the day of Judgment, unless you repent and amend.

Where is now the fair Hellena, Cleopatra, Arethusa, Hero, Lucretia, Roxane,
Panthea, Leucippe, Ariadne, Polixena, Lesbia, Rosamond; And the rest of those
admired Pieces whom the world has seemed to adore, where is now their Beauty
and glory. They are dead, and become a sink of Corruption, and so ghastly, as
we should be afraid to see them. Think now you proud Dames, what mettle you
are made of, and let it give a check to your Pride.

Flatter not your selves before your glass, you Mistresses and Madames of the
world, I mean you, who are Empty of Virtue and Grace, and full of Pride and
wickedness: You, that take a pride to charm Spirits, and bereave them of
reason and grace; You, that study each day new lessons of Vanity, Pride, and
niceness, to wound hearts, whereby you undo Souls: your body is just of the
same temper with the shadow which you see in your Glass. You are indeed
nothing.

And if you will, that I say you are something; You are a mere dunghill
covered with Snow; A sink of Infection, environed with Flowers; A rich Coffer,
full of loathsomeness; You are the frailest and most changeable things in the
world. I dare hardly eye you any longer, for fear while I look upon you, you
vanish from mine eyes, since you are ready to change and to dye every hour.

Me thinks I could even laugh at your Vanities, and mock at those that admire
you so. I could willingly turn back and tear those Love-discourses out of my
Book in contempt of your Vanities, were it not for their sakes, who are indeed
True-lovers.

But for such Lovers sakes, truly; who are not possessed with this over-sottish
and doting affection on the one side; Nor with a stupid, blockish, or peevish
Love on the other side: Such as are indeed virtuous, discreet, modest, Loving,
constant, of sweet and gracious Conditions; I could wish, that I were able to
invent such sweet and pleasant Love-straines as might continually fill there
hearts, with as much Joy and delight in each other, as can be thought of.

Let us then endeavor to be such true Lovers; and to all such (as to our
selves) Let us wish all joy and happiness.

SECT. XII. Remedies against unlawful Lusts.
LEt us also (while we view the excellency of Lawful and true Love) beware of
unlawful and Raging Lusts. There is well nigh as much difference between true
Love and unlawful Lusts, as between heaven and hell.

For Nuptial Love is lawful, honorable, and blessed, ordained of God in
Paradise; A Remedy against fornication, adultery, and all unlawful Lusts. And
from which as has bin declared, springs a million of blessed and joyful
effects.

But all unlawful Lusts and the effects thereof; as fornications, Adultery,
Incests, and the like, are Cursed, and often forbidden and threatened against in
Gods sacred word, as all men acquainted therewith, do well know; And from
thence proceeds a multitude of evil and miserable effects.

Let us therefore briefly view the miseries of such unlawful Lusts. The
consideration whereof may be Remedies sufficient to slight our irregular
desires from the same.

Though these Lusts be pleasant at first, yet the end is as better as
Wormwood, as that wise King says, Prove. 5.4. The way to death and hell,
verse, 5.

To the body, it often causes loathsome diseases, as Pox, Gout, Sciatica,
Aches, Convultions, and diverse others; It usually causes dullness, weakness,
and shortens life.

Many men consume their estates thereby, in feasts, banquets, Revelling, pride,
and gifts, thinking thereby to seem magnificent and please their Minnions.

Lusts has bin an occasion of much Iealousies, strife, discention,
disturbance, and subversion of multitudes of persons, families, Towns, and
Kingdoms,

It was an occasion of the destruction of the old world, of Sodom, of
Ghomorra, The Sychemites, of Troy, Persepolis. Of Spain in the Reign of King
Rodericke, and many others.

It has bin the Rain of strong men, as Sampson, wise, as Solomon, Priests, as
Holies Sons, Elders, as in the story of Susanna, Histories are full of
examples in in this kind; As of Caracalla the Emperor, Childericus the first
of that name King of France, Teundezillus King of Spain, Redoaldus King of
Lombardy, Mulleasses King of Thunis, Abusahid King of Fez, and his six Sons.
Of Tarquin, Antonius, Cleopatra, Appius Claudius, Alexander Medices Duke of
Florence, Galleatius Duke of Millaine, Peter Jews Duke of Placentia, Ione
Queen of Naples, Fredegundus and Brunhaldus of France, and others innumerable.

From this root of unlawful Lusts, springs also to the Soul of man a
multitude of evils and miseries; as Fornications, Adulteries, Incests; and
sometimes Rapes, breach of Vows, and treacheries are occasioned hereby, whereof
Histories are replenished with Examples.

Cares, fears, jealousies, pains, perplexities, Enmities, Contentions,
extreme sorrow, heart-burnings, sadness, dullness, and sometimes fiery dotage
and madness, proceed from this Fountain.

Shame and Repentance is certainly the end thereof, or worse; Despair, and
eternal misery, without Reconciliation to God through CHRIST our Savior.

The consideration of all these miseries, may make us for ever hate, and
endeavor to avoid such, unlawful Lusts.

Other Remedies usually perscribed against the same, are; A moderate, cool,
dry, and sparing diet, fasting, Prayer, Continual Action, in some good
business and employments, and to be always thinking of other good matters.

But the best and most usual Remedy for such as are of an unruly temper, is
marriage and Nuptial Love.

Let therefore married men, endeavor to Love their wifes as much as they can,
and let Batchellors if they may, Marry such as from their hearts they can truly
Love.

For true Lovers (as I conceive) may take more pleasure in the Enjoying of one
another, then if they might possess the Love and society of as many Minnions
and beauties as they can desire in the world; For why, diversity of Loves (as
in objects to the sight) hinder, entire and true pleasure in any. And we know,
that one dainty dish most pleasing to our palate, is more delightful then
abundance which cloyes our eyes and stomach.

SECT. XIII. Remedies against Discontents after marriage,
But now if we should mistake our selves (as many men do) who think they take
an Angel by the hand at their marriage day in the Church, but after find that
they have a Scorpion in their house, and in their beds; some scolding,
brawling, ill conditioned woman, for King Solomon says, An evil woman is like
a Scorpion, yet let us be contented.

Let us be as wise as we may, and consider women's weaknesses and infirmities;
That if perhaps men had their bodies, they would be as frail and as
passionate as women; And if Women were freed from the frailty of their sex,
they would be as manly and as excellent as men.

And though Women have diverse natural infirmities both of body and mind, yet a
wise man will not love his wife a jot the worse, because he knows they are
natural.

But few Women are Angels, and he that would have a Woman without passions,
must marry when the Sign is not in Coelo.

And for this scolding malady, this is a good Remedy; To be silent and not
regard her, or else to laugh at her.

But let us see if the fault be not in our selves. The reason why many Women
are so bad, is; because they have ill Husbands, if so, let us mend. Happy are
we, if our Wives be an occasion of our being good, though they be never so
bad. And sometimes, a good man may chance to make a good wife of an ill one.

It is also fit, that Men should use their Wives well, and maintain them in
good fashion according to their means, and to let them have such reasonable
and convenient Liberty and authority, as it is fit a wife (who is a man's second
self) should have and enjoy.

For want of this, many women being too straightly kept under, and unkindly and
Churlishly used; are even forced to fly out beyond Reason, and to become
Froward, Contentious, Jealous, discontented; And some, to turn Queanes by
Compulsion.

Too much liberty and Authority on the other side, is not fit to be allowed
them; especially to such kind of women, as love not their own houses, but by
reason of much gadding abroad, learn more tricks then be good, who are then
only pleasant and contented. And at home nothing but brawle, and are there
commonly sullen, froward, peevish, discontented, and of idle lewd conditions.

Let therefore, both men and women endeavor to avoid all occasions of strife,
and discontent, as much as they may; And such as cannot be avoided, to
Contemn or Dissemble, and make the best thereof. And to endeavor in all
respects, to live lovingly, familiarly, and pleasantly, in such sort as becomes
them.

Saint Paul, and Saint Peter, give excellent directions, to this purpose.

So ought men to love their Wives, (says Saint Paul) as their own bodies, for
no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as
the Lord his Church, Ephesians. 5.25.

And again, ye men Love your wives, and be not bitter to them. Colossians.
3.19.

And to women, he says; Wives submit your selves unto your husbands, as unto
the Lord; For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head
of the Church. Ephesians. 5.22.

Saint Peter also gives directions to this purpose, in his 1. Epistle, and 3
Chapter.

I will write them at large, for they are most excellent; He begins with
Wives, and is longest about them, they having as it seems, most need of
instruction.

Ye wives (says he) be in subjection to your husbands, that if any obey not
the word, they also may without the word be won by the Conversation of their
wives, while they behold their Chaste conversation coupled with fear.

Whose adorning, let it not be that outward Adorning of playting the Hair, or
of wearing and putting on gorgious Apparel. But let it be of the Heart, in
that, which is not Corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit,
which is in the sight of GOD, of great price.

For after this manner in the old time, the holy Women also who trusted in GOD
adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own Husbands: Even as Sara
obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord, whose Daughters ye are, as long as ye do
well, and not being dismayed with fear.

Likewise, Ye husbands (says he) dwell with your Wives according to
knowledge, giving honor unto the wife as unto the weaker vessel; and as being
heirs together of the grace of Life, that your Prayers may not be hindered.

Finally, be ye of one mind, having Compassion one of another, being
pitiful, courteous; Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, but
contrariwise, blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye may
inherit a blessing.

Thus much (says St. Peter) 1 Ephesians. 3 Chapter, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and
10 verses.

So then, let Men and their Wives in all respects, Endeavor to live together
as they ought, according to such Divine direction.

Let them always be as Loving, kind, pleasant, and as familiar as may be,
and mutually enjoy together all the blessings and benefits, belonging to this
Nuptial Love and Society.

And especially, let them be Pious and Religious. Then, though their Beauty
and Bodies should decay and become infirm, yet their very Souls may be in
Love with one another, which is far more excellent then bodily Love.

So while they view one another as divine and Celestial creatures, as the
beloved of God himself, their Loves may still kindle and increase, until both
they and it ascend to that firmament of fire, where Love (all divine and
heavenly) flames beyond imagination, and lasts for ever.

SECT. XIIII. A brief persuasion to Marriage.
I Shall now endeavor briefly, to persuade such, as may conveniently (though a
single Life, be otherwise to be preferred before it) to this honorable and
blessed estate of Marriage.

It has always bin confessed by all reasonable men; That a consonant Marriage
(such as when both parties be equally matched in respect of Years, Birth,
Constitution, and Fortunes; and of loving, kind, wise, constant, and good
Conditions,) is an earthly Paradise of happiness.

And no man can justly blame such Marriages, unto which; All laws, both Divine
and Humane exhort us, Nature provokes us, Honesty draws us. All Nations
approove thereof, necessity of Continuing our kind, constrains us, and
abundance of felicity inviteth us thereunto.

And St. Paul says, It is the Doctrine of Devils to forbid Marriage.

The best and most learned Philosophers, have praised and used the same: As
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, Plutarch, and others.

And though a Contemplative divine Spirit, can overcome Nature, and contemn
the greatest earthly pleasure, in Comparison of heavenly delights, and take
great pleasure in such Contempt; Yet all men have not this divine Grace of
Continency. And looking downwards again, we may consider, that we have
Bodies as well as Souls, which require due and convenient Recreations.

And though (as St. Paul well observed) Marriage hinders a heavenly
Contemplative life; in respect of Care, and other disturbances; yet for all
these forenamed considerations, and many other. It is good to marry, though
better to live single, if we burn not; and if we have divine Grace enough to
be Continent.

And this Nuptial society being honorable, blessed, and ordained of God, for
avoiding of unlawful lusts, for the preservation of Mankind, and for mutual
help, comfort and pleasure, in one another.

It cannot be denied, but it is good to marry; especially, when such marry
whose bodies and minds do Sympathize, and both are of Loving and good
conditions. From such a Marriage (as has bin dilated) springs a Terrestrial
Paradise of pleasures and happiness.

To conclude then; Let us wish all joy to such happy Lovers. Let the Graces
dance, and the Muses sing at their Wedding. And let all pleasantness, love and
joy, dwell for ever in their hearts. And as their years, so may their Love and
Joys increase. That in aftertimes they may say: This is the twentieth or
thirtieth year of our Joy.

Let them always be familiar and kind to one another; So to our selves when
we are married, and to all married men, let us wish all prosperity.

And let us all take King Solomon's counsel, Prove. 5.17. Rejoice in the wife of
thy youth, let her be unto thee as the loving Hind and pleasant Roe, and
Rejoice in her Love continually.

SECT. XV. Of the good use of this Nuptial Love, and so concluding with a
brief discourse of Divine Love.
TO conclude then with the good use of this Nuptial Love. If God please to
give us any blessings in this kind, let us use them well, Enjoy them and be
thankful.

He that uses these external felicities of the world, such as this of
Nuptial Love, to the glory of God, and to good ends, with moderate
delectation, is better to be reputed, then he that unduely, Inconsiderately,
Rashly, Inconveniently, and Suspitiously (as some Monks and others do)
neglects, and refuses so great a good, which God freely offers to our
acceptance.

These external pleasures and blessings of the world, may serve to many
excellent uses, stirring us up to all duties of piety, to the Love of God, to
thankfulness, and joy in him.

Let us then enjoy God in all things. And all things in him, and to his glory.

The Principal good use of this Love and the felicities thereof, which I shall
now insist upon, is; That by viewing and enjoying such pleasures and felicities
of the Earth, we may look higher to their Fountain; Contemplating the Love,
Loveliness, Beauty, Sweetness, and Excellency of the Creator, who is
infinitely more excelling. And so conclude, with a brief Discourse of Divine
Love.

True it is, that all other Excellencies, are but dung and dross in respect of
GOD; yet by and through these lower delights and felicities of the Earth; These
little glimpsing Rays, proceeding from that Sun of Glory: we may spy some
light of that Sun, GOD himself, and of that Eternal felicity, which we
pretend hereafter to possess. And so in some measure, spell and spy Heaven
from the Earth.

Neither ought we to disdain, to make Comparisons between Corporeal and
Spiritual things; between Earthly and Heavenly; Though in respect of the
Excellency of the Spiritual and Heavenly, there is no comparison; Yet (as
Children have need at first, to be allured to the acquist of Great and
Excellent matters, by such toys and trifles as they apprehend; so) in respect
of our weak apprehension, such Comparisons and Similitudes, are, and ought to
be used, in a convenient manner.

So, as we may make, a very good use of Earthly felicities in this respect,
(as men do of Spectacles;) for by, and through these, our dim Eyes may see
the cleerer into heavenly Excellencies. And consequently, be the more
enamored of them, and so stirred up to seek and enjoy them.

And in this respect of Nuptiall-Love, the sacred Scripture gives us many and
fair Examples.

As in Hosea: I will return unto my first Love, for it was then better with
me than it is now. Hos. 2.7.

And in diverse places, CHRIST and his Church, are compared to Lovers,
betrothed, and to be married together.

The Church, is called the Bride, the Lamps wife. Rev. 21.9. And the end of the
world, is called their marriage day. Rev. 19.7.

Saint John Baptist calls Christ, the Bridegroom, and his Church the Bride,
John. 3.29. And Christ calls himself the bridegroom, Mark. 3.

That Song of Songs between two Lovers betrothed each to others. Is by the
consent of all Divines, a most pleasant Love-song, between Christ and his
Church.

What remains then, but that we seek for, and enjoy that fountain of all
Love, loveliness, beauty, sweetness, and excellency, which is infinitely more
permanent and Excellent, then all the other beauties and excellencies of the
world, if they were all united together.

If we could truly think, what God is, how beautiful, lovely, glorious, and
in all respects most Excellent; Our hearts would presently be filled with Love
and Admiration of him; insomuch, as then we should settle our dearest and
noblest thoughts wholly upon him, and in his Love we should be filled with
sweetest flames of joy and pleasures.

One thing have I desired, says King David, and I will still desire, to behold
the beauty of the Lord.

His beauty, infinitely excells the beauty of the heavens, Sun, Moon,
Stars, Angels, or what is most excellent.

If there be such beauty, loveliness, and pleasure in a Creature. As that it
has such power to draw near unto the eyes, Ears, and affections of such as
behold and consider it, how much more beautiful and lovely is God himself,
the Creator and the fountain from which all other Excellencies spring. How
should this divine beauty of God, attract our desires, and inflame us with Love
and Joy.

If we so much endeavor, and be so much affected with the Comeliness of
Creatures, how should we be Rapt at the Admirable Luster of God himself.

He offers his Love most freely, to such as will accept the same; Wisdom
cries out in the streets etc. Prove. 8. He invites us to come into his fair
garden, to eat, drink, with them to be merry, and to enjoy his presence for
ever, Cant, 5.

But, we must then lay aside all vain objects of the world; All mucky
Covetousness, All aerie Ambition. All vain sensual Lusts. Our desires must
not creep on the Earth, we must purify our hearts, deny our selves, and
look above our selves, If we will have a clear vision of God: A flaming
Love, and soule-ravishing delights in him.

Let us then endeavor to lay aside all Earthly thoughts, when we intend to
view this sight; To enjoy this Love, this pleasure. Let us by Contemplation
which is the best opticke, view heaven, see and grow into acquaintance with God.

Being acquainted, let us proceed further, and endeavor to be more familliar
with him; To deny our selves, and go out of our selves, to live above our
selves with him. Let us power forth our souls into God, and In-soule our
selves into him, so as his Divine Love and Joy, yea himself may wholly
possess us.

When a Soul is once thus possessed with the beauty and Love of God, it will be
often thinking of him, often mounting up to heaven, and as a vapor exhaled by
the Sun, often gliding after its Love, being thereunto attracted by the
allurements of his most Amiable, fair, and Divine beauty, and Loveliness.
Insomuch, as it will be enlightened with glorious thoughts, towering
apprehensions, Ardent affections, and heavenly Joys.

Further, when the soul considers the infinite Love of God to it. As that this
infinite glorious God, should send his only Son, a part of himself, to
redeem and glorify us. That this part of himself, This very God, our
Savior, Jesus Christ, should vnvaile himself of all his glory, come to live
on Earth, and suffer so much; such a Death for such miserable wretches as we
are, when we were his enemies; to deliver us from Death, Hell, and all misery,
and to merit for us, Heaven and all felicity, why then it is even overcome
(and with Saint Ignatius, even weeps) with Love and joy, to think that his
love was crucified for him.

Lord teach us a language wholly divine to thank thee for such Love.

See, what a virtue is in the passion of our Savior, that if our souls in
Contemplation of his wounds, should ressent the smart, yet knowing that he
suffered all this most willingly to make us happy. It is enough to make us even
swoune with Joy and Love, and be extazied with a thousand sorts of pleasures.
Insomuch as we should willingly dye of Love, and joy for his sake.

Moreover, when the Soul thinks how her Savior loves her, it is enough to
fill her with sweetest joy and pleasure.

O! how she is inflamed with Love, when she contemplates those sweet words
of her beloved, calling her his sister, his spouse, his Love, his Dove, his
undefiled. And saying, thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee;
Thou have ravished my heart with one of thine eyes etc. Cant. 4.

And my beloved, is the fairest among Women, the chiefest among ten thousand,
Looking forth as the morning, fair; as the Moon, pure; as the Sun, etc. Cant.
5.

That she is a Kings daughter; As a Queen in a vesture of Gold, of Ophir,
embroydred Raiment of Needle work, that the King might take pleasure in her
Beauty, Psalm. 45.

O! how the sweet harmonious accents of these words do ravish the Spirits, and
powerfully attract the hearts of all those unto him, that are able truly but
to hear the Echo of them, and to perceive the sweetness thereof; Insomuch,
that they are ready to borrow wings on all sides, and to fly out of
themselves, that they may be wholly possessed with the Love and Joy of their
Savior.

Let us then feelingly speak to our Beloved, in the same language which he
speaks to us; Then which indeed can be no better, no sweeter.

Come then my Beloved, Kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth, for thy Love is
better then Wine; Draw me and I will run after thee: Show me, O thou whom my
Soul loves, where thou feedest and where thou make thy flock to rest at
noone. Cant. 1* 2, 4, 7.

Stay me with thy flagons, and comfort me with apples, for I am sick o^
Love. Cant, 2.5.

Come my beloved, let us go forth into the fields, let us lodge in the
Villages, Let us get up early to the Vineyards, let us see if the Vine
flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the Pomgranate bud forth.
There will I give thee my Love. Cant. 7.11.12.

Set me as a seal of thine heart, and as a signet on thine Arm; For Love is
as strong as death. It is as a fire, a vehement flame, many waters cannot
quench Love, and the floods cannot drown it, etc. Cant. 8.6.7.

I am persuaded, says Saint Paul; That neither life nor death, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the Love of God which is in Christ, Romans 8.38.

True Love suffers not for the Subject which it Loves, It has a power in it to
change the nature of things. From the time that a Soul is chastely taken with
this passion even the pains and torments thereof are changing the name and
quality within the Heart. They are Roses rather then Thorns: For if it sigh,
it is of Joy and not of pain, if it be necessary to dye for the glory of this
Lovely cause of its life, It is no death to it, but a mere Rapt of
Contentment, which severs it self from it self, in Love of another self,
whom it Loves more then it self.

So that, if we were truly capable of the Love, Beauty, Glory, and excellency
of our Savior; Though with Saint Lawrence, we should broyle upon Devouring
flames; Yet our hearts which would burn more hot with the fire of his Love,
then that of our punishment, would quite extinguish the same; for our hearts
being all aflame already, and our souls afire, how could we expire amidst
those heates, though our bodies were burned to ashes, since the stronger must
needs prevail.

Insomuch, as we should feel the delights of Heaven in the fire, whereof we
should make our selves a Crown of glory.

Though we cannot attain to such an height of Love and Joy, yet let us
endeavor to love as much as we can; For GOD, who always accepts the will
for the deed, will lovingly accept of our good wishes and Endeavors. And his
Power is made perfect in our Infirmities; as St. Paul says.

And the more to inflame our love to GOD. Many gracious and glorious Promises
are registered in his Divine word, to such as Love him.

I shall only mention and Conclude, with that of Saint PAVL, 1 Corinthians, 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of
man, those things which GOD has prepared for them that Love him.

Think then you Spirits of the world, what Felicity this is; We know the Eye
has seen most Beautiful, Lovely and glorious things: The Ear has heard
rare Consorts of Music and voices. What sweet Joy and pleasure, has the
Heart of man imagined of the Orchards of Adonis; The Gardens of Hesperides; The
Delights of the fortunate Islands. Of the Elizian Fields, and Turks Paradise.

But let Humane imagination think of all these at once, and assemble in one
Subject whatsoever is most Beautiful and delicious in Nature. Let them imagine
a Quire of Sirens, and let them join thereto in Consort, both the Harp of
Orpheus, and the voice of Amphion. Let Apollo and the Muses, be there to bear
a Part: And let them search within the Power of Nature, all the extreme
Pleasures which it has produced in the world hitherto, to charm our Senses,
and to ravish our Spirits; Yet all these are but mere Chymeraes, and as a
vain Idaea; A mere Shadow of a body of pleasure, in Comparison of those
Divine thoughts and pleasures, which the Saints may and shall enjoy, in the
Contemplation of GOD and his infinite Beauty, Glory, Love, and of the
Felicities which he has prepared for them that Love him.

Their thoughts and Contemplations even in this life may be Composed, of
mutterably Glories, Crowns, Kingdoms, Divine visions. Heavenly exultations of
Spirit, and of extreme joys, pleasures, and felicities; It is impossible to
express the pleasures of a heavenly Soul. The Contentments thereof are not to
be so called; Its sweetness has another name; Its Ecstasies and Ravishments
cannot be uttered. Saint Paul himself, could not express the same. He could
not tell, whether he were in his body or no; Insomuch, as the heart that
feels them cannot comprehend them. Truly therefore, does Saint Paul say; That
such pleasures have not entered into the heart of man.

This seems to be a Riddle, Not Entered into the heart of man, how can man
enjoy it then; Indeed, he must be above a natural Man. Above himself that
enioyes such pleasures. He must be Partaker of the Divine nature, of a
Superhumane and Heavenly temper.

All Grace is above nature, And if (by reason of our frailties and infirmities)
we cannot attain to such a height of Love to, and joy in God, in this life;
yet if we endeavor truly, for this grace to Love and serve him, (who always
accepts our true Endeavors and desires, and perfects our weakness by his
power) There shall come a time, when, we shall see GOD as he is, know him as
we are known, Love him beyond expression, and enjoy in him infinite pleasures
and felicities for ever.

And then we shall be made like him as Saint John says. 1. John. 3.2, In
such sort, as fire by uniting it self to iron, by an exceeding and extreme
heat does purify the iron and convert the same into fire. In like manner (but
above all degrees of Comparison) does GOD purify and reduce us to a being
supernatural and deified, unites and takes the soul into his own divine
nature.

And this fire which shall so unite us to God is divine Love; For as God is a
consuming fire to his Enemies. So is he a fire of Love to his friends.

And then we shall have a new being, and a new Name; That is, of our Spouse,
of our Beloved, of GOD himself; For, hereby the Soul becomes a Part of GOD,
and with him and in him, enjoyes all Happiness; So, as now it may be said, to
be no more a Soul but GOD himself.

To conclude; Let us then fervently wish and long for this time, which shall
be at the Marriage of the Kings Son, to which the Angels shall invite us.
Then shall we Celebrate an Everlasting wedding Feast; yea, our Souls shall
be the Bride, and Love shall be the Banner over us. And then shall we possess
and enjoy infinite pleasures and felicities, for ever.

FINIS.
Jmprimatur,

THO: WYKES.
December: 7. 1637.

