The way to wealth, wherein is plainly taught a most present remedy for
Sedicion. Written and imprinted by Robert Crowley the.vii. Of Februarye in the
year of our LORD. A thousand five hu^derd and fifty

In Elie rentes in Holburne

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Who so thou be that do desire,
to live and good days se.
Look yt in thy tongue and thy lyps,
none ill or disceite be.
Fle from ill and do that good is,
whereof comes no blame.
Seek thou for peace diligently,
and then ensue the same.
Psalm. xxxiiii. By what means Sedicion may be put away, and what
destruction will follow if it be not put away spedely. Consultatio Robert Crolei
COnsidering that al me^ may plainly perceive the great hurt yt (of late
days) Sedicion has done in this realm, and that all wise men may esilye
gather, what greater hurt is like to ensue, if it be not spedely seen unto: it
shall be every true Englyshmans duty forth with to employe his whole study to the
remouynge so great an euel out of so noble a realm and commone wealth, lest
happily (if through negligence it grow and take deper rote) it be shortly to
strong and more suerly grounded, tha^ that it may be rooted out, without
the utter destruction of the whole realm. For what can be more true, then that
which the truth it self has spoken? Every kingdom (says Christ) that is
divided in it self, Matthew. xii.
shall be brought to naught. Intending therefore to play the part of a true
Englyshman, and to do all that in me shall ly to pluck this stinking wede up
by the rote: I shall in this good business do as in their evil exercise the
diseplayars (that gladlye would, but have nothing to play for) do. Hold the
candle to them that have wherewyth, and will set lustily to it. And so doing,
I shall be no less worthy the name of a true herted Englishman then the
trumpettar is, worthy ye name of a man of war, though he do not in deed fight,
but animate and encourage other.

Sedition therefore being a dangerous disease in the body of a commen wealth:
must be cured as the expert Phisicians do use to cure the dangerous diseases
in a natural body. And as the most substanciall way in curinge diseases, is
by puttinge away the causes whereof they grew: so is it in the pullinge up of
Sedition. For if the cause be once taken away, then must the effect needs
fail. If the rote be cut of: the branch must needs die. The boughs cannot
budde, if the tree, have no sap.

Give ear therefore (o my country men) give ear. And do not disdain to hear
the advice of one of the least of pour brethren for the matter requires
every man's counsel, Daniel. xiii.
and God reueiled unto young Daniell, that which the whole counsel of
Babylon perceived not. Give ear, I say, and if I tell you truth, be not
ashamed to do yt I bid, though ye know me to be at your commandment. Gene.
xxi
For Abraham was contented to do at the biddinge of Saraie his wife, because he
knew that her biddinge was gods will. And ye Ninevites did at the biddinge of
pore Jonas, Jonas. iii.
sit in sackecloth and ashes, because they perceived that he told them the
truth. Yea cruel Herod did not refuse to hear John Baptiste, because the
thing which he told him was true. marcke vi.
Least you therefore should be more lofty then the Babilonians, more shamefast
then Abraham, more stubborn then the Ninevites, and more cruel then Herod,
give ear and patientlye hear what I shall say.

The causes of Sedition must be roted out. If I should demand of the poor man of the country what thing he thinks to be the cause of Sedition: I know
his answer* He would tell me that the great fermares, the grasiers, the rich
but hares, the men of law, the merchants, the gentlemen, the knights, the
lords, and I can not tell who, Men that have no name because they are doares in all things that any gain hangs upon. Men without conscience. Men utterly
void of gods fear. Yea men that live as though there were no God at all.
Men yt would have all in their own hands, men that would leave nothing for
others, men that would be alone on the earth, men that be never satisfied,
Cormerauntees, gredye gulles, yea men that would eat up men women and
children: are the causes of Sedition. They take our houses over our headdes,
they bye our growndes out of our hands, they reyse our rentes, they leauie
great (yea unreasonable) fines, they enclose our commens. No custom, no law
or statute can keep them from oppressyng us, in such sort, that we know not
which way to turn us to live. Very need therefore constrayneth us to stand
up against them. In the country we can not tarry, but we must be their slaves
and labor till our hertes brast, and then they must have al. And to go to the
cities we have no hope, for there we hear that these insatiable beasts have
all in their hands. Some have purchased and some taken by leases, whole
allies, whole rentes, whole rows, yea whole streats and lanes, so that the
rentes be raised, some double, some triple, and some four fould to that they
were within these.xii. years last past. Yea there is not so much as a garden
grownd fre from them. No remedy therefore, we must needs fight it out, or else
be brought to the like slavery that the french men are in. These Idle bealies
will devour al yt we shall get by our sore labor in our youth, and when we shall
be old and impotent, the^ shall we be driven to beg and crave of them that will
not give us so much as the crowmes tha^ fall from their tables: Such is the
pytie w^ se in them. Better it were therefore, for us to dye like men, then
after so great misery in youth to dye more miserably in age.

Alas poor man, it pitieth me to se the miserable estate that thou art in.
Both for that thou art so oppressed of them by who^ thou should be defended
from oppression: and also for that thou know not thy duty in this great
misery. Thou art not so much oppressed on the one side, but thou art more
destituted on the other side. They yt should norish and defend thy body in thy
labor do oppress the: and they yt should feed thy soul and strengthen thy
mind to bear all this pacie^tly, do leave ye alone. If thy shepherde had been a
diligent watchman, and had espied the woulfe coming upon the, before you had
been wtin his reach he would, have stepped between ye and thine enemi, and
enstructed ye in such sort yt though he had come in nine sheep skins, yet he
should not have deceived thy syghte. The deuell should never have persuaded
the yt thou myghtest revenge thine own wrong. The false prophets should
never have caused the to believe that thou shouldeste prevail against them
with the sword, under whose governance God has appointed the to be. He would
have told the that to revenge wrongs, is in a subject to take and usurp the
office of a king and consequently the office of God. For the king is gods
minister to revenge the wrongs done unto the innocent. As he that takes in
hand therefore, or presumes to do any office under a king, not being
lawfully called unto it, presumes to do the office of a king: so he that
takes in hand to do the office of a king, takes gods office in hand. We
read that our savior Christ being in the estimation of the world but a
private man, Luke.x^.
would not walk out of the bounds of that vocacion. But when a certain man
came unto him and desired that he would command his brother to divide the
enheritau^ce with him: he axed who had appointed him to be judge in such
matters. And again when the woman taken in adultery was brought unto him: he
should not give sentence of the law against her, but axed her if any man had
comdemned her, and upon her denial let her go. If these examples, John. viii.
with the terrible stories of Corah, Datha^, Abira and Absalom had been
diligently beaten into thine head: Numeri. xvi
thou wouldeste (no doubt) have quieted thy self, ii. Reg. xviii
and have suffered thy self rather to have been spoiled of al together yea and
thy body toren in pieces rather the^ thou would have taken on the more then
thou art called unto. For no cause can be so great to make it lawful for the to
do against gods ordinance: But thy shepeherde has been negligent as (alas
the while) all shepeherdes be at this day, and has not enstructed the aright.
He espied not the wolf before he had woried the, or happlye he knew him not
from a sheep. But it is most like he was but an hirelinge, and cared for no
more but to be fed with the milcke and fatlinges and cladde with the woule,
as the greateste number of the^ that bear the name of shepeherde in England
be at this day. Yea perchance he had many flocks to keep and therefore was
absent from them al, leaving with every flock a dog that would rather
worye a sheep then drive away the woulfe, well, brother, these be great plages,
and it behooves the sins to be great that have deserved these so great and
intolerable plages at gods hand. Return to thy conscience therefore, and se
if thou have not deserved all this and more to. Consider first if thou have
loved thy neighbor as thy self, consider if thou have done nothing unto him
that thou wouldeste not that he should do unto the. Look if thou have not gone
about, to prevent him in any bargen that thou have seen him about, look if thou
have not craftily undermined him to get some thing out of his hand, or to
deceive him in some bargein. Look if thou have not labored him out of his
house or ground. Se if thou have not accused him falsely or of malice, or else
given false evidence against him: Se if thou have not given evil counsel to
his wife or servants which might turn him to displeasure. Consider if thou
have not desired and wished in thine heart to have his commodity from him, if
thou might without blame of the world have brought it about. For God
looks upon the heart and if thine heart have been infected with any of these
euilles then haste thou been abominable in the sight of God, and haste deserved
these plages at gods hand. Now if you befou^d abominable in thy be hauoure
toward thy neighbor what shall thou be found trowest thou in thy demaners
to god ward? God requires thine whole heart, thine whole mind, and all the
powers of thy body and soul. Thou shall love thy Lord God with all thy life,
with al thy mind, and with al thy strength. That is to say, Math. xxii.
there shall be nothing in the which thou shall not apply wholly to the love of
thy Lord God. But how was it possible for the to love God (whom thou see not)
sith thou love not thy Brother whom thou see? God requires the to love him
ever. And how often have thou gone whole days together, whole weakes, yea
whole years, and never thought once to love him aryght? How many and how great
benefits have thou received at gods hand, and how vnthanckful have thou
been for them, thynckynge that thou haste gotten them by thine own labor and
not received them freely at gods hand? As though God had not given the thy
life, thine health, and thy strength to labor. Yea and as though it were not
God only that gives the increase of every man's labor. But knowing by thine
own creacion and bryngyng up, and also by the young fruit that God sends ye
of thy bodi, and further by the fruits yt God se^deth and causes yearly to
grow out of ye earth, yt there is a god almighty; yet you have not honored him
as God, romans.l.
but have turned the glory of God into an Image made after the shape or
similitude of mortal man, renuinge and ridinge from place to place to seek and
to honor things of thine own makeinge, crienge and calling upon them in
thy need and paying unto the^ thy vows and thancking the^ for thine health
received doing them daily worshipe and reverence in the temples, and
bestowinge thine alms upon them in deckinge the^ and setting lights before
them. Biside this thou haste put confidence of salvation in pardones that you
haste bought, in prayers that thou have hiered or mumbled up thy self, in
masses that thou have caused to be said, and in worckes that thou thy self
haste fantasied, and haste not thanckefullye received the free mercy of God
offered unto the in Christ in whom only thou maiste have remission of thy
sins: and therefore God has given the up in to a reprobate mind to do the
thing that is not beseminge. Romans i.
Even to stand up against God and gods ordinance, to refuse his holy word,
to delight in lies and false fables, to credit false prophets and to take
weape^ in hand against gods chosen ministers, I say his chosen ministers.
For be they good or bad they are gods chosen. If they be good: to defend the
innocente* If they be evil: to plage the wicked. If thou will therefore that
God shall deliver the or thy children from the tirannie of them that oppress
the: lament thine old sins, i. Esdras.i.
and endeavor emendment of life. And then he that caused King Cirus to send the
Jews home to Jerusalem again: shall also stire up our young king Edward to
restore the to thy liberty again, and to give straight charge that non shall be
so bold as once to vex or trouble the. Proverb. xxi.
For the heart of a king is in gods hand, and as he turns the rivers of
water, so turns he it. Besure therefore, that if thou keep thy self in
obedience and suffer all this oppression patiently, not geueing credit unto
false prophecies that tell the of victori but to the word of God that tells
the thy duty: thou shall at the time, and after the manner that God has
alredie pointed, Ezech. xi.
be delivered. Perchance God will take from thine oppressors their hard stony
hertes and give them hertes of flesh, for it is in his power so to do. Let him
alone therefore. Read the prophecy of Jeremy, and especially the seven and
twenty Chapter, Read Jeremy his prophecy.
the eighte and twenty and the nine and twenti, and therein thou shalt learn
thy duty in captiuitye, and how vain a thing it is to credit the
prophets that Prophecy vyc-torie to them that have by their sins deserved
to be led away captyue, yea and to remain captive till such time as the time
be complete duringe which God has determined to punish them. And know thou
for certentie, that if thou be still stouberne, God will not leave the so. He
will bring the on thy knees, he will make the stoop. If the ge^tlemen and
rulars of thy countreie should be to weak for the, he would bring in
strainge nations to subdue the (as the Babilonians did the Jews) and lead the
away captive. So that refusing to serve in thine own country, thou shalt be
made a slave in a strainge contrei. Quiet thy self therefore, and strive not
against the stream. For thy sins have deserved this oppression, and God
has sent if the as a just reward for thy sins: and be you never so loath, yet
needs sustain it thou must. Apointe thy self therefore to bear it. Let it
not be laid upon the in vain let it do the thing yt God has sent it for, let
it cause the to acknowledge thy sin, repent it and become altogether a new
man. That in the day when God shall deliver the, his name may be glorified in
the. And the^ God shall se^d ye plenty of true prophets, yt shall go before ye
in puriti of life, and godli doctrine. They shall not come or send.iiii. times
in an year and no more, neither shall they set one togather up the tenth of
thine increase to their behoufe, and leave the destitute of a diligente guide
(as thy shepherdes do now a days) but God has promised by his prophet to
take a way these shepeherdes from the, and to commyt the to the keeping of
David his fayethful servant, that is to say to such as will be as diligent
in feadyng the, as David was in gouernyng the people of whom he had
governance. Give ear therefore ye shephardes of this church of England. Ye
Bishops, ye Deanes, Archdiacons and Canons, ye Persons and ye Vicares what
soever ye be, that receive any part of the tenth of men's yerelye increase or
any other patrimony of preachers give ear to ye prophet Ezechiel, for ye same
Lord yt bad him speak unto ye sheperdes of Judah, byddeth him speak unto you
now also. Thou son of man says the Lord: prophecye against the shepherdes
of England, prophecy and say unto those shepheardis: thus says the Lord God.
Woe be to the shepherdes of England, Ezech. xxxiiii.
that have fed them selves. What ought not those shepherdes to have fed those
flocks of England. Ye eat the fat, and deck your selves with the woule,
and the mutton that is fat, ye kill to feed upon, but these silli sheep ye feed
not. The soroweful and pensive ye have not comforted, the sick ye have not
healed, ye broken ye have not bound up, the stray sheep ye have not brought
again nor sought for ye lost. But with extreme cruelty ye have played the
lords over them etc. I need not to rehearse more of this prophets saying unto
you, for ye know where to have it and have leisure enough to seek it, for ought
that I se you busied withal unless it be with purchaisinge lands for your
heirs and find fingered ladies, whose woma^like, behavior and motherlike
housewifry ought to be a light to al women that dwell about you, but is so
fare otherwise that unless ye leave them lands to Marye them wythall, no man
will set a pin by them when you be gone. Well look to this gear be time,
least perhaps it beede a scabbe emonge you. I would not your wives should
be taken from you: but I would you should keep them to the furtheraunce of
gods truth whereof ye profess to be teacheares. Let your wives therefore
put of their fine frockes and french hoodes and furnishe them selves with all
points of honest housewifery, and so let the^ be an help to your study and
not a let. S. Paul teaches you not to make them ladies or gentlewomen. i.
Timo. iii.
Neither does he teach you to be so gredie upon liueings, that for the
liueinge sake ye will take upon you the duties of twenty men and yet do not
the duty of one, no some of you be not able to do any part of one duty. If
gods word do allow it that one of you should be a deane in one place, a
canone in an other, a parsone here and a parsone there, a master of an house
in Oxforde or Cambridge and an officer in the kings house, and yet to do none
of the duities hereof thoroughly: the^ set your pens to the paper and satisfy
us by gods word and we will also help you to our power to satisfy the
consciences of them that be offended at your doings herin. If you can not do
so: then give over your pluralities and make your insatiable desires give
place to gods truth. Content your self without competent liueinge, and
fail not to be diligente in doing the duty thereof. But if ye will do
neither of boeth: trust to it ye shall hear more of it. Your checkinge of
one or two in a corner can not stop every man's mouth in a matter of truth
being so great an infamy to ye gospel of god which ye profess. And if ye will
needs hold still your pluralities for your lordlike liueing sake doubt ye not ye
will be charged with that which ye would seem to be clear of. For a great
number of your unworthy curates have been the stirrars up of the simple
people in the late tumultes that have been, where as if you had not robbed the^
of that which they pay yearly to have a learned and Godly teachar, they had
been better enstructed, as appeared by the quietness that was emonge them that
had such shepeherdes. Well brother. Thou I say that art thus oppressed on the
one side and destituted on the other: take mine advise with the. Submit thy
self wholly to the will of God. Do thy labor truly, call upon God continually.
I mean not that thou should be ever muttering on thy beads, or yt thou
should have any beads, but my meaning is, that thou should ever have
thine heart lifted up unto God, for so means Saint Paul when he says. I
would men should pray always and in all places, liftinge up their pure
hands. etc.

And in all thy doings let thy desire be that Gods will be fulfilled in the,
and what so ever God sends the, hold the content wtal and render unto him
most hertie tha^ckes for that he deals so mercifully with the, acknowledginge
that by his justice he might pour out upon the mo plages then ever were heard
of. And when thou commeste to thy parish church, if thy curate be an evil
live ar, Math. xxiii.
then remember what Christ said unto his disciples. When the scribes and
pharisees do set them down upon Moses seat, then do all that they command you
to do, but do not as they do, for they say and do not. Remember this I say,
and what so ever thy curate bids the do when he sits on christ's seat,
that is, when he reads the bible unto the: that do thou. But follow not his
examples. Do not as thou see him do, but at thy first entrance into the
church, lift up thine heart unto god, and desire of him that he will give the
his holy spirit to illumine and lighten the eyes of thine heart that thou
may se and perceive the true meaning of all the scriptures that thou shalt
hear read unto the that dai. And so shall thou be sure, that though thy
curate were a deuell and would not that any man should be the better for that
which he reads: yet thou shall be edified and learn as much as shall be
necessary for thy salvation. And for thy sake god shall make thy curate (that
otherwise would mumble in the mouth and drounde his words) to speak out
plainly, or else he shall give the such a gift that thou shall understand him
plainly. (...). ii.
Of such power is God, for when the Apostles spoke in the hebrew tongue only,
all that were present heard every man his own language. Doubt thou not therefore
but if thou be desirous to learn thy duty out of that thy curate reads to
the: God will make it plain unto ye, though it be not plainlye read. For he
that could make the hebrew tongue (which sowndeth far otherwise the^ other
tongues do) sownd al manner of languages, to every man his own language: can
also make thine own language sownde plain unto the, though it were not spoken
any thing plain. Thus seeste thou that the cause of Sedition is not where
thou laiest it, for I have declared to the that thine own sin is the cause
that thou art Sedicious. For Sedition is poured upon the to plage thy former
sin withal. Because thou knew God by his creatures and yet did not
honor him as God, he has given the over into a reprobate sense to do the
thing that is unseemly, even to stand up against God and gods ordinance,
as I have said before.

Now if I should demand of the gredie cormerauntes what they think should be
the cause of Sedition: they would say, the paisa^t knaves be to welthy,
proue^der pritheth the^. They know not themselves, they know no obedience,
they regard no laws, they would have no gentlemen, they would have al me^ like
themselves, they would have al things commune. They would not have us masters
of that which is our own. They will appoint us what re^t we shall take for our
grounds We must not make the best of our own. These are ioly fellows. They
will cast down our parches, and lay our pastures open, they will have the law
in their own hands. They will play the kings. They will compel the king to
grafit their requests. But as they like their fare at ye break fast they had
this last somer, so let the^ do again. They have been metely well coled, and
shall be yet better coled if they quiet not the^ selves. We will tech the^ to
know their betters. And because they would have al co^mone, we will leave the^
nothing. And if they once stir again or do but once cluster together, we will
hang the^ at their own doors. Shall we suffer ye vila^nes to disprove our
doings? No, we will be lords of our own and use it as we shall think good.

Oh good masters, what should I call you? you yt have no name, you yt have so
many occupacio^s and trads yt there is no on name mete for you. You vnge^tle
gentlemen. You churles chikens I say. Give me leave to make answer for the pore
Ideotes over whom ye triumph in this sort. And this one thing I shall desire
of you that ye report me not to be one that favors their euel doings (for I
take God to witness I hate does their evil doings and youres also) but give
me leave to tell you as freely of your faults, as I have alreadi told them of
theires. And for as much as you be strong and they weak, I shall desire you to
bear with me though I be more ernest in rebuking your faults, then I was in
rebuking theirs.

True it is, the pore men (who^ ye call paisaunte knaves) have deserved more
the^ you can devise to lay upon them. And if every one of them were able and
should sustain as much punishment as they al were able to sustain yet could
they not sustain the plages yt they have deserved. But yet if their offense
were laid in an equal balaunce with yours (as no doubt they are in ye sight
God) do^^t not but you should sone be ashamed of yo^re part. For what can you
lay unto their charge, but they have had examples of the same in you? If you
charge the^ with disobedience: you were first disobedient.

For without a law to bear you, yea contrary to the law which forbids al
manner of oppression and extortio^, and that more is contrary to conscience,
the ground of al good laws, ye enclosed from the pore their due commones,
leauied greater fines the^ heretofore have been leauied, put them from the
liberties (and in a manner enheritaunce) that they held up custom, and reised
their rentes. Yea when there was a law ratified to the contrary, you ceased not
to find means either to compel your tenantes to consent to your desire in
enclosinge, or else ye found such maistership yt no man durst gain say your
doings for fear of displeasure. And what obedience showed you, when the
kings proclamations were sent forth, and commissions directed for the laying
open of your enclosures, and yet you left not of to enclose still? Yea what
obedience was this which ye showed at such time as the kings most honorable
counsel perceiueinge the: grudginge that was among the people, sent forth the
second proclamation concerning your negligence or rather contempt in not
laieinge open that which co^trari to the good estatutes made in parliament you
had enclosed? It appears by your doings that there was in you neither
obedience to your prince and his laws, nor love to your contrei. For if there
had be^ obedience in you: you would forthwith have put al his laws in execution
to the uttermost of your power. And if you had loved your contrei, would you
not have prevented the great destruction that chanced by the reasone of your
insatiable desire: I am sure you be not rulars in your country, but ye can se
before what is likely to follow upon such oppression, and especially in a
realm that has hertofore had a noble and a valiaunte enmminalti. But grant
ye were so beastish: yet have you not lacked the^ that have told you of it
both by words and writtinges. You have been told of it I say, and have had
the threatninges of God laid plainlye before your eyes wherein you must needs
se the ve^geaunce of God hanging over your heads for your lack of mercy. There
is not one story of the Bible that serves to declare how readi God is to take
vengeance for the oppression of his people: but the same has been declared
unto you to the vttermoste, beside the notable histories and cronicles of this
realm, wherein does most plainly appear the justice of god in the revenging
of his people, at such time as they have kept themselves in quiet obedience to
their prince and rulers and their destruction when they have rebelled.

Wittinglye and willinglye therefore ye have boeth disobeied your king and his
laws, and also brought your contrei into the miseri it is in, by pulling
upon your self ye vengeance of god which of his justice he can not hold
back from such people as do wyllinglye and wittynglye oppress him in his
members, in such sort as ye have done. How you have obeyed the laws in
rukeinge together of fermes, purchaisinge and prollynge for benefices, robbing
the people of good ministers thereby, all the world sees and all godly hertes
lament. Look the estatutes made in the time of our late sovereign of famous
memory Henry the.viii. and say if ye may by those estatutes (taken in their
true meaning) either being no priests nor students in the universities have
benifices, or other spiritual promotions (as you call them for ye are ashamed
to call them, ministracious because ye neither will nor can minister) or
being priests have pluralities of such ministrations. Well I will burden you
no more with your faults, least perhaps you can not well bear the^ But
this I shall say unto you. You shall never the sooner be gentlemen for your
shout oppression, nor the later have things in private for that ye let your
tenauntes live by you upon their labor. And think not to prospere the
better in your insatiable desire for that you tryumphe so Lordelyke over the
poor Captyfes, that being seduced by the vain hope of vyctorye promised
them in piuyshe Prophecies have greatly offended God by rebellion: for the
greater their offense is, the greater shall your plage be when it comes. For
you have been the only cause of their offense. If he therefore that is the
occasion of one man's falling unto any kind of vice, were better have a mylstone
tied about his neck and be cast into the deep sea wythall: what shall be
thought of you that have been the occasion of so many men's falling into so
detestable sin and trespass against God, as to distrube ye whole estate of
their contrei with the great peril and danger of their anointed King in his
tender age, whose blood (if he had perished) should have been required at your
hands as the blood of al them that have perished shall? Oh merciful god, were
it not that gods mercy is more then your sins can be: there were no way but
to despeyre of forgeuenes. But god is not only mighty in mercy and able to
forgive al ye sins of the whole world: but he is also redye to forgive all that return from their wicked ways, and with a constant faith and sure believe
to obtain do call on him for mercy. I advertise you therefore, and in the name
of Christ (whose name you bear) I require you, that without delay ye return to
your hertes and acknowledge your grievous and manifold offenses, committed in
your behavior to wards the poor members of Christ (your brethren boeth by
religion and nation) whom you have so cruellye oppressed, wyshe even from the
bottom of your hertes, yt you had never done it. Be fully determined to make
restitucio^ of that ye have miss taken, though ye should leave your selves
nothing. For better is a clear conscience in ye hour of death in a beggars
bosom, then mountains of gould with a conscience yt is gilty, Wish that you
had contented your selves with that state wherein your fathers left you, and
strive not to set your children above the same, lest god take vengaunce on you
boeth suddenly, when ye be most hasty to clime. And if for your worthiness god
have called you to office so that ye may with good conscience take upon you ye
state that ye he called unto: then se you deal justly in all points, and
follow not fylthy lucre to make your children Lords, but study to furnish
them with al knowledge and godly manners, that they may worthily succeed you.
Grudge not to se ye people grow in wealth under you, neither do you invent
ways to keep the^ bare: lest happily it chance unto you as it did to King
Nabuchodonozer and his servants when they divised ways to keep the Hebrews
in slavery still, Exodi. i^


They rebelled not but quietly did their labor, referrynge their cause to God.
They prepared not for wars neither had any confidence in their own strength,
but when the Egiptians thought to have had a fair day at them: Exodi. xii.
God drowned them al in the red sea, and drove their dead bodies on land in
such sort that they whom they thought to keep still in slauerye might easyly
take the spoil of them. Think not therefore, but if the people quiet
themselves in their oppression and call unto God for deliverance: he will by
one mean or other give them the spoil of their oppressors. He is as mighty
now as he was in those days and is now as able to flea boeth you and youres
in one night, Exodi. xiiii.
as he was to flea all the first borne of the Egiptyans: And then who shall have
the spoil? Be warned betime, least ye repe^te to late leave of your gredie
desire to pull away the liueynge from the clergy, and seek diligently to set
such ministers in the church as be able and will enstruct the people in all
points of their duty, that you with them and they with you may escape the
wrath of God that hangs presently over you both. Jonas. iii.
The king and Citizens of Neniue were not ashamed to fit in sackecloth and in
ashes lamenting their sins and there upon found mercy. Wherefore if ye
will ^ynde mercy, ye must not be ashamed to do the like, for certenlye the
greatness of your sins imports as present destruction to you as if ye were
the same Ninevites yt Jonas was sent unto. Be not ashamed therefore to proclaim
a solemn fast through out the whole realm, yt all at once with one voice we may
cry unto god for mercy. Leave of your co^munions in a corner, and come to ye
open temples yt men may se yt ye regard ye Lords institucion. Break your bread
to the pore, yt al men may se yt ye regard fasting. For yt is the true fast, to
refrain the meat and drink yt accustomably we were wout to take and give the
same (or the value thereof) to the nedy. So shall you both feel and know their
disease, and ease it also. Trust not to your great number of valiant warriors,
neither to your mighty provisions, but remember what befell to Holofernes ye
stout captain of king Nobuchoddnozer, when he would not harken to the right
advice of Achior his vndercaptaine.

For certainly I say unto you, Iudeth. v.
god was never more ready to deliver his people of Israel from oppression at al
times when they walkinge in his ways committed their cause unto him: then he
is now ready to deliver al christen me^ that do with like confidence call upon
him, If you therefore will not he arken unto Achior his counsel, but determine to
torment him when ye shall triumpth over the rest: doubt you not but Judith shall
cut of al your hedes on after another and god shall strike your retinew with such
a fear, Iudeth. xiii. and.xv.
yt none shall be so bold as once to turn his face. Yea if there were no men
left on live to put the^ in fear, they should be feared with shadows. And
though there were no gonnes to shote at the^, yet the stones of the street should
not cease to fly emonge them, by the mighty power of God, who will rather make
of every grass in the field a man, then such as trust in him should be ouerrun
or kept in oppression. Be warned therefore, and seek not to keep the commones of
England in slavery. For that is ye next way to destroy your selves. For if
they commit their cause to God and quiet the^ selves in their vocacion, being
contented with oppression, if gods will be so: then shall ye be sure that God
will fight for them, and so are ye over matched. But if they will needs take in
hand to revenge their own wrong God will fight against you boeth, so that you
boeth consumynge one the other shall shortly be made a pray to the^ that ye
doubt least of all the world.

As you tender your own wealth therefore and the public wealth of this noble
realm of England, which God has enriched with so many and so great
commodities, and as you desire to use and enjoy the same, and not to be led
away captive into a straynge nation, or else be cruelly murdered among your
wives, kinsfolk and children, and finallye to be damned for ever: so look upon
these causes of Sedicion, and do your best endeavor to put them away. You that
be oppressed, I say, refer your cause to God. And you yt have oppressed,
lament your so doing and do the office of your calling, in defendinge the
innocente and fedinge the nedye. Let not couetyse constrain you to rob the
people of that portion which they pay to have godly ministers to enstruct the^
in their duty, and to releue the unwieldy that be not able to labor for
their fode Be careful and diligent to seek for such ministers, and when you
have found them let them have all that the people pay yearly out of their
increase, that they may live there on and minister unto the pore, out of ye same.

Thus doing, ye shall not only escape the vengeance that hangs presentlye
over you but also be rewarded at gods hand boeth with exceeding plenti of al
good things in this life, and also with life everlasting when nature shall
end the same. Where as if ye will not take counsel but remain still in your
wicked purpose* Pharao nor ye Sodomites were never so hardened as you shall be,
neither is the remembrance of their distruccion so terible to us, as the
distruccion of you shall be to others that shall come after. The spirit of GOD
work in your hertes that ye being admonished of the sword that is coming,
may by repentance of your syn escape the danger thereof.

So be it

