THE Terrestrial PARADISE OR Happiness on Earth. BY R Crofts.


London. Printed by T. Harper. for William Adderton. 1639

THE TERRESTRIAL PARADISE, OR, Happiness on Earth.

Written by Robert Crofts.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper for William Aderton, and are to be sold at
his shop in Duck-lane, 1639.

THE PREFACE TO the Readers.
ALL men naturally desire happiness All their plots, purposes, and endeavors
aim at this end only. Wherefore it is and always has been free and very
commendable, for all men to learn and seek happiness in all good ways To tell
what they have learned and to do good to themselves and others, according to
their genius abilities, opportunities, and occasions. Having therefore had more
leisure then sometimes I wished to have, and therein also the opportunity to
peruse many good Authors, I thought not amiss (to avoid idleness and
Melancholy, and to recreate and please my self) to search and study for true
joy and happiness. And having collected many notes concerning Terrestrial,
Moral, and divine happiness on earth, I have since written the same together
in a Book and as well as my weakness could, digest the same into such a
manner, method and style, as I thought best, with such alterations, additions,
intermixtions, and inventions, as met with my Meditations; intending the same
at first only for private use. I had thought to have written in this Epistle
diverse reasons moving me to publish this little Treatise before the rest which
I have written of this subject. But if I should, the same would extend the
Epistle too long for the Book: Nor is it expedient to particularize, and tell
you private reasons in print, I shall now therefore concerning this matter only
tell you, that having lately published a little Book being one particular part
of Terrestrial Happiness (as this is a general part thereof.) The Epistle
therein, to the Reader, may with very little alteration serve to this Book
also, to which (if you be not satisfied,) I refer you.

And since I have made use of many good Authors; And found much happiness in
the inquisition and study thereof, I cannot but hope there are some things
herein worthy your perusing. Nor is it a crime, as some would seem to
mayntaine, to make use of Authors; It rather argues conceitednesse,
vainglory, and folly in such men, who think it Pedanticall and weakness; to
stoop to and acknowledge other men's authority and opinions as being opposite to
their affected humors and style, when as themselves indeed gain all their
knowledge from others. And now, i^ is said; No new thing can be written which
has not been before.

Yet by composing a Book in a new manner, method, and style, by altering,
adding to, abridging, and sometimes converting to other purposes, the same may
seem to be (and be as useful) as if it were all new, and which to do is often
as difficult, and requires wel-nigh as much art, as wholly the invention of new
matters: and is better to be esteemed because more authentical.

I should have done well indeed, to have cited Authors, But being at first
written for private use I neglected the same, and now cannot redeem that
neglect, or if I could the Treatise, in respect of the style intermixions,
abstractions, additions, and alterations in diverse places would not well admit
thereof. But although it be truly said that no new thing, can be said or written
which has not been (to the same effect) before; yet may it be said of this
Treatise in general (as well of the composition thereof) that the same is new,
in as much as never any man (that I can read of) has written any Book of this
subject, Namely, the enjoying of earthly happiness freely and cheerfully
(though in the good use thereof) and with a heavenly mind: But of ^e contempt
thereof many Books ^ave been written, and yet the grea^est contemners of
earthly felicities, (...) their Books will sometimes con^esse this truth, That
in the good use ^hereof the same may be enjoyed ^reely and cheerfully. And that
such ^ree enjoying, and the contemplati^ns thereof may excite us to Piety, to
^eavenly joy and happiness.

Concerning the style and method, (...) affect not too much niceness and
^uriosity. Nor on the otherside, too ^uch looseness and indigestion. My
^ndevours have been to compose the ^ame in a serious, yet free and plea^ng way.
But, I confess, my endeavors are very weak and worthless, whch I tell you;
and truly te^ you, because I had much rather yo^ should be possessed with a
prejudicat^ under opinion, then great expectation; It is easier to make the one
fals^ then the other true, I could wish indeed, that I were able to raise
Meditations as high as Heaven from the Earth. But the consideration of my
weakness, and unworthiness deject^ me.

But the Abstracts, I confess, I have been but little used to study in tha^
way. And they were but a late exercise of a short time for recreation and to
try conclusions. In them also I have not much cared for niceness o^ ^uriosity,
but taken a free liberty. The ^ooke were (perchance) in a wise ^ans judgment,
better without them. But in my weak judgment the same ^ay be read (as they
were written) ^o recreate the mind. Also to quic^en the memory. They are
compo^ed (considering the subject) in a ^ew and, I hope, pleasing manner, and
free from unnecessary Poetical ^dditions, fained allegories, Parables, and
consequently from obscurity, te^iousnesse, and most befitting the ^^bject.

Concerning the Title, it is usual ^o prefixe titles to Books in these ^imes,
perchance better then they deserve, and as some think, a kind of policy. If
therefore you think have herein done amiss I have pres^dents for it.
Notwithstanding; think the Book in diverse respects i^ correspondent to the
Title, and man very well befit the same. However would desire you to expect
only a very short discourse upon each of the several heads or Sections; a
view whereof you may see in the Analysis If you look for more you are not like
in this Book to find it.

How necessary this Treatise is, i^selfe will show. I conceive there cannot be
a greater motive to stir us up to virtue and piety, then to show (against
the pernicious opinion of the World conceiting the contrary) that virtuous and
pious men even in ^is life may enjoy much more hap^nesse than vicious impious
men. That this truth may more plainly ^ppeare, I shall endeavor hereafter to
^ew the same more particularly and ^ainly, also to search further and ^ore
excellent Happiness, to enjoy ^s far as our minds are capable) on ^arth, the
joys of Heaven within us.

Robert Crofts.

The Analysis briefly.
A view of earthly Happiness.

(...) We should enjoy the same With Contentment, In the good use thereof,
Freely and cheerfully. Notwithstanding their Vanities, Dangers, Impediments, etc
With a heavenly mind.


THE TERRESTRIAL PARADISE, OR, Happiness on Earth.
The first Section. A view of earthly Happiness.
Terrestrial happiness is usually reduced to these three heads, To Riches,
Honor, and Pleasures: from which as from several Fountains, all the rest does
spring and proceed, and he that enjoyes these may be said to enjoy a
Terrestrial Paradise o^ Happiness.

To define the riches of the World, were to tell you what every man knows, the
good effects and benefits which spring from thence are many and diverse. Good
Education, Acquaintance, Friends, Lovers, Honor, Authority and many pleasures
of diverse sorts are hereby often occasioned. So as many rich men seem to enjoy
an^ earthly Paradise.

True honor is defined to be the shining brightness of worthy virtuous and
gracious actions, reflected from our own consciences unto the sight and view of
those with whom we live, it may be also called a graceful respect or renowned
reputation, which every man ought to have in recompense of his worthiness
which is declared unto the World by good and glorious deeds and approved of, by
the acknowledgment of good and virtuous men; and it shines most brightly in
such as are of greatest birth, of greatest riches and of greatest dignity and
authority both in Church and Commonwealth.

It is not then an imaginary Fantasy, but a splendent brightness, which
makes him that is the subject thereof, to shine forth as the sparkling rays of
a Diamond, and for as much as it proceeds from virtuous and worthy actions,
it is always accompanied with inward joy and pleasure. And among noble, good,
and great Spirits, nothing is more desirous and pleasant, insomuch (...) they
will spare no labor, no pain, but willing^^ and fearlesly will adventure
through many ^ifficulties, many perils to gain the same.

A good name, says Solomon, is better than ^old, and more precious than
ointment.

Pleasures are of diverse sorts: all the riches, ho^our and delights of the
World serve to please ^ur minds. What a number of excellent plea^ures and
felicities has God created in this Ter^estriall Paradise which may please our
senses!

And first the sense of seeing, as the Heavens their glorious aspect, the Sun
in its lovely brightness, the Moon her silver rays, the Stars their ^winkling
sparks, the Air its fair nakedness, the Birds enameld with all sorts of
colors, the Trees ^edeckt with blossoms, fruits and leaves, the medows with
Tapestry green, the Rivers with ^he Crystal of their streams, the Sea, it is
huge and pleasant watery Mantle, And an infinite number of creatures both in
the Earth and Sea of different figures, fair and goodly Cities, Towns,
Churches, Houses, Orchards, Gardens, all plea^ant places, and all fair,
beautiful, and amiable ^reatures.

To please the sense of hearing also, How can we but be much delighted amidst
the pleasures of a sweet harmony, either of voices or instruments; at the pretty
purling of a silver brook, the sweet running murmurs of a pleasant fountain,
^he pleasing notes and pretty warbling of Birds, ^he amorous accents of a
delicate voice, joined with the sweet allurements of the melody of a Lute, the
musical tun^ and delightful strains of all kind of Instruments, to hear the
pleasant and gallant noyses of Bells, Trumpets, Drums, and other delicious
sounds. Also to hear pleasing Discourses, Histories, Songs, Tales, Jests,
News, and the like.

So likewise of the other Senses, as the tasting of sweet and delicious meats
of all sorts, of pleasant and sparkling wine, and other delightful liquours.

Also the smelling of odoriferous Perfumes, Flowers of every kind, and all
other sweet and fragrant things; there is such a multitude of delights and
felicities in the World to please the Senses, as they are innumerable.

Likewise the most pleasant and happy society of Parents, Children, Wives,
Lovers, Friends, Kindred and acquaintance: And in general, the enjoyance of
riches, honor, all sorts of lawful Sports, Recreations, Delights and
Happinesses; all whatsoever is pleasant and delectable.

Insomuch, as from diverse of these particulars (as might be at large dilated in
whole Volumes) ^pringeth abundance of sweet and pleasant joys and felicities.
Enough to charm, and sweetly bring our minds into an ecstasy of joy and
happiness.

In all which if we thoroughly view them in their number, variety,
pleasantness, excellency, and happy effects we may plainly see, that even in
this life we may enjoy a terrestrial Paradise of joy and happiness.

The abstract of the first SECTION.
THere is within the Earth, so many treasures,
Such glorious honors and delightful pleasures,
That who enjoys all these felicities
Enjoys indeed, an earthly Paradise.
The riches of the Earth to us do bring
Much happiness, from thence does often spring
So many benefits, honors and pleasures,
As makes us much esteem these earthly treasures.
Honor likewise, Its glorious bright aspect
And splendent beauty, does so much attract,
All good and great, noble heroic Spirits
As that they much desire by glorious merits,
By all good worthy deeds, the same to gain
For which they will spare no labors, fear no pain.
To them nothing is more delightful, and they deem
Nothing on Earth more worthy their esteem.
A good name, says King Solomon, is better
Then gold, and precious ointment is not sweeter.
Pleasures are many, and of diverse kinds,
The whole world seems to serve to please our minds
How many pleasant sweet felicities
May we enjoy within Earths Paradise?
Who can but sweetly, greatly pleased be,
So many lovely, pleasant sights to see
The Sun, Moon, Stars, whose glittering heavenly beams
Dazzle our eyes, likewise the silver streams
Of Rivers, Fountains, pretty Birds to see,
And other creatures, blossoms on each tree,
Fruits, leaves, the medows, woods and fields so green,
All pleasant objects therein to be seen,
The Sea, the Ships, Cities, Towns, Castles fair,
Churches and houses, gardens, beauties rare
Gold, Pearls, a thousand other pleasing sights
Each one affording us most sweet delights.
Likewise to charm and to delight the ear
Sweet Music, pleasing melody to hear
The pretty chirping warbling notes of Birds,
And purling murmurs of a Brook, affoords
Us pretty pleasures, and the melody
Of Instruments, likewise the harmony
And delicate accents of an amorous voice,
The gallant sounds of Trumpets pleasing noise,
Of Drums and Bells, does greatly, sweetly move,
And please our ears; and also tales of love
And other pretty Stories, Jests, Songs, News,
Do sweetly charm us in a pleasing Muse.
So likewise pleasant cates, and banqueting dishes,
All sorts of dainty meats, as fowls and fishes,
Sweet pleasing liquors, brisk, neat, sparkling, fine
Canary, and the like delicious wine
To please our tasting sense, of every kind
Abundance in this Paradise we find.
And also flowers, perfumes and fragrant things
Of diverse sorts, the Earth yields forth and brings
To please the sense of smelling. Insomuch
The pleasures of the Earth are truly such,
So sweet, so many, that if I should tell
You what, how sweet, how many, I should dwell
For ever in discourse. It does surmount
All pens, all tongues to show, and to recount.
The happy pleasures loving Parents may,
And children also, mutually enjoy,
Each in the other; likewise husbands, wives,
Lovers and friends even during all their lives
Partake together; truly so much joy,
Such mirth, and sports, such sweet delights we man
Enjoy together in our happy love
And mutual pleasures, that they even may move
And bring our minds with delectation sweet
(Charming the same when therein they do meet)
Into an extasis of pleasure; thus we may
A Paradise of sweet delights enjoy.
The second Section. We ought to enjoy earthly happiness with contentment.
HAving viewed wherein earthly happiness consists, now, to the intent we may
be further happy therein, let us endeavor to settle our minds in a contented
estate, in all accidents and conditions, and so to enjoy these terrestrial
felicities, with a contented happy mind.

It is strange that some have put this truth in^ a Paradox, That he forsooth is
the richest and ^ost happy who is most contented, when no^ing is more certain
then it, the soul having no ^easures, no happiness, more properly her own ^or
more in effect, then that of contentment.

He that is poor in desires is rich in content^ent, one says, who bridleth
his intemperate ^esires, contendeth even with Jupiter himself in ^elicitie, to
him that desires but a little, a little ^eems much, and he that covets no more
then what he has, may be said to possess all the World.

But he that possesses abundance of these earth^y happinesses, and yet fears
the loss or want of them, or out of a covetous, ambitious, or intemperate
voluptuous heart, grieves because he en^oyes not so much as he desires, is as
miserable as ^e that wants them; those who extend their desires beyond nature
and moderation, letting ^oose their appetites, to follow vice and
superfluities, make superfluous things necessary, the souls slaves to their
bodies, they are (...) contented. They would build house (...) ^^^ble, and
after of Jasper and Porphyry. They would first possess a Lordship, then a
Kingdom, after the World, which if they did, they would then think the World
too little, and grieve because they enjoy no more, no better Worlds, they a^
never satisfied. They would have they know no^ what, they are always restless,
still desire, trouble, and perplex themselves till they bring themselves into a
fools Paradise.

But this mean, for a man to enrich himself and to make himself happy and
contented, by desiring little, according to nature, moderation and reason is
very just. It is in every man's power he may find it within himself, Nature
has so provided that in all things, so much as suffices, is at hand, and in
our own power.

A little we know of these earthly felicities is enough to suffice nature and
to live well, and we may take as much felicity in sufficiency as if we
possessed all the riches, honors and pleasures in the world, which if we did,
we could enjoy the superfluity, to wit, that which is above sufficiency, only
by looking on, and contemplation, so may we while it is another: what
happiness is there on earth, which in our minds by contemplation, we may not
enjoy?

An^ (...) commonly see, that poor men of low degree, are as contented as
rich, noble and voluptuous men, they are usually more free from idleness; ill
passions, intemperance, and consequently from such distempers as are incident
thereunto, and we may observe, they are commonly free, fearlesse, secure,
healthy, merry, con^nted, happy men.

Having therefore food and raiment, let us be ^erwith contented, as we are
divinely exhor^d. And concerning crosses, want and troubles, ^t such
considerations as follow (amongst di^ers others which might be written) move us
to ^ontentation in all conditions.

Crosses want and troubles are common to all ^en, oftentimes to the best men.
It is a sign of weakness not to digest that with contentment, which cannot be
avoided, which is common to ^ll, to the best men, when we have so many and ^uch
companions.

Some crosses and troubles are necessary, as Winter to Summer, else pleasures
and prosperity would become dry, stale, wearisome, and cloy us: It is a mixture
of crosses and adversity, that makes prosperity and pleasures most sweet unto
us.

We may convert our minds from those things that offend us to those which are
pleasing, and afford us delectation. Though we have some want and troubles,
yet perchance we may enjoy many pleasures and felicities also, in so much that
if we be not too peevish and wayward, we may drown our sorows and crosses in
pleasantness and joy.

However, the worst things have some mixture of comfort in them, and it is
certain, Tha^ all crosses and troubles will have an end, Custom^ and Time will
surely wear them away. Custom is a remedy against the most tedious and irkso^
troubles, even the Gally slaves can sing in their servitude, after they have
been some time accustomed thereunto. Time is the finisher of all trouble,
perchance we have already well nigh forgo^ all the crosses and sorrows of our
life time past and such as we do remember, we rejoice that they are past and
gone. And this good effect crosses, and adversity always leave behind,
Pleasure and prosperity after the same is past, is the sweeter. Joy and
pleasure after sorrow is a strange enlightening to us, in such sort, as it
should seem Nature has given sorrow and troubles for the greater increase and
service of our pleasure and delight.

Foresight, Expectation, Meditation, Wisdom and Fortitude, are excellent
Remedies against crosses and adversity. Let us therefore hereby endeavor to
raise and quicken our spirits above and beyond fear and adversity. Contemning
all the frowns and blows of the World, which do scare and depresse only weak
and feeble spirits, and to settle our minds in a contented and blessed
tranquillity, which is a beautiful, sweet, equal, pleasant estate of the mind
such as neither ^ood accidents, nor ill, Prosperity nor adversity an mend or
depresse.

Piety is yet a better remedy against crosses and adversity, and the best way
to contentment and true happiness. To consider that the Almighty God our
loving Father does by his most wise, just, loving and good Providence order and
guide all things, is enough to make us sweet^y contented in all conditions. It
is a safe and a happy way to apply our wills to his will. It is effeminacy and
dastardlines to complain against God; and greatly adds to our misery. It is
magnanimity and courage to yield to him. It is perfect freedom and happiness
to obey God. He that follows his Captains commands through adversity and
dangers, as well as prosperity shall be greatly rewarded. The good Soldiers of
our heavenly Captain shall be crowned with eternal glory and triumph.

Let us then do our best endeavors in all good ways for the attainment of
earthly Happiness, and depend on the Providence of the Almighty for success,
trusting him in all things, casting all our care upon him, who truly cares for
such as rely on him, and truly knows what is best for us: so may we be assured
that in what estate soever we be in, the same is best for us, and that all
things shall convert to our happiness, let the World toss and vary it self
how it list, we shall ever remayn safe and happy. Even crosses, losses, want
and all afflictions shall then increase our happiness, for why,

First, we shall be delivered out of all afflictions, Many are the troubles of
the righteous, says King David (though often more are the troubles of the
unrighteous) but the Lord, says he, delivers the righteous) out of all. And
they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: Oftentimes they are delivered in
this life, certainly in heaven. How pleasant will heaven be eternally to such
as have been here in want and afflicted for a time? a moment in comparison.

Secondly, we may have joy in all crosses and afflictions. Our Savior says,
In the world ye shall have afflictions, but in me you shall rejoice, and your
joy shall no man take from you. Unto the righteous does arise in trouble joy,
in darkness light, says King David, afflictions and want do often stir up and
quicken good souls to look and see far into heaven, possessing themselves,
with most sweet and heavenly joys and consolations, I do abound with all joy,
says Saint Paul, in the midst of tribulation.

Thirdly, the same shall turn to our good, All ^ings work to the good of them
that love God, ^ith Saint Paul, Afflictions take from us all base ^are and
effeminacie, they are purgations to ^ense us, and bridles to withold us from
evils. They are spurs to excite us to all goodness, It is ^ood for me, says
King David, that I have been ^fflicted. Troubles, want, and crosses make us
wiser, more circumspect, resolute and courageous. The same tryes, exercises,
increases, quickens, and refines all heavenly grace in us, Your light
afflictions which are but for a moment, says Saint Paul, shall work in you an
eternal weight of glory. This glory if we could truly think of, though we
should suffer all the miseries on earth, yet should we greatly rejoice, and
glory to think, at what an easy rate we should gain such eternal happiness.

Why then should we not be sweetly contented in all conditions, since there may
be such happiness in losses, crosses, want and afflictions, and what better
happiness can we learn then to be contented, and sweetly pleased in all
estates and occurrences, and so to enjoy these earthly happinesses, with a
contented, fearlesse, free and happy mind?

Such men therefore as are well persuaded of the goodness and fitness of their
condition whatsoever it be, and their minds settled in a free, fearlesse and
contented estate, are to be esteemed happy men, and no men living are able to
enjoy more true pleasure and happiness on earth then such men.

So that whether we lose, want, have sufficiency or abundance, Let us make a
good use thereof, be contented with, and rejoice in all things.

The abstract of the second SECTION.
THe way in earthly things, true joy to find,
Is to enjoy them with contented mind,
He is the richest and most happy man,
Who (being moderate in desires) can
Content himself, and sweetly pleased be
In all estates, conditions, each degree.
Who covets naught, does all the world possess,
And sure he may contend in happiness
With love himself, but he that fears the loss
Of earthly things, and grieves at every cross,
Or letting loose his appetite, does extend
His vicious desires beyond the end
(...) moderation and of reason, sure
^e is not happy, but he shall endure
(...) restless discontent; he fain would be
A Lord, a King, an Emperor, then he,
^he World would have, nay more, he knows not what
^ouses of Jasper, neither this, nor that
^an please his mind, surely he is not wise,
^e brings himself into Fools Paradise.
^ut nature has provided for us so
As every man may be content. We know
A little is sufficient to suffice
Nature it self. And he that's truly wise
Within himself can true contentment find,
He enjoys even all the world within his mind.
Give me the silent shade, the quiet life,
The happy Country, free from Cities strife,
The bush where under Tityrus did sing,
And no more wealth then may contentment bring,
He bring the choicest Nymphs into my Cell,
The Muses and the Graces there shall dwell.
I will endeavor, sweetest joys to find,
To enjoy both earth and heaven in my mind.
It Is sure a happy state and free from strife,
To live a still, poor, and contented life,
We often see that poor despised men
Are healthy, merry, happy, Let us then
In all estates, ever contented be,
Yea, even in crosses, troubles, misery.
Crosses and troubles are to all men common
Let us not grieve too much for that which no m^
Living is free from, and we know indeed
Some crosses necessary are, we need
A mixture, pleasures else were bitter,
Stale, and would cloy us, crosses make them sweet
And though we have some troubles, yet there be
A thousand pleasures in the world, which we
May still enjoy, so as perchance we may
Drown all our griefs in pleasantness and j^y:
And though our troubles should be very bitter,
Yet being past, pleasure will then be sweeter.
Wisdom and fortitude may raise our mind
To such a noble temper, we may find
Such peace and courage in us as we dare
Contemn the World when it frowns, and no whi^^ fear^
Its blows, which only feeble minds depresse
And heerby crown our selves with happiness.
But yet the surest and best remedy,
Against all crosses and adversity,
^o advance our minds to piety,
^s indeed true magnanimity
(...) yield to God, such are the happiest men
^o trust in him in all things. Let us then
(...) all good ways endeavor to attain
^rrestriall happiness. Concerning gain
^t us on him, who cares for us, depend,
^^d always what is best for us does send.
(...) may we happy be and rest secure
(...) all conditions; we may now be sure
that even crosses, want and misery,
shall now convert to our felicity.
^e shall from all afflictions be releast
and joy will be most sweet when sorrow's past
^ow pleasant will heaven be eternally,
^o such as here have suffered misery?
unto the righteous often does arise,
(...) trouble joy, in darkness to their eyes
^oth heavenly light appear, so as we may
(...) trouble see and taste of heavenly joy.
^fflictions take from us effeminacie
And all base fear adds magnanimity,
Wisdom and goodness in us, quickens, tries
All heavenly grace; and in such exercise
Refines and purifies the same, that even,
Our joy shall be thereby, increast in heaven.
This heavenly joy and glory if we could
But truly think and taste thereof, we should
Though all earths miseries were in the way,
Go through them all, with sweet and pleasant
Since that such joy, such happiness may be
In crosses, losses, want and misery
Let us in all conditions, sweetly rest
Contented, so shall we be ever blessed.
None can enjoy more earthly pleasure then
Such as be fearlesse, free, contented men.
So whether want or have, or lose, or gain,
We always happy, joyful, may remayn.
The third Section. We must enjoy earthly happiness in the good use thereof.
TO the knowledge of and contentment in the felicities of the earth, we must
add a third intention, to wit, good use thereof, if we mean to be hap^^^
herein.

^o much therefore as we do possess, and may ^oy of these earthly happinesses,
let us use the ^e well, and so let us enjoy them freely and ^erfully, without
this good use, and if instead ^r of we abuse them, what can we expect but
^elicity and misery therein, even in this world, (...) all abuses (that is all
immoderate and vicious ^ires, intentions and ill uses thereof) are ene^es to
health, peace and happiness. A multitude (...) passions, perturbations, cares,
fears, griefs, ^es, diseases, distempers and miseries are inci^nt to all vices,
to all abuses, and no men even on earth, live more unhappily, more miserab^
then abusive vicious men.

While therefore we view the pleasantne^ number, variety, excellency, and
happy effects terrestrial felicities, we are by all means to very careful
that in the use and enjoyance the of we exceed not moderation; and plunge o^
selves into the dangers and abuses thereof, and instead of happiness therein,
cause to our selv^ much grief and misery. For why,

First, Satan is very busy with these earth pleasures and felicities,
prompting us to abuse and so endeavoring by their ill use to steal aw^^ our
hearts from all heavenly graces, and so from God himself, he offers us a
terrestrial Paradi^ also, and cries, All this will I give thee, if the wilt
fall down and worship me. But he does notably cozen and mock us, he deals with
us as h^ did with Adam, though he offers us Paradise, te^ us we shall be as
Gods, etc. yet he gives us b^^ an Apple, and such an Apple as the eating the^
of will bereave us of all good, fill us with all evil and cause us to be
driven out of the Paradise o^ all felicities, into a world of misery. His
offer^ and gifts are like that gay painted Box of Pandora, stuffed with all
manner of evils and miseries, if we could see the evil and misery of the
condition, we should think it infinitely too great ^te to buy his painted
proffers, yet these ^hly things are sometimes his principal baits ^atch fools
withal, whereby he carries them ^ll wickedness, I mean such fools as King Da^
speaks of, and King Solomon, Fools are we by ^on of our transgressions, Let us
take heed we not into his unhappy miserable fools Para^.

Also the strong torrent of our sensual corrup^ns being once set a running,
after vice and ^ckednes, will often break down the banks of ^deration and
stint; and (if we be not very ^tchfull and cautelous) flow to all manner of
^esse and dissoluteness, for wickedness and vice ^ery deceitful, and with its
painted vanities ^d sugared baits of seeming pleasure, draws and ^^res our
sensual appetites, sometimes una^res, beyond the bound-marks of Reason and
^mperance, and so blinds us, as that we are of^n persuaded, that we are about
the business, health, and moderate recreation, when indeed ^^e are canvasing
for intemperance, and our ^ndes even ready to be drawn away to wic^dnes and
impiety. And therefore we had need (...) be careful and cautelous.

The World also, even these earthly felicities (...) themselves, have many
dangerous tempta^ons to vice and wickedness, and consequently to hinder the
happiness thereof, and to make miserable therein, even on earth.

The riches of the World (being an huge hea^ and many benefits springing from
the good (...) thereof) will if we take not heed draw our hear^ to covetousnes,
and covetousnes having once e^tred our souls, will possess us with a base
sord^ desire of riches, and we shall become thereb^ unjust, deceitful,
pinching, niggardly, and full (...) unworthy conditions. Always possessed wit^
cares, fears, suspicions and discontents; especially at every loss or cross,
though of smal^ value.

Honor also having a bright luster, shining t^ the World, and being much
desired of great spirits, does tempt us to that towering and topless^ vice,
ambition possessing us with a ravenous dry unsatiable thirst thereof, making us
to become ful^ of vain plots, fears and perplexities, and exceeding desperate
and melancholy at every accident (...) thwarting our desires therein.

And pleasures also with their painted and sugared baits allure us, and if we
beware not will cause us to fall into unlawful lusts, intemperance, and all
manner of prodigalities, which are at their best but fugitive follies, and
their end melancholy and misery, and so to plunge our selves into a multitude
of griefs, aches, diseases, passions, perturbations and miseries, which are
incident to temperance, Idleness, Lust, Riot, and all im^oderate and dissolute
use of Pleasures.

So that it appears, vice and wickedness though the same have an outward show
of ^auty yet) is inwardly like a painted sepulture, (...) horrid, foul, and
ugly, full of base desires, ^amefull actions, dangers, vanities, impedi^ents,
anguish, distempers, passions, perturbati^s and miseries, even in this life,
the same at the ^est is surely but a Fools Paradise.

To the intent therefore that we may be happy respect of these earthly
Felicities, let us by all ^eans endeavor to avoid the dangers and abuses ^erof,
all unlawful, immoderate and evil desires ^^d uses thereof.

And in all respects let us endeavor to use the ^me well. The good use of
earthly felicities con^^steth in three points. The first concerning our ^lves,
the second, others. The third, and princiall Gods Glory, to which the two
former are so to be directed.

First, concerning our selves, Temperance is ^he razor and the rule of enjoying
earthly Felici^es, the razor to cut off all abuses, all strange and ^itious
superfluities, and the rule of that which (...) good and necessary, keeping us
always with^n the precincts of reason, and virtue. Let us ther^ore in the use
and enjoyance of earthly pleasures and Felicities, still observe a due
moderation, an^ order, in respect of matter, measure, time, manner and all
occasions, in such sort as the same man best tend to our well being, as to the
preservation of nature. The maintenance of our bodies (...) minds in due
temper and vigor, so as we man be able to perform all the duties and actions
(...) our life, with alacrity, cheerfulnes and pleasantness.

There are no men in the world that live more pleasantly, healthfully,
prosperously, and in all respects happily then the moderate virtuous man for by
reason of his temperance in the desires and in the use of these earthly
Felicities, his body commonly becomes free and clear from crudities, rheumes,
noysomnes, ill diseases, and distempers, and so most healthy, agill, lightsome
and expedite to all the motions appertaining thereunto, his mind also thereby
becomes fre^ from sloth, dulnes, evil passions, and perturbations, his
affections well tempered, and his whole soul apt, perspicuous, free, and
cheerful in the performance of all the actions and exercises thereof. His whole
life resembles a fair, bright and pleasant day, wherein are no clouds, no
tempest, but all fairnes, serenity and peace, he seems to go to heaven,
treading on Roses.

Secondly, in respect of others, we ought so to use and enjoy earthly happiness,
as the same may ^e without offense, scandal, damage, and prejudice of another.
The virtue of Justice ought to ^e our rule herein. Charity and liberality
should ^e also exercised hereby. Let us therefore do no ^arme but all the good
herein, that conveniently we may to our Family, Friends, Kindred, Neighbors,
as also in general to the Church and Commonwealth.

No man lives more unworthily, then he that ^iveth merely for himself, but he
that uses his time, his goods, and his endeavors for the good of others also,
lives most worthily and honorably.

But thirdly, all our endeavors, indeed all our actions, pleasures and
enjoyances ought to be directed to this point, to wit, Gods glory. Let us
always remember Saint Paul's rule, Whatsoever ye do, let all be done to the
praise and glory of God.

Let these earthly pleasures and Felicities excite and encourage us to
thankfulness, to all duties of virtue and piety, to look higher to their
fountain, to God himself, to heaven, to love and rejoice in him, to contemplate
his infinite goodness, love, beauty, sweetness, glory, and excellency. And so to
enjoy these earthly Felicities with a heavenly mind, and by these also to spy
and enjoy a Paradise of heavenly delights on earth. Of all which I intend to
write more largely and particularly in the last Section.

So then if we can thus use them, let us freely enjoy them in their greatest
excellency, pleasure and happiness.

The abstract of the third SECTION.
HE that on earth, will happy be, must use
Terrestrial happiness without abuse,
For all abuses, all intemperate
Desires, are enemies to a happy State,
A multitude of aches, griefs and cares,
Distempers, passions, perturbations, fears,
Anguish, and miseries are incident
To vicious men, they seldom are content,
Though vice seem pleasant, yet assuredly
Sorrow shall follow all impiety.
And therefore vicious men, as most unwise,
Do also run into Fools Paradise.
There is none living in the World that can
Live so contented as the virtuous man,
He lives most healthy, happy, free, secure,
Pleasantly cheerful, always being sure,
The treasures, riches, pleasures of his mind,
Shall ever last, his happy soul does find
A free delight in all things, and the way
To heaven he rides as in a Summers day.
Let virtue rule us then, in earthly pleasure,
Let temperance in all things, teach us measure,
So let us then, a mean in all things use,
In matter, measure, time, without abuse.
Let justice also, guide us in this way,
Lets do no harm, but all the good we may.
Remembering always in all things to give
Him glory who gives these, by whom we live,
And let these earthly pleasures us excite
To all good actions, also move, invite
And quicken our dull minds themselves to raise
Up higher to their fountain. And rejoice
In him, with pure, divine and hearty love
And so by looking up to heaven above
From whence these lower joys do spring, we may
A heavenly Paradise likewise enjoy
Of sweet delights on earth, so may we find
The joys of earth and heaven in our mind.
The fourth Section. We may enjoy earthly happiness freely, and cheerfully.
KNowing earthly happiness, being contented in all conditions, in respect
thereof, and using the same well, we may now in such knowledge, contentment,
and good use enjoy the same freely and cheerfully, even in its greatest
excellency, pleasure and happiness.

Which to the intent we may, we must also banish out of our minds, all idle,
superstitious, erroneous opinions, concerning the same.

Certai ly, if we would advisedly think and be persuaded as the truth is, that
Virtue and Religion is a furtherance to the enjoying of earthly happiness,
rather then a hinderance therein, and that the enjoying of the Felicities of the
earth freely, is not contrary to Virtue, Religion, and heavenly happiness, nor
any hinderance if not abused, but in the good use and enjoyance thereof, rather
a furtherance thereunto (all which in due place I shall further endeavor to
show) we should be more careful and diligent in seeking the felicities both
of earth and heaven.

Yet see those common and main errors of the World in this kind, multitudes of
men conceiting that Religion does debar them from the enjoying of earthly
Felicities, to which they are naturally strongly inclined, will not search into
the happy ways of Religion and Piety, which leads to eternal happiness.

And many men knowing the vanities; dangers, and impediments of these earthly
Felicities, do become in their carriage and writings too austere, Stoicall,
Monkish and rigid in the enjoyance of the same.

There are many indeed (who would seem) to be men of notable understanding, do
study to contemn and tread underfoot all sorts of pleasures and care of the
body, retyring the spirit into it self, not having any commerce with the body,
but elevating it self to high things, and so would seem to slide through this
life insensibly, neither tasting, not attending it, suspecting not only
recreations and pastimes, but also necessities, which God has seasoned with
some pleasure. They come unwillingly into places of lawful, honest, and
harmless pleasures, and hold their breath till they are gone, as if they were
in place^ of infection, they fear to use earthly pleasures (though well) and
so to enjoy them because they see some vanities and danger, in them, so as the
earth, yea, even their life is burdensome and offensive to them, and they
seem to be willing to die before their time.

It is most certain indeed, that there are many vanities, dangers, and
impediments in these earthly Felicities, but this hinders not, but we may
enjoy them in their good use freely and cheerfully, as I shall endeavor to show
plainly, answering the objections to the contrary, in the ensuing Sections: And
it is also most certain, that moderate due and convenient fasting, abstinence,
and forbearance of earthly pleasures, retyrednesse, divine melancholy and
solitariness, as I may call it, heavenly contemplation, ecstasies and the like,
adds sprightfulnesse and heavenly wings to our souls, so as thereby we become
the more Angel like, apt and prepared to receive, retain and enjoy all divine
Graces, all heavenly joys and consolations, even to elevate our souls to the
heavenly Paradise, and to enjoy God himself and heavenly delights in some
degree on earth. But the same ought to be done duly and conveniently, as I
intend to show in the seventh Section, not hindering the free and cheerful
enjoy^ance of earthly happiness at due and convenient times also, in the good
use thereof, which so may and ought to be enjoyed freely and cheerfully.

And it is also certain, that by an immoderate melancholy, and overnice and
slavish forbearance of convenient, good, harmless pleasures, the spirit may
sometimes become singular, vainglorious, curious, and wandering from harmless
and lawful ways. So while these men would seem to live after a strange
manner, wholly above themselves: By not endeavoring to play the parts of men,
as well as of Angels, they sometimes proceed to conceive and maintain prodigious
Paradoxes, and erroneous fancies.

But we are to know, that while we are in this life, It is very fair, good,
lawful, and commendable, for us to learn well, to play the parts of a Man;
yea, it is a divine knowledge in a religious and virtuous manner, rightly and
duly to govern, use and enjoy, both the pleasures of the mind and of the body
also, and not to renounce the meanest of them, but in their good use freely to
enjoy them, to which Nature provokes us, Reason also excites us, yea, Religion
and God himself exhorts us. All which I shall endeavor to show as plainly as I
may.

We must consider, we have bodies as well as souls, which require due
refreshments, recreations, and pleasures, to which every man finds in himself
a natural appetite and desire, yea, necessity compels us thereunto, we could
not subsist nor live without these. And Nature wills very wisely, that these
actions which it has enjoined us for our necessity, be also delightful,
inviting us thereunto not only by appetite, but by reason.

What greater folly is there, and more against reason as well as nature, to
account our actions vicious, because they are natural, unworthy, because
necessary, and pleasant. It is indeed contrary to Justice, to be too defective,
stoicall and rigid on the one side. As to be too excessive and superfluous on
the other. So that as we ought not to take such pleasure in earthly things as
to prejudice the health and safety of our bodies and minds by excess and
abuses, so we ought not also to take so little pleasure therein, as to hinder
the welfare thereof through defect.

In such sort, as we must not disallow and reprove natural and convenient
pleasures, as we do those which are impious, vicious, and superfluous, but
rather greatly commend the same, for as much as that reasonable mean may be
observed therein, which is good and commendable in all things. And so without
question that delectation which proceeds from the temperate and good use of
pleasures is to be enjoyed freely and ^heerfully.

And it is also reason, that the mind should partake with the body of such
natural pleasures which are just, good, and convenient These two, the body and
the mind, are as it were married together, it is against reason, not well done
to divide and separate this natural conjunction, but rather we should renew
the same by mutual offices.

The Spirit ought to quicken and revive the dull, heavy body. The body also
should stay and allay that strange, unnatural, prodigious, proud, extravagant
lightness of the spirit. The Spirit should assist and favor the body, as the
husband, the wife. And not reject it nor hate it. It should not abandon the
body, and refuse the natural pleasures thereof, which are due, convenient,
just, lawful, and moderate, such as befits the Marriage that is between them.
It seems unnatural, Presumption, Pride and Folly so to do, contrary to right
and reason; It should a^her in all cases assist the body to mayntaine it
always in due order.

And as Nature and Reason, so also Religion commends, yea, wills and
commands the enjoyment of earthly happiness, within the bounds of Temperance
and Virtue. It is true indeed, Religion exhorts and commands us to avoid
intemperance and abuses herein, and to use them well. But herein it does
greatly increase our happiness even on earth, for as has been showed, a
multitude of restless desires, cares, fears, distempers, anguish and miseries
proceed from all vice and impiety even in this World. And no men on earth live
more pleasantly, healthfully, prosperously, and happily then the contented,
temperate, virtuous, gracious man. So that Religion greatly adds to our free
enjoyance of Terrestrial happiness in directing us to avoid the abuses
thereof, and to use the same well. And in such good use, it commends, wills
and commands the enjoyance thereof freely and cheerfully. And greatly blames
such as forbid and teach the contrary. To instance in some places of the sacred
Scriptures.

Thou shall rejoice in every good thing which the Lord thy God has given thee,
Thou and the Levite and the stranger that is among you, Deuteronomy. 26.11. Because
the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy increase, and in all the work of
thy hands, therefore thou shall surely rejoice Deuteronomy. 16.5.

Behold, that which I have seen, (says the Preacher) It is good and comely
for a man to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor, that he
takes under the Sun all the days of his life, which God gives him, for it is
his portion. Every man also to whom God has given riches and wealth, and has
given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his
labor, This is the gift of God, He shall not much remember the days of his
life, because God answers him in the joy of his heart, Eccles. 5.18, 19, 20.

Rejoice in the wife of thy youth, Let her be unto thee as the pleasant Hind
and loving Roe, and rejoice in her love continually, says Solomon, Pro. 5.17.

Now the Spirit speaks expressly, says Saint Paul, That in the latter times,
some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences
feared with a hot iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from
meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of them which
believe and know the truth, for every creature if God is good, and nothing to
be refused of it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the
Word of God and Prayer. 1 Timothy 4.2, 3, 4, 5.

By these few instances (amongst diverse others which might be added) it
appears that we may freely and cheerfully enjoy these earthly happinesses, and
that such as forbid or deny the same are greatly to be blamed. The rather
because as Saint Paul signifies in the forenamed place to Timothy, That God
has created them to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and
know the truth.

God himself is the Author of these. Riches and honor come from God (says
King Solomon) and the blessing of the Lord makes rich. He created, says
Moses, the Paradise of pleasure, wherein he planted man. They are Gods gifts,
says the Wife man, and ordained of him, (which appears also by their variety
and pleasantness) not only for necessity but for lawful and moderate delight,
Eccles. 5.18, 19. And therefore if well used are to be esteemed as his gifts and
blessings.

Also they may serve to many excellent uses, as has been said in the former
Section, even to increase in us heavenly joy and happiness also, of which I
intend to write in the last Section.

And therefore in all these respects it appears, That such as use these
terrestrial Felicities with moderate delectation, to the glory of God, and so
to good ends, are better to be reputed, then such as unduly, inconsideratly and
rashly, neglect and refuse so great good which God lovingly and freely offers
to our acceptance.

Wherefore Monks, Anchorites, Carthusian Friars, and others of the rigid and
Stoicall sort of people are in a great error, who superstitiously refuse and
neglect Riches, Honors, Marriage, Flesh, Wine, moderate and lawful Recreations
^n their good use. It seems they think themselves wiser in refusing, then their
Creator is in offering ^o great benefits.

This superstitious opinion is most commonly found in discontented brain-sicke
men; Surely they are injurious, to reason, unjustly depriving themselves of the
good enjoyance of much happiness, yea, to Religion and God himself, very much
detracting from his goodness, and most free love and kindness.

From whence should this opinion and belief spring, that God takes pleasure
in the refusal and neglect of the good use and enjoyance of his creatures,
which he freely commends, exhorts, and offers to our acceptance. But the wiser
Philosophers and Christians have been and are of another opinion; as Saint
Paul was, Romans 14. 1 Timothy 4. The practice also of our Savior, Who says of
himself, The Son of man came eating and drinking, etc. Matthew 11. Of the
Christians in the Primitive Church. Who did eat their meat together with
gladness and singleness of heart, Acts 2.46. Of those which resorted to the
feasts of Charity mentioned. Jude 12. which are recorded to be certain Banquets
which the Christians kept altogether, and of diverse other in all ages. Do show
that this opinion of the free and cheerful enjoyance of earthly happiness in
the moderate and good use thereof ought to be embraced. The objections to the
contrary, I shall endeavor to answer in the following Sections.

So that if we will be ruled by Nature, Reason, Religion, by God himself, if
we will follow the opinion of the wiser Christians. The practice of our
Savior, and of those Christians in the Primitive Church and others in all
Ages, if we can use these earthly Felicities with Temperance, to the glory of
God, we may surely enjoy them in such good use freely and cheerfully.

Let us then enjoy God in all things, and all things in him, and to his glory.

The abstract of the fourth SECTION.
THat we in Earths delights, free joy may find,
Lets banish Superstition from our mind.
Most certainly, if we could truly see
Religious excellency, we should be
Enamored with its beauty presently
However some do think that rigidly,
The same does hinder earths felicity,
And therefore too too superstitiously
Refuse the same, so making others fear
To tread these divine paths, conceiting there
Is naught but rigid solitariness
Debarring them, from earthly happiness
Whereas indeed, the same does much increase
Terrestrial joys, external happiness.
These men would seem to be exceeding wise
In studying altogether to despise
All earthly pleasures, insomuch they fear
To see or taste thereof, as if they were
Infectious, in their good and harmless use
And so because of dangers in abuse
They weakly fear to enjoy them, Thus they find
The world a grief, a burden to their mind.
Whereas in truth, we ought without abuse
To enjoy earth happiness, in its good use
Freely, to which Nature greatly excites us
And reason also liberally invites us.
Justice and Temperance d^ as well condemn,
Stupidity and failing in extreme
As the other way, intemperance in excess,
Both hindering true delight and happiness.
Religion also does commend the joy.
Which in the temperate use thereof we may
Receive therein, it bids us freely take
Those pleasures which were only for our sake
Created, and which God does freely give
For our necessities while here we live
And moderate delectation, Let us then
Freely enjoy the same, surely such men
As will refuse such joy, so great a bliss
As heaven does offer, greatly do amiss.
But Lord, do thou our minds so guide, so raise,
That we all things in thee, and to thy praise
May still enjoy, and also that we may
Thy self in all things, evermore enjoy.
The fifth Section. We may enjoy earthly Felicities, notwithstanding their
vanities, etc.
THe reasons why many men do so much condemn the free and cheerful enjoyance
of earthly happinesses, are because of their vanities, dangers, impediments and
the like.

But I shall now endeavor to show, that we may and ought to enjoy them freely
and cheerfully notwithstanding these; And first in this Section,
Notwithstanding their vanities. Those that would mayntain the contrary, do
worthily and truly tell us, That earthly Riches, Honors, and Pleasures are
vain, short, uncertain, and transitory. And that in comparison of eternal an
heavenly Felicities, they are not worthy to b^ esteemed, but rather to be
despised.

It is most certain indeed, that those soul^ which do often contemplate the
heavenly glor^ and are truly raised to the knowledge of divine things, are
elevated above all pleasures and Felicities of the earth, in as much as
Eternity is abov^ time, and infinite Felicities above vanities. An^ in these
thoughts they are often so raised abov^ themselves, that if they were capable
of vaniti^ they would not know themselves, while their souls are thus
contemplating on the treasures, the glory, and the delights of heaven.

So as they do in part taste before hand of the sweetness of those Felicities
which they hope to receive at the end of their life; which makes them very
generously to tread under foot, all the pleasures and greatnesses of the earth,
while their souls are in such contemplations, directing their aims to heaven.

And it is also most true that the Felicities of the earth are not worthy to be
compared with those of heaven either in worth, or duration of time, they are
altogether vain, even as nothing in such comparison.

Yet notwithstanding in respect of our nature, infirmities, weaknesses, and
necessities, And in ^^spect, of themselves also without such compa^^on. They
are to be well esteemed both in re^^ect of time and worth, even as the gifts
and blessings of God commended, yea commanded to be joyed in their good use,
rather then neglected refused, As serving also to many excellent uses ^^d
purposes, even to increase in us divine and ^^avenly joys and happiness, of all
which, I shall ^re also discourse of somewhat more particu^rly.

And first in respect of our selves, In that they ^^e natural and necessary to
us. Which appears (...) their pleasantness, and variety of curious co^urs,
harmonious sounds, pleasant tastes, and fra^rant smells which God has
particularly appro^riated to every kind of creature, affording rather delight
then necessity. But if we consider ^ow necessary they are also, As that we
cannot mayntain our selves, not live without them, we shall know, That they are
to us of much worth, and therefore to be well esteemed and freely en^oyed in
their good use.

Necessity and pleasure is an excellent Marri^ge in Nature. And it is good
reason that those actions which are necessary, should also be delightful, to
which, as has bin said, both Nature and Reason invites us, And therefore such
as go about to break this marriage, do endeavor (...) disunite that which
Reason and Nature ha^ joined together.

Whence it may be inferred that super flui^ which is vain and vicious in all
things being (...) chewed, we may not disdain freely and cheerfu^ly to enjoy
these earthly Pleasures, Recreatio^ and Felicities, which God himself has
ordain to be natural, necessary and pleasant, and del^ctable to us.

Secondly, in respect that they are the gifts an^ blessings of God, ordained
and created for o^ good use and enjoyance, and which he lovingly offers up to
our good use and acceptance, yea, commends and commands the good use and
enjoyanc^ thereof, as appears in the former Section: Therefore to be well
esteemed, even as his gifts an^ blessings, and in their good use to be enjoyed
freely and cheerfully.

Thirdly, they are to be well esteemed, as serving to many excellent uses, to
Gods glory. And therein, to the good of our selves and others, Natural, as the
mayntenance of our bodies and minds in due temper, and supernatural, insomuch
as they may be an occasion greatly to increase our heavenly joy and happiness.
Of which I purpose to write particularly in the last Section.

So as although in comparison of the heavenly ^^licities, these of the earth
are vain, short, and ^^ansitory, and with the same not worthy to be ^^mpared,
yet without such comparison, and in ^espect of our nature and necessities. And
for as ^uch as they are Gods gifts and blessings, com^ended and commanded to be
received and en^oyed. And since many good uses may be made ^hereof, to the
increase of our happiness both ^ere and in Heaven. Therefore they are to be
^njoyed, And such as either through ignorance, ^eevishnesse, or Superstition do
neglect and reuse the enjoyance of these earthly blessings ^n their good use,
are to be censured and ^lamed.

The abstract of the fifth SECTION.
THose souls which raised are above the sky
To heavenly glory, to Eternity
In contemplations, do most certainly
Account earths joys, but even as vanity.
In such comparison they truly deem
All earthly joys, not worthy their esteem.
While as their happy souls do thus aspire
To heavenly joys, with flaming sweet desire
They do forget the earth, and being above
Themselves inflamed with heavenly joy and love,
They are so rapt in sweet delights that even
They seem to taste already joys of heaven.
So while their souls are raised above the Sky,
They seem to tread down very generously
All earthly joys beneath their feet as vain
Not worthy their esteem, Their glorious aim.
And surely, no comparison can be
Twixt earthly times, and heavens eternity.
But though in such comparison, certainly
The greatest earthly joys, are vanity.
Yet in themselves, and also in respect
Of us, and our necessities, to neglect
And disesteem them, truly were a crime,
In such respect, they are in worth and time
To be regarded: Yea to us they are given
By God himself, as tokens sent from heaven.
Not only for necessity, but delight,
Which does appear because unto our sight
And all our senses, they afford variety
Of delectations, even to satiety
Beyond necessity, and therefore they
Which superstitiously refuse to enjoy
What God himself has freely, kindly, given
Are worthy blame, though Saints, and heirs of heaven.
This is not all, he does not only give them
But lovingly commands us to receive them,
So as without abuses, and annoyance
In their good use, and moderate enjoyance.
And also in such joy they may invite
Attract, encourage, quicken, and excite
Us unto all good actions, and to raise
Our souls to God himself, to heavenly joys
From whence these spring, and so to taste, to find
Pleasures of heaven, on earth, within our mind:
So though earths joys be vain and transitory,
Yet may we thereof, make us crowns of glory,
The sixth Section. We may enjoy earthly Happiness, notwithstanding their
dangers, etc.
ALthough it be most certain, there are many dangers and impediments, in
earthly Riches, Honors and Pleasures, yet these may be avoided, and so
c^nverted to our Felicity, in as much as to eschew and overcome them, or to
endeavor so to do, is acceptable to God, and by him rewarded, And (since they
are to us natural, necessary commended and commanded by Reason and Religion it
self as Gods creatures, gifts, and blessings to be enjoyed in their good uses
which are many, as has bin showed) their dangers and impediments hinder not,
but we may enjoy them in their good use freely and cheerfully.

But they which would mayntain the contrary, truly tell us, First, That earthly
Riches, Honor and Pleasures are dangerous, disposing us to Covetousness,
Ambition, Intemperance, and sundry vices.

But we may truly answer, Although these earthly Felicities be dangerous,
disposing us to such vices. This is no sufficient reason to divert us from the
good use of them, It is absurd to say, A man may not use a Knife, because some
have cut their fingers therewith, So to say we ought not, to desire Riches,
Honor, and Pleasures in a moderate manner, And so in their good use freely to
enjoy them, because they are an occasion that some men fall into Covetousness,
Ambition, Intemperance, and other vices, is an insufficient Reason.

The affections as one says, Are the nerves and sinews of the soul, They
serve to contract, to slacken, to lift up, to lay down, to stir and settle
the same, whersoever it will, even as the body is moved and removed by its
ligaments, wherefore they are to be preserved and moderated, not taken away,
and utterly destroyed.

We are to imitate, in this, a well experienced Horsman, who for to tame and
manage well his horse, will not take from him agilitie and courage, but
endeavors especially to bring him to run, to turn, to rise, to curvet, and to
stand, how and when it pleases him, and not according to the horses will, even
so when we perceive our affections inclining to stubborn disobedience, we
ought rather to correct and reform the same with reason and judgment, then
wholly to mortify and extinguish them,

And although the Riches, Honor and Pleasures of the earth be dangerous
temptations to evil; Yet for a man not be ill, where he has no provocations
thereunto, is less commendable, and deserving, then to be good in the midst of
dangers and temptations.

Insomuch that if we can make a good use even of these dangers and temptations
by overcomming, or endeavoring to overcome them (for God that accepts the will
for the deed, will lovingly accept of our good wishes and endeavors, and his
Power is made perfect in our weakness and infirmities, as (S. Paul says) the
same shall then convert to our good and advancement, we shall be greatly
rewarded in heaven, for such conquest and endeavors, in such good use therefore
even of these dangers, we may take Saint James exhortation, Count it all joy,
says he, when ye fall into diverse temptations.

But it is further objected to this purpose, by such as would deny this truth.
They truly tell us, That we are exhorted in Gods sacred Word to forsake, hate
and overcome the World, and we may also truly answer, That surely it is not
meant therein by forsaking, and hating the World, that we should go live in a
Monastery, forswear Marriage, Vow wilful Poverty, refuse lawful meats,
moderate and expedient Recreations, and the like. But rather in the same sense
as we are exhorted to forsake and hate father, mother, wife, children, etc.
That is for Christ's sake and the Gospels, rather then forsake him and goodness.

By forsaking, hating and overcomming the World is meant the dangers, abuses,
and evils thereof, certainly not the good things therein in a superstitious
manner. These as has bin said, may be enjoyed notwithstanding their vanities
and dangers in their good use freely and cheerfully.

To contemn, overcome and be above the World, is indeed a brave proposition,
and many there be who glory to discourse thereof. Though perchance they scarce
know what it is, much less practice it. The world is often dangerous and
wanton in a corner, in solitarines, in idleness and in those places and actions
where some men make profession of flying from it, and trampling it underfoot,
which is meant of Hypocrites who have so much degenerated from their beginning,
That there remains almost nothing but the habit, And that also serves to
puff them up; to make them proud and impudent, which is quite contrary to
their Institutions.

But to contemn the use, the service, the commodity, and therein the enjoyance
and pleasures of the World, what accusation is it against Nature that invites
us, against Reason that wills us thereunto, yea, against the Author that made
them to these ends? What ingratitude is it to refuse that which God lovingly
offers?

To sequester our selves from the company of the World, and from the enjoying
of earthly things, because of their dangers, proceeds, as a Reverend Divine
says, from a weak, base, and distrustful mind, as if we would so force
goodness upon our selves, That therefore only we would be good because we
cannot be ill, but for a man to know the highest of worldly contentments, To
live in the throng of the World, and yet to be above it, to use it, enjoy it
and contemn it, as he pleases, to compel it to his service without infection,
well becomes the noble courage of a Christian.

No man indeed can serve two masters, we cannot serve God and Mammon, Let us
then make the World our slave, only God our master.

It is true indeed, then, to be servants to the World, It is better to go out
of it, but to use it as a Master compelling it to our service, in all good ways
without abuses, as it is more difficult then to sequester our selves from it,
so is it also more victorious, and shall be an occasion of greater triumphs and
brighter Crowns in Heaven.

The abstract of the sixth SECTION.
ALthough it is certain, that terrestrial treasures
Honor and greatness, also earthly pleasures
Do greatly tempt us unto covetousness,
Ambition, all intemperate vitiousnesse.
Yet in good use thereof, we freely may
The greatest pleasures thereof, still enjoy.
When our affections unto ill incline,
We ought with reason, and with grace divine
Such ill desires to conquer and to quell,
It is more praise and glory, to do well.
In midst of great tem^tations, then to be
Otherwise good, for mere necessity.
And as the danger's greater, we shall be
The more rewarded for such victory.
Whereas to sequester our selves for fear
Into a Monastery, or forbear
Things lawful as expe^ient recreation
(Which may and ought with moderate delectation
Be used) because of dangers, does proceed
Out of a weak distrustful mind indeed.
But for a man to know the highest joy
The world affords, and yet without annoy
To live therein, and as a Master use
The same in all respects, without abuse,
And can even as he list the world compel,
Unto his service, and even then do well
In midst of great temptations, surely he
In heaven, with brightest glory crowned shall be.
The seventh Section. We may enjoy earthly Felicities, notwithstanding their
impements, etc.
SVch men as object against the free and cheerful enjoyance of earthly
Felicities do truly tell us, That the enjoyance and use of earthly happiness
does often hinder us in the attainment, and also enjoyment of supernatural and
heavenly things.

But we may also truly answer, and are to know, That it is indeed only the
abuses of these Pleasures and Felicities that hinder us therein, otherwise in
their good use, They may serve as spectacles to sees by the more clearly into
heaven, and may further us in all good heavenly ways. They may stir us up to
thankfulness, and to all duties of piety, increase our love to God, and joy
in him, They may be notable encouragements to do more worthily, and to go on
more cheerfully in the ways of God, and in such good use they may be sweet and
pleasant additions to our hope of heaven. And by viewing and enjoying these we
may look higher to their Fountain, contemplating the excellency, sweetness and
beauty of the Creator who is infinitely more excelling, and so in some measure;
epsy and enjoy the Felicities of heaven also while we are on earth, but of
this more at large in the next Section. And therefore in their good use we may
enjoy them freely and cheerfully.

But such as would mayntaine the contrary, do further object to this purpose
more particularly, The most material Objections I shall endeavor to collect
briefly, and so to answer them, They truly tell us.

First, that Abstinence and forbearance of pleasures, does best fit and prepare
the mind for the well performance of all divine Exercises and Contemplations.

Secondly, that many ill men possess and enjoy these e rthly Felicities, and
many good men want them, which shows, (say they) the same are hindrances in
goodness.

Thirdly, that our Savior says, It is hard for a rich man to enter into
heaven; And Saint Paul, Not many mighty, not many noble are called, and that
the mourners, the meek and dejected spirits, are rather pronounced blessed in
Gods Word, then voluptuous men.

All which I shall endeavor to answer briefly.

Concerning the first, That fasting and forbearance of pleasures, fits and
prepares the mind for divine Exercises. It is most true, and it is very
requisite and good that we fast, pray, repent, be abstemious, and exercise our
selves in all Christian duties, so far as we may conveniently without
superstition, as we are exhorted thereunto. And, God forbid, that I should be
guilty of speaking against due and convenient fasting, abstinence, and therein
retiredness from pleasures of the World, to divine Contemplations, which at
due and convenient times, is certainly most pleasing to God, And very
beneficial both to body and mind, disburthening the same of many gross
humors, vapors, and spirits, and so taking away sloth, dulnes, many
distempers, and making our minds, as far as is possible in this World, like
Angels most free, quick, and sprightly in the performance of all divine
Exercises, and so most apt and well prepared for the conceiving, Receiving, and
retayning of all divine and heavenly illuminations and consolations.

But herein it is good to observe a due and convenient order (as concerning
fasting) according to the prescriptions and customs, of the Church and Saints
in all Ages, to fast publicly, when Authority enjoins us, sometimes privately
according to our Saviors exhortation, and the usual practice of religious
Christians, which is good to be done at, and in convenient time, as sometimes
forbearing a meal, sometimes a day, till night or the like, when, and so, long
as we may conveniently and by our own experience find the same, does make us
best prepared for all divine exercises and contemplations. And also upon good
occasions, It is not good to make an extraordinary exercise ordinary, which in
some sort takes away the excellency thereof. And because it is an extraordinary
exercise, extraordinary occasions best be fits the same.

And so of other Christian duties, a due and convenient order is to be observed
in all of them, according to that of the Wiseman, There is a time for all
things, a time to be dejected, a time to mourn, a time to refrain from
pleasures, etc. Eccles. 3.

Yet ought we not to be so superstitiously nice, as to refuse Gods creatures,
gifts, and blessings which he freely offers to our good use, and enjoyance, and
so hinder and prejudice the welfare of our bodies and minds, through defect.
But these earthly felicities also are to be used and enjoyed in due order, and
at convenient times, The Wise man also says, There is a time to laugh, a time
to rejoice, etc. Eccles. 3.

And commonly in the use and enjoyance of meat, drink, recreations, and all
pleasures, a temperate custom, as it is most beneficial to the welfare of the
body and mind. So also is it most pleasant, and such men as so use and enjoy
the same may be commonly observed to be the most healthy, free, cheerful, and
happy men, and consequently apt, and well prepared for the performance of all
good exercises of body, and mind, both humane and heavenly.

And the free and cheerful enjoyance of earthly happinesses also, may
encourage and stir us up to all divine exercises, and may be an occasion of
many heavenly contemplations and consolalations, as more plainly appears in
the last Section. And so further us in the attainment, and also enjoyment of
supernatuall and heavenly things, rather then hinder the same, And therefore in
such good use, (notwithstanding this objection) may at convenient times be
enjoyed freely and cheerfully.

It is true also as it is further objected, That many ill men enjoy earthly
felicities and many good men want them: And good reason for it because of their
dangers and impediments, as has been objected and answered. God like a wise
Physician, a loving Father, often keeps his servants from these things knowing
(Perchance) the same will hurt them, for we are prone to fall into abuses and
wickedness: And we had much better never enjoy them, then abuse them. But
these dangers, abuses, and hindrances may be avoided, (Converted to our good,
and increase our happiness, as has been showed and answered before.

Or perchance the reason why many good men want these may be to try, stir up,
quicken and refine all heavenly graces in them, and so to increase their glory
and happiness in Heaven, And the reason why some ill men enjoy them, may be
for their greater mi ery and punishment in the ill uses of them, O perhaps lest
these earthly, should be thought of any value in respect of heavenly
felicities, or diverse other Reasons best known to the Almighty.

Yet many good men also, as the most regular Philosophers and greatest
professors of verrue, Zeno, Cato, Scipio, Epaminondas, Plato, Socrates himself
and diverse others have used, enjoyed, and written in commendation of love, and
other sports, delights and pleasures. Likewise Abraham, Job, Solomon, and
innumerable others have possessed and enjoyed these earthly Felicities. And
sometimes Christ himself (as at the Marriage in Cana) would use and approve of
the enjoyment of earthly creatures lest they should be thought evil.

Being indeed of themselves good, but of an indifferent nature to us, good, or
evil, as they are well used or abused. But being well used with mediocrity and
to good ends. They are without question, rather to be used and enjoyed then
despised or neglected, Unto the pure all things are pure, says Saint Paul. And
again, Romans 14.14. I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus (says he) That
there is nothing unclean of it self, But to him that esteems any thing
unclean, to him it is unclean; and in the same Chapter he intimates, Such to
be the weaker Christians who are nice and scrupulous in these things.

Yet however we ought not to despise such men who refuse the moderate use of
earthly blessings: Saint Pa^l advises so, Romans 14.2, 10, 13. Forasmuch (as he
says) as well such as eat, or drink, or such as refuse, both do it to pleas^
God, and to give God thanks. Wherefore it appears, Although such refusal be
superstition, and folly, in such men, yet since they do it to please God, we
ought not to despise, or judge them, But rather respect and well esteem them,
for their good intents and purposes.

Let no man judge you in respect of meat or drink, or of an holy day, or of
the new Moon, or Sabbath days, Col. 2.16.

True it is we read of many ancient Fathers, and holy men who have been very
strict and observant in the refusal of riches, of honor, of dainty meats,
flesh, wine, marriage, and all pleasures, and lived in Deserts, Cells, and
Monasteries very abstemiously, eating very seldom, and faring only with
bread, water, herbs, or other course meat, And of Saint John Baptist who lived
a very austere life, Whose garments were only of Camels hair, and girdle of
skins, his meat Locusts and wild honey, Of whom our Savior says, Matthew. 11.
That he came neither eating nor drinking, and blamed them who therefore said, he
had a Devil.

Wherefore we are to reverence and well approve of the severe sanctity of
those ancient Fathers, and holy men (respecting their good intents, being
intended and done to the glory of God, and in and through Christ Jesus
gloriously ^ewarded) yet we may as much admire those others, as devou^ and of
like sanctity, who imi^ate our Savior, He says of him (after he had ^old of
Saint John Baptists severity as before, Matthew. 11.) That the Son of man came
eating and drinking, But being with temperance and moderation, He blamed those
which therefore said, Behold, a man gluttonous, and a Wine-bib^ber, a friend of
Publicans and sinners, concluding, But wisdom is justified of her children,
implying his innocence, And that there ought to be a wise moderation in all
things.

Now such as imitate our Savior, and those ancient Christians in the Primitive
times, Who did eat their meat together with gladness and singleness of
heart, And those who resorted to those ancient Feasts and Banquets of Charity,
of whom I have written before, and others since in all ages virtuous and
religious Christians of all degrees, who have not disdained to enjoy these
gifts and blessings of God in their good use, are much better to be reputed
then such as refuse so much good, which God lovingly and freely offers to our
acceptance, good use, and enjoyance.

Such therefore who can live in the World, and yet be so spiritual and heavenly
minded, That they can use it as if they used it not, how, and when they please
for their own advantage, Who ca^ be temperate like our Savior amongst
Publicans and sinners, or as Lot, be a good man in Sodom.

Such as know these earthly Felicities in their highest excellency and
pleasures, And yet can avoid their evils, dangers and impediments, and in all
good ways use them or contemn them as they will themselves, Such men indeed
are most worthy of praise, and to be esteemed most deserving.

And this to do, is a greater glory, and shows much more and stronger sanctity
and grace inwardly, then utterly to abandon the World by retyring to a
Monastery, or to neglect Gods gifts and blessings, and consequently shall be
more gloriously rewarded in Heaven.

Whereas it is also further objected, That our Savior says, It is hard for a
rich man to enter into heaven. And Saint Paul, Not many noble, not many mighty
are called, etc. 1 Cor. 1. The Reason is because riches and greatness are
great dangers and impediments, And therefore the former answers may serve to
this objection also.

Not many mighty, not many noble are called after the flesh, says the Text. If
a mighty and noble man can be spiritual and heavenly, notwithstanding the
temptations of the flesh, and the ^llurements of Riches and Greatness, which
na^urally draw our desires downwards, He is a no^le and worthy man indeed.
Thrice blessed are those rich, mighty, and noble men who can overcome such
great temptations to evil, as great honor and riches allure unto, It is a
greater glory to mount up to heaven, through impediments, through great
temptations and difficulties then otherwise.

Whereas it is also objected, That the Mourners the meek, and dejected spirits
are rather pronounced blessed in Gods Word then voluptuous men, It is true
indeed our Savior says, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted, Blessed are the meek in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of God,
But these are indeed, words of blessedness, of comfort, and of exultation, To
such as are truly penitent and meek in spirit, exciting them to faith, to hope,
to joy and cheerfulness.

It is an error to think and mayntain that Religion dejects us, we see the
same is sufficient to cheer, quicken and comfort, the mourners, the lowly and
dejected spirits, and to raise their joys as high as a Kingdom, as Heaven. For
most sweetly and happily does it teach us, That such men are blessed, They
shall be comforted, to them belongs the Kingdom of God.

Religion indeed tells us, we ought to mourn and be dejected, for our sins and
frailties, rathe^ then always to enjoy the Pleasures and Felicity of the
World, But this also is to be done in du^ order, and at convenient times, as
has bin said There is a time to mourn, and a time to rejoice Eccles. 3. And
indeed even true repentance and humiliation, in its deepest sorrows ought
incontinently to work in us a sound and joyful assurance of reconciliation to
God, in consideration of his infinite mercy in JESUS CHRIST to his penitent
believing creatures; and so to open unto us the sweet Fountains of joy and
cheefulnesse rather then dejectus, causing in us a happy and blessed
tranquillity, and exalting our joys even to the Heavens.

And although it be most true, that Religion ought to make us deny our selves,
And to see our selves, like the Laodiceans; poor, miserable, blind, wretched,
and naked, yet of Christ Jesus, (who counsels us thereunto, Revel. 3.18.) We
may buy fine gold, white raiment, eye salve, in him therefore we may be, and
ought to think our selves, rich, blessed, happy, the beloved of God himself,
and heirs of Heaven.

This heavenly joy and exultation of Spirit within us, may also add to the
free and cheerful enjoyance of earthly Felicities, in as much as we ^ay enjoy
the same, with a more happy, free, and ^eerfull mind, for why, a gracious,
high spiri^d, joyful, heavenly mind enjoys all things ^ore sweetly,
pleasantly, nobly and excellently, ^en a low dejected mind, which only creeps
^n the earth, and can raise it self no higher.

Does not then Religion, most sweetly and di^inely teach us to be contented,
pleased, and hap^y, in all estates, and conditions, so that whether ^ee be
afflicted, mourn, dejected, loose, want, ^ave sufficiency, or abundance we may
think ^ur selves happy in all things. Having first sought ^he kingdom of God,
and the righteousness thereof, we may now freely enjoy earthly happinesses
^lso, as little additions to that great hope, which we may and ought to have of
those infinite and eternal felicities of Heaven.

It is an error therefore to mayntaine as some ^ave done, that men (though Gods
servants) (should not enjoy earth and heaven also. What a gross absurdity is
it to think that the felicities of the earth (which many wicked men enjoy)
should not be possessed and enjoyed by Gods servants in their good use freely and
cheerfully, since he lovingly offers the same, and for whose good use and
enjoyance they were created, 1 Timothy 4.4.

Being reconciled to God in Christ, what good what happiness is in Earth or
Heaven, That we may not enjoy, for now all things are ours, and we are Christ's,
and Christ is GODS.

The abstract of the fourth SECTION.
ALthough that many hindrances be
In earthly riches, honors, pleasures; We
In their good use without abuses may
Them notwithstanding, cheerfully enjoy.
It Is not their use, but only their abuses
That hinder us in goodness, their good uses
May further us in all good happy ways,
And be occasions, to direct our joys
To God himself, to heaven, from whence they spring
And so whilst we are sweetly solacing
Our selves in thoughts of God, of Heaven, we may
In some degree, pleasures of heaven, enjoy.
It Is true indeed that moderate abstinence
So as the same be with convenience
Disburthens, Our gross minds and makes them lightfull,
Perspicuous, free, most quick, and very sprightfull,
Apt to receive all heavenly inspirations
And to retain divine illuminations.
But too much abstinence, beyond due measure
And over-nice restraint of lawful pleasure
Does much perplex the mind, and so annoyes
The same in all good Actions, heavenly joys.
And herein order, time, occasion, is,
To be observed lest, we do amiss.
But usually, a temperate customs best
And such as use the same are surely blessed,
No men do live more free, and healthfully
More joyful, cheerful, and more happily
More apt in mind, to all good actions, than
He that is usually a temperate man:
In such a man all earthly pleasures may
Best serve to excite good actions, heavenly joy.
Such men indeed are worthy of most praise
Who can their minds to such a temper raise
To know and see the highest sweetest joy
The World affords, and yet without annoy
To live therein, and as a Master use
The same (in all respects without abuse)
As if he used it not, Even how and when
He will himself enjoying now and then
Its choicest pleasures, when he please again
Contemning them, even with a great disdain
For's own advantage, when his soul aspires
To Heaven, comparing them with such desires
He then contemplates, surely such a man
Who thin does use all earthly joys, and can,
Be good, as Lot in Sodom, or as Christ,
Be temperate, even at the Sinners Feast,
And surely such heroic noble hearts
As can be good amongst a shower of darts,
As also such as not withstanding Quires
Of Sirens tempting unto ill desires
Can yet be chaste, and temperate, shall be
Rewarded greatly, for such victory
In Heaven with inestimable treasures
With Crowns of glory, with eternal pleasures,
Most certainly indeed, thrice blessed then
Are such great mighty, rich and noble men,
Who notwithstanding many strong temptation.
Alluring and enchanting provocations.
Can yet (contemning evils) mount the Skies
To heaven through al these charming difficulty.
O how such men, in heaven eternally
Shall sweetly triumph for such victory.
It is an error to maintain, and say
Religion does deject us, truly nay.
Religion sure does comfort, quicken, cheer,
It does encourage, elevate up rear.
Mourning dejected Spirits very high,
Even to a kingdom far above the sky,
To Heaven it self, and sweetly does possess
Them, with true peace, true joy, true happiness,
It also makes earth's happiness far sweeter
So as we may enjoy the same, much better:
For when such raised heavenly joys we find,
We may enjoy the earth, with heavenly mind.
So having sought Gods Kingdom, now we may
The Pleasures of the earth freely enjoy.
In such sort, as we may esteem them even,
Little additions to our hope of Heaven.
Since we are Christ's, and Ghrist is Gods, we may
The sweetest joys, on earth, in Heaven enjoy.
The eighth Section. We may enjoy earthly happiness with a heavenly mind,
insomuch as by the good use and enjoyance thereof, we may learn and enjoy in
some measure, the felicities of heaven, on earth.
I Have in the former Sections, insisted somewhat largely upon the free and
cheerful enjoyance of earthly happiness in their good use, answering the
objections to the contrary, The rather, because certainly, If men were well
persuaded of this truth, That external happiness is not contrary, but rather
in the good use thereof, may be a furtherance, both to internal and eternal
happiness, They would with more swift desires, run the ways that lead them,
both to the felicities of earth and heaven. And also because the too rigid and
stoicall, severity of many men, both in their carriage and writings, is a great
occasion, That multitudes of people in the World, especially such as are young,
and of a pleasant nature, will not follow the divine Precepts of verue and
Religion, thinking the same too severe, Monkish and solitary.

Whereas indeed the ways of religion and virtue, are most lovely, pleasant, and
beneficial, Her ways are ways of Pleasantness, and her paths are peace,
Proverb. 3.17. The same is sufficient to guerdon the followers thereof, even in
this life, with perfect pleasure, and a multitude of benefits. It is no way
deficient, but in all respects amiable and excellent. Adding to the
pleasantness and delights of earthly pleasures, felicities, and recreations,
and making these also serve to increase heavenly joys and consolations. And
when our minds are raised to the knowledge of heavenly pleasures, we may then
also enjoy the felicities of the earth, with a heavenly mind.

Let us therefore endeavor by and through these lower delights and happinesses
of the earth, These little glimmering rays, proceeding from that Sun of Glory
God himself, to epsy some light of his havenly Glory and Happiness, and so in
some measure to spell, learn, and enjoy the felicities of heaven, on earth.

We are not to disdain, to make use of these earthly, in the acquist of
heavenly things, nor to make earthly comparisons, and similitudes herein, For
although there be no comparison between them, either in Time or Excellency. Yet
(as children have need at first to be allured to the acquisition of great and
excellent matters, by such toys and trifles as they apprehend so) in respect
of our weak apprehension, such comparisons and similitudes often are, and may
be used in a convenient manner.

So as we may make a very good use of earthly felicities in this respect (as of
a prospective Glass) for by and through these earthly, our weak sight may see
more plainly into heavenly happinesses, and consequently be excited to seek and
enjoy the same.

Let us then, by reasons light, through these terrestrial endeavor to learn,
epsy, and contemplate higher, more excellent, heavenly happiness. Reason is of
such force, as that it can pass from things known, to things unknown, It can
abstract from, visible things, things invisible, from corporal, incorporall,
generals, from particulars: and high, mystical, and heavenly things, from low
apparent terrestrial things. So as hereby we may in some measure contemplate,
God himself and his heavenly Glory.

It is a common doctrine, the World is made for man, and man for God, and that
there is no happiness in the World from which we may not draw some
instruction, to know God, our selves and our duty. If therefore, (first in
general) we consider all the Felicities in the World, in their greatest worth,
beauty, sweetness and pleasantness, reason will tell us, That if there be so
much excellency in the creatures, the Creator is in all respects much more
excellent, and that if we may enjoy such, and so many pleasures and felicities
in creatures. Much more, and better may, and shall we enjoy in God himself, and
taste and see, how good the Lord is, says King David.

The Felicities of the Earth in their greatest worth and excellency, Are but as
drops proceeding from the ocean of his infinite sweetness, If we may enjoy so
much pleasure, so much happiness in these little drops and foretasts, how much
more may and shall we, in those rivers of pleasures, in that sea of happiness,
which is in God in the heave^s. Reason also tells us, If there be so much, so
many, and such excellent treasures, glory, delights, and felicities, on earth,
the place of our mortality, of our pilgrimage, possessed also by Gods enemies,
There is abundantly more happiness in Heaven, the place of our Eternity, our
Kingdom, and possessed only by God himself and his Friends.

And besides the instruction which man draws in general from earthly
Felicities, he may, likewise in particulars, even by reason, spy and learn
some knowledge of God himself, and his heavenly glory and happiness.

As for example, The azur'd Heaven so richly decked and counterpointed with
Stars and rolling Torches, never ceasing over our heads, enjoying the same by
contemplation, he mounteth higher, and is carried with admiration, fear, love,
and reverence of the Author, and sovereign Lord of all; So that we can, even
by our corporal eyes from the Earth, look to the Moon, the Sun, the starry
Heaven, and therein sweetly please our selves in the view and contemplation of
their glorious aspect, Their bright, lovely, twinkling, silver, heavenly rays,
from thence by the eye of reason, we can see further, to the Christalline
Heaven; yea, to the Imperial above the Spheres, and there contemplate far
more excellent glory, delights, and happiness.

So as even by reason, in, and through these earthly Felicities our dim eyes
(as through spectacles) may espy some light of God himself, and of his
infinite beauty, ple^santnesse, sweetness, and excellency.

But if we add the eye of Faith also to our Reason, we may view farther and
see more plainly. This Author of all happiness God himself, and his
Celestial glory. And taste of the ocean of his infinite sweetness and
heavenly pleasures.

And, as Reason, so faith also, in the view and contemplation of heaven may
make a very good use of earthly comparisons, similitudes, delights, and
happiness, We often find in the sacred Scriptures, that earthly comparisons
are used to express heavenly excellencies to our apprehension, So as by the
Riches, Honor, Kingdoms, Crowns, Glory, Delights, and Pleasures of the Earth,
we may look infinitely higher, by the light of Reason and of Faith, and
thereby contemplate those infinitely more excellent, Treasures, Crowns,
Kingdoms, Glory and Delights of Heaven.

Faith goes before time, and makes things future, present, in such sort as
thereby we may, even in this life in some degree possess the happiness of
Heaven, in so much as by faithful and heavenly contemplation, we may even set
our souls in Heaven beforehand, tasting already of future happiness,
entertayning our selves, with God himself and with Angels. And so enjoying in
our thoughts and contemplations, a Paradise of heavenly Pleasures and
Felicities on earth.

Let us therefore often in contemplation, by the light of Reason and of Faith
(which are the best Optics) view and contemplate those glorious Crowns,
Treasures, Delights and Felicities, which we expect hereafter to possess in
the Heavens, and as in a mirror behold his glory, who is the fountain and
Perfection of al pleasure and happiness.

It is the poor, despised, and miserable man's, only hope and joy on earth, To
be rich, honorable, and happy in Heaven. The rich, honorarable, and prosperous
man also, with reason imagines, That if Terrestrial Prosperity afford him some
Felicities and Pleasures, He shall be much more happy, when he shall possess
those eternal Riches, Honors and Pleasures of Heaven.

Let our souls then often soar aloft upon the wings of Reason and of Faith,
unto the Empirean Heaven, where our desires shall be accomplished with all
manner of Felicities; Would we have Thrones? This Imperial Heaven shall be our
Footstool, Would we have Crowns? Glory and Immortality shall environ our
heads? Do we desire Treasures? Inestimable riches are in this house of our God,
Would we have Pleasures? Rivers of pleasures are at his right hand for evermore.

Let us then untie our selves from the covetous, ambitious, intemperate, and
vicious desire of these earthly Felicities, and with a Pitch full of desire,
and love, elevate our Thoughts to those most glorious, Riches, Kingdoms, and
Pleasures of Heaven.

The riches of the World, so much as we do possess, In the good use thereof
let us still enjoy freely, and cheerfully, only let us convert our covetous,
base, sordid, and vicious desire thereof, To the love, desire, and enjoyance of
a contented mind, and of the riches of divine grace, Those eternal Treasures
of Heaven; yea even to possess God himself, In such desires let us greatly
rejoice.

So also Honor, and good repute, may we still enjoy, And instead of that
ravenous, and unsatiable thirst, of ayry and vain honor, composed of Pride,
Vainglory, Hypocrisy, and sundry vices, Let every one of us aspire (by the
assistance of the Divine Power) to be Lord of himself, The Worlds Master, To
triumph over all infernal Powers, To be a Son of God, an heir to the
Kingdom of Heaven. And in such desires and aspirations, Let us take mavelous
joy and Pleasure.

All lawful and good pleasures also in such good use, let us freely enjoy,
only let us convert our vain, vicious, unlawful intemperate desire thereof, To
desire and wish for, those most sweet pleasures, which proceed from a happy
tranquillity of the soul and joy in God, and to taste in some measure before
hand of that divine Manna, that celestial Nectar, those fountains of
Pleasures which we hope and expect to enjoy with God himself for ever in the
Heavens.

Let us then freely and cheerfully, walk into this terrestrial Paradise, the
vast Palace of the World, and enjoy the felicities thereof, for to this end
they were created, that we should use them well, and so enjoy them.

Even the meanest delights thereof, were ordained for this purpose, and may be
of excellent use, As for example,

The chirping of Birds, who learn to sing of Nature, to charm our ears,
through the sweet harmony of their warbling, when these please our ears, then
may we think of the sweet Music, of Saints and Angels which shall ravish our
spirits.

And the Fountains, though insensible, yet strive with the sweet murmurs of
their pretty purlings, to afford us delectation. When this delights our
thoughts, Then may we contemplate those heavenly Fountains of Life, which shall
fill us with extreme delectation for ever.

In this Terrestrial Palace, the Spring, the Summer, and Autumn, are
incessantly busied in producing our happiness, for a season, but let us think
in the Celestial Paradise, an Eternity shall accomplish us with more felicity
then we can imagine.

Here we see the Sun, Moon, Stars, The Skies, Fire, Torches, Pearls, Gold, and
diverse other glorious sights and beauties, Let us then think of that Glory, of
which if we could (with Saint Peter) epsy but one ray, we should like him be
so dazeled at the glittering thereof, as we should for ever desire to dwell
there, and to build Tabernacles.

When we see and taste of sweet and pleasant Cates, Banqueting, Festival and
dainty meats, of all sorts, of sparkling and delicious wines, and other
pleasing liquors, Let us then think of that Celestial Manna, the food of
Heaven, of that divine Nectar, the sweetness of eternal joy and happiness,
That everlasting Lovefeast, to which the Angels shall invite us, and where we
shall enjoy infinite pleasures and happiness for ever.

This divine Manna, this heavenly Nectar, if we could but taste thereof, but
truly think thereof indeed, it were sufficient to charm our spirits, and
sweetly to bring them into a most pleasing ecstasy. In so much, that in such
heavenly thoughts and contemplations, we may already in some measure feast on
the joys of Eternity, taste of the delights of Heaven, on Earth.

And so I might instance, in a thousand other occasional Meditations.

Thus if we can use these Terrestrial happinesses, well we may freely and
cheerfully enjoy the same, Even with a divine, a heavenly mind, and they may
further us in the attainment, and also enjoyment of heavenly delights and
happiness.

And when we have made such a good use of them, as Children do of their A, B,
C, and Battledore, or of toys and trifles, such as they apprehend, By these
Learning and coming to the knowledge of far more excellent matters, and
afterward seeing themselves beyond, and above them, do even contemn these, in
comparison of the more excellent things, which they have then learned, yet
still scorn not to use these Letters, and Rudiments of Learning, But so, as
that they can be above them, and use them as they list, for their own advantage.

So let us, having by these earthly felicities spelled and learned eternal and
heavenly Excellencies, endeavor to be above and even to contemn these earthly,
in comparison of the heavenly felicities which are infinitely more excellent,
yet so, as that without such comparison and in respect of our nature and
necessities of their Author, And their good use, we still esteem them well
accordingly; still use them for our own advantage, And so in all respects, to
increase our joy and happiness, still endeavoring by these (as by Letters) to
read and learn further into those infinitely more excellent, treasures, Glory,
and delights of Heaven.

And certain it is; that those souls which are raised to a supernatural and
divine temper, to a high degree of knowledge and contemplation in the heavenly
felicities, are the most happy men, even in this World, in as much as they
enjoy the happinesses of the earth, with a gracious, creared, cheerful,
joyful, and heavenly mind, and also do in some measure already taste of and
enjoy, those felicities which they pretend to receive hereafter, and to enjoy
eternally while their souls are here, solacing themselves in the contemplations
of Heaven.

In so much that even on earth in such divine Contemplations, we may set our
spirits in Heaven, enjoying also a Paradise of heavenly pleasures and
happiness, Tasting in some degree the delights of Heaven beforehand, so as it
seems we may enjoy two Heavens, The first Heaven on Earth, the other Heaven, in
Heaven, Ascending at the end of the Careere of this life, from one Heaven to
another, from this Terrestrial, to the Celestial Paradise.

The abstract of the eighth SECTION:
SEe then, Religious lovely pleasantness,
It crowns us every way with happiness.
It adds unto earths joys and recreations,
And makes these add to heavenly consolations.
And when such heavenly joys, in us we find
We may enjoy the Earth with heavenly mind.
When we in earthly blessings take delight
We may look higher, thence direct our sight
Above the Spears, to God himself, to Heaven
From whence these come, and there contemplate even
The eternal glory which we shall possess,
Even God himself, and heavenly happiness.
For by the eye of reason our dim sight,
May through these earthly pleasures spy some light
Of heavenly joys, and so may be excited
To taste thereof, To which we are invited
O taste and see how good the Lord is, says
King David, Then, by Reason, and by Faith
Let us look up to Heaven; If we consider
The sweetest Pleasures, of the World together,
Reason will tell us, If in creatures be
Such excellency, much more may we see,
Taste and enjoy, In the Creators worth.
From whence, as little drops, these do spring forth
If in these drops, some pleasures we do take
How more shall we, in that mighty Lake
That Sea of sweetness, which we shall possess
In God himself, and heavenly happiness.
If on the Earth, so many Pleasures be,
Which is the place of our mortality,
Much more delights in Heaven shall we see
Which is the place of our Eternity.
When we the azur'd Heaven, richly decked
With glorious rolling Torches, whose aspect
Does often mount our minds in Contemplation,
Up to their Author, and with Admiration
With reverence, with fear, with joy, and love,
To think of him their Lord, who dwells above
All these, we then, with reason must confess
He is all wisdom, power and happiness.
We can with our Corporeal, look even
Unto the Spears, viewing those lights of heaven,
The Sun, the Moon, and twinkling stars, so bright,
Whose lovely, glorious, silver, heavenly light
Gives pleasing delectation; from thence higher
Our sprightly souls, by reasons light aspire
To the Imperial Heaven, where we may
Contemplate marvailous glory, heavenly joy.
So as through earthly pleasures, our dull sight
May (as through Spectacles) by reasons light
Look up to Heaven, to God himself and spy
Some glimpses of his glorious Majesty
And so may taste already, in some measure
The Ocean of his sweet and heavenly pleasure.
But if we add faiths light, to reasons eye
We then may far more plainly, clearly, spy
The glory of God; his bright celestial treasures
And taste the sweetness of his heavenly pleasures.
Faith's, of such power, such force, as that it can
Make future things, seem present to a man
It prevents time, so as thereby we may
Pleasures of Heaven, in some degree enjoy
Beforehand, setting our blessed souls in Heaven
In faithful contemplations, therein, even
Our selves with God, and Angels entertayning
And in such glorius heavenly thoughts, remaining
Most sweetly pleased and joyful. Thus we may
On earth, a heavenly Paradise enjoy.
Let Us often then by faith, and reasons light:
From earth unto the Heavens direct or sight
And there contemplate on those glorious treasure
Crowns, Kingdoms, sweetest and eternal pleasures
Which we expect hereafter to possess
In God himself, in heavenly happiness.
It is the poor, despised, miserable
Man's only hope to be rich, honorable
And happy in the Heavens. The mighty man,
The rich, and prosperous with reason can
Also imagine, If he do possess
In earths prosperity, some happiness
He shall be much more happy in those treasures
Those heavenly riches, honor, glory, pleasures.
Let then our souls be mounting up aloft
Upon the wings of faith and reason, often.
To God, to the Imperial Heaven, where
We shall be filled with sweetest pleasures; There
Would we have Crowns? Immortal Glory shall
Environ us, If Thrones? The Imperial
Heaven, shall be our footstool, if treasures?
Eternal riches are with God; If pleasures?
Rivers of pleasures, various, infinite store
There are at his right hand for evermore.
Let us then with a pitch full of desire
Of love and joy lift up our thoughts, aspire
To those inestimable glorious treasures,
Those heavenly Thrones, Crowns, Kingdoms, R^ches, Pleasures
Let us convert all our vain, vicious
Earthly desires, to the ambitious.
Yea covetous, and intemperate desire
(Even to extremes when thus we do aspire)
Of heavenly things, herein let us possess
Our souls, even with immoderate happiness.
Freely then, let us trace this Paradise
The Worlds vast Palace, let us with our eyes,
Our ears, and all our senses, (since we may)
The pleasures thereof, cheerfully, enjoy.
Even the meanest pleasures, were (we see)
Created for this purpose, and may be
Of excellent use, as chirping notes of Birds
(Who sing to please our ears) the same affords
Us pretty delectation; when they sing
Who can but please to hear their warbling.
When these sweet birds, do please our ears then may
We sweetly contemplate, and think what joy
We shall possess, when full of sweet desires
We shall hear Angels sing in heavenly Quires.
Who with the Music of their harmony
Shall charm our souls, into an ecstasy.
The fountains also, though insensible
Do strive as far, as they can possible
With their sweet purling murmurs to delight us,
So let these pretty pleasures, then invite us,
To think of heavenly fountains, of that River
Which with extrem delights, shall fill us ever.
On earth time, does produce, joy, for a season
In Heaven, eternity, joy, past our reason,
Let transitory joy, then puts in mind
Of heavenly joys, whereof no end we find.
On Earth we see many and glorious lights,
Sun, Moon, Stars, Fire, Cold, other pleasing sights
And shining Beauties, Let us then I pray
Think of that glory, which if but one ray
We could epsy, the glittering thereof would
So dazzle our weak eyes, as that we should
For ever (like Saint Peter) wish to be
And dwell where we this glorious sight may see.
When we do taste sweet liquors, rich and neat,
Wine of all sorts, and curious dainty meat:
Let these sweet pleasures, oftentimes excites us
(To which the Angels also do invite us)
To think and taste of that Celestial Feast
Which shall for ever make us, truly blessed,)
that feast of love and pleasures, where we may
Infinite sweetness, evermore enjoy.
This heavenly Manna, this celestial food,
This divine Nectar, is so sweet, so good
That if but truly taste thereof, we could
(But truly think thereof indeed) we should
Be sweetly charmed into a Rapsody
Of heavenly pleasures, such an ecstasy
As that we should taste of, in some degree
Before hand, Pleasures of Eternity.
So if we thus can use terrestrial joy;
Looking thereby to God, to Heaven, we may
Enjoy the same with happy, heavenly mind,
And thereby also, heavenly joy may find.
So that on earth, already we may even
In some degree, enjoy delights of Heaven
And when this life's careere, shall have an end.
From heaven, on earth, to heaven, in heaven ascend
A Paradise of pleasures, so we may
Both here on earth, and in the heavens enjoy.
FINIS.

