THE MANSION of Magnanimity.

WHEREIN IS SHOWED THE most high and honorable acts of sundry English Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, from time to time
performed in defense of their Princes and Country: set forth as an
encouragement to all faithful subjects, by their example resolutely to
address themselves against all foreign enemies.

Published by RICHARD CROMPTON an Apprentice of the common Law. 1599.

Whereunto is also adjoined a collection of diverse Laws and Statutes meet to
be known of all men: with a brief Table, showing what munition ought to be
kept by all sorts of her Majesty's subjects, for the defense of her Highness
Realms and Dominions.

LONDON, Printed for William Ponsonby. 1599.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX AND EWE, EARL MARshall of
England, Viscount Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Char^ley, Bourchier and Louaine,
Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Master of her Majesty's Horse,
and Ordenance, Chauncellor of the University of Cambridge, and one of her
Highness most honorable Privy Counsel, RICHARD CRVMPTON desires eternal
felicity.

THere is no kingdom (Right honorable) so strongly seated, or with Castles so
fortified, or that so abounds in wealth, which without valiant men trained up
in martial discipline, can be defended from the force of the enemy: for the
stronger or richer the country is, the more are the snares and sleights
prepared by the enemy to compass and conquer the same: for which cause, and
for that also, occasions of war are often offered upon the sudden, it is
necessary that some number of men should be trained up continually in martial
actions, as in other countries is used, and so much the rather, where long
peace has been had, which often takes away the fear of war, and causes
men to live too securely and without regard of forreyne danger, whereby they
are unskillful in wars affairs: and that such trained men may be always
ready and able to inform and lead others vnexperie^ced in that service: for
it is not the number of men that always obtayneth the victory in battle, but
such as are courageous, and well exercised in martial skill, as Erasmus says
well: Erasmus.
Non refert quam numerosum militem ducas in praelium, sed quam fortem, and quam
exercitatum. Homer in these few verses following, Homer.
sets forth the whole military discipline, which rests in the valor of
the soldiers, and their obedience to their Captains and Leaders.

Graeci fidentes animis audacibus ibant,
Ductorum quamuis premerent formidine vocem.
Where he says, that they trusting in their courageous minds, went against
their enemies, there he commends and extolleth their valors in arms: and
where he says, they feared the commandment of their Captains, there he
highly praises their great discretion and modesty. What bred such fame to the
ATHENIANS, who being but ten thousand, overthrew great numbers of the PERSIANS
in one battle, in that time when they most flourished in their conquests, and
did rule over many nations, but valor and skill in the soldiers, and
observation of orders in battle? By order all things are preserved and
maintained, and without order all things come to ruin and confusion, as the
Scripture says, Vbi nullus ordo ibi est confusio. And as these things are
requisite in the soldiers, so is experience, valor, and skill also in the
Captain: for if the blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch, as the
Gospel witnesses: therefore such Captains are always highly to be honored,
embraced, advanced, and rewarded, according to their places, callings, and
deserts, as the defenders in the time of war of the Prince and state of the
kingdom and commonwealth, that they may be encouraged in that service: and
such as lightly esteem these men, or prefer them which live idly and
daintily before them, are enemies to the Commonwealth (as Osorius writes) and
to be taken as the destroyers thereof, in that they do as much as in them
lies, to lay open their Country to the force of the enemy. And because the
matter of this Treatise concerns the defense of our Prince and Country
against the enemy, which service appertains most properly to men of honor,
who ought to hold nothing more dear to them then the safety of the same, of
which they be the chief props, stays, defenders, and mayntainers under her
Majesty; I have thought it convenient to dedicate this little Treatise to a
man of such state, and unto your honor chiefly, to the end you may therein
see the notable acts of Chivalry performed in that service, that thereby you
may be encouraged to follow their steps, and increase the fame, honor, and
renown, which you have attained in your late valiant service at CALES in
SPAIN, and else where. Humbly beseeching your honor to accept this my small
labor, as a token of my desire to commend your Honorable name to posterity.

At your Honors command. RICHARD CROMPTON.

AN ORATION TO BE MADE BY THE GENERAL TO THE WHOLE ARMY BEFORE THE BATTLE.
ALthough Wars are by all good means to be eschued, for the avoiding of the
great effusion of blood that thereby often does ensue, yet when intolerable
wrongs and injuries are offered, either by a foreign Prince, or his subjects,
and no recompense is made for the same, The cause of the war must be published,
that it may appear to arise upon just occasions, which much does encourage the
soldier to fight.
war must be taken in hand: and Bodinus says; Bella non nisi propulsandae
iniuriae, ac pacis causa suscipienda sunt: that is, Wars are to be entered
into, to withstand injuries, and to procure peace. The causes which have drawn
us at this present into the field against these our enemies, are known to many
of you, namely, how these our enemies most violently and in warlike manner, with
Ensigns displayed, in the time of peace, without any proclamation of War
first made, according to the laws of Arms, have entered into our territories
and country, burned some of our Churches, defaced the ancient monuments of
our elders, put multitudes of her Majesty's people to the sword, yea women and
children, wasted their dwellings with fire, despoiled them of their goods, and
ravished most shamefully their wives, daughters and kinswomen, even before their
faces: to be short, there is no cruelty or tyranny whatsoever which might be
devised, but they have afflicted her Highness subjects therewith, without all
pity or mercy. For which due recompense has been diverse times by her
Malesties Ambassadors required, and yet none is made. Therefore either we must
with sword and fire be revenged of these most extreme dealings, or otherwise
they will be encouraged to attempt the like: yea, they will account us men of
no courage, but cowards and base hearted; a name which to our nation has been
always most odious, in that it has bin accounted valorous in arms in all
countries, as one writes: Anglia Bistonio gens semper inclita Mart.

Every man is borne once to die, and how, when, or where, is most uncertain:
and to give our lives for our country, has always among all nations (and
among the heathen) been reputed an honorable thing, whereby everlasting fame is
attained, and left to posterity as the noble Orator Tully says: Hijs maiores
nostri, qui ob rem publicam obierunt, pro breui vita diuturnam memoriam
reddiderunt: that is, To them which have lost their lives for the common
wealth, for a short life they have yielded everlasting memory. There is no
difference betwixt the greatest person and the meanest man, when they are both
dead, if there be no virtues or deeds of fame done by them, whereby to commend
their name to posterity. Therefore every man that desires to live in name
when he is dead, ought to endeavor himself to leave some memory of his
virtues or worthy acts, that it may appear that once he lived here, else
being laid in his grave, he shall soon be forgotten. Riches and beauty (says
Salust) do vanish soon away, but virtues and deeds of fame are everlasting:
which since our lives are short and momentanie, we must by this means make
perpetual. A glorious death is always to be preferred before a life stained
with reproach and infamy.

If you will consider what miseries and calamities happen where the enemy
prevails, look back into the hard dealing of William Duke of Normandy, when
he conquered this Land: it ought greatly to encourage you in this service
against the enemy. Did not he alter the whole state and government of our
Country? Did he not make new Laws, altogether profitable for himself and his
Normans, and hurtful to our Nation? Did he not spoil sundry of the English
Nobles and others, of their lands and possessions contrary to promise, yea even
to those English Lords who aided him in that Conquest? Did not he lay grievous
taxes, tallages and impositions, upon our Nation? There was no cruelty, no
misery, no servitude or bondage which could be devised, but he afflicted them
therewith, as by our Chronicles evidently appears: and shall we look for any
other if our enemies should prevail? The wise Cato said, Cato.
Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum, Happy is he that can beware by
others dangers and mishap. Now therefore, if ever you will show your loyalty
to your Prince, and love to your Country: your natural affection to your old
father and aged mother, to your deer wives and sweet children, which cannot
defend themselves: if ever you will show your selves careful to preserve your
posterities that shall succeed: if ever you desire to maintain the Honor and
Worship of the houses whereof you are descended: if ever you will show your
selves to come of the seed and generation of your valiant ancestors and
courageous forefathers: if ever you will leave Honor or fame to your
posterities of your valor in Arms, whereby your offspring may be encouraged to
follow your steps, now is the time or never. Pluck up therefore your hearts
like men, and set your rest upon it, determining with your selves rather to
die in field in defense of your Prince and country, then that these myseries
should happen unto us: if you turn your faces (which God defend) then shall
our Prince be endangered, the state of our Commonwealth overthrown, we shall
be slain as thick as motes in the sun; our fathers, mothers, wives and
children shall be destroyed; our wives, our daughters and kinswomen ravished
and defloured before our faces, strangers shall possess our lands and livings;
and we that now live in honor, worship and credit, and as it were at our own
hearts ease, shall then be made subjects, bondmen, slaves, and pesaunts to
Forreners and strangers, and then shall all the myseries before remembered, or
which can be devised be laid upon us.

There is no cause (my good friends and fellows in Arms) why we should
stand in fear or doubt of these proud Spaniardes, though they far exceed
us in number, nor of their hauty looks or great bragges: for they are of no
greater force or strength now then they were in former times, when under the
conduct of that worthy and courageous Prince of Wales, eldest son to K. Edw.
the 3. a small Army of Englishmen, passed in despite of them through Navarre
into Spain, and there even in the midst and bowels of their own country,
ouerthrewe at Nadres the usurping K. Henry the bastard, with diverse of his
Nobility, and 60000. of the brauest fighting men in Spain, and erected in his
place Don Pedro their lawful Prince, co^pelling the Nobility and cities to
receive him. Besides, the valorous conquest achieved by John Duke of Lanc.
brother to the said Prince in Galicia, against Don John, son of the said
Henry the usurping bastard. What famous victory the noble K. Rich. the first
obtained against the Souldan of Egypt and the K. of Cypres in their own
territories, and made the said K. of Cypres do homage for that kingdom to the
crown of Engl. Besides other Nations which have often received sundry great
overthrows at our hands, though they were mighty in Arms, such was the will of
God, who gives victory where he pleases.

And for that praise and rewards are due for just deserts, if you will show
your selves valiant Captains and courageous soldiers in this service, of which
I have no doubt, and whereof I will (God willing) make true report unto her Ma.
you may be assuted, that as she will highly commend you, so you shall be rewarded
accordingly: for she holds such as you to be the chief defenders of her state
and Commonwealth against the enemy, and regards not such as live daintily and
at ease before men of your quality: For they (as Osorius affirms) which
prefer such before men of your condition, are to be held subuerters of their
country, in laying it open to the enemy, and in defrauding the same of her
necessary defense and safeguard. And for my part I assure you on my Honor, that
whatsoever persons you shall take prisoners, and whatsoever thing shall fall
into your hands of the spoil (after the battle) you shall enjoy the same with
good will, as the law of Arms requires: to the end ye may the rather be
encouraged in this action now in hand: for I hold it no reason that you should
abide the brunt of battle, and not retain and enjoy the same which you shall
obtain with the venturing of your lives and loss of your blood. And again,
the rather to encourage you in this service, see how graciously and carefully
her Ma. and the whole state of the Parliament have provided for the keeping and
relief of such of you which be common soldiers, which shall happen to be
maimed in her wars, which before her days was never done.

And now to the end we may the rather prevail against our enemies, I exhort
and advise you (noble Captains and valiant Gentlemen) attempt nothing in your
fury without due consideration first had, for such enterprises are not holden
to proceed of courage and valor, but rather of rashness, which often
brings danger to the whole Army. And you courageous soldiers, submit your
selves to the order and direction of your chieftaines and leaders, of whose
great experience and skill in martial affairs, you shall not need to doubt,
by reason of their continual training up therein: and so much the rather you
must thus do, because you are not yet such men of understanding in warlike
discipline: Herodotus.
So did the noble Graecians as Herodotus writes, whereby small companies gave
sundry notable overthrows to great multitudes of the Persians in battle, even
when they were in their chiefest conquests, and most triumphed of their
glorious victories. Where no order is (the scripture says) there is confusion
and utter ruin. Keep therefore your ranks, break not your arraies, stand
fast in your places to which you are appointed; for out of doubt as observation
of orders in battle is never without hope of victory, so does disorder open
the way to the enemy to overthrow you. If you keep order you shall be even
like a strong Bulwark against the enemy, which they will with all their
forces attempt to break, being the only way to gain them victory: of which
purpose if they fail, then they will be utterly discomfited and fall into
your hands. To conclude, for so much as the chance of war is uncertain, and the
sequel thereof stands doubtful, although the causes before remembered, ought
greatly to encourage you in this service, and to hope of victory: yet let us
all make our selves ready for whatsoever it shall please God to lay upon us,
and let us make our humble prayers to Almighty God, confessing our sinful
lives, and heartily repent us thereof, who gives grace in the very instance
of time: as by the example of the thief which was hanged with our Savior
Christ appears; who used these few words unto him. Lord, remember me when
thou come into thy kingdom. And Christ said unto him, This day shall thou
be with me in Paradise. And let us call upon him for his gracious assistance
against our enemies, who no doubt will aid and defend us against them according
to his promise: for heaven and earth shall pass, before one jot of his
Covenant or promise, which he has made to such as serve and fear him shall
fail, as the scripture does plainly testify. Now let us all kneel down and
lift up our hearts to the throne of Gods Majesty and pray.

Almighty God, father of our Lord Jesus Christ, maker of all things, Judge of
all men, we acknowledge and bewail our manifold sins and wickednesses, which
we from time to time most greeuouslie have committed against thy divine
Majesty, provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation against us, we do
earnestly repent and are heartily sorry for these our misdooinges, have mercy
upon us most merciful Father for thy blessed son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake,
forgive al our offenses past, and grant that we may ever hereafter serve and
please thee in newness of life, to the honor and glory of thy holy name,
through our only mediator and advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. And O thou most
mighty God, that art the King of kings, and Lord of lords, and governor of all
things, whose power no creature is able to resist, stretch out thy mighty arm
and come, help us, and be our defense, for without thee, vain is the help of
man. We go not against this multitude trusting in our own strength, but in thy
name, and in thy most gracious aid and assistance, let them know that thou art
the Lord of hoasts, and the only giver of victory, and deliver them into our
hands (if it be thy good pleasure) that we may glorify thy holy name through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost that most sweet
comforter, that art one in three, and three in one true and everlasting god, be
all honor, glory and praise for ever and ever, so be it.

Now in the name of God almighty advance our Standards, display your Ensigns,
and set upon them courageously, for the honor of your prince and country, for
all England prays for our good success in this buisines this day.

THE MANSION of Magnanimity.
Of the strength of this Realm, in respect of the situation, pleasantness of
air, fruitfulness of soil, abundance of al sorts of Grain, Cattle, and
other necessaries for the use of man: how it is replenished with thousands of
courageous and valiant men, whereby to withstand all foreign invasion. Also how
it is defended with many strong holds in places needful, and furnished with a
Royal Navy, with mnnition sufficient to encounter the enemy. Chap. 1.
ALthough I doubt not, both in respect of your loyalties to her Majesty, and
fidelities to her Crown (things due by all Laws from every true Subject to his
Prince and Sovereign governor) and also of the great love and affection that
every man does naturally bear to his native Country, but that you will be
always ready with heart and hand to join in the defense of these against the
enemy; yet have I thought it not vain to set down some special causes and
reasons, which shall the rather move us hereunto. Amongst which (as in the
first part of this book I will commend to your considerations) the strength
of our Country in regard of the situation thereof, The first cause of
encouragement in respect of the situation of our Country.
and how our country is environed with the maine Sea, saving that part only
adjoining to Scotland, which is a sufficient defense to this realm, in that
the Queens most excellent Majesty and the noble King of that country are most
surely linked, as well in respect of the neernesse of blood, as also by reason
of most honorable covenants and agreementes of league, peace, and amity (which
by Gods grace shall long continue) concluded and passed betwixt them, so that
we may well assure our selves that none can come to us but by shipping: whereby
what advantage we have that stand upon the firm land, ready to receive or
defend the enemy, which must lie open to our forces from the sea, every man of
any reasonable sense or understanding may easily conceive.

It is placed in that part of the world which is temperate, neither vexed with
too much heat, nor oppressed with over much cold as many other Countries be.
It is also of a most delicate and wholesome air, full of pleasant springs,
fountains, and rivers. A Country of fruitful soil, Commodities of our
country.
yielding Corn of all sorts, abundance of Wool, Allom, Copper, Mines of
Lead, Tin, Iron, Stone, Wood, Seacole, Pittes to make Salt of, and of all
manner of Cattle, Horses, Fowls and Fishes: Beasts of Venery, of all kinds
plentiful, and all other things necessary for man's sustenance, use and
pleasure. A Country apt for traffic by sea, from all places of the world: in
respect whereof, we are of our selves better able to live then any other nation
under the Sun. Camd fol. 3
Camden makes mention of an old Orator speaking in praise of England, as
follows: O fortunata and omnibus beatior terris Britannia, This Constantine
received the faith of Christ first in England Annals I. Stow ^ 46. An. 306.
quae Constantinu^ Caesarem prima vidisti; merito te omnibus Coeli ac soli
bonis natura donauit, in qua nec rigor est nimius hyemis, nec ardor aestatis,
in qua segetu^ ta^ta est foecu^ditas, vt munerib. vtriusque sufficiat, et
Cereris et Liberi: in qua nemora sine immanibus bestijs, terra sine serpentib*.
noxijs, co^tra pecorum mitium innumerabilis multitudo, lacte distenta, and
onusta velleribus: certe, quod propter vitam diligitur longissimi dies, et
nullae sine aliqua luce noctes, dum illa littorum extrema planities non
attollit vmbras, noctisque metam coeli and siderum tra^sit aspectus, vt sol
ipse qui nobis videtur occidere, ibi appareat praeterire.

That is. O thou happy England and more blessed then all lands, that first of
all have seen Constantine the Emperor: whom nature has endued with all the
commodities of the firm ament and land, wherein is neither too much rigor of
winter, nor heat o^ summer: where is great fruitfulnes of Corn for bread and
drink; Woods also without hurtful Beasts; the Land without noisome Serpents:
where likewise are innumerable multitudes of Cattle giving milk, and Sheep
laden with fleeses of wool: and that which Life does greatly desire, the
days are there very long, neither is there any night without some glimmering
of light, by reason, that the Plains of the Sea coasts does not yield much
shadow, and the sight of the Stars and firmament does pass away so quietly,
that the Sun which seems to us to go down, may there appear as it were
but to pass by.

Also in that this Realm is replenished with infinite thousands of valiant and
courageous Men, The second cause of encouragement valiant men.
able to give battle to the greatest prince in Europe (for Castles are of small
account where valor in arms wants.) Cleomines the Emperor beholding a town
by art and nature mightily defended, called such latebras muliebres, Castles.
Cleomines. Bod. lib. 5. c. 5
alurking place for Women saying:

Neque Ciuitatis robur positum est in mutis lapidibus, What should move a man
to fight.
sed in praestanti fortissimorum ciuium virtute, qui pro aris, pro liberis pro
liberate, pro ciuitate, pro fama, and pro vita dimicabunt.

The strength of a City (says he) rests not in dumb walls, but in the force
of valiant Men which fight for their religion, Children, liberty, Cities,
fame and for their lives.

And such as are desperate and resolute, are most meetest for the same as he
writes also.

Nihil periculosius est, quam desperatis hominibus praeliu^ co^mittere.

There is nothing more dangerous then to fight with desperate men. Bod. lib. 5.
c. 5


And remember as an example ye battle of Poytiers in France where John the
french King with a great number of his nobility were taken prisoners, Poytiers.
and the rest were put to flight, Stow 15 ^
with about ten thousand Englishmen, the french being almost fifty thousand.
This was done by Edward prince of Wales eldest son to King Edward the third,
and Erasmus says also, ij demum vtiles su^t Bello milites, Eras. Append.
Apoth. 337.
quibus decretum est in praelio, aut vincere aut mortem oppetere, They are
meetest for War, which determinne to win the field or else to die. Castles.
But yet Castles and Fortresses are not to be condemned, but must be used as a
mean for the better defense of the enemy.

How much we are bound to the Almighty God, that has given us so gracious a
Prince to reign over us, and what good things we daily receive of her gracious
goodness toward us; and also how happy we are that are her Highness subjects
in respect of other Nations, which are charged with continual Taxes, Tallages,
and Impositions, and besides that live in great bondage and servitude, of which
things we are freed. Chap. 2.
NOw in respect of a most singular and further cause of incouragment herein,
Third cause of encouragement
let us consider how much we are bound to god, in that it has pleased him to
give us so gracious a Sovereign Lady and Queen to reign over us, one of our
own nation: which is observed in the sacred scripture as a great blessing of
god, as in the book of Deuteronomy does appear, and of the right line and
descent of the noble kings and Princes of this Realm: for foreign princes are
always misliked of the people to reign over them; Osor. fol. 19.
as Osorius says, Quoties accidit vt in aliqua regione, vel haereditario iure,
vel matrimonio, vel quauis alia ratione, princeps aliquis ex exteris gentib ad
regnandu^ vocetur, id populis sibi perniciosum fore suspicatur. One under whom
we have enjoyed such common peace and quietness these 39. years and more, as
the like has not been heard of, neither is to be found in any record or
Chronicle sithence the Eonquest to this day, for the like time of government:
One studious to advance, set forth and maintain the honor and glory of
Almighty God: one desirous to reign with mercy, with love, with pity, and
tender compassion, and not by tyranny, not by effusion of blood, neither
always by inflicting the extremity of her laws upon such as justly have
deserved the execution of the same: And is the rather induced to mercy and
pity, by experience of her own troubles (most unjustly laid upon her in her
sisters days) so as it is rightly said: Nihil est enim quod magis inuitat
homines ad misericordiam tribuendam quam humanam miseriam experiri; Aeneid.
lib. 1.
vnde rectissime Regina Dido apud Vergiliu^ inquit, Non ignara mali miseris
succurrere disco. There is nothing that more does move men to be merciful,
then to have experience of the misery of man; whereof Queen Dido (as Virgill
makes mention) said very well: I have learned being not ignorant of evil, how
to help them that are in misery. She is also bountiful to such as deserve
well of her Majesty and of their country, Ovid de ponto lib. 2.
in whom the saying of Ovid the Poet, which he spoke of the clemency and
liberality of Caesar is verified: Est piger ad poenas princeps, adpraemia velox,
Cuique dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox.


The Prince is slow to punish, and ready to reward, and sorrowful when he is
forced to punish any. And again he says of him:

Qui cum triste aliquid, statuit, fit tristis and ipse,
Cuique fere poenam sumere, poena sua est.
When the Prince does ordain punishment to any he is sad also, and where any is
punished he takes it as it were don to himself.

She is a most mild Prince, not fearful to behold or to be spoken unto, Ovid
metamor. li. 2. f 30.
Nullae in front minae nec formidabile lumen,


But with most benign and gracious countenances receives and answers the
petitions and supplications of her subjects: she is of that honorable and
princely disposition in all things, that even the greatest Princes do honor
her. And in that her Ma. 4 cause of incorageme^t.
has fortified the borders of this realm in places dangerous for invasion,
with such castles and strong holds, and with a mighty navy of warlike ships,
Fortification of the realm.
and furnished her kingdom with such abundance of armor and all other things
necessary for the wars and defense of her cuntry and people, as the like has
not bin seen in any Princes days before her time.

If we will consider the miserable conditions of such Nations as live under
Princes where the pleasure of the Prince stands for law, Miserable conditions
of other people.
and where the king says: Sic volo, sic Iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas:


So I will, Iuuenal.
so I command, my will shall stand for reason: And compare the same with our
happy state, we have just cause to think our selves much bound to God: for our
Princes not only make good and wholesome laws, Good laws.
but are well pleased also to be ordered by them, and in the day of their
Coronation take a solemn Oath upon the holy book of God to endeavor
themselves, Oath.
that the same laws shall be observed and executed to all indifferently. Osor.
fo. 105.
And therein is the difference (says Osorius) betwixt a kind and a Tyrant. Non
mediocre discrimen est inter regematque tyrannum, quod Rex legibus s^ deuinctum
profitetur, Tyrannus vero in interitu legum omnem dignitatem suam collocandam
existimet.

Among many other, what an Honorable law was made in the 9. year of king Henry
the third, 9. Hen. 3. A most honorable Law.
as follows: No free man shall be taken or imprisoned, or be desseised of his
freehold, liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any ways
destroyed, nor we shall not pass upon him nor deal with him but by lawful
judgment of his peers, or by the Laws of the land: we shall sell to no man,
we shall deny nor defer no man, 42. li. Ass.
either of justice, right, or equity. By which statute, a Commission granted
out of the Chancerie, to take I. N. and seize his goods and chattels, was
judged void, for that it was done without judgment or suit of the party, or
other due process.

How happy be we in respect of the Russes, amongst whom there is a law,
Russes.
if any man die without issue male (though he have many daughters) yet the
Prince seizes all his goods to his own use, except perhaps of his goods he
gives some part amongst the daughters to bestow them in marriage. And
likewise, if a man that is unfit in his own person for the wars, has such
wealth that thereby many warriors might be maintained: or that if any of the
Courtiers having knowledge thereof, do present his name to the Emperor, the
unhappy man by and by is sent for, and in that instant deprived of all his
riches, which with great pains and travail all his life time he has gotten
together, except percha^ce some small portion thereof be left, to maintain
himself, his wife, children, and family withal: and then the Emperor
bestows these goods amongst his Courtiers according to their deserts, Book
of Navigations fol. 788. 417.
as appears in the book of Navigations. But no such use, law nor custom, is
amongst us. For if a man have no sons, then his daughters or some other of
his line, possess his lands, and his Executor his goods, as pleases the
owner to limit. And when our Prince would have aid of her subjects, toward
the maintenance of her wars, or for other necessary respects, she takes not
her subjects lands or goods from them, neither can so do by her Highness
laws, except they be first thereby condemned, and so forfait them for some
offense; but uses to call a Parliament, and by the assent of all her Nobles
and Commons, has Subsidies and other aids of her subjects, toward the
defraying of some of these charges: and the subsidy or aid thus granted, if it
be of land for the most part amounts not to the thirtieth part of the
yearly rent of the same: and if it be of goods, reaches not oftentimes to the
fiftieth part thereof. Again, whereas in France, Tributes for meat and drink
in other countries.
Flanders, and other Countries, the people pay certain tribute to their princes
for some sort of meat and drink, and for their dwellinges: We are not charged
with any such impositions: Neither is such torment used here in execution of
offenders, Torments in execution.
as breaking of their legs, arms, and back, and so laid on a wheel of a
cart pitched on a pole, and there to lie till he be dead, which is common in
other Realms by the Civil laws, but is executed here by ha^ging only till
he be dead, except it be in case of high treason. Therefore I say we are in
these respects most happy, in regard of other Nations.

How much we are bound to God that does assist her majesty with such grave,
wise and most honorable Counselors: and also diverse and sundry persuasions in
respect of the premises and other things, why we should all resolutely fight
in the defiance of the enemy. And of the miseries of war where the enemy
prevails. Chap. 3.
AS a further cause of this incouragment. Fifth cause of incorageme^t.
how much are we bound to God in that it has pleased him always to assist her
Ma. with such honorable counselors, men of such gravity, Wise Counselors.
truth, faithfulness, and wisdom, of such deep skill, consideration, policy,
forecast, and experience, as to speak it plainly and simply, no Prince under
the sun is furnished with the like: or at least with a better, by whose great
wisdom, travel, and endeavor this common peace and quietness has bin so long
preserved and mantained. If any thing has bin intended to the peril of her
majesty's person or danger of the state, that has been by them quickly espied,
deeply looked into, and with great wisdom and policy in time prevented and
avoided, to their great honors and immortal fame* so as in the choice of them
her majesty has most graciously and wisely considered of the saying of
Osorius. Osor. sol. 292.
Necesse est vt Regis consiliarij sint maximo ingenio praediti, bonis artibus
exculti, longo rerum vsu per ti, in historijs diligentissime versati, What men
must be counselors to a K.
neque praes^ntia tantum sagaciter odorantes, sed long in posterum quid vtile
futurum Reipub. si, coniectura prouidentes: neque solum ingenio and disciplina
atque prudentia valiant necesse est* sed sint opus est singulari fide and
integritate, and quod patriam amore atque pietate debita prosequantur.

That is, It is convenient that the Kings counselors be men of great wisdom,
very well learned, of long experience, well exercised in histories, not only
gravely considering of things present, but also of things necessary for the
good of the whole common wealth in time to come: and it is necessary that they
be not only prudent, learned, and wise, but likewise of great integrity and
faithfulness; and to be such as have a love and special care and affection to
their Country.

Solomon says, Happy is that kingdom where they are many that can give good
counsel. And Jesus the son of Syrach affirms, Eccles. 10.
where they that are in authority are men of understanding, there the City
does prosper. And again Solomon shows, Prou. 11.
where no counsel is, there the people do perish, but where many are that can
give good counsel there is wealth. Words of encouragement
Who will not think himself happy that may dwell in such a strong, pleasant,
free, and plentiful country as this is? in a Country replenished with such
infinite thousands of valiant men, defended with such strong holds, appointed
with such warlike ships, and furnished with such abundance of al other
things needeful for the wars and defense against the enemy: where the Gospel
is truly preached, where so merciful and gracious a Prince does reign, where
such Honorable and wholesome Laws are ordained and executed, and where such
grave and wise Counselors do govern? Who will not fight in the quarrel and
defense of these? Who will not give his life for the safeguard of his old
father, aged mother and dear wife, in defense of his lands and possessions,
his goods and chattels, his liberty and freedom, against all such Forreners
and strangers as would spoil, waste, and destroy the same? Who will not
defend his sweet tender Infantes and Children against such as seek to slay
them? The very brute Beasts and Fowls will defend not only themselves by
natural instinctions, but that which is bred of their own bodies. Will not the
Brache fight in defense of her whelps? The Poet describing her nature says:
Haud secus atque canis Catulis qui dulcibus astat,
Allatratque virum ignotum pugnamque caepessit.


The Brache standing to her whelps, does bark at the strange man, Tully.
and offers him fight in defense of them. And Tully writes of the property
of Beasts in defense of their young, thus.

Bestiae pro suo partu ita pugnant vt vulnera accipiant,
Nullos impetus, nullos casus reformident.
The Beasts will fight till they bewounded, and fear no force nor violence in
defense of their young. Will not the silly Hen set up her feathers, and fiercely
fly at the Kite or other thing that comes near unto her chickens? Will not
the Tigers fight in defense of their whelps? Will not the Ass run thorough the
hot fire for safeguard of her fool? And will not every foul and beast do the
like in their kind? Then how much more ought man, being the reasonable
creature of God, fight against such as would destroy their infantes and
children? Did king Priamus when the Greeks entered the city of Troy, V^.
Eneid. li. 2.
and Pyrrhus the Grecian captain killed Polytes his son before his face,
refrain his voice, his anger or his hand? Nay, did not he say to Pyrrhus, Thou
wretch, for this spite done to me, the gods (if any justice dwell in Heaven, or
if they do right regard) yield thee thy due reward, that before my face my
son have slain? and therewith he cast his dart at Pyrrhus, but in vain, for
it hung in the bosse of his buckler, because his strength for age failed him,
although he did for natures sake thereby show his willing mind to have been
revenged for so heavy and woeful a sight. Did Eneas the valiant Trojan knight,
at this time leave his old father Anchises, his loving wife Creusa, or Ascanius
his young son, among the enemies when Troy was on fire, and shifted only for
himself? No, he rather did choose to adventure the danger of the enemy, who
then every where swarmed in that City, and carried his father on his
shoulders, and led his son in his hand, and appointed his wife to go through
certain bi-waies in the City, to a place where he would meet her, and so
they all save his wife (who it is thought fell into the enemies hands) escaped:
Whereby you may see that Naturae vis est maxima,


The force of nature is the greatest thing in operation that may be: and may
well be called vis maxima, and the operation of nature cannot be taken away,
Naturam expellas furca, tamen vsque recurrit. Is there any that can endure to
see his Wife ravished, his daughter deflowred, or his kinswoman violently
forced before his face? or that can behold his Father, Mother, Wife and
Children, Kinsfolks, his alies and dear friends, to be smitten down with the
hands of the enemy, and with deadly wounds lie gasping for breath, and make no
resistance? Miseries of war.
Is there any that has lived in place of honor or worship, or that is of any
honest sort, degree or calling, that can like to be a subject, a bondsman, a
slave, or pesant to any foreign prince or state, specialy to a Spaniard who of
all other nations is the most bloody, insolent, vicious and tyranous? Is there
any that can endure that strangers shall enjoy his lands and possessions, which
he and his ancesters have long had, or his goods or other things, which he with
his great pains and travel has gathered together to mantaine him self, his
wife and children? These are some of the miseries which happen where the enemy
does prevail: as for example,

When Will. D. of Normandy conquered this land, Holinsh. 303. 297.
did not he alter the whole state and government thereof? Acts and Monu. 166.
Did not he contrary to his oath refuse King Edwards laws and made new laws
at his own will and pleasure, profitable for himself, but most greiuous and
hurtful to the English nation? Fab. 6. part. c. 222. and 217.
Did not he spoil sundry both of the nobility, and others of the welthier
sort, of al their possessions and livings, and gave them to his Normans
notwithstanding his fair promise made at his first coming, that he would
deal lovingly with them? Did not he lay grievous taxes and How cruelly Will.
Conqueror de^^ with the Englishmen.
impositions upon our nation? Did not he cause all the land in England to be
measured and laid upon every hide of land (which as Holinshed says contained
100 akers) vj. s. which amounted to an inestimable sum, Holinsh. f. 11. Graft.
abridg. An. 1085.
when it came all together into his exchequer? And did not he shortly after
cause all men's goods and chattels to be valued, and raised thereof also a
marvelous great mass of money to the great grief and impouerishment of our
people, who so sore lamented the miserable case wherein they were thrawled,
that they hated the Normans in their hearts with deadly malice: howbeit, the
more they spoke and seemed to grudge against such sore touls, tallages and
cruel oppressions as were daily devised to their utter vndoings, the more they
were burdened after the manner of the bondage which the children of Israel
sometime suffered in Egypt, for on the other side the Normans perceiving the
hatred which the Englishmen did bear toward them, were sore offended in
their minds, and therefore sought by all manner of ways how to keep them
under. In like sort, did not Will. Rufus overthrow diverse and sundry towns,
Holinsh. 313.
parishes, villages and buildings, for the space of three miles together, to
make thereof a Forest, which to this day is called the new Forest for wild
beasts and dear, whereby no small member of the poor lost their houses, their
lands and livings, for the maintenance of savage beasts, New forest Camden
188.
of whose hard dealing in this case, Doctor White Bishop of Winchester has
these verses written as Camden affirms fo 198. B. of Win.


Templa adimit diuis, fora ciuibus, arua colonis
Rufus, and instituit Beanlensi in rure forestam,
Rex ceruum insequitur, Regem vindicta, Tirellus
Non been praeuisum transfixit acumine ferri.
Did not he cause a greiuous pain to be ordained, insomuch that who so ever
did kill any of the same dear he should have his eyes put out: Eyes put out
for hunting.
whereupon many refusing to sustain such an intolerable yoke of thrauldome as
was daily laid upon them by the Normans, choose rather to leave both lands and
goods, and after the manner of outlawes got them to the woods with their wives,
children, and servants, meaning from thenceforth wholly to live upon the spoil
of the Countries adjoining, and to take what so ever came first to hand:
whereupon shortly it came to pass, that no man might in safety travel from
his own house or town to his neighbors, and every quiet and honest man's
house became as it were a hold or fortress, and was furnished for defense
with Bows, Arrows, Bills, Pollaxes, Swords, Clubbes and Staves, the doors
kept locked and strongly boulted, and namely in the night season, for fear to
be surprised as it had bin in time of war, and amongst public enemies.
Prayers were made also to almighty God by the master of the house to save and
defend them, as though they had bin in the midst of the seas in some stormy
tempest, by means of these hard dealing toward the English nation. The people
in the North parts of this Realm did rebel, whom the Normans suppressed,
Hands cut off for rebelling.
and caused some of their hands to be cut of in token of their rebellious
dealings, and others by death to be punished, and took so great a displeasure
with the inhabitants of those parts, that he wasted all the land betwixt York
and Durham, so that for the space of 90. miles, there was left in manner no
habitation for the people: by reason whereof it lay waste and deserte by the
space of nine or ten years, so that no greater misery in the earth could
happen then that, into the which our nation was now fallen.

Likewise, did not he take from the Towns and Cities, from the Bishops and
Abbeys all their ancient privileges and free Customs, to the end they should
not only be cut short and made weaker, but also that they might redeem the
same of him for such somes of money as it pleased him to appointe, to obtain
their quietness, and made protestation that as he came to the governance of
this Realm by plain conquest, so he would and did seize into his hands the
most part of every man's possessions, causing them to redeem the same at his
hands again, and yet retained a part in the most part of them, so that they
that should afterward enjoy them, should acknowledge themselves to hold
them of him, in yielding a yearly rent to him and his successors for ever.

In like manner, when the Spaniards by violence possesthe sed Crown of
Portingall, Book of the estate of Fugitives.
did not the king of Spain use the authority of a Conqueror and the
tyrannical cruelty of an usurper, altring their Laws, confounding their
privileges, ouerturning the whole estate of their government, strangling some
of their Nobility, and other of them beheading, imprisoning and banishing some
other of them, with many other horrible and pitiful actions? These are also
other miseries which follow where the enemy does get the upper hand, and shall
we look for any other dealing if they should overcome us?

That we shall prevail against our enemies by faithful prayers to God, whereof
diverse examples are here set down out of the Bible, also diverse other good
persuasions to withstand the enemy, and how that every man is bound so to do,
whereby great fame is attained and left to posterities. Chap. 4.
IF we will consider how valiantly our forefathers have always resisted foreign
forces prepared against our country, 6. cause of incorrageme^t.
and what great renown and same they have gotten for their valor in Arms,
which is spread amongst all Christian Nations, of whom it is written: Anglia
Bistonio semper gens inclita mart.


England a Nation ever famous in battle. Bysto is a country of valiant people
in wars in thrace. Camd. fol. 7.
Of whom John Wheathamsted, sometime the Abbot of S. Albons, in his Granario
writes: Sufficiat igitur Britannis pro nobilitatis suae orgine, quod sint
fortes and potentes in praelijs, quodque vndique debellent aduersarios,
nullumque penitus patiantur iugum seruitutis. It is sufficient for the
Britains (of whom we are descended) for the beginning of their Nobility, that
they are strong and mighty in battle, and that they do every where beat
down their enemies, and cannot suffer by any means the yoke of any bondage.

If we will remember that no Nation sithence the Conquest of this land, which
is about 529. years past, could yet overcome us (praised be God therefore)
notwithstanding sundry attempts made to that end; if we will call to mind the
notable overthrows which king Richard the first gave the Infidels with a few
Englishmen, Fox 245. Hol. 1191.
and made the king of Cypres to do him homage for his kingdom, and besides
him diverse other valiant kings and people have we brought into subjection, and
made them stoop to the Crown of England, as by our Chronicles is evident; we
have now then great cause to be mightily encouraged in this service of
defense: Shall we now distrust more of the aid of our merciful Lord God then
our forefathers did, whom he so graciously assisted against their enemies? or
think he will forsake us now more then our elders, whom he has always defended
in their just and lawful accions? Surely if we endeavor our selves to serve
and fear him, to walk in his ways, to call upon him in our troubles and
necessities, no doubt he will aid us according to his promise: Call upon me
(says he by his Prophet David) in the time of trouble, We must call upon God
to aid us against our enemies.
and I will hear thee and thou shall praise me. And agaiue, Knock and it
shall be opened unto you, ask and you shall have. Whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name, he will surely give it you.

Did not the children of Israel overcome their enemies in battle, so long as
Moses held up his hands and prayed unto God for victory, and when he ceased
the enemy prevailed? Moses. 2 Chronicles. 14.
Did not the Almighty turn away his displeasure from the children of Israel
at the prayer of Moses, when they worshipped the golden Calfe, as it is
written in the 106. psalm. So he said he would have destroyed them, Psalm. 106.
had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the gap to turn away his
wrathful indignation least he should destroy them?

Did not Asha the godly king of Judah when Sarache king of Ethiopia came against
him with an host of above ten hundred thousand chariots, 2 Chronicles. 14
when they joined battle in the vale of Zephera, cry to God for aid against
Sarachc: saying, Help us O Lord our God for we do put our trust in thee, and
in thy name we go against this huge multitude, thou art our Lord God and no
man shall prevail against thee. And the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asha
and Judah, and they were ouerthrowue that there was none of them left, but were
destroyed before the lord and his host?

Did not the good king Iehosophat when the great number of Iehosophat.
the Amorytes and Moabites joined battle with him, before the battle began, 2 Chronicles. 20
stand up, and said: Here O Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem, put your trust
in the Lord your God, that you may be found faithful, give credit to the
prophet and so shall you prosper, and their enemies were overthrown without
stroke amongst themselves, and with their own forces consumed themselves.
Besides the example of Senacherib king of Assour, who with an hoaste of one
hundred four score and five thousand (as the prophet Esaias witnesses) Esaias 37.
could not preuail when he invaded Hesechia king of Judah; for Hesechia did put
on sackcloth, and went up to the temple and prayid, and sent Heliachym and
other prophets to Esaias that he should pray to God for them, and God sent his
Angels, who slew the Assirians host. Whereby it does appear, that it is not the
great multitude of men of war, horses, and chariots, but the lord God that
gives victory in battle, who is called the lord of hosts, who ever fights
for his own people, and never leaves them distitute that put their trust in
him.

These are left to us for examples, that we should not put trust in our own
forces and strength, Psalm. 127.
but repose our confidence in him that has made all, and therefore has power
of al things, Psalm. 108.
he must keep and defend the City or else the watchmen that keep it watch in
vain, as the prophet says, and so he must aid and fight for us, or else we
cannot prevail.

And again he says, O help us against the enemy, for vain is the help of
man, through God we shall do great things, and it is he that shall tread
down our enemies: There is no king that can be saved by the multitude of an
host, neither is any mighty man delivered by much strength. A horse is
counted but a vain thing to save a man, neither shall he deliver any man by his
great strength. Behold the cie of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and
upon them that put their trust in his mercy. And yet we may not leave forces
and other ordinary ways devised and ordained for defense, but must use them as
the said godly Kings and princes did against their enemies, Psalm. 118.
always hoping in the gracious aid and assistance of almighty God, and if he
be on our side who is against us, as the Proph. says, The Lord is on my side I
will not fear what man does unto me.

Now therefore considering these miseries and calamities, which happen where
the enemy does prevail, and the great preparation which they have made to
bring us under their subiections and bondage, if ever we will show our
loyalties to our Prince, our country, or natural affection to our parents, our
love to our wives, Persvvations to encounter the enemy.
children and little infants which cannot defend themselves: our good will to
our kinsfolks friends and allies, if ever we will show our selves careful to
preserve our posterity to succeed us: if ever we will have desire to mantaine
the honor, worship and fame of the houses whereof we are descended: if ever we
will show our selves to come of the seed and generation of our valiant
ancestors and courageous forfathers: if ever we will leave honor or fame to
our posterities of our valor in arms whereby our offspring may be also
encouraged to follow our steps therein (for virtues and acts of fame live when
men are dead) as the saying is viuit post funera virtus, now is the time for
it or never. Therefore let us pluck up our hearts like me^, make ready our
horses, scowre our armor, sharpen our swords, and make bright our weapons
which we are charged to have by the law of this Realm (whereof we may have a
view in this book) and furnish our selves further with things meet for the
wars according to our ability, and when we shall be commanded by her
maiestties authority, let us be ready and set our rest upon it, determining
rather to die in field in defense of our Prince and Country, then that the
enemy should prevail, whereby the miseries, calamities, and bondages before
remembered should fall upon us.

If we stand to it like men, then shall we preserve the word of God amongst us,
our gracious Queen, and her most honorable Counsel, the state of our common
wealth, our own lives, and our fathers, mothers, wives, children, friends,
kinsfolks and allies: then shall we posesse our lands, our goods and livings in
peace: then shall we preserve and continue our liberties and freedoms, and
save our selves and our posterity from thrawledome and bondage; and we shall
pass the rest of our lives to our own good contentment, and likewise
according to Gods good pleasure. On the other side if we fly (which God
defend) then shall the word of God be suppressed, our Prince endangered, her
Counsel brought in peril, the state of our flourishing Common wealth
overthrown: We shall be slain as thick as motes in the sun, our fathers,
mothers, wives, children, kinsfolks and allies, shall be destroyed with the
hand of the enemy: our wives, daughters and kinswomen, shall be ravished and
defloured before our faces, strangers shall possess our lands, livings, and
goods: and we that now live in honor, worship, credit, and estimation, and as
it were at our own hearts ease, shall then be subjects, bondmen, slaves,
vassels, and pesants, to forreners and strangers, and then shall all the
miseries, calamities and bondage which may be devised, be laid upon us.
Therefore consider how greatly this matter stands us upon, and with courageous
hearts and valiant minds let us stand to it, and discharge our duties to our
Prince and Country, as we are bound by the law of God and by the law of
natnre; remembering with our selves, that no man is born only for himself, No
man is born for him self, but for his country also.
but for his country also. Every man ought to do what he can for the
preservation and good of the Common wealth: so did Demonsthenes, as Osorius
writes, Demosthenes vero omnem laborem in sempiternae gloriae studio, and in
Reipub. salute consumabat. And each man ought to be always ready and diligent
to withstand as well foreign force, as to appease civil dissension, that
nothing be an impediment that the Common wealth may not flourish in all
happiness. Nothing can be more discommendable and abhorred, then sloth and
idleness, and nothing more commendable then courage and endeavor to serve the
Common wealth, whereof the little Be in his kind gives an example: for he in
the summer time toileth, not only for him self, but also to his power to
serve the Common wealth, and will not suffer the sluggish drone Be to taste of
his labor, as Vergil writes:

Qualis Apis estate noua per florida rura
Exercet sub sole labor, Virgil.
cum gentis adultos
Educunt fetus, aut cum liquentia mella
Stipant, aut dulci discendunt necterae cellas,
Aut onera accipiunt, venientium, aut agmine facto,
Ignauum fucos pecus a praesepibus arcent.
The very heathen men always take it, that every man is bound to fight in
defense of his Country, Horat. lib. 3.
saying: Pugna pro patria, oportet mori pro patria: A man must die for his
country. Dulce and decorum est pro patria mori, It is a sweet and seemly
thing for a man to die for his country. Cic. in Offic. lib. 1.
And Tully says, Chari sunt parents, chari liberi, propinqui, and familiares,
sed omnes omnium charitates patria vna complexa est, pro qua quis bonus dubitat
mortem oppetere, si ei sit profuturus? Our parents, children, kinsfolks and
friends, are dear unto us, but the entire love of our country only does
comprehend the love of them all in general, for which, what man will not
willingly die, if thereby he may profit the same? Amor patriae ratione
valentior omnium.
Oui. de Pont.


The love (says Ovid) of our country is of greater force then all reason, for
it makes the father to forget all natural affection to prefer the safety of
his country and commonwealth, before the welfare and safety of his dear
children. Tusculans questions.
When as the Grecian fleet of one thousand sail was through a great tempest
by force kept a long time in harbor within the haven of Boetia, and Agamemnon
their Captain had knowledge by the Oracle that the navy could not be released
but by the death of his daughter Phigenia, was not he forward to fulfill the
Oracle in offering her up in sacrifice, and ready to follow the counsel of
Pirrhus persuading him saying, Seneca.
Praeferre patriam liberis regem decet, A king ought to prefer his country
before his children. Osorius.
John king of Portingale hearing that ye Pelican by shedding her heart blood,
would recover her young ones that had been stong by the biting of venomous
serpents, caused the picture of the bird to be carried in his ensign, thereby
to show that he was ready to spend his blood for the defense and safety of his
subjects. When the Athenians were greatly oppressed by the Lacedaemonians,
Paterculus. lib. 1.
and answer was made by the Oracle of Apollo, that they should be conquerors
whose Captain was first slain in battle, Codrus both king and Captain of the
Athenians disfiguring himself, entered disguised into the enemies camp, being
clothed in a sheapheards weed, and of purpose there picking a quarrel, was
slain, which purchased both victory to the Athenians, and renown to himself
for ever. Cicero senten. lib. 1.
To such (says Cicero) our forefathers, which for the common wealth have given
their lives, for a short life have yielded everlasting memory.

His maiores nostri qui obrempublicam mortem
Obierent, per breui vita diuturnam memoriam rediderunt.
Assure your self there is no service more commendable, then that which is
employed, nor death more honorable (touching any worldly thing) then that which
is given for the defense or safeguard of the Common wealth. And because
histories are called by Tully the witness of time, Tully. Osorius. Histories
are witnesses of time.
the light of verity, the life of memory, the teachers of life, the shewers
of antiquity, let us see further what they record touching the valiant acts
and adventures attempted and performed by diverse for the defense and good of
their Country. The wonderful magnanimity and resolution of Mutius Sceuola, a
young Gentleman of Rome, who delivered the City from siege, and caused a firm
peace betwixt Porsemia and the Romans, for he passed over the river of Iiber
with great courage and with an invincible mind, and entered the whole host of
Porsemia, till he came to the kings pauilion, where finding him with a great
company about him, pressed in, and sieve the Secretary in stead of the king: but
when he perceived that it was not Porsemia, he was sorry in his mind, and in
token thereof burned his right hand in the fire, and told Porsemia, that though
it were his chance to miss of his purpose, yet there were three hundred
Gentlemen more in the city that had vowed to perform that action: whereupon
Porsemia seeing so great resolution that the Romans had to defend their
country, forthwith raised his siege, and made peace with them. If the valiant
Horacius Cocles had not adventured his life, and Horacius Fabius his Seignory
for the benefit of their country of Rome, the name of the Romans had been
clear extinct long before the Roman Monarchy. Notable is the history of the
widow Iudeth, which ventured to save her City with unspeakable danger of her
life: for she seeing no other ways to assuage the fury of Holofernes, but by
the smooth words and dissimulation of a woman, presented her self before him
in his chamber, and promised him fair until she had lulled him asleep with
drink, and then making her prayers to Almighty God to assist her against the
proud Assyrian Holofernes, she took out his sword and stroke of his head, and
passed through his host with her maid, having Holofernes head in a bag, and
so came to her castle in the night, and the next day fixed his head upon a
powle for the view of all his army: whereupon they removed, and so she
delivered her City by the great mercy and favor of God toward her. What shall
I say of Curtius that noble Roman, and Assurus the kings son of Phrigia,
either of which seeing in their country a dangerous breach of cliffe in the
earth, which they were persuaded would not be closed up again, until the best
thing in the city (which they took to be a man) were cast into it, willingly
threw themselves into the same, for the safety of the people. But foreign
examples are innumerable, and not so well known unto us as our own.

This Chapter shows sundry examples of diverse Noblemen of this land, who
have adventured their lives in defense of their country, and how that every
man ought to endeavor him self to follow their steps, and most valiantly and
resolutely to fight in defense of his Prince and country, against all foreine
enemies. CHAP. 5.
IT is not unknown unto you, Adventures of the Nobility.
how valiantly the Kings, Princes and Nobles of this our Nation, have in
diverse and sundry wars ventured their own persons, and with their own
hands incountred their enemies. As for example: Did not Henry the first in a
battle in France, Holinsh. 356.
smite down to the ground Crispio Earl of Eureux, by means whereof he was
taken prisoner at the kings feet. Ibide^. 1181. 1170.
Was not king Henry the fifth in person in the battle at Agincourt in
France, and there likewise fought in his own person, Battle of Agincourt in
France fought by K. Henry the 5.
and carried away the stroke of the enemy upon his helmet, and man of the
French at that time a glorious victory? And concerning the valiant service in
field of a great number of the Nobility and others of this realm, how they
have also endaungered them selves in the defense of their Prince and country
against the enemy, and performed most famous acts of chivalry therein, to
their great honors and immortal fames, which oblivion the cankred enemy to
fame, shall never be able to blemish: but they shall remain as spectacles to
posterities for ever to behold, and to encourage them to ensue their martial
acts and enterprises. Among other, what valiant and faithful service has the
noble house of the Lord Talbot done from time to time to their Princes and
country, The valiant service of the noble house of the Lord Talbot. Hall 596.
Mauns in France.
when the Earl of Suffolk (having the charge of Mauns in France) and the
magistrates (specially the clergy of the same city) conspired with the
French, assuring them that if they would come to surprise the city, they
should find them ready to receive them: and so they did, by means whereof, the
said Earl with the rest of the said English men were forced to take the castle
there, and keep it, and in all have sent to the Lord Talbot, who then lay at
Alaunson, certifying him in what state they stood, having neither victual nor
munition, and their castle almost undermined, so that yielding now must follow,
for resistance would not help, if they were not aided with speed. Did not the
said Lord Talbot hearing this news, with all have assemble his Captains and
soldiers to the number of seven hundred men of war, and in the evening
departed from Alaunson, and that night entered into the said castle of Man's at a
posterne gate secretly? Whereupon about six of the clock in the morning the
English men issued out of the Castle crying aloud, S. George, Talbot. The
Frenchmen within thinking nothing less then of this sudden approchment, rose
out of their beds and fled, leaving all their horses, armor and riches behind
them: at which time there was slain and taken four hundred gentlemen of the
French. And thus was the City of Man's reduced again unto English Mauns taken
by the Lord Talbot. Holins. 1262. Awians. Ibid. 1262.
men's possessions by this most noble service and bold enterprises of this Lord
Talbot. Did not the Lord Talbot likewise with a company raise the siege of the
French at Awrans, then being in the allegiance of the king of England? Did not
he and the Lord Scales and others, hearing the Frenchmen to be come within
four leagues of Rone (which then was then also Rone.
under the subjection of the king of England) by night issue out of that city,
and in the morning by day, came to the place where the Frenchmen were, and then
set upon them, where many of them were slain and taken prisoners. Also did not
the Duke of Burgundy when he beseeged the town of Cretoy with ten thousand
men, Ibidem 1263 Cretoy
hearing of the coming of the Lord Talbot raise his siege, the said Lord
Talbot sending him word that he would give him battle: if he would not, that
the said Earl would wast and destroy his country in Picardy, and according to
his promise so he did. Was not John Lord Talbot for his approved prowess and
tried valiancy performed in the wars of France, Ibidem 1276 Camden 462. John
first Earl of Shrewsburie. Normandy. Hall 31 h. 6. Aquitaine Burdeux taken.
Diverse other cities and towns taken.
created Earl of Shrewsburie, about the ninteenth year of Henry the sixth,
and after sent again with 3000. men into Normandy for the better defense
thereof, who neither forgot his duty, nor forslowed his business, but daily
labored, and hourly studied how to molest and endanger his enemies? Did not
the kings Counsel then send the said Earl with an army into Aquitaine at the
earnest suit of the Magistrates and inhabitants of the city of Bordeaux, who
received him and his power into that city by a posterne gate, where they sieve
many of the Captains, and others of the Frenchmen, and so was Bordeaux taken
by the said Earl, which he fortified, and after rode into the country
thereabout, and obtained diverse cities and towns without dint of sword. And
among others, did not he take the strong town of Castillon in Perigot?
Castillon in Perigot.
where the French king when he understood thereof, assembled twenty thousand
men, and entered into Aquitaine, Aquitaine. Castillon befieged by the french.
(where Castillon is) and besieged the said town of Castillon with a strong
siege: where upon the Earl of Shrewsbury assembled 800. horsemen and 5000.
footmen, and went to the rescue of the said town, in which battle very
valiantly he behaved himself, Earl of Shrewsbury slain. Anno 1453. Camden
462.
and there was slain with a small shot: and this was the end of this noble
Earl, after he had with much honor, more fame, and great renown, served his
Prince in wars four and twenty years in France, and was honorably interred
amongst them, on whose Tomb in engraven as follows. Inscription on the tomb
of John first Earl of Shrewsbury.
Here lies the right noble knight, John Talbott Earl of Shrewsbury, Washford,
Waterford, and Valence, Lord Talbot of Goodrige, and Vrchengfield, Lord Strange
of the black Mere, Lord Verdon of Alton, Lord Crumwell of Wingfield, Lord
Louetoft of Worsop, Lord Furniuall of Sheffield, Lord Faulconbrige, knight of
the most noble order of S. George, S. Michaell, and the Golden fleece, Great
Marshall to king Henry the sixth of his realm of France: who died in the
battle of Bordeaux in the year of our Lord 1453. 1453.
If I should set down every particular service of such as have descended of
this noble house, done from time to time in the wars for their prince and
country, it would ask very long time, therefore he that desires to know
more thereof, I refer him to the Chronicles of this realm, where they are
set forth at large, to their great honor and glory. And touching the loyalty of
this noble house to the Crown, I find it not attainted for any disloyalty to
the same since the conquest of this realm, for which they are most deeply
bound to yield their most humble thanks to the goodness of Almighty God, that
so from time to time has blessed the same: and so much the more, for that a
great number of other Peers and Nobles of this land, have been attainted
since that time for their disloyalty. In honor of which house of the Lord
Talbot, I have made these few verses following.



TAlbot I am, that ever have been true,
Unto my Prince, her crown and dignity:
And hope in God, my fathers to ensue,
So as my blood shall never stained be.
Pressed I will be my country to defend,
As does belong, to men of my degree:
And on her foes my life and land will spend,
As each man ought for her security.
The acts of war, performed by my name,
I shall increase, as God shall give me might:
To serve my Prince when she commands the same,
As does belong unto a faithful knight.
My gracious Prince, has honored me,
With name of thorder of the garter knight,
Of which great kings have much desired to be,
Wherein these words, with golden letters bright,
Honey soyt qui mal y pense are seen:
As much to say, as ill to him befall,
That ill does wish, unto so good a Queen*
And so I pray, and during life I shall.
And for some among many examples of the loyalty of that noble house, Holinsh.
368.
first I find, that William Lord Talbot, in king Stephen his time, took upon
him to defend Hereford in Wales, as diverse other nobles of this Realm did
other Castles and towns in England, to the use of Maud the Empress and her
son against the said king Stephen, who usurped and detayned the Crown
against, her said son, contrary to his oath made to ye said Empress, her said
son being ye right heir to Henry the first his Realm of England. John Earl
of Shrewsbury, was slain at North, taking part with Henry ye sixth against the
Duke of York and others: then I find how Sir Gilbert Talbot was sent by the
young Earl of Shrewsbury, being within age and ward to Richard the third, with
two thousand of his tenants and friends to aid Henry Earl of Richmond against
the said King Richard, Stow. 121.
being not only an horrible murderer of his Nephews, king Edward the fourth
his children, but also an usurper of the Crown, whom the said Earl overthrew
at Bosworth field, and so obtained the Scepter Royal of this Realm. I note
also the great loyalty of the right noble George, fourth Earl of Shrewsbury,
that where diverse evil disposed persons in the rebellion in the North parts
of this Realm, about the 28 year of the reign of King Henry the eight, gave
forth very slanderous and dishonorable speeches against the said Earl,
Holinsh* 1567.
as though he had favored more the part of the rebels, then of the king his
Master, for a full testimony and declaration of his truth to his Prince, he
caused his Chapleyn to minister to him an oath, in the presence of a great
number of people, assembled by him to repress the said rebels, by which oath
he did protest, that as his Auncesters had been ever true to the Crown, so be
would not stain his blood in joining with a sort of rebels and traitors against
their Prince, but said, he would live and die in defense of the Crown, if it
did stand but upon a stake. How faithfully did the Lord George last Earl of
Shrewsbury discharge the great trust reposed in him by her Majesty and her
whole Council, in the garding and safe keeping of the Queen of Scots, by the
space of seventeen years at the least; a matter of such importance, as the
like so long time was never committed to any State or Peer of this Realm
since the conquest thereof, and how carefully he did prevent the sundry
devises and subtle practices wrought by her self and others for her escape,
it is sufficiently known. The trust was the greater, for that if she had
escaped, no small danger might have ensued to the person of our most gracious
Queen, and to the whole Realm, as may appear by her sundry conspiracies
against the same. In like manner, when any matter of great importance for the
service of the Realm, in those parts was committed to him (as often many were)
how carefully and painefully, Camden. 463.
and with what expedition he would dispatch the same, the world can testify:
what great confidence was reposed in him by the Queens Majesty when he was
made Lieutenant of the counties of Darby and Stafford in those dangerous days,
and how he performed the same trust to the preservation of the common peace and
quietness of those Shires, is well known to all men: what great trust was
committed to himself also, when he had authority in times of rebellion and
other outrageous actions in those parts to suppress the same in forcible
manner, and to execute the offenders by Marshall justice, without further
proceeding in law against the^, by the large Commission directed unto him is
manifest. Gilbert now the seventh Earl of Shrewsbury.
And lastly, was not the right honorable Gilbert now Earl of Shrewsbury in
the xxxviij. year of her Majesty's most gracious Reign, sent into France to
receive the oath of the French king, for the confirmation of the most honorable
league betwixt her Majesty and the said king? and did not he perform that
Embassage to his great honor? And did not the said king in proof of his great
good acceptance thereof, His Embassage most honorably performed in France.
give him a ring with a diamond therein, as I have heard, valued at xv.
hundredth pounds, a thing meet to remain as an heir loome to that house for
ever, for a remembrance thereof. And now to return to the valiant service of
diverse others to their Prince and country, let me tell you of John late Duke
of Northumberland, John Duke of Northumberland.
of whose fall by his disloyalty to his Prince (though there be great pity)
yet his courage, valiancy, and hardiness in wars, and his great adventure
therein, I trust without offense, may here be remembered, as an encouragement to
others to follow his steps therein, who being in king Edward the sixth his time
sent as General to suppress the rebellion of Ket in Norfolk, Holinsh. 1672.
his number being but small, by reason his whole power was not yet come to him,
and the rebels were many, was by some of his army advised to regard his own
safety, and to leave the City of Norwich, for that it was thought he was not
able with his small company to defend the same against the said rebels, to whom
with noble courage, showing an invincible heart, he said, that so long as any
life was in him, he would not consent to such dishonor, but rather would suffer
whatsoever either fire or sword should work against him: and thereupon did
draw out his sword, as other of the honorable and worshipful then there
present likewise did, and commanded that each one should kiss the others
sword, according to an ancient custom used amongst me^ of war in time of
great danger: whereupon they all made a vow, binding it with a solemn oath,
that they would not depart from thence until they had either vanquished the
rebels, or lost their lives in manfull fight, for defense of the kings honor.
Ambrose Earl of Warwick. Ibid. 1532.
How valiantly did Ambrose Earl of Warwick in the fourth year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty that now is, defend the town of
Newhauen in France, notwithstanding they died in great numbers of the plague,
so as they wanted men and other things necessary for defense, and yet would
not yield the town by force, but manfully stood ready in the breaches to
receive the assault, when the Frenchmen had with their Cannon made great
breaches, very easy for the enemy to enter: whereupon the Frenchmen
perceiving the resolutenesse of the Englishmen, sounded their Trumpet of
parley, and so upon honorable agreement then concluded upon, the town was
yielded up to the Frenchmen. Besides, how valiantly did Sir James Wilford and
other Captains with their soldiers, defend the town of Haddington in
Scotland, against the French and Scots, being about eighteen thousand, in king
Edward the sixth his days, and would not yield it, although they had scarsitie
of men and munition, and were also greatly visited with the plague, so as many
died thereof daily, but most valiantly and with invincible courages defended
the same, Holinsh. 1638.
so as it was not surprised by the enemy?

How valiantly and resolutely did the Lord Gray of Wilton, Lord John Gray, the
Lord Ed. Seymer, Edward Shelley, Preston, and others, to the number of seven
and twenty, all Gentlemen, set upon the foreward of the battle of the Scots
at Musclebrough in Scotland, Expedition. paten. folio.
in king Edward the sixth his time, meaning to have broken their array? but the
Scots had so strongly fortified themselves, that they could not enter, and so
in their retiring they were all slain, saving the Lord Gray of Wilton, and the
Lord John Gray, and Lord Ed. Seymer, who not without wounds and marks upon
their bodies of their being there, escaped.

By these examples it appears, that those Noblemen and others respected not
their lives, nor any painful service, or extremities in the service of their
Prince and country, for which they shall live in fame for ever. Me^ may not
respect any travel or pain to serve their Prince and country.


He that has desire to live in name, when he is dead in body, must endeavor
himself, according to his calling, and as God has endowed him, to leave some
memory, whereby it may appear that once he lived, as these verses following
show.

1
THough Death the fatal thread of each man cuts in twain,
Yet virtues ay shall live, and worthy acts remain:
2
For others to ensue, their painful steps therein,
Whereby they may attain, like lasting praise to win.
3
But such as not regard, to leave some deed of fame,
When they are dead, shall lie, without regard or name.
4
And soon shall be forgot, as they had never bin,
And shall not be thought of, no scarce amongst their kin.
5
What difference shall be then, twixt great and meanest man,
When of their worthy acts, no book record ought can?
6
What booteth titles great, of honor for to have,
Or Croesus golden store, when men lie in the grave?
7
More worth a thousand fold, it is famous for to be,
For virtues and noble acts, then all the rest to thee.
8
That moved mighty kings, and great States of this land,
And many others mo, great things to take in hand.
9
Some kingdoms to subdue by sword, both far and near:
Their persons ventred have, and dangers did not fear,
10
And many worthy Peers, their Prince to serve in field,
And country to defend, great acts with spear and shield
11
Performed have, which fame with blast of trumpe has spread,
Whereby they live in name, though they in grave ly dead.
12
And some have Churches built, in honor of our Lord,
Where they did give him thanks and praise with one accord.
13
Some Colleges for such, as learning list embrace,
Their country and their Prince, to serve in every place.
14
Some Schools to train up youth, in skill and virtues lore,
While tender years do last, in age to have in store.
15
Some Hospitals for poor, where they may be relieved,
When crooked age of strength, to work has them bereaved.
16
And these they have endowed, with living and with land,
To their immortal fame, for evermore to stand.
17
These for their Founders pray, and benefactors all,
And for their offspring eke, on God cease not to call.
18
For their prosperity, and foes eke to withstand:
That all things prosper may, which they do take in hand.
19
And when they are gone hence, that in the latter day,
They may rise up, with Christ, in joys to dwell always.
20
None only for himself, but for his country too
Is borne, and bound for her, the best he can, to do.
21
The Brutish kings that long, did bear the scepter here,
Fair temples to their gods, and Castles strong that were,
22
And cities large, and towns, erected many one,
The enemy to defend, they walled them with stone.
23
And many famous men, the founders of our skill,
Their learned works have left, to study on that will.
24
Before that Christ was borne, whose glory lives this day,
And while the world does last, shall never fade away.
25
The sum of all is this, who that will live in name,
Must leave some deed behind, that worthy is of fame.
And to this end Salust writes: Salust. fol. 1.
Qui sese student praestare caeteris animantibus, summa open niti decent, ne
vitam silentio transeant veluti pecora, quae natura prona ac ventri obedientia
finxit, and quomam vita nostra qua fruimur, breuis est, memoriam nostri qua^
maxim longam efficere oportet, nam diuitiarum and formae gloria fluxa atque
fragilis est, virtus autem clara aeternaque habetur. They which study to
excel other creatures, ought not to pass their lives in silence, as beasts
do, whom nature has made altogether subject to the belly, but because our
lives be short, we ought to endeavor our selves to the uttermost of our power,
that our memory may continue perpetual: for the glory of riches and beauty
are unstable and frail: but virtue is a noble thing, and most worthy to be had
in everlasting remembrance.

How we ought to beware of sedition amongst our selves, and how that sundry
attempts have been made by foreign enemies, for the invasion of his realm
through the occasions thereof, as appears by diverse and sundry examples in
this Chapter following. CHAP. 6.
NOw my dear friends and countrymen, We must beware of sedition amongst our
selves.
to the intent to make us the more able in this service of defense, one thing
there is, of which we must chiefly beware, namely of sedition, rebellion, and
division amongst our selves, for out of doubt there is no greater mischief or
inconvenience that can happen to a kingdom, then civil discord, as one
writes well.

Regnorum pessima pestis seditie.

Sedition is the greatest plague that may happen to a kingdom.

And the holy Gospel says. Math. 12.


Omne Regnum in se diuisum desolabitur.

Every kingdom in it self divided shall be desolate.

As want of the fear of God, Hol. 1772.
disobedience to rulers, blindness of guides, briberie in Magistrates,
rebellion in subjects, civil disagreement, flattering of Princes,
unmercifulness in rulers, and unthankfulness in subjects, are causes of the
ruin of a common wealth: so the fear of God, a wise Prince, learned rulers,
obedience to officers in subjects, lovers of the common wealth, virtue
rewarded, and vice chastened, are the chief causers of a flourishing common
wealth. It is not without great cause that we pray in our Letanie unto God, to
be delivered from sedition: for sedition always implies danger to the person
of the Prince and State. it opens the gate to foreign invasion, as by sundry
examples we may see, for when great dissension and wars were in England
betwixt Herrauld and Tostus his brother, Dissentio^ in England opened the gate
to foreign inuasio^. Stow. 1066.
after the death of king Edward son of Etheldred, because Herrauld usurped
the crown against his oath and the trust put in him by king Edward, who
committed the government of the realm to Herrauld during only the nonage of
Edgar his nephew, to whom he gave the crown, did not then William Duke of
Normandy, Duke of Normandy. Hall. 251.
seeing a convenient time and occasion offered to conquer this kingdom, with a
great army come into England, and landed at Hastings in Sussex, where in
battle Herrauld was slain, Herrauld slain.
and so William possessed this land by conquest. Also, when the great wars
were in England betwixt king John and some of his Barons, Barons wars.
and sundry bloody battles were fought betwixt them, to the slaughter of many
noble and other valiant men, Holinsh. 199.
did not the Barons being sore distressed with the kings forces pray aid of
Philip the Fox. 255.
French king, Frenchmen entered this realm when the civil wars were here.
requiring him to send Jews his eldest son into England with some convenient
number of men, and they would receive him to be their king and do him homage:
whereupon the French king thinking rather by this device to conquer the realm,
sent Jews his son with a great army of men into England, whom the Barons
received, and to him yielded homage according to their promise: whereupon
diverse great conflicts happened betwixt the king and the French, Ibidem. 600.
and such of the Barons as joined with them, who greatly indomaged the said
king, and got the possession of diverse Castles, Towns, and other places, and
so became strong within this realm. Likewise when the civil wars were in
England betwixt Edward the second and his Barons, concerning the Spensers, did
not the Scots waste and destroy the country of the Bishoprike of Durham, Scots
invaded England when civil wars were here.
and did not the French then enter the borders of Guyen, hoping to have
recovered all the lands which the king had in France? What imboldened the
French king to surprise the holds and fortifications near Bulleyne, in king
Edward the sixth his days, but the rebellion in Norfolk, which greatly
troubled the realm, Fox. 1309.
and also to attempt the Isles of Gersey and Garnesey, thinking to have
surprised the same and also our ships, but was repulsed to his great losses
both of men and ships? If we mark the fruits which have proceeded of civil
wars, Conquest by civil dissension. Greece.
we shall see that they have been always guided after a most cruel and
horrible kind of hostility, and that their issue has been the loss and
overthrow of many common wealths. The Romans came to the great Empire of
Greece, more by dissension and civil wars (which they did sow amongst their
neighbors) then by force of arms. French Academie. Prou. 1.
There are seven things which God hates, and the eight his soul abhors,
and that eight is, he which nourishes discord amongst brethren. French
Academic. ca. 63. Justin. li. 8.
After the Romans had kindled the fire of dissension in one nation, they
maintained one side a certain time, until in the end they had overthrown
both the one and the other, and so they deceived sundry nations, as the
Carthagenians, the Asians, and the Gawles: Qui aperte concordiam simulant, and
occulta dissidia serunt, Bodinus. li. 4 fol. 487.
nihil est immortali Deo detest abilius, says Bodinus. And by sowing of the
said dissension, in the end the Roman Empire fell from her greatness by the
means of civil wars, which they had long time nourished amongst others.
Incidit in foueam quam fecit.

The Empire of Alexander being the greatest that ever was, Alexander.
vanished as a fire of tow, through the division and discord that was among his
successors. French Academie. ca. 63. Judea.
And Josephus says that the kings of Judea became subject and tributarie to
the Romans through the civil wars, betwixt Hercanus and Aristobulus, who
were brethren. The affliction of Spain by civil dissension.
There was no country more afflicted then Spain by civil wars, when it was
divided into many kingdoms. The Mores did overcome it on the one side, the
French and the Englishmen devoured it on the other side. And Hungary which had
valiantly resisted the Turk almost two hundredth years together, Hungary.
was at the length subdued by them, by the divisions that happened amongst
themselves.

What a great slaughter was there of the Nobility of France, Fountain.
at the battle of Fountain, near to Anserre, by the civil wars that were
betwixt Lithargus, Jews and Charles the Bald?

What civil wars and bloudsheds did ensue of the division betwixt the houses
of York and Lancaster here with us in England, The houses of York and
Lancaster.
which being begu^ in king Henry the fourth his days, continued till Henry
the seventh, who married the eldest daughter and heir of Edward the fourth, by
which the said two houses were united together, and so all civil wars then
ceased.

These sactions continued diverse years, in which time there died in sundry
battles and skirmishes, Camden. 474.
as Philippus Comineus says, above four score of the blood royal, with the
flower of the Nobility of England, besides a great number of the Lords,
Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, and infinite thousands of the common people.
And to pass over many examples of like sort, France.
in what pitiful state does France now stand, which has been one of the most
flourishing realms of Europe, by civil wars and dissension, which has
afflicted that kingdom above thirty years, whereof has ensued, not only the
slaughter of many noble persons, but also infinite thousands of other
subjects, and in the end the shameful murder of their own natural liege
Lord and King. Murder of their Prince


These miseries may be examples to us, to beware of such like sedition and
division: and happy are they that can beware by others dangers, as the wise
Cato says: Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.


Sedition is perilous, Cato.
although it show to have never so good a countenance of honest cause: and it
were better for the author of such sedition, to suffer any loss or injury,
then to be the cause of so great an evil. Bodynus. lib. 4. fol. 168.
Vt morbi ac vulnera ipsaeque animae egritudines ac perturbationes tum
corporibus tum mentibus noxiae sunt: ita quoque bella ciuilia rebus publicis ac
ciuitatibus pestifera sunt ac perniciosa. As diseases, wounds, and the griefs
and troubles of the mind, both to the body and mind are hurtful, so likewise
civil wars to the common wealth are pestiferous and dangerous. For civil
wars bring forth and nourish want of reverence toward God, contemns
authority, laws and government, without which, Nec domus vlla, nec ciuitas,
nec gens, nec rerum natura, nec ipse mundus stare potest. No house, no nation,
no city, nor the nature of things, nor the world it self can stand. The
fruits of sedition.
Sedition causes change of laws, contempt of justice, base estimation of
sciences, it procures horrible revenge, forgetfulness of pare^tage,
consanguinitie and friendship, it causes extortions, violence, robberies,
wastings of countries, sacking of towns, burning of buildings, co^fiscations,
vanishments, savage murders, alterations and overthrow of policies, with
other infinite and intolerable miseries, pitiful to behold, sorrowful to
express, and lamentable to think of.

Non, Virgil.
mihi silinguae centum sunt, oraque centum,
Ferrea vox, omnes scelerum comprendere formas Possem.
If I an hundred tongues, and mouths had for to tell,
And voice as iron hard, express I could not well,
The perils to a state, and kingdom that may fall,
By civil war, which makes to strangers bond and thrall.
Sedition armeth the father against the son, brother against brother, kinsman
against kinsman, men of the same nation, province and city, one against
another. Hereupon the fields which before were fruitful are left untilled,
corn grows where towns did stand: there the ground with blood of men is
made rank, which before was barren, that a man may say, as Ovid writes of
Troy, Iam seges est vbi Troia fuit resecandaque falce,
Luxuriat Phrigio sanguine pinguis humus.


What does not the fire and fury of sedition and civil wares bring with it,
as one writes well: Quid non discordia frangit, Epist. 1.

Dissipat, eneruat, fera cum dominatur Erynnis?


What does not discord break, waste, and make weak, when Erynnis (which is
feigned by the Poets to be the Lady of dissension and strife) does rule? Erynni
1.
And in the end the bodies thus dismembered, and the parts thereof infected
with the same poison of discord, 2. Reg. cap. 24.
destroy themselves. David the Prophet judged war worse the^ either famine or
pestilence, and he did rather choose a plague amongst his subjects, then civil
wars and tumults. Pythagoras says, that three things are by all means to be
remaued, a disease from the body, ignorance from the soul, and sedition from
the city. Plato affirms, that no evil is worse in a city, then that which
divides, and of one makes it two^, and that nothing is better then concord,
which tyeth and unites it together: Concordia res paruae crescu^t, discordia
antem maximae dilabuntur. By concord small things do increase, but by discord
great things come to confusion. Let us hear what ye noble Orator Tully says,
Senten. lib. 1. fol. 190.
of the miseries which ensue by civil wars: Omnia sunt misera in bellis
ciuilibus, sed miserius nihil quam ipsa victoria, quae etiamsi ad meliores
venit, tamen eos ipsos ferociores impotentioresque reddit, vt etiamsi natura
tales non sunt, necessitate tamen esse cogantur, multa enim victori eorum
arbitrio per quos vicit, etiam inuito facienda sunt. All things are miserable
in civil wars, but nothing is more miserable then the victory it self,
which although it happen to the best sort, yet it makes them cruel, in so
much that though they be not so by nature, yet of necessity they are compelled
so to be, for many things by the ouercommer at the pleasure of such, by whose
aid he does overcome, even against his will are to be done. King Henry the
fifth.
When king Henry the fifth not having above fifteen thousand men, gave a great
overthrow to the French king at Agincourt in France, where he had assembled to
the number of forty thousand of the flower of all his country, and had taken
many prisoners of the french, Hol. 1181.
both Nobles and others, the french as they are men of great courage and
valor, so they assembled themselves again in battle array, meaning to have
given a new battle to king Henry, which king Henry perceiving, gave special
commandment by proclamation, that every man should kill his prisoners:
whereupon many were presently slain, whereof of French king having
intelligence, dispersed his army, and so departed: whereby you may see the
miseries of war, that though they had yielded and thought themselves sure of
their lives, paying their ransom, according to the laws of arms, yet upon
such necessary occasion, to kill them was a thing by all reason allowed, for
otherwise the king having lost diverse valiant Captains and soldiers in this
battle, and being also but a small number in comparison of the French kings
army, and in a strong country, where he could not supply his need upon the
sudden, it might have been much dangerous to have again joined with the
enemy, and kept his prisoners alive, as in our Chronicles largely appears.

Diverse and sundry practices and devices heretofore devised and made (with
many of our own nation) both by the King of Spain and the Pope, to invade our
country, and also what preparation has been made by her Majesty to prevent
the same. CHAP. 7.
NOw for as much as the continual plots and practices of the Pope, Practices of
the Pope against us.
the vowed enemy to this Realm, to the intent to sow discord and division
within the same, to make an easy way for the enemy to invade our country,
have bin strange, I have thought good to make mention here of some part of her
Majesty's proclamation published in the 33 year of her most gracious reign:
Proclamation 33. Eliz.
by which it appears, that the Pope has practiced with certain principal
seditious heads, being unnatural subjects of her Majesty's kingdom, but yet
very base of birth, together with great labor upon his charge, a multitude of
dissolute young men, who have partly for lack of living, partly for crimes
committed, become fugitives, rebels, and traitors, and for whom there are in
Rome, Spain, and other places certain receptacles made to live in, and there
to be instructed in school points of sedition, and from thence to be secretly
(by stealth) conveyed into her highness countries and dominions, and with
ample authority from the Pope, to move, stir up, and persuade as many of her
highness subjects as they dare deal withal, to renounce their allegiance due
to her Majesty and her Crown, and upon hope by forreyn invasion to be
enriched and endowed with the possessions and dignities of her other good
subjects. These sorts of traitors, rebels and fugitives, do bind her highness
subjects (with whom they practice) by oaths, yea by Sacraments, Renounce
allegiance.
to forswear their natural allegiance to her Majesty, and yield obedience
with all their powers to to a forreyn Prince, and to assist forreyn forces: and
for the more forcible attraction of these unnatural people, This is treason
by. 13. El. cap. 1. Bulls.
being weak of understanding, to this they bend these seedemen of treason to
bring certain Bals from the Pope, some of indulgences, pretending to promise
heaven to such as will yield, and some of cursings, threatenings, and damnation
and hell, to such as shall not yield to their persuasion. And it is certainly
known, It is high treason to practice with any forreyners to invade this
Realm. 13. El. cap. 1.
that these heads of these dens and receptacles (which are by the traitors
called Seminaries and Colleges of Jesuits) have heretofore assured the king of
Spain, who is lately deceased, yt though heretofore he had no good success with
his great forces against this Realm, yet if now he would renew his war, there
should be found ready secretly within her highness dominions many thousands
(as they make their account for their purpose) of able people that will be
ready to assist such power as he shall set on land: and by their vaunting they
do tempt the said king hereunto, who otherwise would not peradventure hope of
any safe landing here, considering what success he had in the year of our
Lord 1588, when he made so great preparation to conquer this land: that one
named Parsons, and one Allen have showed to the said king of Spain certain
schroles or beadrolles of names of men, dwelling in sundry parts of her
Majesty's countries (as they have imagined them) but specially near the sea
coasts, with assurance that these their seedmen named Seminaries, Priests, and
Jesuits, are in sundry parts of this Realm secretly harbored, which shall be
ready to continue their reconciled people in their lewd constancy, to serve
their purposes, both in their forces, and with their traiterous enterprises,
when the Spanish power shall be ready to land. Besides this, upon their
impudent assertion to the Pope and king of Spain (though they knew a great
part thereof to be false) they had lately before this proclamation, advertised
into diverse parts of this Realm, by their secret messengers (whereof some have
been taken, and confessed the same) that the king upon their informations and
requests, promised to employ all his forces that he could make by sea, in ye
year of our Lord God 1592, to attempt once again the invasion of this Realm:
but because some of his wisest Counselors doubted yt he should not prevail,
he altered his purpose: besides many other lewd practices and treasonable
co^spiracies by ye said fugitives. But her Majesty doubts not, but Almighty
God the defender of all just causes, will (as he always hither to has) make
all their devices void, and by the help of her faithful subjects, to increase
her and their forces, and by execution of her laws and by other politic
ordinances, to impeach the aforesaid seditious practices and treasons, and does
exhort all the Ecclesiastical State, by their example of good life, and by
their diligent teaching, to retain the people steadfastly in the profession of
the Gospel, and in their duties to Almighty God and her Majesty: and also she
hops to have such sufficient forces in readiness by sea, as by Gods
goodness, and with the help of her good subjects shall be as great or greater
then her highness has had in any time heretofore, to withstand all her
enemies, and that her subjects will consider of all things requisite to
perform for horsemen, armor, and footmen, to be fully furnished as time shall
require for service, to defend their country.

And further, her Majesty does most earnestly require and charge all manner of
her subjects, with their hands, purses, and aduices, yea all persons of every
estate with their prayers to God, to move him to assist this so natural,
honorable, and profitable a service, being only for defense of their natural
country, against strangers and such wilful destroyers of their native
country, and monstrous traitors. And moreover to provide speedy remedy against
other fraudulent attempts of these Seminaries, Jesuits, and traitors, without
the which (it appears these forces should not be continually used) the same
being wrought only by falsehood, by hypocrisy, and by undermining of her good
subjects, under a false color and face of holiness to make breaches in men
and women's consciences, It is felony to receive, aid, or maintain any lesuit,
etc. 27. F. l. cap. 1.
and so to train them to their treasons, that with such a secrecy, by the
harboring of the said traitorous messengers in obscure places, as without very
diligent and continual search to be made, and severe order executed, the same
will remain and spread it self as a secret infection of treasons in the
bowels of this realm, most dangerous, yea, and most reproachful to be suffered
in any well ordered commonwealth. Hereupon, according to her said proclamation,
her Majesty directed her Commissions forth, to enquire by all good means,
what persons were by their behauiours, or otherwise, worthy to be suspected to
be any such persons as have been sent, or that are employed in any such
persuading of her Highness people, or of any residing within her realm to
treason, or to move any to relinquish their allegiance to her Majesty, or to
acknowledge any kind of obedience to the Pope, or to the King of Spain: and
also of other persous, that have thereunto yielded. And to the intent to
discover these venomous vipers, or to chase them out of this realm, for
infecting many more, her Majesty did thereby straightly charge and command all
manner of persons whatsoever without exception, that was keeper of any house,
family or lodging, and governors of any societies, to make dilligent search
immediately upon the said Proclamation made, of all manner of persons that have
been admitted or suffered to have usual resort, diet, lodging or residence in
their houses, or in any place by their appointment, within one year ended at
Michaelmas then last past, or that from thenceforth should be admitted or
suffered to resort, eat, lodge, reside or attend, to be examined of what
condition or country he is, and by what means he has lived, and where he
has spent his time one year last before, and whether he use to resort to
Church to divine service according to the law, and their answers to be put in
writing particularly, and to be kept as a register, to be showed when they
shall be required, that upon cause of suspicion the party may be tried farther
by the Commissioners, whether the same party be a loyal subject or not. And
if any shall be found unwilling to answer to such inquisition, or by his
doubtful answer not like to be an obedient subject, the same shall be stayed by
the household, or him that ought to have the examination of him, and if any
having government or commandment over any servant, that shall be found not to
have performed the points of the said inquisition, as is before limited, the
same party shall be called before the said Commissioners, or before her
Majesty's privy Council (if the quality of the person do so require) and
shall be used and ordered for such defaults, as the said Commissioners, or her
Majesty's Council shall have just cause to deal with such persons. And lastly
by the same Proclamation, did admonish, and straightly charge and command all
persons, that have had any intelligence of any such that are sent or come from
beyond the seas to such purposes, to direct them before her highness
Commissioners, mentioned in the said Proclamation, to be assigned for the
examinations of such persons, within twenty days next after publication of
the said Proclamation, in the shyre Town, City or Port, within the precinct
of the same Commission, upon pain, that the offenders therein shall be punished
as abbetters and maintainers of traitors, as by the same Proclamation amongst
other things therein mentioned does appear.

And how let me turn my speech to you, O ye unnatural and degenerated
Englishmen, Book of English fugitives.
treacherous and unfaithful to her, to whom you owe all loyalty, duty and
obedience: how can you thirst after the destruction of the country, where you
were bred, borne, and nourished? why do you under color of Religion enter into
such heinous treasons, seeking thereby the overthrow of our most gracious
Queen and Sovereign, and the subversion of so glorious a State, by seeking to
bring into this land strangers to subdue ye same; a nation, who where they do
overcome, The tyranny of the Spaniards.
show themselves most cruel and tyrannous, and do seek to fill the air with
horrible blasphemies, and whose abominable incontinencies do reach to the
heavens, asking benegeance at the hands of God. Flaunders can well witness it:
Portingall has proved, Hispaniola can witness, and the other provinces of
India can testify.

And where amongst all nations it has been accounted a most honorable thing,
for men to give their lives for their country, and to dye in the defense of
their temples, It is honorable for a man to give his life for his country.
Altars, and monuments of their elders, you seek to see your country bathed
with the blood of your parents, wives and children, kindred, and friends, to
see your Cities and temples consumed with fire, and the monuments of your
auncesters defaced, our wives, daughters, and virgins defloured and ravished
before your faces, and to bring this realm, which is famous amongst all
Christian nations of the world, to the perpetual slavery, servitude and
bondage of a foreign Prince, in whose service in the field though you have
sundry times showed your selves right valiant, yet they account you as traitors
to your Prince and country, as they well may: they regard you not, they
disdain you: and how hardly you have been dealt withal there, your own
experience tells you, which in the book of the state of English fugitives is
set down at large. I will remember some: When the Duke of Parma lay in siege
at Andenard, did not Norris, Barney, Cornish, and Gibson (whom they had chosen
to be their Captains) with a troop of six hundredth Englishmen, the tallest
and best appointed soldiers that a man might lightly see, offer their service
to the said Duke, their coming being the only cause that the said town (a
matter of great importance, and on the land side as it were the key of the
province of Flaunders) was so soon delivered unto him as it was: for whereas
the Duke of Aniow and the Prince of Orange lay under the walls of Gaunt with
sufficient force and deliberate resolution to succor the said town of
Andenard (upon this mutiny of the English) they marched away with their whole
army, leaving the enemy battering the said town, which seeing it self
frustrated of the expected succors, presently rendered it self unto ye Duke of
Parma: thence they were drawn to Winoch Bargen, to serve against ye French and
English, which lay there encamped, where they behaved themselves with such
desperate resolution that day, that Monsieur de Balaunson brother to the
Marquis of Waranbone was taken prisoner, that besides the loss of many of
their lives, they were in this action a wonder to the whole army. But could the
pride of the Spaniard endure to hear these your praises, nay did not they
envy and greatly disdain it, They disdain you.
saying: That you had served rather like gyddy headed drunkards then men wise
and valiant. For a further proof of valor, shortly after upon the remove of
the Duke of Alansons army toward Gaunt, the rest of them were likewise brought
thither, where also they gave exceeding testimony of their valor and courage,
namely the very day that Sir John Norris made that famous retraite before
Gaunt, who when the Frenchmen fled with a disordered amazement, did with a
present courage and excellent direction, maintain the place with such
regiments of Englishmen, as were under his charge, and withstanding the Duke of
Parma with all his puissance, who furiously charged him, nevertheless withdrew
his men, still holding their pikes in the bosoms of their enemies under the
walls of Gaunt, not without exceeding damage to the enemy, besides diverse
other great services done to ye said king in the field. But how were they
recompensed for the same? were not a great number of them suffered to perish in
manner for hunger, and could neither get meat, nor their pay, to provide for
their need: whereupon some of them were constrained by foraging in the country
to relieve their hunger, and were not four and twenty of them taken by the
Spanish Provost, and carried to Andenard, of the rendering whereof they had been
the chiefest mean, and there openly hanged in the market place? And was not
another troop of them being thirty in number in a village near Papering in
Flaunders, by a company of the Spaniards, after a friendly and souldierlike
salutation of each side, Englishmen murdered most shamefully.
as they were all making merry together, on a sudden taken at advantage, and
unarmed, and most treacherously, cowardly, and inhumanely murdered every one?
whereof, though sundry complaints were made to the Duke by their friends that
were thus murdered, and by their Captains, yet Spaniards being the doers
thereof, there could be no remedy nor justice obtained. But to make them
amends, because they would be the cleanlier rid of the residue of this miserable
troop, the Camp being then before Winoch Bargen, wherein lay a migty strong
garrison of Frenchmen, they made them two Forts of purpose, in which they
willingly placed the English in the uttermost part of the whole Camp, and
nearest confining to the town, to the end they might have all their throats
cut (as indeed they had in very few nights after) at which time the enemy
assaulting the^ with great fury, and they defending themselves most manfully,
above the space of one hour, in such sort as the Alarm passed through the
whole Camp* yet they were not relieved with any succor at all, insomuch as
the greatest part of the^ being slain, the enemy at last entered, and put the
residue to the sword. To rehearse the sundry and several calamities that these
poor men, as well Captains as soldiers endured, during the time of their
unfortunate service, especially at Gansbecke, Ask and Gauer, would seem for
the unspeakable strangeness thereof, scarcely credible, for they never
received in all the time of their service one months pay, their Lieutenants
and their Ensigns have been seen to go up and down sickely and famished,
begging their bread, covered only with poor blankets and tickes of
featherbeds, that they had rifled in the villages abroad. And for a further
proof of the cruelty of the Spaniards against the English nation, whenever
the fortune of wars has delivered any of us into their hands, it is strange
to think with what greedy and insatiable thirst, they have desired to shed
the English blood. And for examples, at Resendale, where sundry English
regiments being by the Marshal Byron abandoned and betrayed, were by them
defeated and overthrown as is scarcely credible, what barbarous cruelty they
used upon men rendered and demanding mercy upon their knees. But admit all
cruelty tolerable during the surie of an execution (though amongst Christians,
and men of noble and valorous minds, there is yet a moderation to be used) what
bloody inhumanitie was ever heard the like to that which they used the next
day: for whereas the Italians and Burgonians (moved with a soldier like
compassion) had taken many English prisoners, A horrible murder of the English
men by Spaniards after they were yielded.
and saved the^ from the former slaughter, upon the next morning march, as they
brought the^ forth, thinking to lead the^ quietly to their quarter, did not
the Spaniards with a hellish fury, crying matta, matta, kill, kill, draw their
rapiers, and murthred with many wounds these poor naked men, not suffering a
man of the^ to escape alive? Likewise in that treacherous and Sinonicall
practice of Graueling, wherein they thought to have entrapped noble Sir Philip
Sidney, how cruelly and tyra^nously did they use these poor men of ours, that
were sent before to discover it, who^ after they had received into their gates
with friendly salutations, Murder of men by the Spaniards after they had
received the^ kindly.
and being entertained a good space in the town, in the end, when they did see
yt the success of their enterprise answered not their bloody, treacherous and
vnma^ly expectation, did they not disarme and unclothe the^ in the market
place, and finally, like cruel butchers, and not like honorable soldiers,
murdered the^ enery one? They will not trust you (neither is there any reason
they should) for upon their arrival in the Spanish camp they were divided
into seven companies, They trust you not.
the one of which was given to the Earl of Westmerland, who upon their humble
request and suit, was made Coronell and Commander of them all, and yet they
would not trust him, but appointed one Contraras a Spaniard to be joined with
him, as his assistant, or rather as a Master or Commander both over him and
the regiment to ouersee. They scorn and hate you: for a great company of them
standing together, seeing certain Englishmen pass by, one of them said, that
he wondered what the King made with any such vermin in his country. Another
of them swear a great oath, that look how many Englishmen there were in the
kings service, there were so many spies and traitors. The third said, it was an
alms deed to put them all in sackes, and throw them into the river. And the
fourth said, it would be a better course to send them to the kings galleys,
where in regard of their big ioints and broad shoulders they could not but
prove good to tug at an oar. A great man in that country swear by a great
oath, that he knew not any one of the English in regard of his ability, fit to
do ye king service worth the straw that lay under his foot. Another great man
of that country said, that he did not know what service the English had done,
or were able to do, unless it were to spend the kings money in tauernes and
brothell houses.

They sought to disgrace you: for whereas some of the English Captains had
made of their own charges new and fair Ensigns, those Ensigns were by a
Spanish Commissarie called Spinosa (who came with order to dissolve the
regiment) taken violently from those that bare them, in presence of the Earl
of Westmerland, who was Coronell of the regiment: and for a greater disgrace
both to him and the rest, though both he, Captain Tresham, and the other
Captains complained to the Duke for redress, yet they could not obtain any:
the Spaniard after wards made his brags, that he turned the English Ensigns
into Spanish field beds.

They count you but traitors for conspiring the overthrow of your Prince and
country, and so they may well do, and so they do all such as contrary to the
trust in the^ reposed did yield the Castles, Cities and fortresses, which they
have committed to them to keep to the use of her Majesty: of which sort Pygot
is one, who having committed to his charge by that worthy Knight now deceased
str John Norris, the keeping of Alofte, and being Comma^der of the rest of the
companies there, most traitorously rendered the town, himself and the whole
regiment (being well near a thousand, as tall and well appointed men as were
in any part of all Europe) to the service of the king of Spain for 30000
French crowns: which service, how beneficial and meritorious it was to the
Spaniard, such as know the country can testify sufficiently: for by yielding
of the said town, they were the occasion that they got Dermounde, the Sasse,
the fort of Leyskins, Hook, S. Anthonies, and S. Margaret, the Door, the best
part of the land of wast, and in manner Gaunt it self, as the sequel very
appara^tly shows: notwithstanding all which service, were they not within two
years space with hunger, the gallows and other rigorous dealings quite
consumed, and brought to nothing, as is aforesaid. They counted for the like
Sir William Stanley and Rowland York, the one rendered unto the king the town
of Deuenter, the other betraying to him the fort of Sutteuen.

As ye have heard the end of the said revolted regiment to the king of Spain,
so you shall hear the end of your Captains and guides, which is set down here
to the end you may perceive, that such and so great calamities as those, could
never have happened to them without the apparent hand of God, whose reuengefull
justice never ceased to pursue the infidelity of those miserable men, until
he had taken them from the face of earth: first Norris chief Captain and
ringleader of the rest, after he had considered of the foulness of his fact,
and withal did see the scorn and contempt wherein he lived under the
Spaniard, it wrought such an impression in his heart, that he fell into a kind
of lunacy, being in prison in Flushing, and in the end ended there his life
with his own hand: Gibson rising out of his bed suddenly (being in manner
naked) was by a Spanish horseman presently thrust through the body and so died,
whose wife sued to the Duke of Parma for justice, but the English blood was
there of such vile price being shed by a Spaniard, that the matter was thought
not worthy to be inquired of. Cornish was in one of the said little forts at
such time as it was surprised by the Frenchmen, where both himself, his
Lieutenant, his Ensign and whole company were miserably slain and mangled.

Barners was shot through the right arm by a man unknown, with a small shot,
in such sort that he has utterly lost the use thereof, and after lived in
great misery and poverty: such (after these men's services) was their fortune,
and such is the end of all treacherous and evil affected Englishmen to their
Prince and country.

Pygot died suddenly in the Marshalsey at London, being sent thither as
prisoner from Ostend. Daulcon became a Pyrate, and was hanged in the North
country: Captain Tailor was slain by the Earl of Westmerland in the Spanish
Camp: Captain Vincent was hanged, Chenie at Bargenopsome, Captain Welsh was
slain under the walls of Roane, York, and Williams were executed at Tyburne.
Thus you have heard what it is to live under, and serve a forreyne Prince. They
trust you not, for how can a strange Prince in reason persuade himself, that
such as are traitors, and in their actions monsters against their country,
will be faithful to him, but will always carry a jealous opinion over you:
that he will never credit you with any service of importance, but when he will
appoint greater persons to ouerlooke you. He which seeks to conquer another
country will use all ways and devises to attain his purpose. Hiena. Eccles.
cap. 13. Plin. histor. nature. lib. 8. cap. 30. Crocodiles.
The beast Hiena (as is mentioned in Ecclesiastes) counterfeits the voice of a
man, and so entiseth him out of his house with fair persuasions, and then
destroys him. The Crocodiles nature is, when he would devour a man, to
weep, as thongh he were loving an kind, when he would draw him on to kill him.
Who will not (that has his senses) rather endure any hard fortune under his
own natural Prince, who will not rather loose his life by the hand of the
enemy, in defense of his native country, then hazard it in the service of any
forreyne Prince against the same? You should rather say, as Eneas the noble
Trojan, when the Greeks had won Troy, afterward traveling through the raging
seas to seek the land of Italy, falling into a dangerous tempest, and seeing
no hope of life, held up his hands. and used these words: O ter quaterque
beati, Virgill. Aeneid.

Queis ante ora patrum Troiae sub maenibus altis
Contigit oppetere, o Danaum fortissime gentis
Titide, mean Iliacis occumbere campis
Non potuisse, tuaque animam hanc effundere dextra?
Saeuus vbi Aeacidae telo iacet Hector, vbi ingens
Sarpedon, vbi tot Simois correpta sub vndis
Scuta virum, galeasque and fortia corpora voluit.


Remember your selves yet at the last, and apply your minds to the faithful
service of your Prince and country: he runs far (as the saying is) that
never turns again: seek by faithful assurance of your loyalties hereafter
to her Majesty, for her gracious pardon yt ye may henceforth live like
dutiful subjects ready to defend your Prince and country against the enemy,
following therein the steps of your faithful, valiant, and courageous
forefathers, whose fame by this your disloyalty you seek to blemish and
deface, rather then to live under any forreyne Prince, that would surprise the
City and bring it in thraldom.

And now to return to the proclamation last before mentioned. Were ever such
practices as be mentioned in the same, wrought against any Christian Prince, by
any man of the Church that challenges to be Peter's successor, Corinth. 14.
as the Pope does? Saint Paul says that God is not the God of dissension but
of peace: Lord God, what answer shall he make in the later day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be opened, that ought to maintain peace, The Pope
stirs the subjects to rebel against their Prince.
thus to sow discord among Christian Princes, and to move their subjects to
oppose against them surely his own conscience shall testify against him,
which will be as strong as a thousand witnesses, as Persius very well says.

Poena autem vehemens ac multo seuerior illis, Satyr. 3.

Quas and Ceditius grauis inuenit and Rodamanthus,
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem.
And again, Conscientia mill testes, and onus Aetna grauius. Can he find by
the word of God, No subject can rebel for any cause. Romans 13.
that it is lawful for the subject to rebel against his Prince for any cause
whatsoever? Saint Paul says, Let every soul submit himself to the higher
powers: there is no power but of God, all powers that are, be ordained of God*
and whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and
procures to himself damnation. When Pilate said to Christ: John. 18.
Know thou not, yt I have power to loose thee, and also to crucify thee? he
said; thou should have no power at all over me, were it not given thee from
above: our Savior Christ was called before the high Priests to answer to his
doctrine, did he oppose himself any way against them? no, he knew they had
their authority from God, and therefore he showed all obedience to them in
respect of their place, and patiently suffered death (though unjustly)
according to their wicked law and judgments.

When Malcus with other of the high Priests servants, came by their
commandment to take Christ, John. 18.
Peter drew out his sword, and cut off Malcus ear: and Christ said unto him,
Put up thy sword into thy sheath, Math. 25.
for all yt strike with the sword shall perish therewith: think thou that I
cannot speak to my Father, and he shall give me more then twenty legions of
Angels? but how should then the Scripture be performed?

The famous clarke Erasmus in his Paraphrase upon this place of Scripture,
Paraphrase.
speaks these words unto Peter, as it were in the person of Christ. Put up
thy sword into thy sheath: matters of the Gospel are not in such manner to be
defended, if thou will succeed me as my vicar, thou must fight with no other
sword then of Gods word, which cutteth away sin, and saves the man. And the
ancient father Tertullian in his Apologia cap. 37 says, In our profession
more meeter it is to be slain then to slay. So did all the Martyrs of God, by
whom the Church of Christ increased. Saint Augustine says: Not resistendo sed
perferendo: Not by resisting, but by suffering, If the Prince should set forth
a law touching the worshipping of God, or matter of conscience against the word
of God, and lymit a pain to the breakers thereof, Acts. 4.
though the subject be not bound in conscience to observe that law (for in such
cases a man must rather obey God then man) yet he may not rebel nor oppose
himself violently against his Prince, but he must rather refer his cause to
God, and submit himself to ye punishments of the law, Peter. 2.
as Saint Peter says: Submit your self to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether it be to the king, as to the chief, or to them that be
sent of him: then it follows, he may not rebel, whatsoever the ordinance be.

The Jews had a law, that whosoever should say, he was the Son of God,
should die: Christ that was the soonne of God in deed, Look John. 19. verse.
7.
and so declared himself to the people to be, yet he did submit himself to
the pain of the law, thoughit be ungodly.

The manner how to suppress rebels, with a persuasion to all subjects to the
due of obedience of their Prince: the great inconveniences that arise of civil
wars. How hateful the name of a traitor is to the posterity; and what
plagues have fallen not only upon traitors, but also upon such as have been
murmurers against their Princes and Governors. CHAP. 8.
WHen the Princes of Germany determined to take arms against ye emperor for ye
defense of their religion, Bodinus 211
they asked Luther if it were lawful so to do: who answered expressly, that it
was not, Sleildan. 4.
and would not persuade them thereunto, saying, that no cause could be just,
for the subject to bear arms against his Prince and country.

And because it is convenient that rebellious and disordered people should be
dealt withal with convenient speed, Bodinus. lib. 4. fol. 487.
let us hear what Bodinus writes concerning the manner how. Si tamen seditio
prius coorta fuerit quam prospiceretur, sapientissimos ac summa virtute
praestantes viros, qui populi motus orationis lenitate ac prude^tia regere
possunt, adhibere oportebit: nam qui vi^ adhibent, perinde faciunt vt ij qui
torrentem praecipiti casu de rupibus altissimis labentem sistere se posse
confidunt. How rebels must be suppressed.
If seditious persons and rebels be assembled together before it be foreseen,
the wisest men, and such as for their great virtue excel, and can move the
people with their gentle and wise persuasions, are most meetest to be used; for
such (as at the first) use force, do as they which think to stay a great water
falling headlong from the high rocks. If wild beasts cannot be tamed with
strokes, but by gentle and skillful using of them, who can think with sharp
and rough words to tame such, as of all beasts are most fierce? The Senate of
Rome did very often reprehend such as used force to appease the fury of the
people, and rather commended Menenius Agrippa, which not with bitterness, but
rather with gentleness and cunning used to reduce the people to their
obedience and duty, which above all other bred to him immortal praise, and
glory to the common wealth. And to that effect the Poet Virgill writes thus:
Ac veluti magno in populo cum sepe coorta est
Seditio, Aeneid. lib. 1.
saeuitque animis ignobile vulgus,
Iamque faces and saxa volant, furor arma ministrat,
Tum pietate grauem ac meritis si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus astant,
Ille regit dictis animos, and pectora mulcet.


When sedition is raised amongst the common people, in their rage firebrands
and stones fly (for fury does minister weapons) then if they see by chance
any grave man, to be reverenced for his vertee and good deserts, they are
silent, and hearken to him diligently, and he asswageth with his mildness and
wise speeches their minds and rages. Pericles.
So did Pericles the Athenian, Peter Loredan the Venetian and others, whereby
it appears, that virtue and wisdom does sometime mors prevail in these
cases, then either laws, arms, or the commandment of rulers.

And to restrain such rebellious people, and reduce them to due obedience, the
fear and reverence of Religion, has been in times past of great force: Lib.
4. fol. 480
for as Bodinus writes, when civil wars were raised amongst the
Florentines, and great slaughter and bloodshed happened amongst them in the
City, and no force of man could restrain the same, Frauncis Soderinus the
Bishop, having on his pontifical ornaments, and a company of Priests
attending on him, and the Cross borne before him, entered into the midst of
the Citizens thus assembled: whereupon they forthwith for the fear they had of
religion, did put off their armor: so did Judas Bishop of the Hebrews, High
Priest.
(when Alexander the great came to the city of Jerusalem with a great host)
being apparelled in his holy vestiments, met him, which sight, and the
brightness whereof being feared, Alexander did reverence the Bishop, and did
not spoil the country nor holy City, but with great benefits did enlarge
the same. By like means Vrbane the Pope is said to have turned and removed
away the siege of Attila from the city of Aquila, 5. Joseph. in anti.
as Josephus writes: but when none of these will serve, then the extermitie of
arms must be used. And because good persuasions and mild speeches are thought
so convenient to be used to appease such vprores, I have thought good to set
down this simple exhortation, which follows.

After that Almighty God had destroyed the world for the finne of man,
Exhortation to rebels.
saving Noah and his family (who were preserved in the Arc by Gods providence)
and that nations and people did again increase and multiply upon the face of
the earth, knowing in his everlasting wisdom, how necessary, good, and
wholesome laws should be for the government and direction of his people, he
gave the laws of the ten commandments in the mount Sinay, wherein is
contained first, our duty to almighty God, and next to our neighbor: then he
also ordained Kings, Princes, and Governors, to rule and order their subjects,
and to punish the offenders thereof by these laws, and gave them power to make
laws, as Solomon says: Prou. 8.
By me kings reign, through me Princes make good laws. And lastly, he gave
straight commandment to the subjects touching their obedience to their
Sovereign Lords and rulers, Romans 13.
as Saint Paul says, Let every soul submit himself to the higher Powers:
there is no power but of God, all powers that be, are ordained of God:
whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and
they that resist, procure to themselves damnation: for rulers are not fearful
to them that do well, but to them that do evil. Will thou be without fear of
the power? do well then, and so thou shall be praised of him: for he is the
minister of God ordained for thy wealth. But if thou do evil, then fear, for
he bears not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God to take
vengeance of them that do evil. Wherefore we must obey, not only for fear of
vengeance, but for conscience sake also, for that cause we pay tribute, for
they are Gods ministers serving for that purpose.

Now what evil counsel has moved you thus to enter into arms against your
natural Prince and Liege Lady, whom Almighty God has ordained to supply his
place, and to reign over you? Who has be witched you, thus to abuse the great
love and favor of so gracious a Queen, which she has borne always, and does
daily show to her good subjects, to oppose against her, that is studious to set
forth the Gospel, that is, and has been so careful to maintain such common
peace amongst us these forty years and more, Though this be touched before,
yet it is not unmeet to be used here to these men
as the like has not bin seen nor heard of, neither is to be found in any
record or Chronicle of this realm sithence the conquest thereof (which is above
528 years) for the like time of government, that is desirous to reign with
mercy, with love, with pity and tender compassion, and not by tyranny, nor
by effusion of blood, neither always by inflicting the extremity of her laws
upon such as most justly have deserved the execution of the same: that is
merciful to offenders, bountiful to well deseruers of her Majesty and their
conntrey: that to her great charge has fortified this realm with strong
Castles, and a Navy of warlike ships and all other things necessary for the
wars in great abundance, for the defense of her kingdom and people: that
has not laid upon us any taxes or tallages, but the like thereof has been
before her time, and greater also: that has made good laws, and taken a
solemn oath in the day of her coronation to endeavor her self that the same
shall be holden, kept, and executed unto all her subjects indifferently,
without respect of persons: and is also well pleased to be ordered by the same
her self.

If you consider the horrible murders of great persons, the pitiful slaughter
of man, woman and child, by fire and sword, the lamentable rauishments of
maids, wives and widows, the ransacking and spoiling of Cities and towns,
with many other miseries and calamities, which have happened, and continued in
other countries, not far hence these many years by occasion of civil wars
and dissension, you shall find, that we have cause to think our selves most
bound of all nations, to the goodness of God, in that he has not suffered us
to be afflicted and visited with the like: all which have been prevented, by
the great wisdom and providence of her Majesty and her grave Council. These
besides other infinite great kindness and benefits, her highness has daily
most graciously bestowed upon us, that more nor greater no Prince can extend to
her people, and shall we now be unthankful for the same? shall we yield
unkindness for kindness? shall we recompense her daily care and study to do
us good, by seeking danger to her person, and peril to her state, which may
ensue by your forcible and violent opposing against her? There is nothing worse
bestowed, then that is done to the ungrateful and forgetful man, as Erasmus
writes. Nihil peius confertur quam quod hemini ingrato atque non scienti.

A man that receives a good turn (if there be any good nature in him) will
always be thankful, and so much the more, when he is not able to deserve or
requite the least part thereof: king David that received many good things at
the hands of God, showed not himself unthankful, but breaking out as it were
on a sudden, said unto himself. Quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae
retribuit mihi? calicem salutaris accipiam and nomen Domini inuocabo. Psalm.
116. 107.
What shall I yield unto God for all that he has done unto me? I will take the
cup of thanksgiving, and and call upon the name of the Lord.

It is all that Almighty God does look for at our hands, that we should be
thankful unto him for all his mercies and loving kindness that he does daily
bestow upon us, as Almighty God says by his Prophet: He that gives me praise
and thanks, the same is he that honoreth me. And all that her Majesty looks
for at our hands, is to be true, faithful and thankful to her. Is there any
thing that does more open the gate to foreign invasion, then civil wars and
dissension? the Gospel says, Every kingdom in it self divided, shall be
desolate. Did not William Duke of Normandy, when civil wars and division was
in the realm, co^quere the same? and likewise in Henry the third his days
(when the great wars were betwixt him and his Barons) did not Philip the
French king, send hither Jews his son with a great number of men of war,
and got sundry Cities, Castles, Towns, and holds, thinking to have made a
conquest of this land, and so had done, if the said Barons (who conspired with
the said Jews) had not revolted from the French, and driven them out of this
country: besides diverse other like examples to be found in our English
Chronicles. If there be any thing meet to be redressed, do you think by this
means (though your number were far greater) to have your wills, or to be
relieved? No, no, assure your selves, the nobility and thousands of thousands,
of the good and dutiful subjects of this realm, will join together (as they
ought) to destroy you, and you shall be slain as thick as motes are in the
sun, before you shall obtain your purpose: for it stands not with the
honor and name of a Prince to be forced by the subject to do any thing against
his will: and such of you as shall escape the sword, shall be sure to be executed
by course of law, that is, you shall be drawn upon hurdles to the places of
execution, and there hanged until you be half dead, and then cut down alive,
your priuities shall be cut off, your bowels taken out of your bellyes and being
alive, they shall be burned before your faces: then shall your heads be smitten
off, and your bodies divided into four quarters (and as the use is) shall be set
upon stakes in the towers and highest places in good Cities and towns, where
it shall please the Prince to appoint. Thus shall your carcases be meat for
the fowls of the air, and a spectacle joyful to your enemies, and woeful to
your parents, kinsfolks and friends to behold: besides you shall leave to your
posterities name of perpetual shame ignominy and reproach, that is the names of
rebels and false traitors, yea rather monsters to your Prince and country: you
shall also undo your wife and children, in that you shall forfet to the Prince
all your lands, leases, goods and chattels, besides your blud shall be corrupted,
so as none of your offspring shall be able to have or claim by you any lands, as
heirs to your fathers, mothers, or other auncesters. And this forfaiture and
corruption of blood shall be as well where you shall be slain in field, as
condemned by course of law. Where have you ever heard or read, that rebels
(whether they have been of nobility or others) did ever prevail, but have bin
always overthrown and brought to confusion, whatsoever their pretenses have
been? And amongst many examples I will put you in mind of a tew: Rebellion in
Lincolnshyre. Hol. 1567.
when as the Lincolnshyre men to the number of 40000. rebelled about the 28.
year of Henry the eight for religion, was not Doctor Makerell and others of
the ring leaders, of that unruly company executed, in such manner, as is above
remembered, Abridgeme^t of Grafton. 140. West country. Rebels in Norfolk, as
Ket and others. Hol. 1734. Wiats rebellion.
and many of the rest of them slain in the field, and so subdued? Was not Sir
Humfrey Arundale, Winslade, Holins, Bury and diverse others of the chief of
the rebellion in the West parts of this realm, raised in Edward the sixth his
days, executed also as traitors? Did it not likewise happen so to Ket and many
others of the rebels in Norfolk in the same kings days, which sought to have
laid Parkes and Commons enclosed open? Was not Wiat, Isley and diverse Knights,
Esquiers and Gentlemen of Kent, who rebelled in the first year of Queen
Marie, and opposed themselves against the Prince in arms, to stay the
alteration of religion and her marriage with the king of Spain, executed for
the same rebellion? and were not above fifty of the common sort of these rebels
hanged up in London in diverse places there? Holin. 1732.
And were not sundry other Esquires and Gentlemen condemned, and should have
been executed for that commotion, had not Queen Marie given them pardon? Were
not the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, and about fifty knights,
Esquiers, and Gentlemen attainted for the insurrection of the North parts of
this realm, Insurrection in the North
in the eleventh year of the Queens Majesty's reign? And was not the said
Earl of Northumberland beheaded at York? And did not many others of the said
Esquires and Gentlemen suffer for that offense in other places? Holin. 1840.
And did not the said Earl of Westmerland, and diverse other of the said
attainted persons, fly over the seas to save their lives, which other wise had
tasted of that sauce? And were not diverse of the common sort executed by
martial law for the same rebellion? The matter is yet fresh in memory, so
that it needs no proof of the end of rebels, and such as bear traitorous
hearts against their Prince. We have diverse examples also out of the holy
Scriptures, and among other a notable example of Absolon, who conspired the
death of his father king David, who rebelling against him (riding under a tree)
was by Gods providence hanged up on a bough thereof by the long hair of his
head. Ignatius. Epist. 2.
Of whom Ignatius the ancient father writes, Absolon parricida existens Dei
iudicio arbori appensus, cor eius quod male cogitabat, sagitta tansfixum est.
And so you may see the vengeance of God on the heart which conceived the
treason, and on the body that executed the same. Achitophel likewise, the
mischievous Counselor to Absolon in that wicked rebellion, for lack of an
hangman, hanged himself; a worthy end of all false rebels, who rather then
they should lack due execution, will by Gods just judgment become hangmen unto
themselves Thus it happened to ye Captains of this rebellion, 2. Reg. 187.
besides forty thousand of the common sort, which were slain in the field for
that rebellion. And as ye holy Scriptures do show, so does daily experience
prove, that the counsels, co^spiracies and atte^pts of rebels never took
effect, but came ever to a most horrible end. Now concerning such as have bin
murmurers against their rulers, you shall see what has happened to the^: some
have been stricke^ with foul leprosy, some burnt with fire suddenly from
heaven, sometime they were consumed with the pestilence, sometime were stung to
death with strange kinds of fiery serpents, and sometime the earth has opened
and swallowed the^ up quick, the Captains and bands of such murmurers, with
their wives, children and families. Then if such strange and horrible plagues
have happened to such subjects as did but only murmr and speak evil against
their heads, what shall become of such subjects as conspire, arm themselves,
assemble great numbers of men in arms, and encourage and lead the^ against
their Prince and country, spoiling, robbing and slaying as many of their good
subjects as do withstand them, and against whom they may prevail. We are
forbidden by the holy Scripture, Eccle. 10.
so much as to think evil to the Prince, for the birds of the air shall
betray thee, and with their wings shall bewray they voice. If we may not think
evil, much less may we do any thing that shall or may tend to her danger, as
rebellions do always imply peril to her person and state. Sam 24.
King Saul was a wicked Prince, and sought the life of David the servant of
God diverse ways, and yet David would not hurt him, no, when he might have
slain him in his cave, but said, The Lord keep me, that I lay not my hands
upon the Lords anointed. 2. Tim. 2.
S. Paul says, I exhort that above all things prayers and supplications, and
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made of all men, for kings, and all that
are in authority, that we may live a quiet life with all godliness, for that
is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. So did the people of
God, Apol. cap. 30.
which lived under Pagans and tyrants, as Tertullian witnesses. If the Princes
be good, they are a great blessing of God bestowed on the people: if they be
ungodly and tyrants, then they are appointed for their punishment: yet must
they pray for them whatsoever they be: for when S. Paul taught to pray for
rulers, then Caligula, Clodius and Nero (who were no Christians, but Pagans and
most cruel tyrants) were governors and rulers of the people. When
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, after he had slain their kings, nobles, wives
and children, and the people of God and wasted their country, spoiled their
cities, yea and Jerusalem it self, and the holy temple, and carried the residue
with him captive to Babylon, Baruc. 1. 11.
yet Baruc the Prophet of God, exhorted the people being in captivity, saying:
Pray you to God for the life of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and of
Balthaser his son, that their days may be as the days of heaven upon the
earth, that God also may give us strength, and lighte^ our eyes, that we may
live under the defense of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and under the
protection of Balthaser his son, that we may long do them service, and find
favor in their sight. If they then prayed for tyrants and ungodly kings, how
much more ought we to pray to God for the life, preservation, and prosperons
estate of so gracious a Queen and sovereign Governor as we have? What shall
I say of you? shall I call you subjects, that assemble your selves in this
forcible manner, and break the common peace of the realm, and in steed of
quietness, joy and felicity (which do follow of blessed peace and due
obedience) do bring all trouble, sorrow, disquietnesse of mind and body, and
all mischiefs and calamities, and turn all good order vpside down, bring all
good laws in contempt, and tread them under foot, oppress all virtue and
honesty, and all virtuous and honest persons, and set all vice and
wickedness, and all vicious and evil men at liberty, to work their ungodly
wills and ungracious purposes, which were before bridled with wholesome laws:
and do weaken, overthrow, and consume the strength of the realm, as well by
wasting and spending the treasure thereof, as by slaying the good subjects of
the same, and make our country ready, as it were, to be a pray and spoil to
all outward enemies, and to bring us, our wives, children and posterities to
perpetual captivity, slavery, and bondage: that strangers may possess our
lands, goods, and livings, to our utter undoing and destruction? Though God do
often prosper just and lawful enemies, which be no subjects, against foreign
enemies: and though a small number (upon wars begun upon just causes) has many
times prospered against huge numbers of their adversaries, that have offered
them wrong and injury, yet never did rebel prosper against their Prince, Note.
how noble or great soever their Captain or number of people have been: and
whether their pretense of rebelling have been for reformation of religion, or
for any other cause whatsoever, yet they have bin always overthrown by the
just judgment of God: and so Sir Thomas Wyat, upon his arraignme^t for the
said rebellion of Kent, Hol. 1. ma.
affirmed openly, lamenting heartily his brutish and beastly fall (as he
rightly termed it) into ye horrible offense of the law, requiring all the
audience there present, to remember his speeches, and to be taught by his
infelicitie and most wretched case, as in the Chronicle does appear. If you be
grieved with any thing which is to be reformed, exhibit your supplication to
her Majesty's Lieutenant here present, and make your humble submission,
confessing your great offenses, and craving together on your knees her most
gracious pardon, with faithful promise, that (by Gods grace) you will not
enter into the like horrible offense hereafter. against her highness and her
laws, and so ye may the rather obtain the same, which her said Lieutenant
has authority under her great seal of England to grant to such of you, as
shall do as is before remembered: and herein you shall do as was used in king
Edward the sixth his time, Holinsh.
by some which then opposed themselves against the said king, as you do now
against her Majesty, who upon their like submission, had their pardon, and by
order from the king also present redress of their griefs. If ought be to be
remedied, it belongs not to the subject to perform it: for if ye Prince
should make a law never so hard against ye subject, and impose a great
punishment to the breakers thereof, yet the subject may not presume to attempt
to remedy the same, but must submit himself to the punishment of the law: as
Saint Perer says, Peter.
submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the king, as to the head, or to ye rulers, as to them sent of him for the
punishment of evil doers; but for the cherishing of such as do well, for so is
the will of God.

If you will not take this course, but stand to the uttermost, assure your
selves, that you shall be consumed with the sword, and such as escape that
death, shall suffer the execution due by law to traitors, in such terrible
manner as is above remembered.

To conclude, if neither the fear of God, your duty to your Prince, the
preservation of her person, the safety of your country, nor the safeguard of
your own lives, if the forfeiture of your lands and goods, if the utter
undoing of your wives and children, the corruption of your blood, the terror of
your execution, the shame and ignominy of the world to be left to your
posterity, the sorrow of your parents, the grief of your friends, and
reioyring of your enemies, to see you come to this miserable and lamentable
end, will not move you to desist from this your outrageous dealing, and to
submit your selves, as is aforesaid, yet at least remember your souls health,
and the saying of Saint Paul, which I put you in mind of in the beginning,
that such as rebel against their Prince, shall procure to themselves
damnation, whereof if you will have no regard, then of all people you are the
most miserable, and it had been better you had never been borne, then to be
condemned to hell fire, where there is no redemption, and where you shall be
tormented world without end, with Lucifer the first rebel against God, and
father of all rebels, and with his angels, where is weeping, wayling, and
gnashing of teeth, and perpetual horror amongst the damned spirits for
evermore, from which Almighty God for his mercy deliver us.

A repetition of certain Statutes, whereby it is high treason as well for any
man to withdraw her Majesty's subjects from their loyalty, as also to be so
withdrawn. CHAP. 9.
IT is not unknown unto you, how that the Bishop of Rome by certain Jesuits
practiced, as you have heard, by the said proclamation to deal with her
Majesty's subjects, to renounce their obedience unto her highness, which no
man can do, No man can renounce his natural allegiance.
because it is due to her Majesty by the law of God, and by the law of nature,
of all which are borne under her obeissance, and that which nature has given
no man can take away, as the saying is: Quod natura dedit, nemo est qui tollere
possit.


And in proof thereof, Dyer. 300.
I find that Doctor Story an Englishman borne, fled into Brabant, and there
took his oath of allegiance to be subject to Philip king of Spain, and after
being brought into England, he was arraigned for practicing beyond the sea with
the king of Spain his deputy there, in forcible and warlike manner to invade
this Realm of England, Doctor Stories arraignment.
and in this practicing did show how and where the best place was to make this
invasion. And if he would so do, there should be diverse ready to aid him, he
confessed that he was an Englishman borne at Salisbury, but said he was the
said king of Spain his subject, and therefore refused to answer to that
indictment, saying also, that he was no subject to the Queens Majesty, and yt
he had bin subject to the king of Spain this seven years, and thereupon
prayed that his plee might be entered, and because he would give no other
answer, he had judgment as a traitor, Stories execution. 13. Elizabeth.
yt is to be hanged drawn, and quartered, and so he was executed in the
thirteenth year of her Majesty's reign. Therefore this devise of the Pope and
his practice to withdraw her Majesty's subjects from their loyalty, is but as
it were a trap laid, to bring such to destruction as shall be so withdrawn,
and it is treason by a Statute made in the three and twentieth year of her
Majesty's reign, as well in the practiser to withdraw, as in the person which
is withdrawn, as by that statute appears, the words whereof be these.

Be it declared and enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, 23.
El. cap. 1. Treason to withdraw any from their natural obedience.
that all persons whatsoever, which have or shall have, or pretend to have
power, or shall by any ways or means put in practice to absolve, persuade, or
withdraw any of the Queens Majesty's subjects, or any within her highness
Realms and dominions, from their natural obedience to her Majesty, or to
withdraw them for that intent from the religion now by her Highness authority
established, within her highness dominions, to the Romish religion, or to move
them, or any of them, to promise any obedience to any pretended authority of
the Sea of Rome, or of any other Prince, State, or Potentate, to be had and
used within her dominions, or shall do any ouert act, to that intent or
purpose, every of them shall be to all intents adjudged traitors, and being
thereof lawfully convicted, shall have judgment, suffer, and forfeit, as in
case of high treason. And if any person shall after the end of that Session of
Parliament, by any means be willingly absolved or withdrawn as before is said,
or willingly be reconciled, or shall promise any obedience to any such
pretended authority, Prince, State, or Potentate, as is before said, that then
every such person, their procurers and counselors thereunto, being thereof
lawfully convicted, shall be taken, tried, and judged, and shall suffer and
forfeit as in cases of high treason. And be it likewise enacted and declared,
that all and every person and persons, that shall willingly be ayders or
maintainers of such persons so offending, as is above expressed, or of any of
them (knowing the same) or which shall conceal any offense aforesaid, and
shall not within twenty days at the furdest, after such persons knowledge of
such offense, disclose the same to some Justice of peace, or other higher
officer, he shall be taken, tried, and judged, and shall suffer and forfeit, as
offenders in misprison of treason.

And because by the said proclamation published in the said three and thirtith
year, it appears that the Pope has authorized Jesuits and Seminaries (named
in the said proclamation) by color of Bulls to absolve the persons mentioned in
the Statute last before remembered, I have thought it also convenient to set
down in this place, the Statut^ made in the thirteenth year of the Queens
Majesty's reign, concerning the bringing in of Bulls into this Realm, which
is, as follows.

Be it enacted, 13. El. cap. 1. Bulls.
that if any person or persons after the first day of July next coming, shall
use or put in ure in any place within this Realm, or within any the Queens
dominions, any Bull, writing, instrument, written or printed, of absolution or
reconciliation, obtained and gotten from the said Bishop of Rome, or any of his
successors, or from any other person or persons authorized, or claiming
authority by or from the said Bishop of Rome, his predecessors or successors,
or Sea of Rome, or if any person or persons after the said first day of July,
shall take upon him or them by color of any such Bull, writing, instrument,
or authority to absolve or reconcile any person or persons, or to grant or
promise to any person or persons within this Realm, or any other the Queens
Majesty's dominions, any such absolution or reconciliation by any speech,
preaching, teaching, writing, or any other open deed, or if any person or
persons within this Realm, or any the Queens Majesty's dominions after the
said first day of July, shall willingly receive or take any such absolution or
reconciliation, or else if any person or persons have obtained or gotten
since the last day of July, in the first year of the Queens Majesty's
Reign, or after the said first day of July, shall obtain or get from the said
Bishop of Rome, or any his successors or Sea of Rome, any manner of Bull,
writing, or instrument written, or printed, containing any thing, matter, or
cause whatsoever, or shall publish or by any ways or means put in ure, any
such Bull, writing, or instrument, that the^ all and every such act and acts,
offense and offenses, shall be deemed and adjudged by the authority of this Act
to be high treason, and the offender and offenders therein, their procurers,
abbetters and counselors, to the committing the said offense and offenses,
shall be deemed high treason to the Queen and the Realm, and being thereof
lawfully indicted and attaynted, shall forfeit as in cases of high treason, and
their ayders, counselors, or abbetters, after the committing of the said
offenses and acts (to the intent to set forth, uphold, or allow, the doing or
execution of the said usurped power, jurisdiction, or authority, touching, or
concerning the premises or any part thereof) shall incur the pain of the
Satute of Praemunire, made in the sixteenth year of king Richard the second.
16. R. 2. cap.
Provided always, nd be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if
any person or persons, to whom any such absolution, reconciliation, Bull,
writing, or instrument, shall after the said first day of July, be offered,
moved, or persuaded to be used, put in ure, Conceal.
or executed, shall conceal the same offer, motion, or persuade, and not
disclose and signify the same by writing, or otherwise within six weeks next
following, to some of the Queens Majesty's Privy Council established in the
North parts, or in the Marches of Wales for the time being, shall incur the
pain and forfeiture of misprision of treason, Treason. B. 19. 6. El. 6.
which is to forfeit the profit of his lands, during his life, all his goods
and chattels, and to have perpetual imprisonment. And the pain of the said
Satute of the Praemunire, is to forfeit all his lands, that he has in
fee-simple, Forfeit. B. 101 24. H. 8.
to the Crown for ever, and all lands that he holds in tail, or for life,
during his life, and all his leases for years, and other his goods and
chattels for ever, and shall have perpetual imprisonment, Protection.
and be out of the Queens protection.

And it has been taken that any man might kill such a one before the making of
the Statute of 5. F. n. b. 232. Coron. B. 193.
El. cap. 1. but now he may not.

Although it may be doubted, for that we are divided for religion, if any
invasion should be attempted in this Realm, Invasion.
that some desirous of alteration thereof, would join with them, yet it is to
be hoped, that there are thousands and thousands of true and faithful
subjects, German fo. 122. Forf^it. B. 102 Trial. F. 54. 5. R. 2. 2. H. 5. cap.
7.
which will spend their lands, lives, and goods (as they ought) before the
enemy should prevail. And one reason moves me thus to think, for that the
Queens Majesty does not punish them by death, nor loss of goods and lands,
as was used in Queen Mary's time for religion, but imposes upon some of them
a certain sum of money, to be paid monthly for not coming to Church:
besides great numbers of others which perhaps would like well of the change of
religion, as well as the rest, and yet are neither charged with like payment,
nor otherwise any way dealt withal. And another chief reason moves me thus
to think, for that they which shall show themselves traitors, false, and
untrue to their own Prince and country, A forreyn Prince that conquereth,
trusts not him that is conquered.
in adhering to strangers (besides that they shall overthrow themselves and
their houses, and utterly undo their wives and children, for that they shall
forfeit al they have) may in all reason assure themselves, ye no forreyn Prince
will think yt such persons will be true to him, for he yt will not regard his
country where he was bread and borne, his father, mother, wife, children,
kinsfolks, nor allies, his lands, livings, and possessions, his liberty and
freedom, how can a stranger that comes to conquer and bring all these into
his subjection, servitude, and bondage, be persuaded that he will love, obey,
or carry any loyalty or faithfulness toward him, as is aforesaid? How such
have been dealt withal by them, with whom they have joined against their
Prince and country, how fair soever they have promised, appears in part
before, and more ensues.

Of the conspiracies and trecheries of certain Nobles and others against their
Prince and country, and what have bin the rewards of such traitors, by them,
who made use of their treasons: and how dangerous the controversy in religion
is to a common wealth. CHAP. 10.
WHen William Duke of Normandy attempted to invade this land, Holinsh. 298.
William Duke of Normandy.
there were certain Noblemen of England, which were aiding and assisting to
him in this action, to whom he made many fair and large promises, until he
had won the Crown, and then he forgot and nothing regarded them: and they
which thought themselves sure to be made for ever by bringing in this stranger
into this realm, did see themselves underfoot, and to be despised and mocked
on all sides. Ibid. 197.
Again, when the variance was in England betwixt king John and some of his
Barons, and that the king did put them often to the worst, they did write to
the king of France Philip, Ibid. 600. Jews the French kings son came into
England when civil waires were there.
praying aid of him, and requiring him to send Jews his son with men of
war into England, to assist the^ against their king, promising that they
would accept him for their king, and do him homage: whereupon the French king
sent his son Jews with a great company into England, to whom the Barons did
homage, and the said Jews took an oath also to maintain and perform the old
laws and customs of the realm, and to restore to every man his rightful
heritage and lands: requiring the Barons to continue faithful unto him: and he
used them so courteously, and gave them so many fair words, and made them such
large promises, that they believed him assuredly, but they remembered not that
Jews looked for a kingdom. And what will not many do, if they may thereby be
sure, or in hope to get a Crown, as one writes: Ad quid non adagis regnandi
dira cupido?


They remembered not, that the Fowlers whistle sounds sweetly, when he
deceives the bird most cunningly, according to the saying: Fistula dulce canit
volucrem dum decipit auceps.


Neither, Cato. lib. 1.
that fair words make fools feign: and that under the green grass often
lurketh the subtle serpent: nor that in the fairest flower a man may soonest
find a canker: Poemata Ciceronis. 249. fol. 161.
Nullae sunt occultiores insidiae, quam quae latent in simulatione officij, aut
in aliquo necessitudinis nomine. Tully de amicitia says: Aperte enim adulantem
nemo non vidit nisi qui admodum est excors, callidus ille and occultus ne se
insinuet studiose cauendum est. They had also forgotten the counsel which
Vicount de Melloir a Frenchman gave to certain of them in his sickness at
London, Holinsh. 603 Book of Martyrs fol. 214.
which was as follows: I lament (says he) for your destruction and
desolation at hand, because you are ignorant of the perils hanging over your
heads: for this understand, that Jews, and with him sixteen Earls and Barons
of France have secretly sworn and vowed, that if fortune should favor him so
much as to conquer this realm of England, The oath of Jews the French kings
son with other his Earls ^ Barons.
and to be crowned king, to kill, banish, and consume all those of the English
Nobility, which now do serve under him, and persecute their own king as
traitors and rebels: and furthermore, to dispossess all their lineage of such
inheritance as they now hold in England. And because (says he) you shall not
have doubt hereof, I which lie here at the point of death, do now affirm unto
you, and take it on the peril of my soul, that I am one of those sixteen,
that have sworn to perform these things, and therefore I advise you to
provide for your own safeties and also of your realm, which you now destroy,
and that you keep this thing secret, which I have uttered unto you. After this
he shortly died, but the courteous offer of Jews to the Barons (as is above
remembered) so lulled the^ on sleep, as it were, Holinsh. 601.
that they regarded not this good advise: for after this, diverse of those
which before had taken part with king John, as William Earl Warren, William
Earl of Arundell, William Earl of Salisburie, William Marshall the younger,
and diverse other, supposing verily, that the said Jews should now attain the
kingdom, revolted to Jews: but after that Jews was settled, Note here what
followed by trusting of fair words.
and had gotten the tower of London, and diverse other holds, Castles and
defencible places of this realm into his hands, and thought himself in manner
sure of ye kingdom: then the Frenchmen began to show their inward disposition
and hatred toward the Englishmen, and forgetting all former promises (such is
the nature of strangers when they are become Lords of their desire) they did
many excessive outrages, in spoiling and robbing the people of that country
without pity or mercy, and bare little good will toward the Engish men, as
it appears sundry ways: and first of all, in that they had them in manner in
no regard or estimation, but rather sought by all means to spoil and keep
them under, Book of Martyrs. fol. 257.
not suffering them to bear any rule, nor putting them in trust with the
custody of such places as they had brought them in possession of. Secondly,
they called them not to counsel so often as at the first they used to do,
neither did they proceed by their directions in their business, as before
they were accustomed: and thirdly, in all their conversation, neither Jews nor
his Frenchmen used them so familiarly as at the first coming they did, but
showed more lofty countenance toward them, whereby they greatly increased the
indignation of the English Lords against them, who might evil abide to be so
ouerruled To conclude, Holinsh. 602.
where great promises were made at their entering into the land, they were slow
enough in performing the same: so as the expectation of the English Barons was
made quite void, for they perceived daily, that they were despised and scoffed
at for their disloyalty showed toward their own natural Prince, hearing now
and then nips and taunts openly by the Frenchmen, saying, that as they had
showed themselves false and untrusty to their own lawful king, Note.
so they would not continue any long time true to a stranger. Hereupon the
Barons better considering the words of the said Vicount of Melloit, and withal
the great danger that the realm was brought in by their dissension and
opposition against their sovereign Lord, and the little account the Frenchmen
made of them, Book of Martyrs. 247.
gave them just occasion to take a better course, and so they revolted to king
Henry their natural Liege Lord (for King John shortly after the coming of
Jews into England departed this life) and they joined with the King in battle
against Jews, where he had a great overthrow: whereupon he and all his
company departed into France, and king Henry possessed the Crown after that
in quiet.

Caesar was wont to say of such as were false to their Prince and country,
Caesar.
that he loved Traitors to serve his turn, but abhorred them as monstrous to
the common wealth.

It is written of Alexander the Great, Alexander.
who had conquered many countries, that he did long time seek many ways to
win a certain country pertaining to Darius king of Persia, and perceiving
that it was invincible, he dealt with a noble man that had the charge thereof,
under the king for a great sum of money to yield that country to his
possession, and so did Alexander give good countenance in his Court to this
noble man a good space, and in the end entering into a deep consideration of
the matter, and meaning thereby to make an example to such as he might commit
trust unto, to beware of such treasonable practices, he suddenly commanded
execution to be done of this noble man, who hearing thereof, and little
deserving the same as he thought, desired to come to Alexanders presence (which
was granted) besought him to know the cause of this sudden execution: who said
thou have been false to thine own Prince, how can I then trust thee, or hope
thou will deal truly with me, or be my true subject* Tullie lib. 2.
officiorum. Alexander.
if I should credit thee with the like? and so he was executed. Philip king of
Macedon did greatly blame his son Alexander in an Epistle which he did write
to him saying, what occasion or consideration has brought thee into this hope,
that thou should think that they will be and continue true and faithful unto
thee whom thou have corrupted with money?

I read of one Christopher Paris, Holinsh. 98. Christopher Paris. Irish Chron.
that had ye charge of a Castle in Ireland, to the use of his Lord Thomas
Fitzgerauld, and being dealt withal by the king of England his Lieutenant
there, to yield to him to the use of the king the said Castle, for a certain
sum of money agreed in the end so to do, and delivered up the hold
accordingly, and received his money. After the Lieutenant considering the
vniustnesse of this man to his Lord, which had put him in trust with the safe
keeping of his Castle, and to whom he was deeply beholden, meaning to make an
example of such treachery, caused this Captain presently to be executed,
declaring thereby though for the time he embraced the benefit of his treaso^s,
yet after he could not digest the unfaithful dealing of this traitor to his
Master, that had trusted him with a place of such great credence and defense.
Christian van de Veque betrayed for a great pension the the Castle of S.
Christian van de Veque.
John, being one of the most importa^t fortresses of Portugal, to king Philip,
who in the end was rewarded with such as a traitor deserves: for being a while
entertained with hope, was at last banished to ye wars of Africa for ten
years. The like usage in manner received all his fellows, which betrayed the
king of Portugal their lawful king, by deliueries of such places as they had
in government, or by doing the king of Spain any other service to the
prejudice of Don Anthonio king of Portugal.

Have we not seen ye unnatural practices of Shelley, Charles Paget, and
others, with the Spaniards to invade our country, and to have overthrown this
happy state and government thereof? look into a little treatise published
1585, where it is set down at large. Esaias. 22. Sobna.
The Prophet Esaias speaks of one Sobna whom the king Hesekiah had greatly
advanced, who outwardly showed that he would live and dye with him, but he had
a false heart to his Prince, and more favored the Assirians, the kings enemies,
who sought to invade his country, but he was carried captive into a foreign
country far off according to Gods ordinance, and there dyed in confusion.
Such as are traitors to their own country, may be well compared to the viper,
Rhetorik. Wilso. fo. 64. Pliny.
whose nature and property is, as Pliny writes, that when by course of time
he is to come forth of the belly of his damme, he eats a hole through the
same, by means whereof she dies, and so is he the cause and the destruction
of her that did breed, nourish and preserve him. It is a common saying: He is
an evil bird that defiles his own neast: and so is he a monster and no man,
that conspireth or intends any peril or danger to his native country. Who
that desires to know what has been the end of traitors and false conspirators
against their Prince and country in old time, may read M. Renegers book,
Reneger.
wherein they are disclosed at large.

As civil wars, Civil wars.
and dissentions are perilous to all states, so are all occasions to be
prevented which may breed the same, amongst which there is no one thing yt
sooner inge^dreth such discord, Contention for religion breeds oftentimes
civil dissentio^.
then contention for religion, which carries away men with such vehement
passions, that they will fight for the same, more willingly, then for their
wives or children, lands or goods, in respect of it, they regard nothing:
through the diversity thereof, French Academie. ca. 63
the father is against the son, and the son against the father, they which are
nearest of kin loose their natural love, they which are of ye same country
and lineage, persecute one another as mortal enemies, and sundry nations abhor
one another for ye same cause. To raise sedition and tumults in a City,
Bodinus. li. 4. fo. 486.
nothing is more dangerous (says Bodinus) then to be divided in opinion,
whether it be in matters of state, or of laws and customs, or for religion,
therefore the causes whereof such mischiefs may ensue, by all policies in the
beginning are to be looked unto. He is not counted a good Physician only that
cures the disease, but that preserves health, and preuenteth sickness to
come. A small spark raises great flames of fire, as the saying is: Concitat
ingentes flammas scintilla minuta.


In the beginning a fire with little water may be suppressed, Nota.
which if it increase to great flames, without much ado will not be quenched,
Ovid.
as the Poet Ovid very well says:

Ignis ab exigua nascens extinguitur vnda,
Sed postquam creuit, volitantque ad sydera flammae,
Vix putei fontes, fluuij succurrere possunt.
And the same Poet writes also, De art amandi.

Principijs obstat, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas conualuere moras.
Withstand the beginning, for the medicine is too late prouiuided, when the
disease by ouerlong tarying is increased. Before religion is established, Not
meet to argue against religion settled by authority. Bodinus li. 4. fo. 481.
Paradox. fo. 1
to argue of religion, to try the truth is allowable, but when it is set down
by common authority, it is not after to be disputed upon or brought in
question, as Bodinus affirms: for there is nothing so firm or stable, which
by force of argument can not be perverted: and to that effect Tullie writes:
Nihil est tam incredibile, quod non dicendo fiat probabile, nihil tam horridum
aut incultum, quod non splendescat oratione, and ta^quam excolatur. And
Plutarke affirms: Quod extat Licurgi lex antiquissima, Plutarke. 5.
quam Florentini (disputatores omnium acutissimi) in populari statu inferunt,
nec scilicet de legibus semel receptis ac probatis disserere liceret, Bodinus
li. 4. fo. 48.
intelligit leges disputatas in dubium reuocari, dubitationem vero iniusticiae
opinionem afferre, ex quo legum ac magistratuum contemptum and reip. interitum
sequi necesse est. Quod si Philosophi and Mathematici suarum disciplinarum
principia in dubitationem reuocari non patiuntur, quae deme^tia est de
religione non modo priuatim, sed etiam public disputare velle? There is an
ancient law (says he) amongst the Ligurians, which the Florentines (most
quick in disputation) did command to be holden, that of laws once received
and allowed to dispute, it should not be lawful; for to call in question laws
before determined upon, does bring in doubt the thing before agreed unto, as
though it were not right and just, whereupon contempt of the laws and
government, and the overthrow of the common wealth does consequently ensue. If
the Philosophers and Mathematikes will not suffer the grounds of their learning
to be brought in question, what madness is it then privately or publicly to
dispute of religion once set down and allowed? Fo. 5.
Doctor Smith in his book de Repub. Angl. says, Certain it is that it is
always a doubtful and hazardous matter to meddle with changing of laws, and
government, or to disobey the orders of rule and government, which a man does
find already established.

Bodinus shows, Bodinus li. 4. fo 482.
that the people of the East and of Africa, and the kings of Spain most
straightly did prohibit the same, when great contention was amongst the
Muscouites for religion: the king delivered to the Bishop, and certain men
called ( Curiones) a book, wherein was set down what he would have taught
touching divine matters, to be preached and taught to the people, and
commanded that none upon pain of death should add or withdraw from it. The
Princes of Germany by mutual agreement, after long civil battles amongst
them for religion, ordained that the religion of Rome and Saxony should be
suffered, and that none should dispute of religion upon pain of death, Ibid.
fol. 482. None to dispute of religion settled upon pain of death. Martin
Mar-prelate.
which the Governors of Germany, and especially of Augusta did execute,
whereby all Germany was quieted. If then to dispute of religion once allowed by
authority, or to encounter the same, it be so dangerous to move sedition and
civil discord, was it not high time (think you) to suppress Martin
Mar-prelate, who by several writings did not let to affirm, yt we have no
Church, no Bishop, no Ministers nor Sacraments, and therefore that all which
love Jesus Christ, with all speed ought to separate themselves from our
Congregation, affirming that our assemblies are profane, wicked, and
Antichristian? Could there be a greater dishonor offered to her Majesty, and
to the state of the learned Clergy, yea to the whole Parliament, whereby the
religion now professed, is established?

Was it not time to look upon such as denied public Baptism, if it be not
done by a Preacher, and bring in question what is become of them which were not
so baptized, as though they should not be saved?

Was it not high time to look about, when some of them durst utter, that if
reformation were not had with speed, of such things as they disliked, that the
subjects ought not to tarry any longer, but to do it themselves, and moreover
durst say, that he and his fellows are forced in conscience to speak for this
new order, and to use it, and that there is many a thousand which desire that
which he does: and that great troubles will come, if it be not provided for?

Was it not time to look to such, as by these means distracted the minds of
her Majesty's subjects, in drawing them into factions, and encouraging the
number of malcontents and mislikers of the state, which make no account of
religion, but to make cheir commodity, though it be with the spoil of their
own country, if opportunity served, in pulling away the good and faithful
hearts of many subjects from her Majesty, because she maintains the state of
the Church government which they mislike, and which is protested by them to be
profane and Antichristian?

Was it not time to look to those sorts of me^ ye publish such libels, and
such seditious books, tending to such dishonor of this state and government* as
the like never was offered in any age?

Was it not time to look to such as have attempted these things with such
impudent and desperate boldness, as if they thought there were neither Prince
law, ruler, nor magistrate that durst control or seek to repress them?

Was it not time to look to such as have uttered such bold speeches against
our settled state and law, and the loose boldness of mind toward the superiors
is joined with contempt, and contemptuous boldness is the very root and
spring of discord, dissension, vprores, civil wars, and all desperate
attempts, that may breed trouble or danger to the state; yea, and if they
might be hardened with some continuance of time and hope of impunity, and some
multitude of assista^ts gathering to the^, what hereof might follow, I leave to
ye grave judgment of those, to whom it appertains. All which matters
aforesaid, with many other of like sort, concerning Martin Marprelate, are
gravely answered by the the reverend Father in God the Bishop of Winchester. B.
of Winchester.
The mischiefs which might have ensued by this seditious sect, was so greatly
disliked by her Majesty and her Counsel, that her Highness did publish her
Proclamation with the advice of her honorable Counsel, in the one and thirtith
year of her reign to the effect, as follows:

Her Majesty considering how within few years certain seditious and evil
disposed persons toward her Majesty, Proclamation 31. Eliz.
and the government established for causes Ecclesiastical within her Highness
dominions, had devised, written, printed, or caused seditiously and secretly to
be published and dispersed, sundry schismatic and seditious books,
defamatorie libels, and other fantastical writings amongst her Majesty's
subjects, containing in them very erroneous doctrine, and other matters
notoriously untrue, slanderous to the state, and against the godly information
of religion and government Ecclesiastical established by law, and so long
quietly continued: and also against the persons of the Bishops, and other
placed in authority Ecclesiastical under her Highness, by her authority, in
railing sort beyond all good humanity: all which books, libels, and writings
tend by their scope, to persuade and bring in a monstrous and apparent
dangerous innovation within her Majesty's domions and countries, of all manner
Ecclesiastical government now in use, and to the abridgement, or rather to the
overthrow of her Highness lawful prerogative, allowed by Gods laws, and
established by the laws of this realm, and consequently to reuerse, dissolve,
and set at liberty the present government of the Church, and to make a
dangerous change of the form of doctrine, and use of divine service of God,
and the ministration of the Sacraments now also in use, with a rash and
malicious purpose also to dissolve the state of the Prelacie, being one of the
three ancient estates of this realm under her Highness: whereof her Majesty
minds to have such reverend regard, as to their places in the Church and
commonwealth appertains: all which said seditious practices do directly
tend to the manifest wilful breach of a great number of good laws and Satutes
of this Realm, inconveniences nothing at all regarded by such innouations.

In consideration whereof, her Highness graciously minding to provide for good
and speedy remedy to withstand such notable, dangerous and ungodly attempts,
and for that purpose to have such enormous malefactors discovered* and
condignly punished, does signify by the same proclamation her Highness
disliking, and indignation of such dangerous and wicked enterprises, and for
that purpose does thereby will and straightly charge and command, that all
persons whatsoever, within any her Majesty's Realms and dominions, who then
had, or then after should have any of the said seditious books, pamphlets,
libels, or writings, or any of the like nature already published, or then after
to be published in his or their custody, containing such matters as above are
mentioned against the present order and government of the Church of England,
or the lawful ministers thereof, or against the rites and ceremonies used in
the Church, and allowed by the laws of this Realm, that they and every of
them should presently after with convenient speed bring in, and deliver up the
same unto the Ordinary of the Diocese, or of the place, where they inhabit,
to the intent they might be utterly defaced by the said Ordinary, or otherwise
used by them. And that from thenceforth no person or persons whatsoever, should
be so hardy as to write, contriue, print, or cause to be published or
distributed, or to keep any of the same, or any other books, libels, or
writings of the like nature and quality, contrary to the true meaning, and
intent of her Majesty's said proclamation: and likewise, that none after should
give any instruction, direction, favor, or assistance, to the contriuing,
writing, printing, publishing, or dispersing of the same, or such like books,
libels, or writings whatsoever, as they tendered her Majesty's good favor, and
would avoid her Highness displeasure, and as they would answer for the
contrary at their uttermost perils; and upon such further pains and
penalties, as by the law any way might be inflicted upon the offenders in any
of these behalfes, as persons maintaining such seditious actions, which her
Majesty affirms by that proclamation she minds to have severely executed.
And if any person had knowledge of the anthors, writers, printers, or disperers
thereof, that they should within one month after the publication of the said
proclamation, discover the same to the Ordinary of the place, where he had such
knowledge, or to any of her Majesty's privy Council, as by the same
proclamation plainly appears.

After that Martin Marprelate and his fellows were restrained of setting
forth their seditious books, they and such like used to assemble themselves
in conuenticles, where they had exercises (as they termed them) of religion
contrary to the law, whereupon a Statute was very necessarily made in the five
and thirteth year of her Majesty's reign to the effect following. 35. El.
cap. 1.


If any above sixteen years of age, shall obstinately refuse to come to some
usual place of Common prayer, to hear divine Service, established by the
Queens Majesty's laws by the space of one month without lawful cause, or
shall by printing, writing, or express words, advisedly and purposely
practice, or go about to move or persuade any within her Majesty's dominions,
to deny, withstand, and impugn her Highness authority in causes
ecclesiastical united to the Crown, or to that end or purpose shall advisedly
and maliciously move or persuade any whatsoever, to forbear or abstain from
coming to Church, to hear divine Service, and receive the communion according
to her laws, or to come to, or be present at any unlawful assemblies,
conuenticles, or meetings under color, or pretense of any exercise of
religion, contrary to the Statutes of this Realm, as before is said, every
person thereof convicted shall be imprisoned without bail or maynprise, until
they shall confirm themselves to come to Church, and hear divine Service,
according to her Highness laws, and make such open submission and declaration
of their conformity, as is there set down. If the offender aforesaid being
thereof convicted, shall not within three months conform himself in coming
to Church, and making submission and confession, being required by the Bishop
of the Diocese, or a Justice of peace of the Shyre, where the person shall be,
or be the Minister of the Parish, the offender there so warned or required by a
Justice of peace, where the offender shall be, shall abjure the Realm by his
oath before the Justice of peace, at the quarter Sessions or Assizes, as was
used by the Common law in case of felony. If he refuse to abjure, or shall not
go, or return without her Majesty's license, it is felony, and he shall loose
his clergy. If any offender aforesaid, before they should abjure, come to
Church on some Sunday or Holy day, and then, and there, hear divine Service,
and make open submission and declaration of his conformity to the laws, he
should be discharged of all penalties and punishments appointed by this Satute.

And also if any after such submission refuse or forbear to come to Church, or
come to such conuenticles as aforesaid, he shall loose the benefit of this Act,
and be, and stand in such case as though no such submission had been had, ne
made.

Likewise if any keep in his house, or otherwise relieve any that shall
obstinately refuse to come to Church, and shall forbear to come to Church by a
month together, every person so doing, after notice to him given by the
Ordinary, Justice of Assise, Justice of peace, Curate of the parish, or
Churchwarden, shall forfeit ten pounds for every month that he does retain
or relieve any such person.

The Satute extends not to men's wives, children, father, mother, wards,
sisters, not having houses of Popish recusants or feeme couerts shall not be
compelled to abjure. The persons that shall abjure, or refuse to abjure, vt
supra, shall forfeit their goods and chattels, and all his lands during his
life.

This act was made to continue to the end of the next session of Parliament,
and now is continued in the Parliament holden in the fortieth year of her
Majesty's Reign.

THE FORM OF submission.
I A. B. do humbly confess and acknowledge, The submission.
that I have grievously offended God, in contemning her Majesty's godly and
lawful government and authority, by absenting my self from Church, and from
hearing divine Service, contrary to the godly Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, and in using, and frequenting disordered, and unlawful conuenticles
and assemblies, under pretense and color of exercise of Religion, and I am
heartily sorry for the same, and do acknowledge and testify in my conscience,
that no other person has, or ought to have any power or authority over her
Majesty, and I do promise and protest without any dissimulation, or any
color, or means of any dispensation, that from henceforth I will from time
to time obey and perform her Majesty's Laws and Statutes, in repayring to the
Church, and hearing divine Service, and will ever hereafter do mine uttermost
endeavor to maintain and defend the same.

Of diverse and sundry victories obtained in former time by the English nation,
both by sea and land, against their forreyne enemies, to the great
encouragement of the posterity, to maintain the honor gotten by their
progenitors. CHAP. 11.
ANd now as in the last part of this encouragement, The last cause of
encouragement.
what notable victories has our nation obtained against the French and Scots,
as well in their own territories and countries, as when they have invaded this
Realm, and how most gaciously Almighty God has always assisted us in our
rightful causes against our enemies, when they have greatly often exceeded us
in number, although they were and be right valiant Princes and mighty people in
arms, to all which have traveled in our Chronicles that is evident, whereby
the invincible courages and valor of our nation in martial acts has
appeared, which ought exceedingly to encourage us in this service of defense,
for that we are descended of them, and not to doubt or despair any whit (if we
be true amongst our selves) though the force of our enemies be great, and their
number exceed us far, for God never fails them which put their trust in
him and walk in his ways, as by diverse examples out of the Scriptures of God
before remembered appears most evidently.

Did not the English fleet, in the year of our Lord 1350, which was in the
four and twentieth year of Edward the third, meet with the Spaniards coming
out of Flaunders laden with Merchandise, Holinsh. 946.
and slew a great number, and drowned also many of them, and took six and
twenty of their ships upon the coast of Sussex? Did not the great army of the
king of Spain at the siege of Bark, when it was bruted that the Earl of
Lecester her Majesty's Lieutenant general with the English forces came to
relieve the town and yet they retired without so doing? and did not they come
to remove the siege which we made against Dusborow, and the great Sconce of
Sutfen, where that most renowned Knight S. Philip Sidney was slain, neither
could they have ever won those things again from us, had not treason more
prevailed then force and valiant courage.

Have not we seen a few years since, the mighty preparation by sea of the
king of Spain and his Allies, appointed with such number of huge ships,
soldiers, armor, weapon, shot, powder, and other things incident to the
wars sent to conquer our country, as the like was never seen on ye seas, in
so much that they called the same the invincible navy? they trusted in their
forces, but yet God confounded their purpose and devises, for did not we with a
few ships and furniture of men and munition (little in respect of theirs) send
some of their mightiest vessels to the bottom of the Sea with great numbers of
their men in them? Did not we with our shot and artillery slay many of them?
Did not we chase diverse of them into Irish coasts, where about xvij. of their
greatest ships perished, so that Lucans verse, Lucan.
which in those days he did write to the glory of our nation, against the
Romans, may be verified in this service.

Territa quaesitis ostendunt terga Britannis.

And were not numbers of their soldiers which entered into Ireland with the
sword destroyed? Spaniards slain in Ireland.
Did not we also in the Low countries keep diverse other of their ships in
their haven, so as they could not come forth into the seas to join with the
rest of the Spanish Navy? This was done without hand-fight, and is to be taken
as the only work of God, and to him therefore we ought to yield our most
humble thanks, and say with ye Prophet David: A Domino factum est istud, and
est mirabile: This is the Lord his doing, and is marvelous in our sight: and
therefore. Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam: Not unto us
Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be all glory and thanks. And we may further
say, as the Prophet David says: If the Lord himself had not been on our side
(now may Israel say) if the Lord himself had not bin on our side, when men
rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick: when they were so
wrathfully displeased at us, yea the waters had drowned us, and the stream had
gone over our souls. The deep waters of the proud had gone over our souls:
But praised be the Lord, which has not given us over for a pray unto their
teeth, our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the snare of the fowler: the
snare is broken and we are delivered. Our help stands in the name of the
Lord, which has made both heaven and earth. Neither did they (though they were
(as the report went) thirty thousand strong) at that time land a man.

And did not the noble Earl of Essex, Sir John Norris, and Sir Frauncis Drake
the next year following with a little Navy, Landing in Spain.
containing not above eleven thousand men land in Spain, burned their ships,
and put their people to the sword, and their towns to the fire, and so
coasted thence along into Portugal, Portugal.
and there landing, marched up into the country, even to the gates of Lisbone,
with drums sounding, and with Ensigns displayed, from whence they returned
unfought withal by any of his forces, either by sea or laud?

Did not the Duke of Lancaster with a compaine of soldiers sail into Spain,
The Duke of Lancasters voyage into Spain. Stow. 1390. 14 R. 2. Gallicia.
Indies.
to claim the realm of Castile, for that he had married the eldest daughter of
Peter king of Spain, that was expelled by Henry his bastard brother? he
conquered the Country of Gallicia against Don John son of the said Henry.
And some doings we have had at the Iudies, where our courageous English
Captains and soldiers conquered many Cities and towns. How valiantly did
they likewise behave themselnes at S. Domingo, Carthagena, Cales, and in many
other places, where the Englishmen were few in number, and the enemies
infinite, and in their own country, whose valiant actions there, have
deserved such fame, as lenght of time shall never take away, for that the like
has never been performed, or read of in any age before our days?

In the year of our Lord God 1365, Hol. 971.
and in the 39 year of Edward ye third, was not Peter king of Castile, chased
out of his realm by his bastard brother Henry? by reason whereof, ye said
Peter was constrained to fly, and came to Bordeaux to sue for aid at the
hands of the Prince of Wales, the said king Edward his son, who thereof
advertised his father, by advise from whom, The Prince of Wales his voyage into
Spain.
the said Prince determined to bring home the said king Peter, and to restore
him again to his kingdom by force of arms, maugre his enemies. The Prince
indeed was very desirous to take this enterprise upon him, both of a certain
pitiful affection, moving him to relieve this miserable state of king Peter,
and also of an ardent desire, which he had to purchase a glorious fame through
martial deeds and noble acts of chivalry. Therefore having this occasion to
employ his time in such exercises, and now commanded thereto of his Father, he
was exceeding glad in his mind, and with all the speed that might be, made his
provision both of a sufficient army of men of war, and also of all other
things necessary for the furniture of such an enterprise, but first he took
good assurance of king Peter for the payment of the soldiers wages. 1367. The
Prince sets forward to Spain.
Thus when the Prince had taken order for his iourny in each condition, as was
thought behoofefull, he with the king of Spain in his company, passed forth
with an army of thirty thousand men.

Henry king of Spain having knowledge that the Prince of Wales was thus
coming against him, to restore his brother king Peter to his former degree,
assembled of the French and of his own people to the number of fourscore and
seven thousand, or there about, of men of war: whereof seven thousand were
horsemen. King Henry sent to the Prince an Herald of arms with a letter, The
king of Spain sends to the Prince.
requiring to know of him, for what cause he moved war against him, since he
had never offered him any such occasion. The Prince dispatched the Herald with
an answer to the Letter, containing in effect, that for great considerations he
had taken upon him to aid the rightful king of Spain, thased out of his
realm by violent wrong: and that if it might be, he would gladly make an
agreement betwixt them, but so algates, that king Henry of necessity must then
forsake all the title of the kingdom of Spain, which by no rightful means he
could enjoy: and therefore if he refused thus to do, he was for his part
resolved how to proceed. The Herald departed with this answer, and came
therewith to king Henry, and delivered it unto him, as then lodged with his
puissant army at Nouarret, which he liked not: whereupon both parties prepared
themselves to battle, and joined. The battle was eagerly fought, and the
victory fell to the Prince. There were stain of men of arms five hundred and
three score, The number slain at this battle at Nouarret.
and of Commons about seven thousand and five hundred of the kings part, and of
the English part there was slain of men of account, but very few, viz. four
knights, two Gascoynes, one Almaine, and the fourth an Englishman, and of other
mean Soldiers not past four hundred, Froissard.
as Froissard says, but other affirm that there was slain of the Princes
part about sixteen hundred, which should seem to be more like a truth, if the
battle were fought so sore and fiercely, as Froissard himself does make report.

This battle was fought upon a Saturday, Caxton.
the third of April, in the year of our Lord 1367. There was taken prisoners
of the kings part to the number of two thousand, and amongst them the Earl of
Dene, Sir Berthram de Cleaquine, the Marshall Dandrehen or Dandenhien, and many
other men of great account. After the battle King Peter went to Burgis, and
was received into the City, and shortly the Prince came thither, Froissard.
and there held his Easter with king Peter, and tarried there above three weeks:
in the mean time they of Austergus, Toledo, Lisbon, Cordeua, Gallice, Civil,
and of all other places of the kingdom of Spain came in and did homage to
King Peter, promising him to be true to him ever after: for they saw that
resistance would not avail, so long as the Prince should be in the Country.

I note by this discourse, Note
the mighty courage of this noble Prince, that durst enterprise to displace a
king of his royal seat in his own kingdom, being there a mere stranger, and
to encounter him in so great an action, having not above thirty thousand in
his Camp, the king being about fourscore and six thousand strong, whereof
above seven thousand were horsemen, and in his own country, where he might be
furnished to supply his want.

And here I may not omit to speak of the notable and valiant service performed
by the said noble Earl of Essex, and ye right noble Charles Haward, now Earl
of Nottingham, high Admiral of England, and diverse other Lords, Knights,
Esquires, and Gentlemen at Cales in Spain in the thirty eight year of her
Majesty's reign, where they found five Gallions of the king of Spaines, that
is to say, the Philip, being Admiral, the S. Matthew, the S. Andrew, the S.
Thomas, the S. James, three Leuantices, two great ships of Noua Hispania, and
diverse galleys, and 20 merchant ships richly laden for the Indies, at which
time the English had fight with the said Galleys about an hour, the next day
the English men and the Spaniards incountred each the other valiantly, which
conflict continued from seven of the clock in the morning till one in the
after noone, which was so sharp, that some of the Spanish ships did run up
the river further into the country to save themselves. The said ships called S.
Matthew and S. Andrew, were taken, and brought into England, the Philip, and
another being Uiceadmirall, ran themselves on ground, and the English entered
the Philip to have had the spoil of her, which the Spaniards perceiving did
set on fire and went out, and the English men escaped the fire with danger: and
some other of their ships were fired by us: there the General landed about
sire thousand men, and marched toward Cales city, being led by the said noble
Earl of Essex, given in the head of that troop, whom certain of the
Spaniards met some on foot and some on horseback, out of the city about
half a mile, but they did not tarry, but retired to the town. The said Eerle
of Essex pursued them resolutely and with such invincible courage unto their
walls* where they played upon them with their ordinance and small shot awhile,
but in the end they entered by plain force, with small loss of their men. The
Earl of Essex was one of the first that entered with many voluntary Gentlemen,
and they which entered, were not above 1000 men which wanne the town, but there
was good aid at hand. In the town there were 500, horsemen, and a thousand
footmen, besides a great number of other townsmen, and great store of
munition, ordinance and victualles. The town was strongly walled, having a
castle strongly edified in the midst thereof, and so fortified and victualled,
that it was thought impossible to have been won without cannon shot, and the
houses were all of stone very strongly and defencibly builded, so as if they
had stood to it, it had not been possible with a far greater number to have
been so soon surprised. We took the spoil of the City, being very rich in
Jewels. Plate, Money, Cloth of gold, Silk, Sugars, Wine, Oil, Rice, and other
merchandise, which was esteemed with the loss of the said ships and goods in
them, to be worth a huge su^me of money. The said noble Earls of Essex and
Nottingham knowing the looseness of soldiers, very honorably caused the Ladies
and gentlewomen (whereof there were diverse in that City) with the rest of the
women and children, with 500 men to be safely conveyed out of the City, and a
strait proclamation made, that none should offer to any of them any violence
upon pain of death, and shortly after they fired the town, and took the
seas; and they brought also with them into England diverse of the best sort of
the Spaniards taken in the said City as prisoners to abide their ransom what
the king will do being herewith moved. I know not, but no doubt her Majesty
will provide to defend the worst, as good policy wills. Solomon says:
Beatus qui semper timet, hoc est, qui cautus and prouidens est, and ad omnia
mala quae possunt in illum incursare, depellenda paratissimus.

How most graciously Almighty God has dealt for her Majesty, to defend her
and her kingdoms from foreign forces and invasion, you may see, in yt in the
beginning of winter about three years last past, when the king of Spain had
gathered together as great a number of Ships as he could furnish from all
parts of his dominions, or could recover by imbarking all other ships of
service, which came for trade into Spain or Portugal, intending to have
invaded her Majesty's realm of England: and yet such was the providence of
God, contrary to his expectation and inte^tion (by hastening of his enterprise
in a time unlooked for, to surprise some place in England or Ireland, before
her Majesty could have had her own force in readiness, she still providing to
have lived in peace, which she professes both to her self and all
Christendom: it pleased him (who from heaven with justice beholds all men's
purposes) suddenly and most stra^gely to drown and make unserviceable diverse
of his best ships of war, being under sail, coming from Lisbone, and very
near to the deffined haven of Ferroll, with destruction of no small numbers of
soldiers and mariners: among which many of those Irish rebels, which were
entertained in Spain to have accompanied either that Navy, or some part thereof
into Ireland, were also cast away: by which manifest act of Almighty God, ye
Army was so weakened, as the same could not put to the seas, according to his
former purpose.

And here I protest, that I write not any thing to disgrace any Prince or
nation, against whom our nation has so often prevailed, but that you may by
the said examples see, that God gives the victory where it pleases him,
although the said other Princes be right courageous and valiant in arms.

That notwithstanding the difference of religion, or any other cause
whatsoever, we ought all to join together for the defense of our Prince and
country against the enemy: with a repetition of certain laws, tending
chiefly to the preservation of her Majesty's person and the safety and defense
of the realm. CHAP. 12.
ANd though we be divided for religion (which God of his mercy bring to
unity) yet I trust that we will wholly, Though we be divided for religion yet
we must join against the enemy.
faithfully, and as we are bound, and belongs to good and loyal subjects,
and natural men to their country, join together in this service of defense
of our Prince and country against the enemy, following the good example of
the Jews, who although great dissension and civil discord was among
themselves (as Josephus writes in his book de bello Iudaico) yet when the
enemy did invade their country, Lib. 6. cap. 10
they joined together, and valiantly defended themselves. So did the Romans, as
Bodinus writes, his words be these: Bodinus. 563
Cum enim aliquando in visceribus vrbis Romanae patres cum plebe capitalibus
odijs inter se contenderent, hostis in Capitolium inuasit, repent ciues ad
concordiam adducti, hostem repulerunt, rursus parta pace, cum ciuiles
discordias relapsas intuerentur, venientes, Romanos agros vastare coeperunt,
repent e ciuilis motus conquieuit, vt hosts propulsarent: That is, When the
chief of the city of Rome, with the common sort of the Citizens there, were
at deadly hate, the enemy entered the Capitol: whereupon suddenly the Citizens
being reduced to concord, they did drive away the enemy, and by that means
peace being obtained, when they again fell into civil discord, the enemy that
perceiving, they destroyed the fields at Rome, whereupon the commotion ceased,
that they might repulse the enemy. To that effect he writes of the troubles
of Spain, Ibidem. 563.
thus: Nec vero motus ciuiles Hispanorum aliter sedare potuerunt, cum absente
Carolo quinto Imperatore, nouum creauissent regem Gallorum, exercitu in
Cantabriam and Nauarram tunc irruente, quas regiones Galli occupauerant, sed
Hispani repent conciliatis animis hostiles impetus represserunt, and amissa
recuperarunt: That is, The civil wars and troubles in Spain could not
otherwise be appeased, when Charles the fifth Emperor being absent, they made a
new King, at which time an army of the Frenchmen entredinto Ca^tabrie and
Navarre, and possessed the same: but the Spaniards suddenly according within
themselves, did expel them, and recovered again those losses.

By these examples, the natural affection which these men had (and every man
ought to have) to the preservation and safety of their country, does
evidently appear. And whatsoever the cause be, that moves civil wars, yet
that ought not to work such malice in them as the safety and good of their
country should thereby be endangered or neglected: whereby the saying of the
Poet Ovid may appear to be true:

Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.
And because there are many good laws ordained, Diverse laws meet to be set
down and known in these dangerous days.
as well in the time of our most gracious Sovereign Lady that now is, as also
of her noble Progenitors, by the authority of their high Courts of Parliament,
touching the security of her Highness person, and the safety and defense of
the realm, which be necessary at all times, but especially now in these
dangerous days to be known, I have thought good here to make mention of them,
to the end men should not be ignorant thereof, although in truth the ignorance
of the law does not excuse, German. fol. 52.
but of the deed, as the saying is, Ignorantia legis non excusat, sed
ignorantia facti. And first touching her Majesty's person, 25. E. 3. cap. 2
Compass or imagine the death of the Queen.
it is ordained by a Statute made in the five and twentieth year of Edward the
third (which some hold to be but a confirmation of the common law) that if any
compass or imagine the death of her Majesty (whom Almighty God of his great
mercy vouchsafe to preserve, and to grant her life, with most prosperous
health, in high felicity long to continue, and to reign over us, to the
overthrow of her enemies and confusion of all traitors) this is high treason.
Treason. B. 24. 1. Mariae.
These words, ompasse or imagine the death of the King or Queen, are large
words, for he that does devise how the Prince shall come to her death, by words
or otherwise, and does some act to explain the same, as in assaying of
harness, sending of letters or message, or such like, this is treason. And he
that does intend to deprive the Prince, in that is intended the Princes death
and therefore it is treason. Withhold Castle. 14. El. cap. Dyer. 145. Treason.
B. 24. Levy war. 25. Edward. 3. cap. 2. Adhere to her enemies. Conspire to
commit treason. 2. Li. ass. 49. Messenger. 21. Eliz. 3. 23. 45. E. 3. 25. Aid.
Brytton. 114. lib. 1. Stamf. 1. Misprision. Treason. B. 2. Arms. No access. in
treason. Com. Plo. 262. Slain in field.
And the withholding of a Castle, Fortress or such like against the Prince, is
a leauying of war against her Majesty, and is treason. If a stranger (borne
in the time of peace betwixt his Prince and the Queens Majesty) come into
this realm, and take rebelliously any of her Castles, and the same detain
against her, this is treason, and is in law as a leauying of war against her.
If any leauie war against her Majesty within this realm, or be adherent
unto her enemies in this realm, giving them aid and comfort in this realm or
else where, and thereof he probably attainted of ouert deed, this is also
treason. If one move another to commit any treason, and the other assent that
it should be done, and it is committed indeed by the one of them: this is
treason in the^ both. It is treason by the common law to kill him that is sent
on her Majesty's message, or that goes to aid her in her wars. It is treason
if any work any thing against her host, or be assenting, counselling, or
consenting to ye same. If any do know another to have committed treason, though
he be not consenting to the same, yet if he do not reveal it to some that has
the law in government, it is misprision of treason. If any join the arms of
England with his arms, this is treason, 38. Henry the eight. I think this is
meant, when it is without difference. Note that in cases of treason, there are
no accessaries, but all be traitors and principals. If a man leauy war
against the Prince and be slain in the field, this is treason, without any
attaynder by the ancient law of the Realm, for he was the cause that the
course of law could not pass upon him, and he shall loose his lands and goods
in this case, and his blood is corrupted, Dower F. 106.
and ye, wife loses her dower by ye common law.

If a treason be committed by the Queens subject out of the realm, against
the realm, it shall be tried in England in ye Kings bench, 8. E. 3. Dier. 132.
Treason out of the Realm. Dyer. 298. Bulls. Obedience. Adherent to the enemies.
Trial. F. 54. 5. R. 2. Prophecies. Rebellion.
or where ye Prince shall please, 33. H. 8. cap. 23. 35. H. 8. cap. 2. see the
case of Story before Chap. 10. touching this. As touching the bringing into this
realm of Bulls, and practicing to withdraw her Highness subjects from their
natural obedience (which is treason) see before Chap. 10. If a man be adherent
to ye kings enemies in France, his land shall be forfeit, and his adherence
shall be tried where the land is, as it shall be of such as adherre to the kings
enemies in Scotland. He that shall publish any prophecy upon any man's arms,
or things used in arms, to the intent to make any rebellion, insurrection,
disturbance, or loss of life, shall forfeit ten pounds, and be imprisoned one
year, and the second time (being convicted of the first offense) shall forfeit
all his goods, and be imprisoned during his life, if any by erecting or setting
up of any figure by calculation, Figure. Witchcrafts. Nativity.
witchcraft, sorcery, or enchantment, or by casting of nativity, or by
publishing of any prophecy to such intent, shall seek to know or understand,
and shall publish the same abroad, how long her Majesty shall live, Prophecies
how long her Majesty shall live. 13. El. cap. 1. Compass her Majesty's death.
or who shall be King or Queen after her, it is felony.

It is ordained also by a Statute made in the thirteenth year of her Majesty's
Reign, that if any shall without the Realm or within, compass, intend, or
imagine the death or destrustion, or any bodily harm, tending to the death,
destruction, mayming, or wounding of the Queens Majesty's person, or to depose
or deprive her from the Crown, or any her dominions, Leuy war. Invade this
Realm. Dyer. 298. Utter by words. Treason.
or to leauy wars against her within this Realm or without, or to move or
stir any forreyners or strangers with force to invade this Realm, or any
other dominions being under her obeisance, and the same shall maliciously,
advisedly, and expressly, utter or declare, by any printing, ciphering or
saying, this is treason, as well in the principal offender, as in their
counselors, procurers, ayders, and comforters, knowing the same offense to be
done, and committed in any place within this Realm, or without. And because
Castles, fortresses, and holds, are necessary things for the defense of the
realm; it is ordained by a Statute made in the fourteenth year of the Queens
Majesty's reign, 14. El. cap.
that if any either within this realm or else where, Conspire to take any of
her Majesty's Castles, etc.
do conspire or devise, to take or detayne, or to waste or destroy, any of her
Castles, Bulwarks, or fortresses, or any part of them, having any munition or
ordenance therein, or appointed to be guarded for defense of this realm, and
the same conspiracies or devises, shall advisedly by any express words,
Withhold any Castle of her Majesty's. Ships.
act or writing, utter, or declare for any the malicious or rebellious intents
aforesaid, this is felony in every such offender, counselor, comforter, and
abbetter, knowing thereof, and shall loose their clergy and sanctuary. And by
that Satute it is further ordained, that if any person shall with force
maliciously and rebelliously withhold from her Majesty any of her Castles or
holds, or any of her ships, ordenance, artillery, or other of her munitions or
fortifications of war, and do not give up the same to her Highness, or to such
person as her Majesty shall appoint to receive the same to her use,
Proclamation.
within six days next after such offender shall be in her name commanded so
to do by open proclamation under the great seal of England, Burn.
to be made within any place or market town, within the County, wherein any
such offense shall be committed, or shall wilfully, Ships. Haven. Bar.
maliciously, or rebelliously, burn or destroy, or cause to be burned or
destroyed, any of her Majesty's ships, or shall bar, or cause to be barred,
any haven within any of her dominions, Imbesill. Armor. Victuals.
this is treason in every such offender and in their counselors, and
abbetters: this act is made to endure during the Queens Majesty's life, that
now is And it is felony in any that has the charge of armor vtctuals, powder,
shot, munition, or other abiliments of war, or victuals provided for
victualling of any soldiers, gunners, or mariners, or pyoners of the Queens
Majesty, that shall (to hinder her Majesty's service) willingly imbezell or
convey away the same, being to the value of xx. shillings at one or diverse
times, if he be within one year next after impeachedsor the same. 31. Eliz.
Chap.

And for that her Majesty must have soldiers to serve her in war, 31. Eliz.
Soldiers
it is convenient to set down their duties. Also it is felony by a Statute
made 18. Henry the sixth, in every man that is mustered, and receives the kings
wages, 18. Henry the sixth.
which departs from his Captain without license of his Captain, except it
be for notorious sickness, or impediment by the visitation of God: and if any
soldier, man at arms, or archer, mustered of record, and going with his
Captain beyond the sea, shall return into England within the term, for
which his Captain has retained him, or leave his Captain there in the kings
service, and adventure of the war, except he has reasonable cause showed to
his Captain, and by him to the chief in the country having royal power, and
thereuppon shall have license of his Captain, License.
under his seal, and the cause of his license, and who that so is mustered of
record, and comes away without letters testimonial of his Captain, as is
said, within his term on this side the sea, that the kings ministers there,
shall have authority to arrest the^, and them there keep, until it be
inquired: and if it may be found before the Justice of peace, and proved that
they have so mustered of record, and departed from their Captain without
license as aforesaid, Felony. Soldiers by sea. 13. Eliz.
that then they shall be punished as felons, as by that Statute plainly
appears: and the said Statute is made to extend to soldiers and gunners,
which serve on the sea, as appears by thirteenth Eliz.

If any person that shall be commanded to come to the muster, Musters 4 and 5. P.
and M: 3.
do willingly absent himself, having no excuse of sickness or other lawful
impediment, or at their appearance at such musters, do not bring with them the
best furniture of array and Armor, Armor.
as he or they shall then have for his or their own person in a readiness,
Imprisonment.
shall for every such default or offense have imprisonment by the space of ten
days, without bail or mainprise, by the commandment of such as shall have
authority to take the same musters, unless the offenders do agree with the
said Commissioners, or two of them to pay to the use of the Queens Majesty
for every such offense forty shillings for a fine. 40. shillings.
And by the same act it is further enacted, that if any being authorized to
leauy, Mustermaistter
muster, or make any men to serve in war, or otherwise for the defense of
this Realm, Take money.
do by any means take or cause to be taken any thing of any person that
shall be appointed, named, or mustered to serve in any such service, Release
soldier.
to release or discharge him of such service, he shall for such offense forfeit
five times so much as he shall so receive, exact or take. There was a notable
and necessary example made of one L. a Captain and one E. a Scriuener, which
L. by writing inde^ted received of the Shiriffe of W. by order from her
Majesty's Counsel, certain soldiers to be by the said L. conducted to serve
her Majesty in the I Will of Wight, the said L. by confederacy with the said E.
discharged diverse of the said soldiers for money, and devised betwixt them
another writing, by color whereof the said L. caused certain Constables to
bring before the said L. certain other to supply the room of the other before
discharged, which was done accordingly: for which bad practice provided
evidently, the said L. and E. were fined severally at 500 marks, and adjudged
also to stand on the pillorie at Westminster, and likewise at the Assizes in
the said County of W. By this practice the Queens Majesty was disappointed of
the soldiers which by her authority were pressed, and so bound to serve, whose
departure fro^her service without lawful license, had bin felony by the law,
where the other were not bound to serve, 4 and 5. P and Ma. ca. 3.
neither had their departure without any license been felony, because they
were pressed without her Highness authority. If any Captain, Discharge
soldier. Wages. Conduct money.
pety Captain or other, having chaxge of men for service in war, shall for
gain, take, discharge, or license any of his soldiers, or man appointed to
serve in the wars under his rule or order, to depart from the said service,
or shall not pay unto his soldiers their full and whole wages, conducte and
coat money within ten days next after he shall have received the same, Ten
times the value.
he shall forfeit for every such offense ten times the value of the thing so
taken or received, and shall also pay to every soldier from whom he shall so
withhold any of the said wages, conduct or coat money, Treble su^me. Holinsh.
998.
treble so withhoulden. Holinsh. 998. speaks of a knight executed as a
traitor for not paying soldiers their wages, 51. E. 3.
which he received of the king to pay them withal, Anno 51. Edward 3. And
touching the true service of Captains and soldiers, Captains. Soldiers. 2.
and 3. Ed. 6. ca. 2.
it is farther ordained by a statute made in the second and third year of
Edward the sixth, that if any soldier serving the king in his wars, do give
or put away any horse, gelding, or mare, or any harness wherewith he shall be
set forth, Soldier put away horse or armor.
that then every such soldier so offending, upon due proof or testimony, to
be brought before the Lieutenant, high Admiral, the kings deputy, Uiceadmirall
or Captain, and in their absence before any of their deputies, shall be
imprisoned by the same Lieutenant or any other before named, without bail or
mainprise, until he has satisfied to the party owner of the horse, gelding,
mare, or harness, so by him sold, purloined, exchanged, or so wilfully lost,
altered or otherwise made away: and if such soldiers so offending, fortune to
escape from the Lieutenant, and other the aforesaid persons without punishment
and restitution aforesaid, that then the same soldier upon complaint made by
the party grieved or his executors or administrators, upon due proof thereof
to be made by any Justice, or Justices of Peace in the parts where such
soldiers so offending shall be found, shall by such Iastice be committed to ward
without bail or mainprise, there to remain until he have satisfied the
parties grieved, his executors or administrators, of or for such horses,
geldings, mares, and harness, so by any such soldier wilfully lost, changed,
altered, or otherwise wilfully purloyned, except the same shall be lost in the
kings service, against the will of the said soldier, or were taken by the said
Lieutenant, or any of the other before named, from the said soldier for any
reasonable respect, and appointed to some other to serve in his steed, and the
same testified sufficiently from any the said persons to the said Justice, then
the said soldier not bringing the said horse or harness to the owner, shall
be discharged thereof against the owner. And by the said Statute it is also
ordained, that if any soldier serving in the kings wars, Soldier depart.
depart without license of the Lieutenant, or any of the other above named,
with buttey or otherwise being in the enemies country, or else where in the
kings service, or out of any garrison where he or they shall be appointed to
serve, it is felony, Felony.
and shall loose the benefit of his clergy and sanctuary. This Statute was
repealed: but it is revived by 4 and 5 Philip and Mary. Cap. 3.


And further it is ordained by the Statute of 2 and 3 of Edward the sixth cap. 2
and 3 E. 6. cap. 1. Commissioners for setting forth of soldiers.
2, that if any to whom the king shall direct his commandment by commission or
letters, for the leuying or setting forth of any man to serve the king in his
war, shall at any time for any gain discharge any by him appointed to serve
the king in his wars, and do assign any other person in his steed for any
gain as is aforesaid, Forfeit twenty pounds.
the persons so effending shall forfeit to the king for every man so discharged
twenty pounds.

And if any Captain do for any cause, License soldier to depart. Lieutenant.
license any soldier in his retinue to depart from the field or fortress
where they shall be appointed to serve, without the special assent and license
of the Lieutenant in writing, shall forfeit for every such soldier so by him
lice^sed to depart, Forfeit twenty pounds.
twenty pounds. If any having the order of any number of soldiers serving upon
the sea or land, do at any time take of the king any wages for any more
soldiers then served in such manner and form as the wages was paid for, Take
wages for more then serve. Days.
or for any more days then such soldiers serve, and do not note the days of
every soldiers entry into wages, and day of his death and departure, and
deliver the same to such treasurers, as shall pay the said wages every month,
in writing, so as the truth of the number of soldiers may appear to the kings
treasurer and master of the kings musters, Forfeit five pounds.
for the time being in yt behalf, he shall forfeit to the king for every such
default five pounds, and be imprisoned by the space of one month, and loose
his room and office.

No Captain shall grant to any of his soldiers appointed to serve under him,
Captain
in any town or fortress kept with garrisons of soldiers, any license or
pasports to depart from his service, Soldier. License. Lieutenant.
Imprisonment. Proclamation.
but only the Lieutenant, or any other as is aforesaid, upon pain of
imprisonment, as well of the Captain as soldier so offending, at the
discretion of the said Lieutenant. Every Lieutenant upon the pain of ten
pounds, shall cause to be proclaimed the whole effect and contents of this Act
that is to say, every Lieutenant of any army in every field to proclaim this
Act every month, and that every of the kings deputies of any fortress, Every
month.
and Captain of any fortress, to proclaim this Act within his charge, once
every quarter in a year: Every quarter. One months wages.
and every person giving to the Lieutenant true information of any the offenses
above remembered, shall have for his labor one months wages of him that shall
be found faulty, to be paid by the hand of the treasurer, upon the warrant of
the Lieuteuant, or any of the others aforesaid.

It is lawful to the said Lieutenants, and other the said persons, to retain
in his or their own hands, to their own use of the wages of his or their
soldiers, the sums following, that is to say, six shillings eight pence for
the livery coat of every common soldier, Retain wages. Coat.
and thirteen shillings four pence for the coat of every gentleman soldier
for one whole year. No manner of Liuetenant or any other the said persons,
shall be charged or prejudiced by virtue of this Act for lack of his number
retained, as is aforesaid, for or concerning any soldier or soldiers,
Soldiers die.
as shall happen to die during his service* or to be sick by the visitation of
God, or that shall depart against the will of the Lieutenant, Depart against
the will of the Captain.
or other before named unless it shall be in default of any of them This Act
shall not be prejudicial or hurtful to any having under them retinue of
soldiers for the not payment of the kings wages to their household servants,
Household servants.
and other whom they shall daily find and give meat and drink during the said
service of war, nor to charge any person for ye Gift of tenants.
taking or receiving of any gift or reward of any of his or their tenants or
friends, toward the relief, aid or help of the same persons, being
commanded by the kings Majesty for to serve in wars, Aid reserved by lease.
or otherwise to find men on horsbacke or on foot, as well within this Realm
as without, Covenant to find horse. etc.
nor for the gift, reward, aid or help, reserved or couenanted to be paid or
given to any person appointed to serve in the wars, or to find horse or men to
serve, by reason of any grant, covenant, reservation, custom, or tenure, not
to charge any Lieutenant or other above named, Wages retained. Victual,
Armor. Pressed money.
for detayning or receiving of any part of the said soldiers wages, toward or
for ye payment of victuals, harness, weapons, or for any pressed money provided
and delivered to any such soldier.

And by the said statute made 4 and 5 of Philip and Marie, ca. 4 and 5 P. and
M. cap. 3
3. It is ordained, that every article, clause, prouise, and matter contained
in the said Act of 2 and 3 of Edward the sixth, shall stand, remain, and be in
their full force, strength and effect, and yet nevertheless, where in the said
Act of 2 and 3 of Edward the sixth, it is provided that no person or persons
shall be charged for the taking or receiving of any gift or reward of any of
his or their tenannts or friends toward the relief, aid or help of the said
persons, being commanded to serve in wars, or otherwise to find men on horses
or on foot within this realm or without, nor for the gift, reward, aid or
help reserved or couenanted to be paid or given to any person appointed to
serve in wars, or to find horse or man to serve by reason of any grant,
covenant, reservation, custom, or tenure, any thing in the said act to the
contrary notwithstanding, as by that Act and Prouiso more plainly appears.
Yet by the said Act of 4 and 5 of Philip and Marie, it is enacted that no
person or persons shall or may by color of the Prouiso mentioned in the said
Act of 2 and 3 of Edward the sixth, Employed in service.
exact or demand, or leauie any sum or sums of money, horse, armor, or
any other thing, other then shall be employed forthwith in the present service
of those wars for which it is leauied, the which sum or sums of money,
horse, armor or other thing, Money rendered back.
or as much thereof as shall not be left, spent or consumed in the said service,
shall be rendered and restored to such person or persons, as paid or delivered
the same upon the penalties and forfeitures contained in the said Act. And by a
branch in the statute of 4 and 5 of Philip and Marie, cap. 2. it is ordained,
Sale of harness, horse, or weapon.
that if any soldier shall make sale of his horse, harness, and weapons, or
any of them, contrary to the form of the statute made in the second and third
year of Edward the sixth, that then not only the said soldier shall incur
the penalties of the statute, but also that the said sale made by such
soldiers, Sale void against the setter forth.
by any person knowing him to be a soldier, shall be void against him that
sold, or set forth the said horse, harness, and weapon, or any of them, to or
for the furniture of such soldier to serve with the same.

Also touching Sea-markes, Sea-marks.
for that they are necessary for the safety of her Majesty's Navy, and others
to be conveyed into the Ports and havens, it is ordained by a statute made in
the eight year of the Queens Majesty's reign that now is, 8. Eliz.
that the Masters, wardens, and assistants of the Trinity house at Detford
Scrond, shall at all times at their costs, make, erect, and set up such
Beacons, marks, and signs of the sea, in such places of the sea shores and
lands near the sea coasts or fore-lands of the sea only for seamarks,
Beacons. Marks.
as to them shall seem most meet, needful and convenient, whereby the danger
may be avoided and escaped, and ships come into their ports without peril. And
that all the said Beacons, marks and signs at the sea coasts shall be
continued, Renewed.
renewed and maintained from time to time.

And it is further ordained by that statute, Steeples, Trees.
that no steeples, trees, or other things now standing as Beacons or marks for
the sea, whereof to the owner or occupier of the place where the same does grow
or stand, before the first day of March next coming, Notice
notice shall be given by the Queens Majesty under her signet, shall be at
any time after taken down, felled, or otherwise cut down, upon pain of an
hundred pound: Forf. 100 li.
and if the offender be not worth so much, then to be deemed outlawed ipso
facto to all intents and purposes. And lastly, Outlawed. Statute of Armor.
for that there is a notable law set down touching how every man must furnish
himself with harness and armor for the wars, I have thought good to set
down this Table, whereby you may shortly see the effect of the statute
concerning the same, made in the fourth and fifth years of Philip and Mary.

And thus with my most humble prayers to the Lord of Hosts for the preservation
of the Queens Majesty's person, and this noble Realm, and to give us grace to
be true and faithful subjects to her Highness and her Crown, and to discover
all traitorous and false hearted Subjects to the same in time, I end this
simple Treatise, the 20 day of January 1599 and in the one and fortieth year
of the most peaceable reign of our most gracious Qneene, whom Almighty God
for his great mercy grant long to live and reign over us. Amen.

Armor.
Every person te^porall shall keep, etc. which has estate of inheritance, or
freehold in lands, etc. Horses or geldings demila^^es with armor for them,
whereof the one half shall be horses at the least, with furnitue. Light Horses
with th^r furniture of harness and weapon. o^stets furnished. Almain riuets,
plate coats, Briga^dines, or Cor slets furnished. Pilies. Long bows. Sheafes
of arrows. Steel caps or Sculs. Black Bills or halbards. Harquebuses. Morians
or Salets. 1000 lib. 6 10 40 40 40 30 30 30 20 20 20 1000 marks 6 30 30 30 20
20 20 10 10 10 400 lib. 2. 4 20 20 20 15 15 15 6 6 200. lib. 1. 2 10 10 10 8 8
8 3 3 100. lib. 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 100 marks 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 40 lib 2 2 2 1 1
1 2 2 20 lib. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 10 lib. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 5 lib. 1 1 1 2 1 1 Goods.
1000 marks 1, or 18 corslets furnished. 1 2 2 2 4 4 4 3 3 400 lib. 1 or 9
Corslets 1 2 2 2 2 1 200 lib. 1 2 1 2 2 2 1 1 100 lib. 1 1 1 2 2 2 40 lib. 2 1
1 1 1 20 lib. 1 2 2 2 1 10 lib. 1 1 1 1 Penalties forfeited for not having in
three months to the Queen an informer. etc. 10 lib. the horse, 3 lib. the
furniture 3 lib. the demilance. 10 lib. the gelding, 3 lib. the furnit. 40.
shillings. 20 shillings. 10 shillings. 10 shillings. 10 shillings. 10
shillings. 101 shillings. 10 shillings.

THE AUTHOR TO his Book.
Farewell, to learned skill thy self submit,
Of this to write, I think thou art not fit,
For TVLLIES eloquence a thing more meet,
How to persuade with words both mild and sweet:
Yet may thou serve, I hope, without disgrace,
Till better come, and then thou must give place.

