A pleasant new Song, Of the backs complaint, for bellies wrong: Or a farewell
to good fellowship.
To the tune of A, B, C.


GOod fellows all to you I send,
These verses which in love I pend:
Desiring you will compass keep,
and bid farewell good fellowship.
I once did bear a good fellows name,
And still am counted for the same:
But now my vow is engaged deep,
to bid farewell good fellowship.
I have been of that ^ett so long,
Till b^^ke complains of bellies wrong:
With great exclaimes in every street,
to make me leave good fellowship.
Me thinks I often do hear it say,
Among drunkards thou consumed away:
Thy (...) ^emory and wit,
all wasted by good ^el^^ship.
Of me thou take but li^^le care,
Though b^^lies and yet back is bare:
And (...) winter will thee (...),
unless thou leave good fellowship.
Thou think good fellows be thy friends
And what thou ha^t (...) them thou spends:
What (...) work against all y^ week,
comsumeth by good fellowship.
But when that all thy money is gone,
And score nor credit thou have none:
These friends from thee away will slipe,
and farewe^l all good fellowship.
When being gone, at thee they will laugh,
It Is bad to trust a broaken staff:
For fear thou fall in danger deep,
give over in time good fellowship,
For daily does attend the same,
Too sisters, called begery, and shame:
Whose hands and hearts full fast are knit,
and joined to good fellowship.
Besides deseases that does flow,
From drunkenness as many know:
Who be their smart, have felt the whipe
that follows good fellowship.
Surfetes, dropsies, and diverse pains,
Ach of the head, b^each of the brains:
Like festred ^i^^oile, foul and deep,
attends on good ^e^lowship.
Ten thousand misseries alack,
Fail^s both on body and on back:
As ancient writters, large have write,
to warn us from good fellowship.
The second part, wherein is declared, The backs complaint, has the belly
reformed: To bid farewell good fellowship. To the same tune.


THis sad complaint when I did hear
Uewing my back, I see it was bear*
And chiefest cause I knew of it,
was keeping of good fellowship.
Being much moved at the same,
A solemn oath then did I frame:
This hainious wrong, for to aquite,
to bid farewell good fellowship.
And therefore here I bid farewell,
To that which once I loved to well:
Henceforth I will in compass keep,
therefore farewell good fellowship.
Farewell all such as take delight,
To drink and go^sell day and night:
Their sole sick healths, and healthles whiff
and causes the ^a^e good fellowship.
Farewell all such that daily use,
Themselves and others to abuse:
I^ using all that they do ^eete,
with them to keep good fellowship.
Farewell all such that well are known,
To have a charge to keep at ho^e:
As wife, and child, yet from them flitt
and fly out to good fellowship.
Farewell good fellows more and less,
No tongue is able to express,
The woeful wants that daily hitte,
on them that keep good fellowship.
Some that were famous throw all parts,
For workmanship and skill in Arts:
Has beggary cought upon the hippe,
for keeping of good fellowship.
So^e that have had possessions store,
Lands, goods, and cattle, few had more:
But lands, and goods, ox, horse, and sheep,
were wasted by good fellowship.
Many examples are daily seen.
Of such that have good fellows been,
Bacchus brave soldiers, stout and stiff,
which now lament good fellowship.
And to conclud the sin is such,
The wise man says, none shall be rich
Except he shun that bitter sweet,
which drunkards call, good fellowship.
Then learn this vice for to refrain,
The only cause of grief and pain:
Least ye like me in sorrow sit,
lamenting of good fellowship.
Per me Edward Cuker.

FINIS.
Printed at London by W. I.


