A SERMON PREACHED AT White Hall, on Easter day the 16. of April. 1620.

By the Bishop of Winchester.

LONDON, Printed by ROBERT BARKER, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XX.

JOHN. CHAP. XX. Maria autem stabat iuxta monumentum, etc.

Ver. II. But Marie, stood by the Sepulcher, weeping, and as she wept she
stouped, and looked into the Sepulcher,

12. And saw two angels, in white, sitting, the one at the head, the other at
the feet, where the body of Jesus had Iyen.

13. And they said to her, Woman, why weepest thou? She said to them, They have
taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid Him.

14. When she had thus said, she turned herself about, and saw Jesus standing,
and knew not that it was Jesus.

15. Jesus says to her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seek thou? She
(supposing He had been the gardener) said to him, Sir if thou have borne Him
hence, tell me where thou have laid Him, and I will take Him thence.

16. Jesus says to her, Marie: She turned herself, and said to Him, Rabboni;
that is to say, Master.

17. Jesus says to her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father,
But, go to my brethren, and say to them, I ascend to my Father and to your
Father, and to my God and your God.


This last verse was not touched.

IT is Eastr day abroad: And it is so in the text. We keep Salomons rule, 1.
Reg. 8. 59.
Verbum diei in die suo: For, all this (I have read) is nothing else, but a
report of CHRIST'S rising, and of His appearing this Easter day morning, His
very first appearing of all. S. Mar. 16. 9.
Mark is express for it, that Christ was no sooner risen this day, but He
appeared first of all to Mary Magdalene: which first appearing of His, is here
by S. John extended, and set down at large.

The sum of it is, 1. The seeking Christ dead; 2. The finding Him alive.

The Manner of it is, That Mary Magdalene staying still by the Sepulcher, first
she saw a vision of Angels: and after, she saw Christ himself. Saw Him, and
was herself made an Angel by Him, a good Angel, to carry the Euangel, the first
good and joyful tidings of His rising again from the dead. And this was a
great honor (all considered) to serve in an Angels place. To do that at His
Resurrection ( His second birth) that, Acts 13. 33.
at His first birth an Angel did. An Angel first published that; Mary Magdalen
brought first notice of this. As he, to the Shepherds; so she, to the
Apostles, the Pastors of Christ's flock, by them to be spread abroad to the ends
of the world.

To look a little into it.

1. Mary is the name of a woman:

2. Mary Magdalen, of a sinful woman.

Eve; that, as by a woman came the first news of death; So, by a woman also
might come the first notice of the Resurrection from the dead. And the place
fits well: for, in a garden, they came, both.

needed it: most needed it, and so first sought it. And it agrees well; He be
first found of her, that first sought Him: Even in that respect she was to be
respected.

In which two, there is opened unto us a gate of hope, Hos. 2. 15.
two great leaves (as it were) one that no infirmity of sex (for a woman we
see: (the other, that no enormitie of sin, (for a sinful woman, one that had
the blemish, that she went under the common name of peccatrix, Luke. 7. 37.
as notorious and famous in that kind:) That, neither of these, shall debar
any to have their part in Christ, and in His Resurrection; any, that shall
seek Him in such sort, as she did. For, either of these non obstante, nay
notwithstanding both these, she had the happiness; To see His Angels (and that
was no small favor:) To see Christ himself: And that, first of all, before
all others, to see and salute Him: And, to receive a commission from Him of
Vade and dic, to go and tell, (that is, as it were) to be an Apostle, and that
to the Apostles themselves, to bring them the first good news of Christ's
rising again.

THere are three Parties that take up the whole Text: and if I should divide
it, I would make those three Parties the three parts; 1 Mary Magdalene, 2 the
Angels, 3 and Christ our Savior.

Mary Magdalen begins her part in the first verse, but she goes along through
them all.

Angels part in the two verses next. 1 Their appearing, 2 and their speech to
her: Appearing, in the twelfth, Speech, in the thirteenth.

Christ's part in all the rest. 1 His appearing, 2 and Speech, likewise.
Appearing, first, unknown, in the fourteenth, and His speech then, in the
fifteenth.

After, His appearing, and speech again, being known, in the sixteenth and
seventeenth. 1 Forbidding her, Mane and tange, to stay, and to touch, 2 and
bidding her, Vade and dic, together quickly to His brethren, and tell them, His
resurrection was past, for (ascendo) He was taking thought for His ascension,
and preparing for that. Thus lies the order, and the parts.

The use will be, that we, in our seeking, carry our selves as she did: and so
may we have the happiness, that she had, to find Christ, as He is now to be
found in the virtue of His Resurrection.

VER. 11.
But Mary, stood by the sepulcher, weeping, and as she wept, she stouped, and
looked into the sepulcher.
OF the favors vouchsafed this same faelix peccatrix, (as the Fathers term
her) this day, 1 To see but Christ's Angels, 2 To see Christ at all, 3 To see
Him first of all, 4 But, more then all these, to be employed by Him in so
heavenly an errand; reason we can render none that helped her to these, but
that, which in a place Christ himself renders, Quia dilexit mulium, Luke 7. 47.
Because she loved much.

She loved much: we cannot say, She believed much. For, by her sustulerunt
thrice repeated, at the second, thirteenth, fifteenth verses, it seems, she
believed no more, then just as much as the High Priests would have had the
world believe, Matt. 28. 13.
that He was taken away by night.

Defectus fideinon est negandus, affectus amoris no^ est vituper and us: It is
Origin. we cannot commend her faith; her love, we cannot but commend; And so
do: Commend it in her, commend it to you. Much it was, and much good proof
gave she of it. Before, to Him living: now, to Him dead. To Him dead, there are
diverse: 1 She was last at His Cross, and first at His grave: 2 Stayed longest
there, was soonest here: 3 Could not rest, till she were up to seek Him: 4
Sought Him, while it was yet dark, before she had light to seek Him by.

But, to take her as we find her in the Text, and to look no whither else.
There are, in the Text, no less then ten, all arguments of her great love,
all, as it were, a commentary upon dilexit multum. And even in this first
verse, there are five of them.

The first, in these words; stabat inxta monumentum, that she stood by the
grave. A place, where faint love loves not to stand. Bring Him to the grave,
and lay Him in the grave, and there leave him: but come no more at it, nor
stand not long by it. Stand by Him, while He is alive, So did many, stand, and
go, and sit by Him. But, stans iuxta monumentum, Stand by Him dead, Marie
Magdalen, she did it, and she only did it, and none but she. Amor stans iuxta
monumentum.

The next is in these, Maria autem stabat. In the autem, the but (that, helps
us to another.) But Mary stood (that is as much to say, as) others did not, But,
she did. ver. 8.
Peter and John were there but even now. Thither they came, but not finding
Him, away they went. They went: But Marie went not, she stood still. Their
going away commends her staying behind. To the grave she came before them,
From the grave she went to tell them, To the grave she returns with them, At
the grave she stays behind them. Fortior eam figebat affectus, says
Augustine, a stronger affection fixed her, so fixed her, that she had not the
power to remove thence. Go, who would, she would not, but stay, still. To stay
while others do so, while company stays, that is the worlds love: But Peter
is gone, and John too: all are gone, and we left alone; then to stay, is love,
and constant love. Amor manens, alijs recedentibus, Love, that when others
shrink and give over, holds out still.

she stood, and she wept; And, not a tear or two: but she wept a good (as we
say;) That the Angels, That Christ himself pity her, and both of them, the
first thing they do, they ask her, Why she wept so? Both of them begin with
that question. And, in this, is love. For, if, when Christ stood at Lazarus
graves side and wept, Ioh. 11. 36.
the Jews said, See how be loved him: may not we say the very same, when Mary
stood at Christ's grave and wept, See, how she loved him? Whose presence she
wished for, His miss she wept for; whom she dearly loved, while she had Him,
she bitterly bewailed, when she lost Him. Amor amare flens, Love running down
the cheeks.

The fourth in these, And as she wept, she ever and anon. That is, she did so
weep, as, she did seek withal. Weeping without seeking, is but to small
purpose. But, her weeping hindered not her seeking; Her sorrow dulled not her
diligence. And, diligence is a character of love, comes from the same root,
dilectio and diligentia from diligo, both. Amor diligentiam diligens.

To seek, is one thing: not to give over seeking, is another. For, I ask, why
should she now look in? Peter and John had looked there before, nay had been
in the grave, (they.) Ver. 8.
It makes no matter: She will not trust Peter's eyes, nor John's, neither. But,
she her self had before this, looked in, (too.) No force, she will not trust
her self, she will suspect her own eyes, she will rather think, she looked
not well before, then leave off her looking. It is not enough for love, to
look in once. Thus we use, this is our manner when we seek a thing seriously,
where we have sought already, there to seek again, thinking we did it not
well, but, if wenow look again, better, we shall surely find it, then. Amor
quaerens vbi quaesiuit. Love, that never thinks, it has looked enough. These
five.

And, by these five, we may take measure of our love, and of the true multum of
it. Vt profit nobis ejus stare, ejus plorare, and quaerere (faith Origin) that
her standing, her weeping, and seeking, we may take some good by them.

I doubt, ours will fall short. Stay by Him alive, that we can, juxtamensam:
but juxta monumentum, who takes up his standing there? And our love, it is dry
eyed, it cannot weep; it is stiffe-ioynted, it cannot stoop to secke. If it
do, and we hit not on Him at first, away we go, with Peter and John; we
stay it not out with Mary Magdalen. A sign, our love is little, and light, and
our seeking suitable, and so, it is without success. We find not Christ, no
marvel: but seek Him as she sought Him, and we shall speed, as she sped.

VER. 12.
And saw two Angels, in white, sitting, the one at the head, the other at the
feet, where the body of Jesus had lien.
For what came of this? Thus staying by it, and thus looking in, again and
again, though she saw not Christ at first, she sees his Angels. For so it
pleased Christ to come by degrees: His Angels, before Him. And, it is no vulgar
honor, this, to see but an Angel, what would one of us give to see but the
like sight?

We are now at the Angels part. Their appearing, in this verse. There are four
points in it. 1 Their place, 2 Their habit, 3 Their site, 4 and their order. 1
Place, in the grave, 2 Habit, in white; 3 site, they were sitting; 4 and their
order in sitting, one at the head, the other at the feet.

The Place, In the grave she saw them: Angels in a grave, is a strange sight,
a fight never seen before, not till Christ's body had been there, never, till
this day; this the first news of Angels in that place. For, a grave, is no
place for Angels (one would think) for worms, rather: Blessed Angels, not but
in a blessed place. But, since Christ lay there, that place is blessed. There
was a voice heard from heaven, Blessed be the dead, Reu. 14. 13.
Precious the death, Glorious the memory now, Psalm. 116. 15.
of them that die in the Lord. And, even this, that the Angels disdained not
now to come thither, and to sit there, is an auspicium of a great change to
ensue in the state of that place. Quid gloriosius Angelo? quid vilius
vermiculo? says Augustine. Qui fuit vermiculorum locus, est and Angelorum.
That which was the place for worms, is become a place for Angels.

Habit, In white. So were there diverse of them, diverse times, this day, seen,
in white, all, in that color. It seems to be their Easter day color; for at
this Feast, they all do their service in it. Their Easter day color, for it
is the color of the Resurrection. The state whereof when Christ would
represent upon the Mount. His raiment was all white, no Fuller in earth could
come near it. And, our color it shall be, Reu. 7. 9.
when rising again, we shall walk in white robes, and follow the Lamb
whither soever He goes.

Heaven mourned on Good Friday; the Eclipse made all then in black. Easter
day, it rejoices, Heaven and Angels all in white. Solomon tells us, it is the
color of joy. And, Eccles. 9. 8.
that is the state of joy, and this the day of the first joyful tidings of it,
with joy ever celebrated, even in albis, eight days together, by them that
found Christ.

In white, and sitting: As the color, of Sit down, and rest. And so, is the
grave made by this mornings work, a place of rest. Rest, not from our labors
only, so do the beasts rest when they die: But, as it is in 16. Psalm. 16. 9.
Psalm (a Psalm of the resurrection) a rest in hope; hope, of rising again,
the members in the virtue of their head, who this day is risen. So, to enter
into the rest, which yet remains for the people of God, Heb. 4. 9.
even the Sabbath eternal.

and in this order sitting, at the head, one; at the feet, another, where His
body had lain.

1 Which order may well refer to Christ himself, whose body was the true
Arc indeed, Col. 2. 9.
In which it pleased the Godhead to dwell bodily; and is therefore here
between two Angels, as was the Arc (the type of it) between the two
Cherubims. Exodus 25. 19.


2 May also refer to Mary Magdalen. Mat. 26. 7.
She had anointed his head, Ioh. 11. 3.
she had anointed his feet: at these two places, sit the two Angels, as it
were to acknowledge so much for her sake.

3 In mystery they refer it thus. Because caput Christi Deus, 1 Cor. 11. 3.
the Godhead is the head of Christ, Genesis 3. 15.
and His feet (which the Serpent did bruise) His manhood; that either of these
has his Angel. That, to Christ man, no less then to Christ God, the Angels
do now their service. In principio erat verbum, His Godhead, there an Angel:
Verbum caro factum, His manhood; there, another. And let all the Angels of God
worship Him in both. Heb. 1. 6.
Even in His manhood, at His cradle (the head of it) a queere of Angels; At His
grave (the feet of it) Angels likewise. Luke 2. 13.


4 And lastly, for our comfort (thus.) have our parts in the first
resurrection, Reu. 20. 6.
which is of the soul from sin. We shall go to our graves in white (in the
comfort, and color of hope) lie between two Angels, there: they guard our
bodies, dead, and present them alive again at the resurrection.

1 Yet before we leave them, to learn somewhat of the Angels: specially, of
the Angel that sat at the feet. That, between them there was no striving
for places. He that sat at the feet, as well content with his place, as he
that at the head. We, to be so, by their example. For, with us, both the Angels
would have been at the head, never a one at the feet: with us, none would be
at the feet by his good will, Headangels all.

2 Again, from them both. That, inasmuch, as the head ever stands for the
beginning, and the feet for the end; that we be careful, that our beginnings
only be not glorious (O an Angel at the head in any wise) but that we look
to the feet, there be another there, too. Ne turpiter atrum Definat, that it
end not in a black Angel, that began in a white. And this for the Angels
appearing.

VER. 13.
And they said to her, Woman, why weepest thou? She said to them, They have
taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid Him.
NOw to their speech. Their question.
It was not a dumb show, this, a bare apparition, and so vanished away. It was
visio and vox, a vocal vision. Here is a dialogue, too: The Angels speak to
her.

And they ask her, Quid ploras? Why she wept? what cause she had to weep.
They mean, she had none (as indeed no more she had.) All was in error, piae
lachrymae, sed caecae, Gregory.
tears of grief, but false grief, imagining that to be, that was not, Him to
be dead that was alive. She weeps, because she found the grave empty, which
God forbid she should have found full, for then Christ must have been dead
still, and so, no Resurrection.

And this case of Marie Magdalen is our case oftentimes. In the error of our
conceit, to weep where we have no cause; to joy, where we have as little.
Where we should, where we have cause to joy, we weep: and, where to weep, we
joy. Our ploras has never a quid. False joys, and false sorrows, false
hopes, and false fears this life of ours is full of, God help us.

Now because she erred, they ask her the cause, that she alleging it, they
may take it away, and show it to be no cause. As the elen^h, a non causa pro
causa makes foul rule among us, beguiles us, all our life long.

Will ye hear her answer to, Her answer.
Why weep you? Why? sustulerunt, that was the cause, Her Lord was gone, was
taken away.

And a good cause it had been if it had have lost, lost a good Lord, so good
and gracious a Lord, as He had been to her.

taken away; that is one kind of taking away. But his dead body is left; so,
all is not taken from us; That, was not her case. For, in saying ( her Lord)
she means not, Her Lord alive, that is not it; she means not, they had
slain Him, they had taken away his life (she had wept her fill for that,
already.) But, her Lord, that is, his dead body. For, though His life was gone,
yet His body was left. And, that was all, she now had left of Him (that, she
calls Her Lord) and, that, they had taken away from her, too. A poor one it
was, yet some comfort it was to her, to have even that left her, to visit, to
anoint, to do other offices of love, even to that. Etiam viso cadauere
recalescit amor, at the sight, Ambros.
even of that, will love revive, it will fetch life of love again. But now,
here is her case; that, is gone, and all, and nothing, but an empty grave, now
left to stand by. That S. Augustine says well, sublatus de monumento, grieved
her more, then occisus in ligno, for, then something yet was left; now, nothing
at all. Right sustulerunt, taken away quite and clean.

And thirdly, her nescio vbi. For though He be taken away, it is some comfort
yet, if we know where to fetch Him again. But here, He is gone, without all
hope of recovery, or getting again. For they (but she knew not who) had
carried Him (she knew not whither) laid Him (she knew not where) there to do
to Him (she knew not what.) So that now she knew not, whither to go, to find
any comfort. It was nescio vbi, with her, right. Put all these together, His
life taken away, His body taken away, and carried no man knows whither; and,
do they ask, why she wept? or, can any blame her for it?

The truth is, Her error.
none had taken away Her Lord, for all this: for, all this while Her Lord was
well, was, as she would have had Him, alive and safe. He went away of
himself, none carried him thence. What of that? Non credens suscitatum,
Augustine.
credidit sublatum, for want of belief He was risen, she believed, He was
carried away. She erred in so believing, there was error in her love, but
there was love in her error too.

And, Yet, her love.
give me leave to lay out three more arguments of her love, out of this verse
(to make up eight, toward the making up of her multum.)

1. The very title she gives Him of Dominum meum, is one, My Lord, that she
gives Him that term. For, it shows her love and respect was no whit abated,
by the scandal of His death. It was a most opprobrious, ignominious, shameful
death He suffered, such, as in the eyes of the world, any would have been
ashamed to own Him, (or say of Him, Meum:) But, any would have been afraid to
honor Him with that title, to style Him, Dominum. She was neither. Meum, for
hers, Dominum meum, for her Lord, she acknowledges Him, is neither ashamed,
nor afraid to continue that title still. Amor scandalo non scandalizatus.

this) That, she having looked into the grave a little before, and seen never
an Angel there; and of a sudden looking in now, and seeing two, (a sight, able
to have amazed any; any, but her) It mooues not her at all. The suddenness,
the strangeness, the gloriousness of the sight, yea even of Angels, move her
not at all. She seems to have no sense of it, and so to be in a kind of
ecstasy all the while. Domine, propter te est extra se, says Bernard. Amor
extasin patiens.

And thirdly, as that strange sight affected why weep you?) show, they would
remove it, if it lay in them: Neither of these did, or could move her, or
make her once leave her weeping: she wept on, still ( Christ will ask her,
quid ploras? by and by again.) If she find an Angel, if she find not her
Lord, it will not serve. She had rather find his dead body, then them in all
their glory. No man in earth, no Angel in heaven can comfort her, none but He
that is taken away, Christ, and none but Christ; and, till she find Him again,
her soul refuses all manner comfort: yea, even from heaven, even from the
Angels themselves: These three. Amor super amissum renuens consolari.

Thus she, in her love, for her supposed loss, or taking away. And what shall
become of us, in ours then? That lose Him 1 not once, but often, 2 And not in
suppose, as she did, but in very deed, 3 And that, by sin (the worst loss of
all,) 4 And that, not by any others taking away, but by our own act, and
wilful default; and are not grieved, nay not moved a whit, break none of our
wonted sports for it, as if we reckoned Him, as good lost as found. Yea, when
Christ, and the holy Ghost, and the favor of God, and all is gone, how soon,
how easily are we comforted again for all this? that, none shall need to say,
quid ploras? to us, rather, quid non ploras? ask us, why we weep not, having
so good cause to do it, as we then have? This for the Angels part.

VER. 14.
When she had thus said, she turned her self about, and saw Jesus standing,
and knew not that it was Jesus.
Always the Angels (we see) touched the right string, and she tells them the
wrong cause, but yet the right, if it had been right.

Now, to this answer of hers, they would have replied, and taken away her
error touching her Lords taking away; that, if she knew all, she would have
left her seeking, and fit her down by them: and left her weeping, and been in
white, as well as they.

But, here is a supersedeas to them: The Lord himself comes in place. (Now
come we from the seeking Him dead, to the finding Him alive.) For, when He
saw, no Angels, no sight, no speech of theirs would serve, none but her Lord
could give her any comfort; Her Lord comes. Christus adest.

Adest Christus, nec ab eis vnquam abest, a quibus quaeritur, says Augustine.
Christ is found, found by her; And this case of hers, shall be the case of all
that seriously seek Him. This woman here, for one, she sought Him (we see.)
They that went to Emmaus to day, they but talked of Him sadly, and they both
found Him. Why, He is found of them that seek Him not. Esa 65. 1. but, of them
that seek Him, never but found. For, thou Lord never failest them that seek
Thee. Psalm. 9. 10. God is not unrighteous, to forget the work and labor of
their love that seek Him. Heb. 6. 10.

So, find Him they shall, but happily not all so fully at first, no more then
she did. For, first (to try her yet a little further) He comes unknown,
stands by her, and she little thought it had been He.

A case that likewise falls out full often. Doubtless He is not far from every
one of us, Acts 17. 27.
says the Apostle to the Athenians. But He is nearer us many times then we
think; Job. 9. 11.
even hard by us, and we not aware of it, says Job. And, Luke 19. 42.
O si cognouisses and tu, O if we did know (and it stands us in hand to pray
that we may know) when He is so, for, that is the time of our visitation. Luke
19. 44.


Saint John says here, the Angels were sitting: Saint Luke says, they stood.
Luke 24. 4. They are thus reconciled. That, Christ coming in presence, the
Angels which before were sitting, stood up. Their standing up, made Marie
Magdalen turn her to see who it was they rose to. And so, Christ she saw, but,
knew Him not.

Not only not knew Him, but misknew Him, took Him for the Gardener. Tears,
will dim the sight, and it was yet scarce day, and she, seeing one, and not
knowing what any one should make in the ground so early, but he that dressed
it, she might well mistake. But it was more then so: Her eyes were not holden
only, Luke 24. 16.
that she did not know Him, but over and beside, Mar. 16. 12.
He did appear (...) in some such shape as might resemble the Gardener, whom
she took Him for.

Proper enough it was, it fitted well the time and place (this person.) The
time, It was the Spring: The place, It was a garden (that place is most in
request at that time) for that place and time, a Gardener does well.

Of which her so taking Him, Saint Gregory says well, Profecto errando non
errauit. She did not mistake in taking Him for a Gardener: though she might
seem to err, in some sense, yet in some other she was in the right. For, in a
sense, and a good sense, CHRIST may well be said to be a Gardener, and indeed
is one. For, our rule is, Christ, as He appears, so He is, ever: No false
semblant in Him.

1 A Gardener He is then. The first, the fairest garden that ever was
(Paradise) He was the Gardener, it was of His planting. So, a Gardener.

2 And ever since it is He that (as God) makes all our gardens green, sends us
yearly the Spring, and all the herbs and flowers we then gather; and neither
Paul with his planting, nor Apollo with his watering, could do any good
without him. So a Gardener in that sense.

3 But not in that alone; But He it is that gardens our souls too, and makes
them, as the Prophet says, Iere. 31. 21.
Like a well watered garden, weeds out of them whatsoever is noisome or
unsavory, sowes and plants them with true roots and seeds of righteousness,
waters them with the dew of His grace, and makes them bring forth fruit to
eternal life.

But it is none of all these, but besides all these, nay over and above all
these, this day (if ever) most properly He was a Gardener. Was one, and so
after a more peculiar manner, might take this likeness on Him. Christ rising
was indeed a Gardener, and that a strange one, who made such an herb grow out
of the ground this day, as the like was never seen before, a dead body, to
shoot forth alive out of the grave.

I ask, was He so this day alone? No, but this profession of His, this day
begun, He will follow to the end. For, He it is, that by virtue of this
mornings act, shall garden our bodies, too: turn all our graves into garden
plots: Yea, shall one day turn land and Sea and all into a great garden, and
so husband them, as they shall in due time bring forth live bodies, even all our
bodies alive again.

Long before did Esai see this and sing of it, in his song Esa. 26. 19.
resembling the Resurrection to a Spring garden. Awake and sing (says he) ye
that dwell for a time are as it were sown in the dust, for His dew shall be as
the dew of herbs, and the earth shall shoot forth her dead. So then: He
appeared no other, then He was: A Gardener He was, not in show alone, but opere
and veritate, and so came in His own likeness. This for Christ's appearing. Now
to His speech (but, as unknown still.)

VERSE. 15.
Jesus says to her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seek thou? She (supposing
he had been the Gardener) said to Him, Sir, if thou have borne Him hence, tell
me where thou have laid Him, and I will take Him thence.
STill she wept: Christ's question unknown.
So He begins with quid ploras? asks the same question the Angels had before;
only quickens it a little with Quem quaeris, Whom seek you? So, quem quaeris,
quaerit a te quem quaeris, whom she sought, He asks her whom she sought? Si
quaeris, Augustine,
cur non cognoscis? si cognoscis, cur quaeris? says Augustine. If she seek
Him, why knows she Him not? If she know Him, why seeks she Him still? A
common thing with us (this also.) To seek a thing, and when we have found it,
not to know, we have so; but even Christum a Christo quaerere, to ask Christ
for Christ. Which howeuer it fall in other matters, in this seeking of Christ,
it is safe. Even when we seek Christ, to pray to Christ, to help us to find
Christ; we shall do it full evil without Him.

This quid ploras, it comes now twice. The Angels asked it, we stood not on
it, then. Now, seeing Christ asks it again, the second time, we will think
there is something in it, and stay a little at it. The rather, for that it is
the very opening of His mouth, the very first words that ever came from Him,
that He spoke first of all, after His rising again from death. There is sure
some more then ordinary matter in this quid ploras, if it be, but even for that.

Thus say the Fathers; 1 That Marie Magdalen standing by the grave side, and
there weeping, is thus brought in, to represent unto us, the state of all
mankind before this day, the day of Christ's rising again, weeping over the
dead, as do the heathen that have no hope: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
comes Christ with His quid ploras, Why do you weep? As much to say, as ne
plores, Weep not; why should you weep? There is no cause of weeping now.
Henceforth none shall need to stand by the grave to weep there any more. A
question very proper for Easter Day, for the day of the Resurrection. For, if
there be a rising again, quid ploras, is right, why should she, why should any
weep, then?

So that this quid ploras of Christ's, wipes away tears from all eyes, and as
we sing in the 30 Psalm (whose title is, the Psalm of the Resurrection) puts
off our sackcloth, that is, our mourning weeds, girds us with gladness, puts
us all in white with the Angels. Ploras then: leave that for Good Friday, for
His Passion: Weep then, and spare not. But, quid ploras, for Easter Day, is in
kind (the Feast of the Resurrection) why should there be any weeping upon it?
Is not Christ risen? Shall not He raise us with Him? Is He not a Gardener, to
make our bodies sown, to grow again? Ploras, leave that to the heathen, that
are without all hope; but to the Christian man, quid ploras? Why should he
weep? he has hope: the Head is already risen, the members shall in their due
time follow Him.

I observe, that four times this day, at four several appearings, 1 at the
first (at this here) He asks her, quid ploras? Why she wept? 2 Of them that
went to Emaus, quid tristes estis? Luke 24. 17.
Why are ye sad? 3 Within a verse following this Text (the 19.) He says to
the Eleven, Pax vobis, Peace be to them: 4 And to the women that met Him on the
way, Matt. 28. 9.
(...) that is, Rejoice, be glad. So, no weeping, no being sad, now; nothing
this day, but peace and joy: they do properly belong to this feast.

And, this I note the more willingly, now, this year; because the last Easter
we could not so well have noted it. Some wept then; all were sad, little joy
there was, and there was a quid, a good cause for it. But blessed be God that
has now sent us a more kindly Easter, of this, by taking away the cause of our
sorrow then, that we may preach of Quid ploras, and be far from it. So much for
quid ploras, Christ's question. Now to her answer.

She is still where she was; Her answer.
at sustulerunt before, at sustulisti, now: situ sustulisti: we shall never get
that word from her.

But, to Christ she seems somewhat more harsh, then to the Angels. To them
she complains of others, They have taken. Christ she seems to charge, at
least to suspect of the fact, as if He looked like one that had been a breaker
up of graves, a carrier away of corses out of their place of rest. Her ( if)
implies as much. But pardon love: as it fears where it needs not, so it
suspects often where it has no cause. He, or any that comes in our way, has
done it, has taken Him away, when love is at a loss. But Bernard speaks to
Christ for her; Domine, amor quem ^abebat in Te, and dolor quem babebat de Te,
excuset eam apud Te, si forte errauit circa Te: That the love she bare to Him,
the sorrow she had for Him, may excuse her with Him, if she were in any error
concerning Him, in her saying, Si tu sustulisti.

And yet, Origin.
see how God shall direct the tongue. In thus charging Him, Prophetat and
nescit, She says truer then she was aware. For indeed, if any took Him away,
it was He did it. So, she was not much amiss. Her situ, was true, though not
in her sense. For, quod de ipso factum est, ipse fecit. All that was done to
Him, He did it Himself. His taking away, Chrysologus.
virtus fuit, non facinus, was by His own power, not by the act of any other:
Et gloria, non iniuria, No other man's injury it was, but His own glory, that
she found Him not there. This was true, but this was no part of her meaning.

I cannot here pass over two more Characters of her love, that so you may have
the full ten I promised.

si tu sustulisti eum, in her eum, in her [Him.] Him? which Him? Her affection
seems so to transport her, as she says no man knows what. To one, a mere
stranger to her, and she to him, she talks of one thrice under the term of
Him, If thou have taken Him, tell me where thou have laid Him, and I will fetch
Him; Him, Him, and Him, and never names Him, or tells who He is. This is
Soloecismus amoris, an irregular speech, but loves own Dialect. Him is enough
with love, who knows not who that is? It supposes every body, all the world
bound to take notice of Him who^ we look for, only by saying, Him, though we
never tell his name, nor say a word more. Amor, quem ipse cogitat, neminem
putans ignorare.

ego tollam; If he would tell her where he had laid Him, she would go fetch
Him (that she would.) Alas poor woman, she was not able to lift Him. There
are more then one, or two either, allowed to the carrying of a corpse. As for
His, it had more then an hundred pound weight of myrrh and other odours upon
it, Ioh. 19. 39.
beside the poise of a dead body. She could not do it. Well, yet she would do
it, though. O mulier, non mulier (says Origin) for ego tollam seems rather
the speech of a Porter, or of some lusty strong fellow at least, then of a
silly weak woman. But love makes women more then women, at least it makes them
have (...), the courage above the strength, far. Never measures her own
forces, no burden too heavy, no assay too hard for love, and nihil erubescit
nisi nomen difficultatis; And is not ashamed of any thing, but that any thing
should be too hard or too heavy for it. Affectus sine mensura virium
propriarum. Both these argue dilexit multum. And so now you have the full
number often.

VER. 16.
Jesus says to her, Mary: She turned her self, and said to Him, Rabboni; that
is to say, Master.
NOw magnes amoris amor. Christ's second speech.
Nothing so allures, so draws love to it, as does love it self. In Christ
specially, and in such in whom the same mind is. For, when her Lord saw, there
was no taking away His taking away from her, all was in vain, neither men nor
Angels, nor Himself (so long as He kept Himself gardener) could get any
thing of her, but her Lord was gone, He was taken away; and that for the want
of Jesus, nothing but Jesus could yield her any comfort; He is no longer able
to contain, but even discloses Himself; And discloses Himself by His voice.

For, it should seem, before, with His shape, He had changed that also. But
now, He speaks to her in His known voice, in the wonted accent of it, does
but name her name, Mary, no more, and that was enough. That was as much to say,
Recognosce a quo recognosceris, Augustine.
she would at least take notice of Him, that showed He was no stranger by
calling her by her name. For, whom we call by their names, we take particular
notice of. So God says to Moses, Exodus 33. 17.
Te autem cognoui de nomine, Thou have found grace in my sight, and I know thee
by thy name. As God, Moses; So Christ, Mary Magdalen.

And this indeed is the right way to know Christ; to be known of Him first.
Gal. 4. 9. the Apostle says, Now we have known God (and then corrects
himself) or rather have been known of God. For, till He know us, we shall
never know Him aright.

And now, lo, Christ is found, found alive that was sought dead. A cloud may
be so thick, we shall not see the Sun through it. The Sun must scatter that
cloud, and then we may. Here is an example of it. It is strange, a thick
cloud of heaviness had so covered her, as, see Him she could not, through
it; this one word, these two syllables [ Mary] from His mouth, scatters it,
all. No sooner had His voice sounded in her ears, but it drives away all the
mist, dries up her tears, lightens her eyes, that she knew Him straight, and
answers Him with her wonted salutation, Her answer.
Rabboni. If it had lien in her power to have raised Him from the dead, she
would not have failed, but done it (I dare say.) Now it is done to her hands.

And with this, all is turned out and in. A new world, now. Away with
sustulerunt; His taking away, is taken away quite. For, if His taking away were
her sorrow; Contrariorum contraria consequentia. Augustine.
Si de sublato plorauit, de suscitato exultauit, we may be sure; If sad for His
death, For His taking away; then glad for his rising, for His restoring again.
Surely, if she would have been glad but to have found but His dead body; now
she finds it, and Him, alive, what was her joy, how great, may we think? So
that, by this she saw Quid ploras was not asked her for naught, that it was no
impertinent question, as it fell out. Well now, He that was thought lost, is
found again, and found, not, as He was sought for, not a dead body, but a
living soul, nay, a quickening Spirit, then. 1. Cor. 15. 45.
And that might Marie Magdalen well say. He showed it, for He quickened her
and her Spirits, that were as good as dead. You thought you should have come to
Christ's Resurrection to day, and so you do. But, not to His alone, but even to
Marie Magdalens resurrection, too. For, in very deed, a kind of resurrection it
was, was wrought in her, revived, as it were, and raised from a dead and
drowping, to a lively and cheerful estate. The Gardener had done his part,
made her all green, on the sudden.

And all this, by a word of His mouth. Such power is there in every word of
His, so easily are they called, whom Christ will but speak to.

But, by this we see, when He would be made known to her after his rising, He
did choose to be made known by the ear rather then by the eye. By hearing
rather then by appearing. Opens her ears first, and her eyes after. Her eyes
were holden, Luc. 24. 16.
till her ears were opened; Psalm. 40. 6.
comes aures autem aperuistimihi, and that opens them.

With the Philosophers, hearing is the sense of wisdom. With us, in
divinity, it is the sense of faith. So most meet. Christ is the Word; hearing
then (that sense) is Christ's sense; voce quam visu, more proper to the Word.
So, Pasl. 48. 8.
sicut audiuimus goes before, and then, sic vidimus comes after. In matters of
faith the ear goes first, ever, and is of more use, and to be trusted before
the eye. For, in many cases faith holds, where sightfaileth.

This then is a good way to come to the knowledge of Christ, by Hodie si vocem,
Psalm. 95. 7.
to hear His voice. Howbeit, it is not the only way. There is another way to
take notice of Him by besides, and we to take notice of it. On this very day we
have them both.

For, twice this day came Christ, unknown first, and then known, after. To
Marie Magdalen, here: and to them at Emmaus. Luc. c. 24. To Marie Magdalen,
unknown, in the shape of a Gardener. To those that went to Emaus, unknown, in
the likeness of a Trauailer by the way side. Came to be known to her by His
voice, by the word of His mouth. Not so to them. For, many words He spoke to
them, and they felt them warm at their hearts, but, Luke 24. 32. 35.
knew Him not for all that. But, He was known to them in the breaking of the
bread. Her eyes opened by speaking a word: Their eyes opened by the breaking of
bread. There is the one and the other way, and so now you have both. And now
you have them, I pray you make use of them. (I see I shall not be able to go
further then this verse.)

It were a folly to fall to comparisons, Committere inter se, to set them at
odds together, these two ways: as the fond fashion now adays is, whether is
better, Prayer or Preaching: The Word, or the Sacraments. What needs this?
Seeing we have both, both are ready for us; the one now, the other by and by.
We may end this question, soon. And this is the best and surest way to end
it, to esteem of them both, to thank Him for both, to make use of both,
having now done with one, to make trial of the other. It may be (who knows)
if the one will not work, the other may. And if by the one or by the other, by
either, or by both, it be wrought, what harm have we? In case it be not; yet
have we offered to God our serice in both, and committed the success of both
to Him. He will see they shall have success, and in His good time (as shall be
expedient for us) vouchsafe every one of us as He did Marie Magdalen in the
Text, to know Him and the virtue of His Resurrection; Philip. 3. 10.
and make us partakers of both, by both the means before remembered, by His
blessed Word, by His holy mysteries; the means to raise our souls here, the
pledges of the raising up of our bodies hereafter. Of both which He make us
partakers, who is the Author of both, JESUS CHRIST the Righteous, etc.

LONDON, Printed by ROBERT BARKER, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty,

M.DC.XX.

