The confutation of. xiii. Articles, whereunto Nicolas Shaxton, late bishop of
Salisburye subscribed and caused be set forth in print the year of our Lord.
M. C. xlvi. when he recanted in Smithfielde at London at the burning of mestres
Anne Askue, which is lively set forth in the figure following.

In the next page shall thou find the contents of this little book.

Imprinted at London, by John Day, and William Seres, dwellyngs in Sepulchers
parish, at the sign of the Resurrection, a little above Holbourne conduite.

Cum gratia and priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.



The contents of this book.
First certain meters sent by master Shaxton to his wife. The^ the Epistle
given him at Hadley. Then his submission to the King. Then his opinion in the
Sacrament before he recanted. Then his. xiii. Articles s^uerally confuted. In
the first is confuted the opinion of traunsubstantiation. In the second, the
belief that the sacrament reserned, remaneth Christ's body and blood. In the
thread, that it ought to be worshipped with Godly honor. In the.iiii. that it
is a daily sacrifice. In the.v. that it is propiciatorpe. In the.vi. that it is
auailable for the quycke and dead. In the.vii. that it need not to be given to
the people under both kinds. In the.viii. that the priest may receue it alone
In the.ix. that the mass is agreeable to Christ's institution. In the.x. that
the church may orden vnpreschynge prelates, In the.xi. that voterers may not
marie. In the.xii. that auriculer confession is necessary. In the.xiii. that
man has fre will.


To the late Bishop of Salisburie, Nicolas Shaxton, his well willer and
faithful friend in Christ. Robert Crowley wysheth eternal health through
Christ our Savior.
IMmediatlye after you had caused your articles to be put in printe (beloved in
Christ) I was stirred with the desire to have them confuted. Not for any
displeasure that I had conceyned toward you, or any other, by whose means
you should be willed or (as it may be thought) required to set them abrod to
the world: but only for the love I bear to Christ's truth, which I would
not (if my wit and knowledge were corespondente to my will) suffer to be
hindered by any so blasphemouse doctrine of Antichrists schole, as are these
Articles of yours. I call them yours, because you subscribe to them, and set
the^ forth under your name. But if I were required to say my conscience: I
could not deny but I think them to be Wynchesters workemanshyp, because they
agree so well with his doctrine, and that chiefelye in the devil leishe
detection of his master the deuylles sophistry, which he set abroud shortly
after these Articles of yours But would God you were as well confuted by me,
as he is answered by Anthony Gilbie. Well, as I could so have I done, because I
would not that so necessary a thing should be left undone. Not for the
scarsitie of the^ that be able to do it much better: but because none other
has taken in hand, neither was it like that any would hereafter occupy their
time in it, because the matter does now daily more and more grow out of mind
And because the copies of your Articles be not communly to be sold: most men
think them in manner extinguished for ever. And in very deed, had not certain
honest men enfourmed me of the great number of the^ that through your
recantation were established in your erroures: I had not taken this
enterprice in hand, another yet finished it when it was begone. But when I
understood what hynderaunce to Gods truth, your Authority, has already and
might here after do if your articles should remain untouched: I thought it to
less then necessary to spend some time in it, trusting that God will give the
increase boeth in your heart and in the hertes of as many as are not obstinate
blind vessels of Gods Ire ordained to destruction.

If my writing can not satisfy you, in any of your Articles: I pray you
write unto me (whether you shall think it best) privately or apartly, that I
may either enstruct you further, other else be enstructed of you.

And if your age or other impedimente will not suffer you to declare your
mind in all things concerning your Articles: yet let us know what you will
say to the copy of your own hand which you writ being in prison.

If you keep silence and write nothing again: then may ye well think that
we will judge you obstinate and yet to have nothing to say, for now is it fre
for you to speak your conscience, so far as the scripture will bear you. If
you can by the scriptures defend your Articles and prove them to be chatholyke
and Godly: I shall with all readiness embrace them and revoke all that I have
written to the contrary. Otherwise I require you (even in the name of Christ
whom you profess in that you will be called christen) that you acknowledge
your errors, that such as were offended by you, may have occasion by you to
rise again.

I am not ignoraunte of your behauioure sense your recantataion, boeth in the
city of London and else where. Your private communication (besides your
sermons dashed full of sorrowful tears and deep syghynges to alure the people to
the Romeishe way again) is openly known to all men. Men know also, how you
have (upon occasion given, to speak of persecution) affirmed the good
bishops of Wynchester and London, and such other, to be the only sufferers
of persecution in these days.

Blame me not therefore, though I be earneste with you, sith many men hang
upon your words, and one of your good bishops spared not even in the
presence of his prince to declare him self not to be al of the best. Whose
emendeme^t I most hertely beseech the Lord Jesus grant me to se. And yours
also (master Shax to^) if it be possible, that we may rejoice together after
all this discord in opinions and matters of religion, The spirit of the
living God work in you the thing I have prayed for.

Amen.
From London the.xxvi. day of Noue^berin the year of our Lord God. M. D.xlviii.
* These things (...) ensuinge were made also by the said Nicolas Shaxton
after his recantation and sent unto his wife, who^ he refused to keep company
wythall as before he had done) supposing (by like) that this should be for her
a remedy in the stde of him her lawful husband, for as then he thought never
after to take her again for his wife: but thought by this his exhortation to
be sufficiently discharged. The coppe hereof was had at his wives hands.
Receive this little ingredience,
Against the grief of incontine^ce.

S^ffer honger, thirst labor,
S^oyde evil thoughts, study in scripture
Keep thine eye, ill company eschew
Least delight and desire them do ensue,
Which if they get in their head,
Thy body living, the soul gostly is dead,
If thy brittle flesh does rage,
Twyg it sharply til that it does swage,
Custom this, watch and pray,
God will give the his gift, I dare well say,
His promise will he surely fulfill
So thou ask, thus sekest and knockest still.
Pray long enough without this,
Thou te^ptest God not doing that in the is.
And so prayinge cannest not obtain
But synnest greatly, and labourest in vain,
Probatum est, and is found sure,
It shall heal the, put it in v^e.
I Thought best to write it in rhyme,
To remember it the better in due time
The ryme is base, the medicine is good
But to use it right passes flesh and blood.
So does it to think a good thought
Desire or do well can we naught.
To pray some while a man is content.
To the rest even contrarywyse bent.
Yet by grace all may be done,
Though the flesh rebelleth eft sone.
I have learned says Paul in whatsoever state
I am in, therewith to be co^tet erly and late
I can be low, I know also to excede.
In all things am I enstructe in deed.
Boeth to be satiate, and eke to be hungry
To suffer need and also to have plenty.
I can do all in him that me conforteth
So shall he do that duly to Christ resorteth,
To the wyllyng there is nothing to hard
If good will be gone, al is but marde.
Put good will to if, and boldly begin
Thou have half done, continue, thou shall win
Thine enterprice I put the out of doubt
Hope in God he will bring it well about.
I will join hereto a larger declaration
At more leisure in solute oration.
Read it friend but set affection a side
Where it is cou^cellour there is a leude guide
Read it soberly and be no longer blind
Blasyheme not God neither be to him vn^nd
Say not it is impossible to live chalte
By Gods grace easily do it thou may
Without whom we can do nothing
By whom to effect we shall it well bring
The thing is hard but love makes it light
None shall be crowned but he lawfully sight
This crown is not traunsitory nor corruptible
But everlasting glorious and immarcissible
Which grant us God and persons three
The ever living blessed trinity.
AMEN.
To Nicolas Shaxton.
If Paul had know it to be Gods will
To have this medicine put in ure:
Think you it had passed his skill
To use the same in his great cure?
Me durst prescribe no remedy 1. Cor.vil

Against fleshlye incontinence:
But only chaste matrimony,
Which kylleth all concupiscence.
Wherefore each christian I exhort
To chose a make of honest mind
To whose chaste bed they may resort
And do as nature does them bind.
Finis, Quod, R. C.
The true Coipe of a letter which the faithful in suffolk made and gave it
unto Nicolas Shaxton when he had reca^ted in London and came to Hadley to
declare the same.
A Wonderful dread may be unto the conscience, of those which are in danger
of the threateninge that Christ speaks in the Gospel of Luke the.xvii. chap.
that says. It is impossible that offenses should not come, but unto him by
whom they come, it were better for him: that a mylstone were hanged about his
neck, and be cast into the sea, the^ that he should ossend one of these
littleons, Oh Shaxton, shaxto^, take heed to your self now, although you have
in your reca^tation said you were not perfectly seen in the scripture. Yet
how can you excuse your self but that you be the offeder of many a pore
soul. But now you say, ye are better learned the you were before. Well seeing
that you have been so well scholled sithence you went to London, it may be well
gathered that you were simply learned before. And yet to say the truth, your
learning is not greatly augmented sithe^ce. For these be the doctrines of men,
and not of the holy Ghost that ye have now set forth in your reca^tatio^ which
ye would that we should earnestly believe and follow, not one title of the lyuelye
word of God, have ye authorized your dreaming articles withal unto the which
blessed. S. Paul, would that we should give no credit althonghe you were an
Angel of heaven and had spoken them. Oh merciful Lord thou that have all
grace, it is thou that can and may illumine the conscience of all men. So
that they shall not deny the truth. We beseech the, O Lord eue^ for the truth
sake, grant that this lost sheep may come home again to thy graciouse fold
not fearinge the worldly punishments of princes and rulers, but boldelye to
confess with all the holy prophets and Apostles thy eternal wisdom which
thou have commanded thy son the bishop and only savior of our souls Jesus
Christ to declare. And that with thy sernaunte Peter he may weep bitterlye
for that he has denied the, which art our gratiouse God. Oh Shaxto^ Shaxton
pray to our merciful God that he may give the his grace again. For many by
the are offended whose conscience be so assured in Gods truth, that another
fire, nor h^^er can pluck it out of their hertes. Although in scile^ce they
do mourn, yet think not but those new vessels which are fille^ with new
wine must needs have his vente. You know that if we should hold our peace the
stones in the streate, will speak to declare the glory of our eternal god. Yea
ye have brought your self in such case, that none will trust you, which is
illuminate with christ's verity. Oh Shaxton weye in your conscience And mark
well to thend what glory to our Lord god thou should have offered, if thou
had stand strong in the undoubted truth of God and ended thy life in that
thou tokeste in hand, thou stodest manfully to co^de^natio^. Alas whi did
thou not perceiner, thou saidest at thy departing from us, when thou were sent
for to London, that either thou would burn, or else forsake Gods truth. In
deed thou prophesiedest truly, but it was more to preserve thy flesh, the^ to
honor the eternal god with thy death, thou fearedest the^ the un que^chable
fire that iseuerlasting. Thou sto^bleist at the stone, where other with a
strong faith went over. Thou forsokest this, but we pray God that for it thou
find not death everlasting. Thou laideste thy hand unto Gods plough, but
thou lokedest backward Thou deniedest thy only savior before me^, yea thou
waste ashamed of him and of his word. Thou haste utterly forsaken the
headcorner stone, which thy fayeth should have bent coupled wholly to it, it is
to be thought that sit hence your last scholyng at London thou have betrayed
the innocent blood.

Alas Shaxton remember that our savior Christ in all the holy scriptures, nor
yet none of his Apostles has promised us in this life to live without any
trouble in this world, but for his words sake to be called a reprobat, a
seditious person, an heritike one that goes about to make insurrection these
with such other names must his elect suffer, so to be called of the world for
the settinge forth of Christ's doctrine, you know what S. Paul says. All that
is written is written for our learning and comfort. The wise man commands
his son, to prepare him self un to tribulation when he should enter into
the way of the Lord, you should have sat down as Christ gives counsel and
have cast the accomptes what the buildinge would have cost. But Oh Shaxton
thon walk on the water with Peter a little time, trusting to much to thine
own strength, ye had forgotten the counsel of. S. James. which says. Who
that lacks wisdom let him axe it of God. The thing that was not in you that
ye thought that ye had had. But blessed is our merciful God that has
evidently declared his manifest truth of his word geuinge the knoweledge of
it to the unlearned and very babes, and has hid these things from the prudent
and wise of this world, yea your doctors, bishops or what name so ever they
have, are many times without this knowledge. Eue^ as those doctors, lawiers,
which disputed with Christ, not knowing what to say to him, so far were they of
from his knowledge. So do ye which are of that religion tomble and toss the
scriptures, loking to your liyng prophets, fa^tasies and dreams, and what ye
imagine in your deuillish brains contrary to Gods holy word, that same are we
pore subjects compelled to believe in pain of halter and fire. But as the true
prophet of God says. Ye grope in the day and will find no light, ye walk
not circu^spectly as me^ wise. Ye wa^der after vanities to put Gods word to
silence. Ye compass with your flatteryng kings and governors to your
diabolical lusts, ye are those that cri peace, peace, and make all the strife,
and with your subtle inuentio^s ye do as much as lies in you to frustrate the
glory of God. But this we say: do make, compass what ye can: yet is Gods
truth grafted in our hertes, and faithfully we do believe it that the Lord
which only has died for our sins, and as touching his ma^hode sits on
the right hand of God our father in he auen, this Lord we say, is able to
defend his own cause, who will at his pleasure beat you to powder, and in
the mean time we shall be content to bear the words of the holy Apostle in
our hertes. Nos autem gloriari oportet in cruce domini nostri Jesus Christi.

And we remember his godly lesso^s, that those which will live devoutly in Jesus
Christ, must suffer persecution. Well Shaxton the living God that sits in
heaven give the his holy spirit in the knowledge of his word, and stro^glye
as a champio^ of Christ to come again unto the battle fyghtyng under his
baner. If thou lose this temporal life (which is but vain pleasures) yet a
better is promised the which never shall fail. Oh Shaxto^, let these
sayings of Christ perse into thy conscience, and doubt not but that error
which is in the brought in by the devil and his ministers shall be to quietness
and rest.

Take heed that thy housse be clean swepte Thy own conscience shall bear the
record.

Thus art thou written unto, for great care is taken for thy fall, yet rise up
again and be of good confort there is mercy with the Lord. The game shall go
on thy side, Christ has promised he is true therefore believe him. We beseech
the Oh Shaxto^, do this much for us eue^ for Christ's sake: Let it be known to
the magestrates and to al those that be in authority under the kings magestie
having such vrge^t matters committed unto their wisdom how the co^scie^ces of
many as yet be unstaid, seeing the commandments, Articles, and acts be
void of gods holy word. We se my Lord of Winchesters book very feeble and yo^g
to confute Gods truth withal. It is no fine threde of holy scripture, but
rather bo^ble twine in make torches to honor his Images or idols withal. We
do not doubt but it is thought (among such as he is) that with other have
brought to pas a pleasan^t sacrifice to God the burning of Christ's testame^tes
with other Godly new books which as yet they were never able to answer by the
scripture. This O Shaxto^ thou know as well as we. But after this and such
other means they stop ye swet springes that lead us to the head fountain Jesus
Christ. In this they play the Philistia^s part that stopped up Abraham's wels.
But we pray daily unto our merctfull God which has al men's hertes in his
hands, to reueile to the kings magestie more of their subtle inue^tio^s that
he may perceive their crafty iuglinges. As king Darius did through the worckynge
of God by his prophet Daniell. Thus the living Lord by whom all mercy comes
send his majesty long life and quietness boeth of body and soul.

Finis,
Shaxton. THe true copy of the submission of me Nicolas shaxton late bishop of
Salisburie, made to the Kings most excellent majesty.


Crowley. IN that you submit your self to the kings hyghnes, you do but your
duty. For (as Paul writes) al living creatures are Romansxiii.
bound to submit them selves to the higher powers, not only for fear, but for
conscience sake also. Yea, not only to faithful and christian potentates: but
to the wicked and tyrannouse also, yeldynge unto them all that is theyrs, that
is to say obedience and tribute. Exemple whereof we have in our savior
Christ, who did not only answer the hypocrite Phariseis who tempted him,
biddynge the^ give Caesar his due: but did him self also Marc.xii.
pay the tribute monei demanded by the gatherers thereof. How he obeyed them
is manifest by that he (being King of all kings, having all power in
heaven and Math.xxviii Math.xxvi
in earth, who might also have had legio^s of angels to have defended him
against all the princes of this world) would submit him self even to the
death, yea the most cruel and reproachful death of the cross. Wherefore I
exhort you (and in you all christians) to hold you still in this obeydience.


Shaxton. And set forth for this intent, that glory may be gene^ to almighty
God, who of his infinite goddnes, has not only given me grace to acknowledge
mine error, and to revoke the same: but also at the respect of my most
humble submission, has sterred the heart of the kings hoghnes to have pity
and compassion in remittyng the punishment of death, whereunto I was justly
condemned.


Crowley. In very deed, many men have (through the setting forth of this your
submission) been moved to glorifye God, who has in these our days (the
latter days of this world) most plentuouslye poured out of his spirit upon
those lyt leons that the world takes for his excrementes, reueylynge unto
them those mysteries which he has hidden from the wise and prudente of this
world, but not for such causes as you resite. For in that you say, that God
has given you grace to acknowledge and renoke your error: all the true
honourers of God, (who honor him in spirit and verity) do think that he
wythdrewe his grace from you leaving you in your own hands, whereby you
incontinente to such blindenes, that you call truth error, and error
truth, and revoke with Peter that ma^full promise which you made to your
master, saying that you were ready to suffer all kinds of death for the
truethes sake. Would God you would with Peter lamente your weakness and seek
Christ again by repentance, and not desperatlye hang your self with
Judas, so that your bowels break out to the great ignominy of all the
children of your whoreshe mother. For the brute goes that they have made you
a proselite.ix. times worsse then one of them. And for that you ascribe the
cause of your pardon to your submission which you say was so precious in the
sight of God, that incontine^t thereupon he so sterred the kings hyghnes he^t
to pytye, that he remitted the punishment of death, whereunto you were justly
condemned: no doubt you are far wide. For God accepts none so rebelliouse
submission, wherein me^ forsake him to do the will of man, or to avoid the
dispeasure of any mortal man. For he says. Fear not them that kill the
body and can not kill the soul: but fear him that has power to slay the
body, and cast the soul into ternall torments. And again he that denies me
before men: I shall deny him before my father which is in heaven. That you
have denied him: shall appear more plainly in the declaration of your
articles.

That you were justly condemned to dye, is manifest. For you were condemned
by a law, But how justly you submitted your self, to avoid the danger of
condemnation: I doubt not but every man (that has any little portion of the
spirit of God) does casely perceive by the word before going and shall more
easily perceive by that which shall follow, knoweynge for certentye that who so
saves this mortal soul, shall lose the eternal and immortal soul, in the
time John.xiii.
that shall be after the short time of this life.


Shaxton. And to extend his bountiful goodness upon, me which in deed his grace
has done most largelye.


Croweley. Alas Shaxton, who has bewytched the? Thou did once seem to be
spiritual, in so much that men judged that thou desiredesse to be dissolved
and to be with Christ accountynge death for gaynes, and yet content to live in
the flesh, susteynynge therein allmaner pains, travel, and persecution for
the poor flock of Christ which is so besette with rauenouse woufes, that
were it not that our shepherde Christ defends us no remedy we should be all
devoured. But now (alas for the) thou art become altogyther fleshly,
accou^ting it bountiful goodness to be pardoned of this bodilye death, which a
fayethfull christian takes for the end of all dayngers of the troublesome sea
of this world, and the gate whereby we enter into eternal life and endeles
felicity. But the natural man, perceyueth not the things that i. Cor.ii.
be of the spirit of God.


Shaxton. Despise not a man that turns him self Eclesi.viii.
away from his sin, neither cast him in the teath wythal, but remember that
we are all poisoned with corruption.


Crowley. That we are al poisoned with corruption is well declared in you. For
so sone as God wythdrowe his assistent grace from you: incontinent you were
overthrown, declarynge your self to be flesh, fraylenes, Romansvii.
and a lump of sin. For in the flesh dwells naught else but sin. You
should therefore have called to your remembrance, the council of our savior
Christ to his dearly Mathe.xxv^
beloved Peter, James and John, saying Watch and pray, least ye enter into
temptation. For the spirit is ready and the flesh is weak. The wicked
spirit our adversary i. Peter.v
(who goes about like a rorynge Lion seeking whom he may devour) is ready to
tempte us, and our flesh destitute of the grace of God, is weak and easy to
be overcome. We must watch therefore in the word of God, praying always for
the assiste^t grace of God, whereby we may be able to put that adversary to
flight. We therefore, knowing our own infirmity, will not cast you in the
teeth nor despise him that turns him self away from sin. But we are
persuaded that you have turned your self to sin, and not from sin,
except it be from that sin which Paul speaks of to the Corhinthyans,
where he says that Christ was made sin, that is the only sacrifice for
sin. From this sin you turn your self, which we greatly lament.
Exhorting you (eue^ in the name of our lord Jesus Christ) to return again
from the sin you have turned to, and you shall be sure we will not despise
you nor cast you in the teeth wythall.


Shaxton to the kings most excellent majesty. FOr as much as (most dread
Sovereign Lord) miserably now in mine old age* eue^ within this year, I have
fallen into the most detestable, and most abominable heresy of them that
be called Sacramentaries, denying wretchedly, the presence of Christ's blessed
body in the holy Sacrament of the aultar^.


Crowley. I go not about to play Momus part with you, fyndyng fault with
every thing that you do or say. Neither as doctor S^a^dych did with dead
Barnes, to descante upon your words, wringing and wresting them for my
purpose: but mine intent is only to declare unto you (and in you to all other
that shall chance to read these my writings) your errors, allowynge and
confyrminge all truth that I shall find in your submission. In that you say
therefore, that within this year you have most miserablye fallen into the
most detestable and abominable heresy of them that are called Sacrame^taries
I say unto you that you have said very well, in that you say, of them that
are called Sacramentaries. For though they be called so: yet are they not so
in deed. For I am sure, you mean of them that deny the traunsubstantiation
of the sacrame^tal bread and wine. Which men are neither worthy the name of
Sacramentaries nor yet heretykes. For they neither deny the Sacrament nor hold
any singular opinion, contrary to the catholyke fayeth of Christ, except you
will say that the opinion of the greateste number is that catholic faith,
which thing Idare say you will not nor can not affirm (unless ye be paste
all shame) for we se besides the testimonies of the scriptures, that the
greater number are so vnco^stant in their belief, that they will believe every
flyinge tale, that is named to be their forefathers belief. Yea the great
number of them that accomple them selves learned, and take upon them the
governance and leadynge of other, will change their belief.iiii. times every
year, if they may epsy any profit haugynge thereon. Besides this experience,
our Savior Christ teaches plainly, that in these our days (the later
days of the world should arise false prophets and false anointed Mat.xxiiii.
which should show such wonders that they should seduce (if it were
possible) even the very elect. He witnesses also that Math.xxii.
there be many called, but few elected. So that if you will account any for
Sacramentaries, and their opinion heretical: it must needs be the greater
multitude, and their opinion. For the little floke is Christ's, who shall at his
coming find scarsely any fayeth at all in this world.

And where you say that you have most wretchedly denied the presence of the
blessed body of Christ in the holy Sacrament of the aultare: I say unto you,
that if you take this Sacrament for that memory of Christ's death (the only
satisfaction for our sins) which Christ him self instituted and ordained to
be frequented and used among his fayethfull adherentes, and folowers: that
then you have (in deniynge of the presence of Christ's blessed body in the
sacrament) done more then ever did any of the^ whom you call Sacramentaries
and heritikes.

For we deny not, yea we proteste and defend that in the Lords supper is
presentelye distributed the body and blood of Christ. And that every
faiethful membre of Christ that comes thereunto with unfeigned faith in the
promises of Christ: is there made partaker of the very body and blood of
Christ eue^ the^ same body that the Jews did most cruelly tormente, hanging
it upon a cross and the same blood that they shede.

But yet we say not (as I am sure you mean) that the bread is turned into
his flesh and the wine into his blood, another that the flesh and blood of
Christ enters into our bodies as the bread does (for that were contrary to
the first institution thereof) but that spirituallye by faith we are partakers
of boeth, as I shall more plainly declare in your articles.


Shaxton. And forasmuch also, as it has pleased your majesty of your
great charity and most Godly care ye had de for my soul, to send to me
the right honorable Bishops of London and worcester, together with your
graces worshyful chaplaies. Doctor Robinson, and Doctor Redman, to confer with
me, enfourme me and enstruct me, to the intent, that finally (Gods grace
workynge boeth in them and me) I might be brought from my said error and
heresy unto the true catho^yke fayeth.


Crowley. No doubt it was a toke^ of a great and charitable care of a prince
tawarde his subject, to send, not only.ii. of his worshipful prelates, but
also like many of his chaplaynes, to confer with, enfourme, and enstruct you
(as he thought) for your soul health.

Wherefore of duty you can do no less but render unto his hyghnes most
humble and hertye thanks.

But in that you were so sone overthrown, it was a token, that either you were
a very weak soldier, or else but sle^derly armed. For I doubt not but if you
had been a stout Christofer, armed with the armoure of light, holdeynge in
your hand the sword of the spirit: you would have said with Paul, who
shall separate us from the love of God? Shall trouble or anguishe, persecution
hunger, nakedness, peril, or the swerd? Yea, you would have said, that
neythere death, neither life, Angel, rule, power things present, things to
come, high, lowth, or any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus. The^ would you have answered those
messengers with the worddes of the Prophet. Woe be unto you that call light
darkness, and darkness light.


Shaxton. Which thing, according to your graces expectation has taken good
success in me, thanks be to almightye God.


Crowley. The thieves, robbers, and murderers. The pillars, the pollers, and
usurers, The beastelye fornicatours and adulterers, The ourtagiouse disers and
hasarders: do when they speed of their purpose, say that they have had good
success in their affairs. So do the whores and bands say that their chance
is good, when many beastly whoremo^gers have wasted their money upon the^ And
in all this they say that God loves them, and that they are much bound to
thank God for it, and do in very deed thank him in their words. The cause of
al this is none other, but that they be altogyther flesh, and think the
satisfiynge of the fleshly despres to be the gifts of God, because they are
persuaded that god is the geuer of all good things, and their fleshelye
blyndenes persuades them, that the abundance of all that the flesh desiereth
is the only goodness that can be had in this world.

This caused the baude of Bristowe (as I learned by the report of an honest
man) to say the world was naught, when her women had gained her but.viii.
pence in the weke.

In like manner you (Master Shaxton) when the flesh had so prevailed in you,
that it had compelled you to forsake the chaste matrimony of Christ, and to
embrace that Idolatrouse whoredom of your abominable mother, the great
whore of Rome: then you say these vain things have had prosperouse success
in you. So that it may right well be said unto you that is spoken by the
prophet Esaie. Woe be to you that Esai.v.
call the thing that is good, badde; and that is badde, good, setting light
for darcknes, and darkness for light.


Shaxton. For by such learning as they have showed me, and especially by the
vnifourme consent of the whole catholyke churthe in that article, even from
the Apostles time to this our age (few excepted, who have been taken and
iustlye reputed for heritykes) I am fully persuaded, perfectlye believe, and
unfeignedly confess, that after the consecration rightly done by the priest,
there remains none othere substance, but only the substance of the blessed
body of our savior Christ god and man, like as before I have subscribed unto
a ^yll, hereunto annexed.


Crowley. Here you declare your self, either to have learned some deuylleyshe
doctrine of these four messengers, other else that before you were enstructed
by the^ you had no learning at al. For if you had any learning before, I am
sure it was the learning of the gospel, for therein had been al your exercise,
even from your youth. And through it you were called to be shepherd over a
great floke And as it seemed, for the love you had thereunto: you surre^dred
into the kings hands again the dignite of that ministratio^. Whereupon I
conclude, that if you had any learning it was the learning of the gospel. If
this be true, then is the doctrine that these men have showed you a deuilishe
doctrine.

But this thing makes me to wonder not a little that you (who have
heretofore been most earnest against the confirmation of necessary Articles
by unwritten verities) will in this poyute grant that you are persuaded by
nothing so much as by the vnifourme consent of the whole Romeishe church
(which you call the catholyke church) in that article saying, that from the
Apostles time hitherto, all (a few heritikes excepted) have truly and iustlye
hosden this opinion. In this place I will not greatelye contend with you for
the time sens the Apostles, although I might have inoughe in the aunciente
doctors to prove the contrary, or else to declare* S. Augustine, Ambros,
Chrysostom, and such other, to be those heritykes whom you exempte out of
the vnifourme co^se^t of the catholic church. But in the Apostles time, I dare
be bold to affirm, and am able to prove by the scriptures: that there
remained in the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ boeth bread and
wine. How you have iudgled the^ out se^ce, I ca^ not tell. And (by the help of
God) I will (in the declaration of your first article) prove boeth by the
scriptures and doctors, that there was then and is now in the Sacrament boeth
bread and wine.


Shaxton. And finally, forasmuch as the said honorable bishops and
worshypfull doctors, have had further conference with me, not only in the
rest of the six articles, but also in all other matters of controversy, that
other they or I could call to remembrance, and are agreed fullye in the same.

So that now I am fullye persuaded and resolved in all matters of any wayght
or importance, wherein I was before, either ambiguouse or in doubt, or else of a
contrary judgment unto the^: and do now esteem and judge eue^ as they do in all thesethyngs.


Crowley. I can gather none other by your words, but that if the fire were
set on the other side of you, it should not be hard to perswad you to the
co^trari of your former words. But I would not wyshe that you or any other
should be compelled by fire, fagots, or sword, to speak or write any thing
contrary to the conscience. For if Christ had wylled his Gospel to be
auaunced and defended after any such sort, he would not have committed it to
poor fisher men, but rather unto kings and emperors. I would wish therefore,
that you and all the hard herted, would frelye without compultion open their
hertes and receive the grace and fre mercy offered unto them in the Gospel,
nothing regarding life nor death, richesse nor poverty, quiernes nor
persecution, marying them selves to no opinion, that is not grounded on the
scripture.


Shaxton. Therefore, I most humblye (even from the bottom of mine heart)
thank your excellent majesty, that you have had this godly care for my soul
health, and that by your most graciouse means, I am brought and reduced, from
that damnable error that I was in.


Crowley. Greater thanks could you not have given to your prince for the
great care that he had for your soul health, then if you had stand
manfullye to the truth of the scriptures, taking pacietly the death that
should have been laid on you, that your Prince might (through your constancye)
have been moved to search the scriptures for the truth of your opinions.


Sha^xton. And surely (had not this your pity and compassion been) would
obstinatlye have dyed in the same, and so from the temporal fire, should have
gone to the everlasting fire of hell.


Crowley. A sharp judgment. Then is there no remedy for them that dyed in
the opinion that you speak of. For you have all ready condemned them to the
pytte of hell. But I pray you, who made you judge of the soul? I think your
four schole masters have no scripture to bear you in this. And though you
say, that you dissent not from them in any wayghtye matter: yet I dare say
for them, the me^ think not as you say in this matter. For if they would
make the worste of it, they can not make it a damnable sin to say that there
remains bread and wine in the Sacrament: for as much as, it is no article
of our fayeth to believe the contrary.


Shaxton. And now with all reverence and humility, I submit my self unto
your graces clemeucie, ready with al patience (if it be so seen to your
hyghnes) to suffer even the very death (as I have instly deserved) or else to do
any other thing that your majesty shall think good or expediente, for the
reducyng of your graces subjects from the erroine that they he wrapped in,
unto the true catho like faieth, and the order taken in this your most
christen realm. Not only in this one article: but also in all othere, wherein
I my self am now (thanks be to God and your hyghnes) fully resolved, and
thoroughly persuaded, thus to continue to the end of my life, by the grate and
goodness of God. Who ever preserve your majesty, to his glory, and the profit
of this your realm.


Crowley. Oh, what a pleasure had it been to our prince, to have seen you
submit your self unto him, to be at his pleasure concerning your (...)
comes through hearing, and hearing thothorowe the word of God, set forth to
us in holy scripture. And because some manne would say peradventure, that I
conster the scripture after mine own imagination and fantasye of mine own
brain. Nay I do not, nor I will not so do, God forbydde I should. For that
were even to steal Gods word, like as thieves steal other men's goods, and
apply them to their own uses. So is that a stealing of Gods word, and appliyng
of it to our own uses, that is to the defense of our own evil opinions.
Against whom that so do speaks Esai the prophet. Nunquid non verba mea sunt
quasi ignis dicit dominus, et quasi malleus co^terens petram? Propterea ecce
ego ad prophetas dicit dominus, qui furantur verba mea vnusquisque a proximo.
etc.

Are not my words even as fire says the Lord, and as an hammer that
breaks the stone? Therefore behold I will upon the Prophets, says the
Lord, that steal my words every man from his neighbor. and.c I would not do
so therefore, but I believe the word of God in all the holy scripture, and in
every part thereof, in that sense and meaning that the holy Ghost meant and
means therein, and none otherwise. This is my faith that I have hitherto
followed, and wherein I ente^d (by Gods grace) to persiste to the end of my
life. And al my words sermons, and writings have I always framed according
to this my faith so nygh as my wit would serve me, and so will do by Gods grace
unto the end of my life. Now may every man perceive, that with this fayeth
can stand no damnable errors nor heresy. Wherefore (thanks be to God) I
teken my self as far from any perile of error or heresy, as he that is
farthiest. Towchynge mine opions truth it is, that I dissente in opinions from
diverse good, Godly and excellentlye learned men. Yea from mine own self
also, and that within the space of small time. For what so ever I espy by the
scriptures that I am in wrong opinion, I will surely change it and amend it.
Marye this is true in these matters that be not set forth opely in the
scripturs, and that be against no necessary article of the christian faith,
which al be set forth in deed openly in the scripture, as* S. Augustine says
in his book of christian doctrine, the.ii. book and.ix chapter.in this wise. In
these sentences which be openly set forth in scriptures are all those things
found that contain fayeth and manners of living, hope, and charity. Therefore
in such points I vary not from any christen man, lay, or learned: but
consent in one with all christians. Therefore the points wherein I dissente
from other (both good and learned men) are no necessary points, neither open
places: but obscure hard, and hydden mysteries of the which that sentence
may be well understand that is written in the third chapter of Ecclesiasticus.
It is not necessary for the to se with thine eyes (that is to know and
understand those things which be hydden, hard, and obscure. In such things
I say only, do I dissent from other and not else. Wherefore it is a thing to
be marneyled and wondered at, that the bishops with such fury and fyersnes
(like mad men) burn and slay up the Kings people (as they do) for things not
certain nor necessary to be known, but opinable matters and disputable.
Whereby they show them selves utterly vnfayethful, and not to believe the
manifest and open places of scripture (I mean the commandments of God) as
they should believe the^. That is to say, love them, delight in them, and do
the^. For if they did: surely they should know this our doctrine to be of God,
and not of man, according to the sentence of our savior Christ in the.vii.
Chapter of John My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. Whosoever would
do his will (that is to say observe his commandments) the same shall know
of the doctrine, whether it it be of God, or else I speak of my self. So
without doubt if they were Godly men and kept Gods commandments they
should have come to more knoweledge the^ they be yet come to. For as says
our savior Christ. Mathe.xiii. He that has, shall have it given unto him,
and he shall abou^d That is, he that has any thing, as he should have it,
ryghtly: and uses it well, as he should do: the same shall abou^d and increase
more and more in goodness and godliness. But he that has notieue^ that he has
shall be taken from him That is, he that lives not accordeynge to the knowledge
that he has in Gods open word of his commandments, but knows his
Lords will and does it not: shall be deprived of that he has, and turned over
into blyndnes of ignorance. Does not. S John say in the.ii. Chapter of his
first Epistle. He that hates his brother is in darkness, and does walk in
darkness, for darcknes has blinded his eyes? Does not he that persecuteth his
brother, burns him, and kylleth him, hate his brother? Then must it ensue and
follow, that he is in darkness and blindness, for his malice blyndeth him, and so
he ca^ not judge of gods doctrine that he has sent into ye world, and is
growe^ ever more and more and increases by their persecution. So that if they
were not utterly blind: they should have observed and marked the experience of
the thing these.xxvi. years and above, and should have said to them selves
This way of our workynge has taken no good success after our minds. Let
us go an other way to work. For the burning of one makes.xx. to spring
out of the ashes, and so there do in deed. For I say for my part, if it had
not been for this broylyng I should never have looked so diligently upon the
matter, but have flepte on boeth sides sou^dly as I did before, and been still
wrapped in mine old ignorance, where, by this occasion, I have trauayled
somewhat, and God has lyghtened my darckenes, and accordeynge to my prayer,
brought me out of mine old ignorance wherein I was so deplye drowned and
thought never to have chan^ged my judgment in that point, but did abhor
utterly the opinion that I am now of, and detested it with the authors thereof
And wretchedly and also presumtuously condemned Lamberte, Frythe and such
other Godly men, as most constantlye have suffered cruel death and martyrdom
(though wretched folk mock at it) for the same.

But now I know well, they will say ye are to blame to impute this
persecutyng and burning to us, ye sclaunder us. For it is the kings law that
does it and not we, Nay I am not to blame at al. For I speak naught but
truth. Neither do I sclaunder you: for your deed is open and manifest to all
England. And where you excuse you by the kings law: that excuse will not
help you but much rather condemns you. For it was you principal, and such as
you had before seduced, that procured such laws to be made and abused the
kings clemencye and gentylnes, perswadynge him that those sore laws should
be the occasion of much quietness in his realm. But God shall lyghten the
kings heart when it shall please him, and he shall espy your conueyghaunce,
and redress that is amysse. And this your sin is double (so much as it is
besid) in that you cast your fault upon the king and his law, not utterly
unlike unto them that said unto Pilate, when he bade them take Christ them
selves and crucify him.

They answered. It is not lawefull for us to kill any man castinge their
fault upon the judge his neck. But did they deceyne God by that craft
(says. S. Augustyne) no truly. No more do they doubtelesse, and that shall
ye surely know at that fear full day except ye repent and amend, which
god give you al grace so to do. And though I speak generally of all Bishops
yet do I not mean all. But I mean them only, whose fruits show them what
they be. For by their fruits they shall be known, says our savior Christ.
Now I think surely, that these gelous fathers, when they shall chance to
read this, will say unto me, as the wise deputy Festus said to Paul Thou
art mad. Whereunto I will make like answer as Paul did to Festus. I am not
mad (good sir) but I speak words of truth and sobernes, which thing ye
shall well know hereafter, if you do not amend.

And now at the last after this long digression, to return again to my
purpose to show you mine opinions wherein I disente from many other: they be
these. Even all the.vi. Articles established (through the bishops means) by
thacte of parliamente, and solemnly read in all parish churches through out the
realm eueri quarter of the year once. Which thing though it be established
with as much assurance as my brother my Lord of winchesters wit could devise,
yet must it be destroyed, because it is of man and not of God.

For the Lord destroys the councelles cells of nations, he reproves the
thoughts of the people, and the councels of princes: but the council of the
Lord abides for ever. Psalm.xxxiii

And among those forsayed syx articles I most distent from other in the
Sacrament of Christ's blessed body and blood. For where as they say, that
under the accidents which be there by a miracle without any substance is
contained the natural body and blood of Christ our Savior: I deny those
feigned miracles, and say, that there does still remain bread and wine in
their kind and be consecrated by the invisible workynge of the holy Ghost, to
be a sacrament, sign or token of the blessed body of our Savior Christ,
torn on the cross for our redemption. And as towchynge these words, this is
my body that is given for you, for as much as they be a part of the
scripture, even our savior Christ's words of him that never made lie: I
believe the^ to be certain and true in that sense that he spoke them and
meante them. This is my sure fayeth, wherefore I am herein far from any peryle
of herisie, although I wade no farther therein at al, but even prison my wit,
reason and understanding, into the obsequie service, and obedience of Christ
and faith, and say to my self thus.

For as much as many, and excellentelye learned men, varye within them selves
in the interpretation of this sentence (this is my body* et cetera) therefore
it must needs(...) and say. The things that we have heard and seen we must
^eades speak? Lamente your overthrow and weep with Peter: and he that made him
strong again, shall strengthen you also. Thus I leave you to Christ. Whom I
most hertelye beseech, to pluck out of your heart, the doctrine that
your.iiii. scholemaisters taught you, and plant in you again the doctrine of
his heavenly father to your salvation and the establishinge of the
consciences of them whom your fall did offend.

For whose sakes I have taken in hand to confute your Articles, trusting
that God will so work in the heries of them and you boeth: that you shall all
rejoice with me for your deliverance from that deuilleishe doctrine that you
say you learned of those deuynes that were sent to you in the time of your
last imprisonment.


Hereafter follows the true copy of the Articles with the confutation of the
same
Shaxton. The first Article.
ALmyghtie God, by the power of his word pronounced by the priest at mass in
the consecration turns the bread and wine, into the very natural body and
blood of our savior Jesus Christ. So that after the consecration, there
remains no substance of bread and wine, but only the substance of Christ
God and man.

Crowley. This is sone spoken. But to prove by the scriptures, that it is true:
therein lies all the difficulty of the matter. Here (I am sure your four
scholemaisters will say. That it is done, is manifest by the scriptures. But
how it is done, reason can not attain to know. Wherefore we must against
reason, believe the wonderful work of God above reason.

Yet am not I satisfied. Neither can I believe that they can prove by the
scripturs: that the bread and wine are turned into the body and blood of
Christ. Let your scholmaisters therefore (or else do you their scholar) show me
what scripture you have for this your opinion. I am certain you have none at
al* except it be one that you are wont to wrest for your purpose, and that is
this.

The Lord Jesus in the same night in the which he was betrayed, took bread,
gave thanks, and brake it saying. Take ye, eat ye, this is my body, which
is broken for you. Hereupon I am sure you will infer: his conclution. Ergo, the
bread is turned into his body. For the self same almyghtye God which by his
word created al things of naught: has spoken these words, and is much more
able, to alter and change the nature of things that be, then he was to make
the same things of naught. Wherefore. and cetera.

Thus have ye confirmed this part. The^ say you of the wine. After the same
manner also he took the cup when supper was done and said. This cup is the new
testament in my blood. This do (as often as ye drink it) in the remembrance
of me. Here say you and your scholemaisters. The same Christ which is able to
perform his word, has said of the bread and wine that they are his body
and blood. Ergo they must needs be his very natural body and blood al
substance of bread and wine turned into the same. I doubt not but there is
all that you and your scholemaisters would desire me to conclude for your
purpose. To this I (with Gods help) will make such answer, that you and all
other your fauters shall be ashamed to wreste it so far out of tune here
after.

For the first part you shall understand that I have taken the text written by
saynct Paul to the Corinthyans, because this place of Paul is an exposition of
the same matter written by the Evangelists. They writ that Christ took bread
and blessed, and gave it to his disciples. But Paul writing to a people that
knew not what this blissing that the Jews used should mean: he calls that
same blessing thanks geuynge. Declarynge thereby, hat the blyssynge that the
Jews used (which our savior Christ also used in this actio^) was not
altogyther such crossing gestures as our mass masters use: but co^^rarywyse
void of al such foleish toys and replenished with all Godly veneration and
thanks geuynge. Exemple of thyshane me in the stories of Abraham Isaas and
Jacob, with other the fathers or the old Testamente. Seeing therefore, that
Christ took bread, and gave thanks: it must needs follow that he gave such
thanks as the fathers (the patriarckes and Prophets) used to give. Neither
making sign of the cross nor of the galow tree (for it had been all one, to
make the sign of the cross then, and to make the sign of the galow tree uow
For as thieves and all other perniciouse fellows, be now hanged on the galowe
tree: so were they then on che cross) but with reuerente gesture of the body,
and vpryghte countenance toward heaven: he called on the name of his father,
most humbly besechynge him, to work inwardly in the hertes of his Apostles,
the thing that he intended to declare to them by a visible sign And. S.
Paul calls this blessyng a thanks geuynge, because the fathers did always
use in the beginning of this blessing to give thanks to God for the great
merrye that he had always showed unto them

In token whereof, they committed unto his mercy also, their dearlye beloved
children, most humbly besechyng him, to show like mercy unto them in
prosperynge the succession of their enheritaunce, that they by the assistent
grace of God, might walk in the fear of the Lord, from generation to
generation forever.

Thus did Christ bless and brake it. If I should ask you what he brake: I
doubt not but you would answer that he brake bread, and said, take ye,
eateye, this is my body. But if I should ask you what it was that he called
his body: then I know your answer would be after your old manner, that the
same bread that he took and brake, was it that he called his body.

But I will show you a like thing to prove whether you can learn to understand
this place of scripture by a simile. Apelles took pensell and paper and drew
thereon, and said This is Venus. Now ask I you whether this that Apelles
spoke of were Venus in deed, or her Image.? I doubt not, you will say not
Venus but her Image. Then tell me. Was the pensell and paper her Image, or the
luniamentes that Apelles? The lines you say drawn on the paper, and not the
paper otherwise the^ the glass is the Image of a man's face which appears
therein.

Even so say I of these words of Christ. This is my body. He took bread, he
brake it, gave it to his disciples and said. This is my body. As who should
say, this bread broken, given to you, and received of you is a clear image of
mi body, which is by the will of my father broken freely offered and given to you
and by faieth received of you, so that in like manner as this bread is received
into the body and naturally nourishes the same: so does it declare to you by
that natural property, that my body eaten by fayeth (that is by beleuynge
and trusting upon salvation by my sufferynges in the body) does nourish the
souls of as many as do so eat it.

In like manner took he the cup after supper, saying. This cup is the new
testament in my blood. Here may you (if you have any little glitteryng of the
spiritual knowledge) easilye perceive that Paul knew of no
traunsubstantiation in this mystery,

For he reports that he learned of the Lord all that he taught the
Corhinthyans concerning this misterye: and yet he reports that Christ said
of the cup. This is the new testamente in my blood. And thyuke you, that if
Paul were here, he would say that he believed the substance of the cup to be
changed into the substance of the new testament? I know well you do not
think it. For your opinion is, that by the virtue of those words, the wine
which is in the cup is turned into the very blood of Christ. And yet do not
the words appertain any thing at all to the wine, unless you will admit
the figure whereby the thing that conteyueth is taken for the thing contained.
And so doing, you must say that the wine is the new Testament in Christ's
blander and not the blood it self. So that if you will needs have
traunsubsta^ciation: it must be of the substance of wine, into the substance
of the new testament. That is the certentye whereby our consciences are
certified of the promise of God made to us in the scripture.

With this transubstanciation we could bear, if so be you would not deny,
that the substance of bread and wine does still remain, declarynge unto us
sensibly (by visible signs) the thing that is in the scripture taught us by
words. For immediately after, Christ* says. Do this so often as ye shall
drink to the entente to remember me thereby. That is to say. So often as you
will make your selves partakers of one cup of wine, to the entente tu call to
your remembrance thereby, the great mystery of the participation you have in
me and al things that I have or shall do for you: do it after this forsayed
form. So that by this are condemned, as well the private masses, wherein one
ministers and receives al, as the freshly transubstaneiation, whereupon is
grounded the sacrifice for the quick and the dead, as shall be declared more
at large in the several articies concerning the same.

To persuade one that were wyllyng to learn, this were sufficient. But seeing
that you and your schomaisters are more ready to burn me and al other that
seek your soul health (God give you a better mind) then to accept our
dortrine: I am constrained to labor to draw you by force of arguments, none
otherwise, then Hercuses drew the froward Cerberus out of hell. I will
therefore make this argument, grounded on the definition of bread. Bread is a
confection made of many graynes, united or made into one body, by the myxture
of water, and force of fire, having in it the virtue to nourishe the sensible
bodies.

But this confection remains after the consecration (as you call it) Ergo,
there remains bread. That this co^fectio^ remains: I take wytnes of my
Lord of winchester in his book written on this matter.

And if you think him not an Author Autentyke: make an experience upon me.
Let me have daily a sufficient weyghte and measure of that consecrated bread
and wine, and shute me up from all other kind of sustinaunce. But this one
thing I would desire. That the bread and wine ye consecrate: be free from all
kinds of poison. For though I do know that God is able to preserve me from
all manner of poison: yet will I not, neither may I tempte my Lord* God so far.
But if you, do poison me, I shall gladlye suffer it for the truth sake.

If all this will not content you. I pray you give ear to Gelasius, who
writes on this wise. Surely the Sacraments of the In the ce cel holde^ Rome.
body and blood of Christ be divine things, and therefore are we, by them
made par takers of the divine nature, and yet does it not sease to be the
substance either of bread or wine: but they do remain in the property of
their nature. And no doubt the Image and similitude of the body and blood of
Christ, are celebrated in the action of the mysteries.

What thing would you have more plainlye spoken? But if you will not believe
S. Paul, who calls it bread and the cup of the Lord even after the
consecration: it is not like that ye will give credit to Gelalius, although in
deed you, and all such, are wont to gene more credit to the judgment of men,
that lived not these many hundred years, because of their antiquity: then to
the very truth (which was before the^al) whereby al men's spirits should be
tried. Wherefore I would you should not lack testimonies of the^. And to do
you pleasurewithal, I will resite you i. or.ii. testimonies by ye which you may
perceive that you have erred in this your atticle, and in yuur letter to the
kings highness also, wherein you say that this your opinion, has been the
vnifourme consent of the whole church, even from the Apostles time.

Saint Chrisostom (whom I am sure you upon Math
will not repute among them whom you call heritykes) says. So sone as the
inner eyes se the bread, they fly over the creaturs and think not on that
bread which the baker has baked: but on him that called him self the bread
of life, who is signified by the mystical bread. Saint Ambrose also upon the
Sacrament
writes these words. This bread that goes into the body, is not so
scrupelouslye sought of us, but the bread of eternal life, which vpholdeth
the substance of our soul. Saint Augustine also writes on this ^n
the.xxviii ^^rmon upon (...) Lorddes ^ordes in ^uke.
wise. Use you this bread daily, or do you, after the custom of the Greeks in
the east part, who receive it at the years end? If you think these me^ to
be none of the church why do not your honorable Lords burn their books, as
well as they did the Bible with other pore men's books, wherein was nothing else
contained but that is also in these men's books? But to what purpose were it
for me to spend much time in reprouyng your honorable fathers doyngs: seeing
my life time would not suffice to do it any thing to the purpose? And to pull
you back again from your detestable blindness: I think it impossible. For
Paul writing to the Hebre. says. It is not possible, that they which be once
illuminate, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and be made partakers of
the holy Gooste, and that have also tasted of the good word of God, and of
the powers of the world to come, and are slypped out again: to be brought
again unto penite^ce, for that (in as much as in them lies) they have
crucisied the son of God anewe, for their own pleasure, having him in
dirision.

This notwythstandynge the mercy of God is upon all his worckes, and things
not possible to man, are possible to God, who knows the secrets of your
heart, whether you fell of weakness through the fear of death or of contempt.
If of weakness (as it is our parts to judge) then despair not.

For God has abundance of mercy in store wherein you shall have your part,
if you repent. I would wyshe that your scholemaisters and you might be won
by this my labor. But if your hertes be so stony, that the truth can take no
rote therein: it shall suffice me, if other the simple members of Christ having
light, may escape the stumblynge stocks that you have laid in their way. For
their sakes therefore chiefly, and for you and such other (if it be possible
that you may be brought from your blyndenes I have enterprised this
daungerouse labor And for that this Article, as it is first, so is it the
chief and principal, whereof the most part of the other do depend and hang,
I am the more earnest in the confutation thereof, knowing for certentie, that
the consciences boeth of you and of your honorable scholmaisters are on my
side. But fear to lose the Lordlyke lyuynges of this world, preuayleth
against us boeth. You say with the pharisees. Ne forte Romani. But I doubt not,
the good mould shall bring forth fruit by receyuyng the seed. Knowing that
neither the God head can be made of any other substance, another the bread and
wine turned into Christ's flesh and blood at all times when it shall please
the priest to play a mass, most superstitiouslye breathynge out the words
that our Savior Christ spoke to no such purpose. For as S. Augustine upon
John the.xxx trea^ise.
says, it may be in one place only. And as the same Augustine writes to
Dardanus. We must take good heed that we make not so divine a thing of this
body, that we deny it to be a body. For it follows not that all things
which be in Christ should be in all places at once as Christ is For then
should we also be in all places at once. For the scripture does truly record
of us, that we live, move and be in him. It is manifest therefore, that
notwithstanding the words pronounced by the priest: the bread and wine
remain in their natural property, even after the consecration as you call it.


Shaxton. The second Article.
THe said blessed Sacrament, being once consecrated, is and remains still,
the very body and blood of our savior Christ, although it be reserved, and
not presently distributed.

Crowley. This Article is a branch of the other and is not in credit with
the^ that have the other in suspicion. Wherefore, haueynge sufficientlye spoken
of the other: it shall not need me to tarry long upon this. Nevertheless,
because I perceive you go about to hang an other article upon this: I shall
(by the healpe of God) make him so bare, that your other shall take no hold
thereat. Where as you say therefore, that this Sacrament being once
consecrated, remains still the very body and blood of Christ: I must ash
you this questian. Whether the body and blood of our savior Christ, be
corruptible, and may putrify or not? I am certain of it, you will say no.
Well then must I ask you an other question.

If the Sacrament be long kept, paste the time that bread and wine will
naturallye be sweet: will it not be moldy, r^tten, and sower? I doubt not but
you will say yea. For your holy father made a law that you should shyfte the
pyxe every month puttyng into it new consecrated cakes and spend the old,
and the wine may not be kept at al, but presently spent when it is
consecrated, because it will sone be sower. Is not all this true? I am sure you
can not deny it, Well then will I conclude with this question. If the substance
of the sacrame^te (I mean the natural substance) may be musty rotten and
sower, and the body and blood of Christ (which you say is the only
substance of the Sacrament) can not by any means putrify: I pray you tell
me how the body and blood remains in the Sacrament being reserved, and
what thing it is, that does therein receive putrefaction. Perchance you will
answer me as your scholmaisters are wont to answer, when men say they
feel, see, and taste bread and wine in the Sacrament. The qualities (say they)
do remain, but the substance is changed into the body and blood.

But when the Sacrament shall be corrupted: I think your scholemaisters and
you will say, that the substa^^ce remains and the qualities be changed. That
is to say, the body and blood of Christ (which as you say is the only
substance of the Sacrament) remains uncorrupted, but the qualities, that is
to say, swetenes clear^es, whytenes, and al other the qualities of bread and
wine, do corrupt. Would God your great master Aristotle might hear you
make this answer. I doubt not he would bear no more with you then he did
with his master Plato in the opinion of the eternity of the world. But you
will say perchance. What should we do with Aristotle in these matters?
Aristotle was a man that builded altogyther upon reason, but in this thing
we must stycke to fayeth and let reason pass. But with your patience, do not
our masters of Oxford and Cambrige affirm that al students that entend to
have judgment in scripture, must first read Aristotle's worckes? Have they not
in these universities.vii. years at the least, wherein their chief study
must be in Aristotle, before they can be admitted to the most sacre^e study
of Gods holy word? I pray you therefore, disdain not your old master
Aristotle, but hear what he says of putrefaction. Putrefaction (says he) is
the corruption of the natural heat in a moist body, which corruption
changes by an externe heat. If putrification therefore, be in a moist body:
I pray you tell me what moiste body it is in the sacrament that receives
the putrificatio^. As for the qualities which you say do corrupt, are no
bodies, neither have they any substance, but are mere accidents, things
that do chance to be in bodies that they may be both sensible. For neither
the bodies without the^, nor they without the bodies can be sensible.

Seeing therefore, that the putrification must needs be in a body, and that
the qualities be no bodies: I pray you let us know what body receives this
putrification in the Sacrament? I am sure you will not say, that the body and
blood of Christ does putrify: then must you needs grant, that either
there remains the substance of bread and wine in the sacrament which
receives this putrification, or that the Sacrament being so reserved,
returns to the nature of bread and wine again, and so receives
putrefaction, as bread and wine. Which thing granted, one of your two
Articles must needs be heretical, choose you whether. Yet do I coniect an other
of your answers. You will say, perchance, so long as the sacrament is sweet
and tolerable to be received into the stomach, it is and remains still the
body and blood of Christ: but as soon as it begins to putrify, it
cease to be any longer Christ's body and blood, to the great peril of
them that so keep it. If you say that I do but dream this answer of mine own
head: I will ask you, who made you so bold to burn it when it does stynke,
if it do not then cease to be the body of Christ. Will you burn Christ as an
herityke, will you be more cruel to him, then you were to pore Tracie (whose
body you burned after his death only) burn p^ge his body after his
resurrection? Yea, if your Articles be true: you burn his Godhed also. I
think therefore, you could not shape a better answer for your self, then to
say, that Christ boeth God and man has made him self bread and wine again,
because he could not otherwise escape burning. For your holy father has
already give the sentence in his holy bible of Decrees, that if it fortune
this substan^ce (which you call god and man) to stink: that the^ it must be
burned without merci. Wherefore if you grant that it remains still the body
and blood of Christ, notwithsta^dinge the putrifactio^: you must needs grant
also, that you burn the body and blood Christ. But if you say it cease to
be the body and blud of Christ, when it begins to putrify: then does it
not remain the body of Christ when it is reserved.

For if it remain the body and blood of Christ while it is swet: then does it
remain in the same estate for ever. Yea, if it be once changed from the
nature of bread and wine and become the incorruptible body and blood of
Christ: it can never be corruptible again but shall still remain
incorruptible.

But experience teaches us, that it remains not still incorruptible. Ergo
the substance is not alltered at all. And herupon I conclude, that it can not
remain the natural body and blood of Christ, because it never was the same.


Shaxton. The third Article.
THe same blessed Sacrament being consecrated, is and ought to be worshypped
and adoured, with Godly honor, where so ever it is, for as much as it is the
body of Christ, inseperably united to the deity.

Crowley. In the end of this article, you point as it were with your finger,
where you would have him to take hold by the other that went before saying. For
as much as it is the body of Christ, inseparablye united to the deity. But I
think it best for you to seek out some corner to hang him in, for here you
can have no sure handfaste. For if you be remembered, I have cut of the
knagges that you poynted upon. I will not deny (yea I will proteste and
defend) that the Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ be reuerente
things, and that they onghte to be reverently used among the fayethfull
members of Christ, but to honor and adoure them with divine honor, I say
is no less then detestable Idolatrye.

For as only God is divine, so must divine honor be geueu unto him only.
If these Sacraments therefore be not God. What can it be less then Idolatrye,
to honor the^ with divine honor?

That they be not Gods is sufficiently proved in your other articles, and yet
shall be more plainly proved here. First if they were God, then were that now
bread and wine (the work of man's hand) that shall to morrow be God, the
creatoure and maker of all mankind. So that I shall this day be able to make
the thing that to morrow shall be able to make me, yea and that in deed made
me at the first.

I shall grind wheat and press grapes, and with the one part thereof shall I
fill my stomach and be drunk, and with the other I shall make me a God, and an
almyghtye creator and maker. What is this better, then to cut down a tree and
to warm me at the fire of the one part thereof, and to make me a God of the
other? But I think very shame will co^pel you to recant certain of your
former words, and to say that you mean not, that the substan^ce of the bread
is turned into the substance of god, but that it is (through the almighty word
of god spoken by the priest) turned into the substance of the body of Christ.
And that you infer thereupon the essential presence of the deity, for that
they be inseperably united together. A fyr, if you will grant me this, I se
well you will not stand to your first Article: wherein you affirm, that after
the words of consecration, there remains no substance of bread and wine but
the only and very substance of Christ God and man. For if you say that the
substance of the bread is not turned into the substance of the godhead: the^
is he none otherwise in the bread after the consecration then he was before.
Before the consecration the bread was not to be honored with diuiue honor:
therefore it is not to be honored with divine honor at all. But here you will
say that although the substance of the bread be not turned into the
substance of the godhead yet is God otherwise present in the Sacrame^te after
the consecration, then it was before. For the second person in trinity being
incarnate, and remaining inseparablye vnitted to the father and to the holy
Ghost. it must neades be that the manheade of the same person being risen
again from death is inseperablye united to the Godheade, so that the Godheade
is always essentiallye present with the body.

All this is true, but it follows not of this, that the Godheade is otherwise
present in the bread after your consecration (as you call it) then it was
before, because the body wherein Christ is incarnate, is not nor can not be
substanciallye present there. For that were as much to say, as that the body
wherein Christ is incarnate, is so mixed with the deite, that it is in all places
at once, as the deity is. Which saying is against the doctrine of
Athanatius in the Creed that you sing and read daily in your prime. Wherein
he says. Deus et homo vnus est Christus, non confusione substantie, sed
vnitate person.

That is, Christ being but one, is boeth God and manne. Not by the mixture of
the substance, but by the unity of the person. If the substance therefore of
God and man be not myxed together: then is not the manheade so large to be in
all places, as the deity is. For of it own nature it can be but in one place
at once.

And this is it that. S. Austine speaks ^d Darda^ine
of in this wise. We must beware that we do not so set up the divinity of the
ma^head, that we take away the verity of the body For it is not consequent,
that the thing that is in God should be so in all places as God is. For the
scripture does most truly record of us, that welyue, move, and be in him
and yet be we not in all places as he is.

But man is in God after one sort, and God is in man after an other sort.
After a certain peculier sort. For one person is boeth God and man, and boeth
are one Christ Jesus. In all places, in that he is God, but in that he is man,
in heaven. If this be not sufficient, hear yet more of the same Augustine. As
concerning his manhood, he was in earth and not in heaven (where he is now)
when he said. No man ascends into heaven saving only the son of man
which is in heaven, who did also descend from heaven. I pass over here,
many testimonies of the auntiente doctors, whereby is manifestlye declared the
local nature of the body of Christ, and that it is, nore can no more be in all
places at once now, then it might when he yet living upon the earth.

But perchance you will not be ashamed to say that it might even then be in
all places at o^ce. For in very deed your Articles declare no less but that
you think it to have been in.xiii. places at once, the night before he
suffered. Which thing granted, it must needs fo^owe, that it being a mortal
body, might be and was in many places at once.

But to satisfye you in this matter, I would you should thorowlie scanne the
words of Christ to his Apostles, when he told them that Lazarus was dead.
For your sakes (says he) I am glade that I was not there. Now think you by
these words, did christ ieste with his disciples, or did he speak in
earneste? If he meaned good faith by them (as I suppose you will say that he
did) how can you deny but that his body was then local and could not be in
all places at once? For if he did not ieste with his disciples in these words,
he meante none other thing by the^, but that his disciples should believe him
to be God, for that above the nature of man, he being absente, knew without
any man's relation, that Lazarus was dead. And so the very words do sound.
For he adds. That you may believe. As he should have said, and as the text
lies in deed. I rejoice for your sakes, that your fayeth may be confyrmed in
the opinion of my divinity, knowing that I was not there present in body, and
can tell you of the death of Lazarus, without relation of any that was there.
Now tell me, if Christ might have been in many places at once in his ma^head:
what should it have helped the faith of the Apostles, to say that he was not
there? This matter is to manifest. Wherefore I thyuke it but waste labor to
go about to make the day brighter. For thed aye birds can hold them selves
content with this light. As for the lurkinge night byrds that fle the light:
the increase of light should but drive them into darcker corners.

Wherefore I shall desire the Lord of his infinite mercy to open their eyes
and to take the veil from their hertes that they may be able to abide the
light, and to receive into their hertes, the truth of Gods word,
confessing with the fayethfull me^bres of Christ, that the son of God the
second person in trinity is and ever has been God, equale with the father
and the holy Ghost. And that although (as he is God) he can not be contained in
any place, but is immense, increat, almighty, and everlasting. Yet as he is
man, he is and must neades be in one only place at once, and being ascended
into heaven, is locally there and not here as he was locallye here and not
there, before his ascension.

This is our fayeth in Christ Jesus, the only son of God, whom we
honor, and believe to be honored, neythere in the mount of Samaria, neither
in Jerusalem but in spirit and verity.

Wherefore when you say come o^te into the deserte, for lo there Christ
works miracles, in our blessed Ladies chapel, And when you say knele down
before the pyxe, for lo there is Christ reallie present: we say unto you that
our shepeherde Christ has given us warning to be ware of you wherefore we
will not believe you. But we believe and confess that he sytteth on the right
hand of God the father, where he must be honored in spirit, till he come to
judge the quick and the dead and that no divine honor ought to be given to
any creature in heaven, earth or in hell.


Shaxton. The fourth Article.
THe church (by the ministration of the priest, offers daily at the mass,
for a sacrifice to almyghtye God, the self same body and blood of our savior
Christ, under the form of bread and wine, in the remembrance and
representation of Christ's death and passion.

Crowley. Before I can say any thing in this matter, I must know what
church it is, that does as you say offer up this sacrifice, by the
ministration of the priest. Is it the same church that offered up Christ on
the cross, or is it the church that was redeemed by that sacrifice: If it be
the same churh that offered up Christ on the cross, then it is the
congregation of the wicked. For so says the Prophet. The wicked have
persecuted me. But I am sure you will say, it is the church that was redeemed by
that sacrifice, that offreth it up now by the ministration of the prist. Here I
might axe of you, how you could prove to me, either by the scriptures or by
ancient doctors, that the church redeemed by that sacrifice, may offer it up
again so often, to the entente to redeem the^ selves therebye? But to that you
will answer that they offer it not up for their redemption, for they were
redeemed once for all. Yet will not I be suffised with this answer For I am sure
you say in the ca^non of your mass, these words. For the redemption of the
souls of thy church. But I will not much contend with you in this matter,
because I am fully persuaded that your own conscience cries out against you
therein.

Show me (I pray you therefore) some one sentence of the scripture, or of the
aunciente Doctors, that may seem to maintain your assertion. You will
perchance recite me the words of Paul to the Hebrews, say inge, Every
priest is ready, daily offering up sacrifice for sin. This makes so much
for your purpose, that if you read the next sentence following, you shall sone
se it marreth all your market. For it follows. Which can never take away
sin. If that which is offered up by the priest, can never take away sin,
the^ is it not the same that was offered upon the cross, for that took away
sin, yea and was of force to take away all the sins of the world.

But to what purpose should it be to make many words about this text,
seeing that it is manifest, that Paul does here speak of the priests and
sacrifices of the old law only, and not of any sacrifice to be offered
among christians. Yea, not much after the words cited, he is not afraied to
say that there is no more sacrifice to be offered for sin.

Yet because you Sacrificers are wont to wreste this place (as it is manifest
that you have done many other) I thought it good to give you a wound with
your own weapon. And now I shall despre you to hearken to the words of the same
Paul, to the contrary of your Article, which are these.

No man can offer up a greater sacrifice the^ him self. Your priest
therefore, can not offer up Christ in sacrifice, because Christ being
offered up must needs be the greateste sacrifice, and so can he not be when
a priest sacrifices him, for if the priest sacrificed him self, he should be
the greatest sacrifice that he could offer, for no man can offer a greater
sacrifice then him self. Yea God requires non other sacrifice of us, but our
selves as writes. S. Paul. Give your Roma.xii.
selves a living sacrifice to God. And the Psalmisse. The sacrifice that God
accepts is a penitente spirit, a contrite and humble heart. Whereby it is
manifest, that the congregation redeemed by the sacrifice offered on the
cross, does not nor can not offer up this sacrifice you speak of. For (as
Paul writes) he can not be offered up, but he dies. Wherefore he offered him
self once for all, because he could dye but once. Yet grant he might die
every day, would you think that to be his church that would kill him every day?
I think not unless you take Judas and the Jews to be of his church not
wythsta^ding the one betrayed him who^ the other crucified. Thus se we that the
church of christ knows of no sacrifice that they offer by the ministration
of the priest. But they make their own me^bres a lively sacrifice to God, as
Paul wills the^ to do. And knowing the^ selves to be the kynglye priesthod
that Peter speaks of: they do (as Saint Augustine says) boeth vow and
gene the^ i. Peter.ii
selves unto God. Offeringe up them selves upon the aultare of their hertes,
nothing The.x. book* De ciuitate dei.
regarding the fond inventions of your idle brains, whereby you go about to
offer Christ to his father again. Having not only no such commandment in
the scriptures: but great plentye of manifest scriptures and saynges of the
most ancient doctors to the contrary. But I suppose you regard neither of
them. For you are (as it seems) whollye addycte to your whoryshe mothers
doctrine, and that makes you writ so circumspectlye, teaching two contraries
in less then six lines of your Article of this sacrifice. For you say first,
that it is the self same that was offered on the cross, and at the last you
say it is done in the remembrance thereof. Now tell me I pray you whether
the thing remembered and the remembrance of the thing be not contrary The
Artiters call the^ Relatina, and therefore most contrary. Eue^ as the master and
the servant, the father and the son and such other. For in respect of his
master, the serua^te can by no means be master, nor the son a father in
the respect of his father.

As you say therefore, it is the remembrance of the sacrifice done on the
cross, Ergo it is not the self same sacrifice.


Shaxton. The.v. Article.
THe same body and blood that is offered in the mass, is the very
propiciation and satisfaction for the sins of the world, for as much as it is
the self same in substance, that was offered upon the cross for our
redemption. And the oblation and action of the priest, is also a praise and
thanks geuyng unto God for his benefits, and not the satisfaction for the
sins of the world. For that is only to be attributed to Christ's passion.

Crowley. If I had not sufficiently declared in your first, second and third
Articles, that the sacrament is not the self same in substance that was
offered on the cross: then ought I in this place to be occupied therein. For I
perceive you point upon sure hold there. But forasmuch as I have made it so
plain that you can not take any handfast there: I shall desire you to learn to
turn this sentence, and say. For as much as, that body and blood, which is
offered in the mass, is not the self same in substance, that was offered on
the cross, for our redemption: it is not, nor can not be the propiciation and
satisfaction for the sins of the world. And if you be not yet satisfied as
concer^ynge the first: I pray you read and understand the words of Peter
Act.iii.
written in the Acts of the Apostles. Repent you of your error and return,
that your sins may be wyped away. That when the time of the refrigeration
from the sight of the Lord shall come, and he shall send the same Jesus
Christ, which has been before preached unto you (who^ heaven must needs
receive unto the time of restitution of all things) which God has spoken by
the mouth of al his holy Prophets from the begy^nynge.

If heaven must needs receive him until such time as that day shall come
wherein the Lord shall restore al things: then must we know after what manner
heaven shall receive him. For after some manner he left not heaven when he
descended to be incarnate, nor the earth when he ascended in the syghte of his
Apostles, but was is and ever shall be boeth in heaven, earth, and hell. But
(as. S. Ad Dardanum.
Augustine says) as he was manne, he was in earth and not in heaven (where he
is now) when he said, no man ascends into heaven, saving the son of man
which is in heaven, which also descended from heaven. And in this respect
shall he come from heaven to judge the world. For otherwise he is here already
and ever has been. If we therefore, will not wyllyngelye shut up the eyes of
our conscience against the manifest truth: we must needs grant that the
very natural body, which was borne, dyed, and rose again, is also ascended
from the earth to heaven, and has from that time been, is and shall be there to
the day of his coming to judge the world. Whereupon it must needs follow, that
the priest can by no means offer in the mass, the self same substance that
suffered on the cross for our redemption.

In the residue of your Article, you seem to deny that you affirmed before.
For here you say that the oblation done by the priest, is not the satisfaction
for the sins of the world, for that is only to be attributed to the
passion of Christ. But if the oblatio^ done by the priest, be not the
satisfaction for the sins of the world: the^ is it not the offering up of the
self same substance that was offered on the cross. For the offering up
thereof was and is the satisfaction for the sins of the world. But if you
will say, that the action of the priest is not the offering up of the self
same substance that was offered on the cross: then will I say that you deny
the first part of your Article, which is, that the body and blood offered
in the mass is the very (...) for the sins of the world. I will also thereupon
deny, that it is any sacrifice at al. For a sacrifice ca^ not be without the
offering up of some thing. And other thing is there none offered in the mass
the^ that which you call the self same substance: therefore if it be not
offered there is nothing offered. And thereof it follows that it is no such
sacrifice. But I know you will say, that you mean by the oblation and action
of the priest: the prayers and thanks geuynge, which he offers, and so it
is a sacrifice of praise and thanks giving. Whereunto I answer, that if there
be any prayer, or thanks geuyng offered in this action, they are not the
whole: no not the tenth part of the action, if they be compared with the
crossynges, whysperinges, doukynges, and other the iuglynge iestures of the
priest in the same action. Wherefore if it should be named aryght, it should
be called a iuglyng cast, and not a sacrifice of praise and thanks geuinge.
For all such actions ought to bear the name of that which does most abound
therein. But in very deed if it were used aryghte, it might right well and ought
to be called the sacrifice of praise and thanks geuynge for that it were the^
the present consalation of our weak co^scie^ces, putting us out of dout that
we are the true me^bres of Christ, united and knit together in him by the might
of God in our hertes, through the fayeth in Jesus Christ, whereby we receive
justice, and are made partakers of all his justice and deseruinges, no less
then we are made partakers of that Sacramental bread and wyue, at the
receyuynge whereof, we render praises and thanks, even from the very bottom
of our hertes, desyerynge the eternal father never to suffer us to be
unthankful, for the inestimable love that he declared toward us, in that he
spared not to give his only son even unto the death of the cross, for our
sakes.


Shaxton. The.vi. Article.
THe said oblation or sacrifice, so by the priest offered in the mass is
auaylable and profitable, boeth for the quick and the dead, although it lies
not in the power of man to limit how much, or in what measure the same does
avail.

Crowley. If I were not fullye persuaded, that in the time that you writ these
Articles (other else subscribed unto them) for they seem to be boltes of
wynchesters quiver) the good spirit of God had left you, and the evil
spirit was entered, as into Saul, the first king ^ynges.xvi.
of Israel: I could not marvel inoug he at your great obliuiousnes herein.

For in the last Article we spoke of, you said that the satisfaction for the
sins of the world, was to be attributed to the passion of Christ only, and
not to the oblation or action of the priest in the mass. For you said, that
it was but a sacrifice of praise and thanks geuynge to God for his benifites.
And now ye say that the oblation before named, so offered up by the priest in
the mass: is auaylable borth for the quick and the dead, although it lie
not in the power of man, to lymet how much, nor in what measure it avails.
I can not se therefore, but that you are so forgetful, that you forget in this
Article the thing that you spoke of in the last. Yet because you shall have none
occasion to think me partial in this matter I shall take every thing to the
most anauntage for your opinion that may be. And then shall I (by the aid of
God) declare your confuse opinions so plainlye, that you your self shall dislike
the^, I doubt not. First you might say, that in this article, you mean of that
oblation or sacrifice, that you call the body and blood offered in the mass,
which you say, is the self same that was offered on the cross, and then it
is and must needs be auaylable and profitable for the quyche and the dead,
because it is the satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, which you
say in the end of your last article, is to be attributed only to the
passion of Christ. Wherefore, to make this your meaning, is to deny that which
you said before. I would therefore think it best for you to say, that you
mean here of the oblation and action of the priest, which you call the
sacrifice of praise and thanks geuyng^, and then I shall despre you to tell me
what profitte it is that comes to the quycke and the dead by this sacrifice.

Perchance you would say, that although it be not a full satisfaction for the
sins of the world: yet is it a mean whereby the souls of them for whom it
is done, do emoye the satisfaction made by Christ on the cross. For so do
some of your doctors teach, saying that it is the applycation of the
merytes of Christ, to the sayers, hearers and biers thereof. But amongeste all
other, I would feign know of you, what the sellers do gain by this.
Doubtless (as I suppose) more then all the rest. For they obtain this worlds
wealth thereby, what so ever the other have. What they shall lose at the day of
the Lord, judge you. I trust not to be par tener with them in their gaynes.
But this I will say to you. If this be such an application as you make it: you
are far uncharitable, that (haueynge a competente portion to line upon) do not
continually occupy your self therein, seeing you be called thereunto. Yea I
think it no less the^ your bounden duty so to do: seeing you be called to so
high a ministration, as to apply the merits of Christ to men's souls. But to
avoid this great trauaylle, it shall be best for you to say, as the
pardoners did by their pardons and as your purgatory priest say. No pe^ye,
no Pater noster, the money must first apply your sacrifices: and then your
sacrifices must apply Gods mercies.

Oh most detestable, and more the^ blasphemouse doctrine. Shall your fond
in^^^tions, apply the merits of Christ to the soul of man? Shall not the
faith in Christ do this thing? Shall we look to be made partakers with him,
by other means then he has appointed? Will you (villayne wret rhes) take upon
you to make marchaundise of Christ's merytes.

Ye blind guydes, hear the threatenings Esai.v.
of the prophet. Woe be to you that call good ruyll, and evil good, light
darckenes, and darckenes light. If it be good to trust in your applycations:
then is our says in vain. If we may receive Christ's merits, without
your applications: then are they vain.

That we may do so, is marifeste by that many received them before your
applications were invented, And where have you any commandment in the
scriptures thus to apply Christ's merits at your pleasure? Will you apply
the merytes of Christ to the members of the devil? What adulterer what,
ertorcioner, what usurer, what whormonger, what murderer, will not you say
mass for, if you be hyered. And do you not say that the masses which you
sing and sayeare the application of Christ's merits to them that you say them
for?

Oh adulterous generation. Forget not Esaias.v.
the forsayed curse of the prophet. Wobe unto you that call good evil and evil
good. You say it is good to purchase your chauntres, trentalles, and dirige
masses, for the health of our souls, boeth whylse we be alive here, and when
we be dead. But to trust in the death of Christ only, and to bestow our
riches upon the lively Images of God, the blind, lame, and impotent creatures,
regarding nothing of your apylhe applications: you say is herisie. Through
you are the people provoked to anger, and are become the children of lies,
refusyng to here the law of God. To them that se: they say, se not, And to
them that search out, they Esai.x xx.
say, search not out for us the things that be straight and good. Speak to
us the things that please us. Seek out erroures for us.

Alas for you (mouste miserable men) if it were better to be tied to a millstone
and cast into the sea, then in offend one of the least little ones that
believe in Christ: what plages ra^ you hope to escape, that have and do daily
offend so many? Is not the whole multitude of the people brought to such pas
by your ungodly preachinges and whisperinges in ears: that they hate even to
death, al them that preach the pure word of God voied of all the dregs of
Dunsse learning and man's traditions? Preach to v^ (say they) the doctrine that
onre fathers followed. It was never merry in England, sense the new Testament
and Christ was so much spoken of. This is your doing.

This is the fruit of your popeish preaching Repent you of this (O you Romeishe
merchauntes) for your city shall fall, and the great destruction thereof is at
hand.


Shaxton. The seventh Article.
IT is not a thing of necessity, that the Sacrament of the aultare, should be
ministered unto the people under boeth the kinds of bread and wine. And it is
nont abuse that the same be ministered to the people under the one kind, for as
much as in every of boeth the kinds, whole Christ, boeth body and blood is
conseyned.

Crowley. As the words of this Article be placed they seem to teach that in
some thing there is none abuse, though the thing whoche ought of necessity
to be done: be left undone But I will not greatly strive with you in this
matter. Idyd only think it good (by the way) to touch it: because you should
know how spttle diligence and learning is showed in your Article. As for the
meaning of your article: I take it to be none other, but that the robbynge of
the people of one part of the communion: is none abuse. No mar, uaile though
you be of this opinion: for you teach it to be none abuse to take the whole
from them, usurping to your self, the thing whereof (by right) ye ought not to
be partakers. And as it seems by your negligence in the ministration thereof:
it is against your will, that you distribute that one part once in the pere.
Yea, a man ca^ gather none other by the external signs: but that the money
you receive at Ester, is the only cause of your administration then. For this
you will be sure of. The money shall be paid, before you will minister. And
then one man's ^^^ney is as good as an others. Pay the some and the^ ye are al
welcome. But he that has naught to pay, must either beg, or tarry on other
day. Yet can I allow the order of the tauerns to be much better then this. For
there a man shall eat his bread, and drink his wine, and then call for a
rekenyng. Yea, he shall have more for his farthynge, the^ you will give him for
his.ii. pence. And as you say your self, the wine is as good in the tauecue,
as when you give it to the people For you bestow not so much as one ^rossynge
or whisperyng over it.

Marye I think you inyxe it with water to declare that there ran boeth water
and blood out of our Savior Christ's side. And as for the bread you say is
none, but flesh in the lykenes of bread.

And in the ministratio^ thereof, you speak in a strange tongue (as iuglers do)
because men should think the words to be the worckers of the feate. I speak
these words to declare your sacrament to be no communion, but a Romyshe
merchaundise. Wherefore it should be none abuse at all, though both the parts
were taken from the people and you to. But to witholde the one part of the
communion of the body and blood of Christ from the people, I lay (and wylby
the aid of God prour) that it is no less abuse, the^ to teach that Christ
shed not his blood to: the^.

First we must know* whether it were necessary for Christ to i^stitute the
communion under boeth the kinds or not. If it were necessary (as I think you
will not deny) then is it also necessary, that al, as many as shall be
admitted to that communion: do also recey^e it under boeth k^ndes Othere^s were
the one part instituted in vain. For other vie is there none of this
sacrament: but to be received of the faithful beleuers, to remember the death
of Christ thereby, and to certify their own consciences of the part they
have with him in all his deserninges, and of the couplinge together of all the
fayethful me^bres of Christ's church into one body by faith. But if you be so
sha^les, that you will deny that Christ did necessarily instituted the co^mmion
in boeth the kinds: then will I say unto you that he could not otherwise have
declared unto us the misterye of his ^leshe and blood, the^ by boeth the
kinds. For what other thing is the mystery of the flesh and blood of Christ:
then that like as the body lives by bread and brothe, recey^ed by the mouth,
so does the soul live by the merits and dese^^ynges of Christ in the
flesh, received by faieth, as by the mouth of the soul. And this is it that
Christ speaks of. John.vi. Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man and
drink his blood, you shall have no life in you. So that if he would by
visible signs declare unto us, that his flesh and blood are the necessary
fode of our fowls: no remedy, he must needs do it by the necessary fode of
our bodies. Seeing therefore that the broth or lycoure, is as necessary for
the sustinaunce of our bodies, as the bread is: it could not be but necessary
to institute this Sacrament or misterye, in boeth. Well now I am sure you will
not deny the necessity of institutynge the communion in boeth the kinds. But
thus perhaps you will say (with your scholmaisters) that as the Apostels (who
only were present at the institution thereof) were priests: so is it only
necessary, that priests receive it in boeth the kinds. For the words of the
supper, being spoken to the Apostles: must extend no farther then to their
successors.

If all the Apostles were priests, then is it like that the order of knave
traitor priests has been derived, even from the Apostles time. For there
was one among them that was a kna^e and a traitor And therupo^yo^^ ground (I
am sure) that a kna^e priest may celebrate and receive the sacrament in both
the kinds, because he is the successoure of one of the Apostles which was a
knave. Bu^ now to the purpose, That all the Apostles were priests, I de^^^.
For Judas (who was no membre of Christ) could not be a priest. Here if you
will say, that then many of our priests at this day be no priests,
because some of them be members of the devil: I will not greatly stycke to
grant you tha^ conclusion. For if you speak of a priest, which is signified
by this word Sacerdos: I say the church of Christ knows none other
priesthode, but that which ^s spoken of in the first of the revelations.

And of that order is none that is not the true membre of Christ. And such one
offers his own members, an acceptable sacrifice to God. And every one that
offers this sacrifice, is a priest of this order: though he be neither
shaven nor anointed. And such priests were all the apostles (Judas only
excepted) and they only are the apost^es successors that offer this
sacrifice. And therefore ought they a^* and they only to receive both the kinds
of the communion For amongst other the^ these, can there be no communion of
Christ's body and blood, though they devour never so many sacraments, to
their own condemnation But if you speak of a priest which is signified by
this word presbiter, that is to say an elder: I will say your priests for the
most part are elderly enough and so old musty barters, that they will hold no
new wine. And so are they not the successoures of the Apostles (unless it
were of the Apostle Judas the traytoure) for they were elders, able to govern
the people with Godly do^trine and ensample of life. I conclude therefore, that
as many of your priests as are not the true members of Christ are as good
priests, as Judas was apostle, and do God as good seruise in selling his
Sacraments, as Judas did in sellyng his son. Well, let us return to the
words of the supper, to prove whether they will birefe us of the one part or
n^. The words spoken of the bread, are these. Take ye, eat ye, this is my
body which is broken for you. And of the cup is said. Dryuke every one of you
of this, for this is my blood in the new testament, which shalbeshed for many
into remission of sins* Now tell me if any of the true me^bres of Christ, may
lefully be de feated of any of these parts. If ye may with hold any part from
the^: it must be the bread ra there the^ the wine. For it is said of the wine.
Drink every one of you of this. Even as though he would have said. Take heed
you be not defeated of this part. There shall come bribours, that shall
withholde it from a great nu^bre of your successors, saying that I spoke these
words to you only and to such as should bear the name of my ministers.

And therefore they heynge none of your successors, and yet boestynge them
selves to be your only successors: shall usurp to them selves, this part of
your communion. But teach you in all the world, that the words which I speak
unto you, I speak unto as many as shall truly profess my name. Drink you
every one of this.

Wherefore I conclude, that it is a thing of necessity that the communion be
ministered in boeth the kinds, to all the fayethfull members of Christ. And
that if is the an abuse to minister it to any of them, under one kind only.

But, because I perceive whe^se this great error of yours springs, I shall
somewhat speak thereof. For as much as (say you) under either of boeth the
parts, is contained whole Christ body and blood: it must needs follow, that it
is none abuse to minister to the people under one kind only.

An assertion worthy a fleshly philosopher sauourynge more of Aristotle the^ of
Christ. For if it were granted that the sacramental bread were turned into a
lyueynge body, then would Aristotle say, that there must needs be blood in
the same or else some other humor of the same nature to supply the office of
blood. Hitherto Aristotle takes your part. But when you say, that in the
blood must needs be whole Christ boeth body and blood: there Aristotle
leaves you. For he is not of the opinion that the whole ought to be present
with every part, though he affirm the parts to be necessarylye present with
the whole. But if you will hearken to him in all his assertions: he will teach
you, that in every natural body must needs be a form, quantie, and
quality, to represe^t it to our eyes. And that we must deserne and know the
bodies one from an other, by their quantities, qualities, and form that they
be of. But I doubt not you will forsake Aristotle in this point wherefore I
shall desire you to forsake him in the other also. I would wyshe you either to
be an whole divine, other eis to give over diuitie for all together, and become
a mere Philosopher. For all mou^grels are abominable before God. I could spend
much time with you in this matter, but that I think it time lost to braule
any longer with your beastiye reason. But briefelye I shall conclude
admonishynge the fayethfull reader, to mark well the sure foundation of your
Article, to be set upon Aristotle's ground, and yet contrary to his mind. And
with how small circumspection you wryt, when you say that the whole Christ is
contained under either of boeth the kinds, when you name naught else there, but
body and blood. As though whole Christ were naught else.


Shaxton. The eight Article.
IT is no derogation to the virtue of the mass, though the priest receive
the sacrament alone, and none other receive it with him.

Crowley. In deed it is no derogation to the virtue of the mass, that the
priest only receives the Sacrament. Yea, it is the only vpholdinge,
strenghthynge, and defense of the mass, when the priest eats and drinks
up all himself. For if he should distribute it to any other and make them
partakers with him: it should not then be a mass (which name comes from the
market of Rome) but a communion. And if you will say (as I suppose your
meaning is in this Article) that it is no derogation to the virtue of the
communion of the body and blood, of Christ that the priest receives it
alone: then must I needs say that it is so great derogation to the virtue
thereof, that it is thereby declared to be no communion at al. For the whole
strength and virtue thereof, is to signify unto us the death of Christ, our
deliverance by the same, and the wonderful knittynge together of all the
receyuers thereof into one body: by the faith in Christ, the head of the same
body. And this virtue has it not when it is received of the priest only,
neither can it have. For the distributinge of it among many, and the commune
receyuynge of it, are the things wher^n is declared unto the receivers that
the body and blood of Christ were not the priece of one man's sins only, but
of many, even as many as should certaynlye put their trust in him, and that
the same b^leuers are through belief in him become members of one body even as
the bread whereof they be parteners is but one loffe or piese of bread made of
many grains of corn. The receyuyng of the priest therefore is as much
derogation to the communion, as the use of one contrary can be to an other.

Neither can black distayne white, more then the mass distayneth the
communion.

For to make that thing private, which of it own nature is commune: is to
take the same thing clean away and to put the contrary in his place.


Shaxton. The.ix. Article.
THe mass used in this reame of England, is agreeable to the institution of
Christ.

And we have in this church of England, the very true sacrament, which is the
very true Sacrament which is the very true sacrament, which is the very body
and blood of our Samoure Christ, under the form of bread and wine.

Crowley. Who so compares the words of the scriptures concerning the most
sacret co^^^^ion, instituted by Christ the night before he suffered: with the
bechynges, dowkyngs, crowchynges, knelynges, tossinges, crossynges, wynkynges,
starynges, whisperynges, galpyngs, turns and half turns, that are prescribed
in the cannon of pour mass, may ealylye perceive how they agree, Let us
therefore brieflye compare them, that the truth of your article may appear as
it is. First the Gospel says, that Christ took bread, not prepared for that
purpose, but of the same bread that they had de eaten with the pascall Lamb:
but your cannon says, you must have wafers, or else you can make no God.
Christ blessed after the manner of the fathers, geuynges thanks to his father
for the preservation of those lyttleons whom he had received: but your ca^non
says, here make one cross, and here an other, here three crosses, and here
other three, one with your thombe in your forheade, an other upon your crown
with the patell of the chalice, with I wot not how many mo. Christ distributed
the bread to his disciples who were then present: but your cannon says ye
must hoyce it over your head, that the people may honor it as God. And
when you have played with it a while your cannot says you must eat all your
self. Christ took the same cup and the same drink that was communely used
among the people of the country: but your cannon says, no remedy you must
have a cup made after the prescripte fasbion, which must needs be hatlowed by
the bishop. And for the drink you must needs have wine in a bottell, which
must be red wine if there be any to be gotten that is not sower. I think
because that wine looks mostlyke blood. Christ commanded all his fayethful
dearlynges which were there present, to drink of that coppe: but your cannon
byddeth the priest drink all him self, and to lycke the chalyce when he
has done, because there should nothing escape his syppes. Christ byddeth
his fayethful do that which they saw him do in a remembrance of his death
but your cannon byddeth you say thus. To the holy father we offer this lively
sacrifice for the redemption of the souls of thy church.

Here may you se (christian readers) how this mass used in this realm of
England greeth with the institution of Christ. Now let us se whether in this
church of England we have the very true sacrament or not. I doubt not but we
have it. But that it is the same which ye call the body and blood of Christ, I
can not be persuaded, because the body and blood of Christ can be no
Sacrament. For as. S. Augustine defines, a sacrame^te ^d Marcelli ^um.ii.
is a sign, referred to an holy thing. If this therefore whereof you speak be
the body of Christ (as you say it is) then can it not be a sacrament, that
is the sign of an holy thing, for it is the holy thing it self. So that
you must either deny it to be the body and blood of Christ, either else the
sacrament thereof. For onethyng can not be both sign and thing signified,
because they be in that respect most contrary the one to the other

But I know your hold in this matter. You say not that the substance of the
bread and wine, is the Sacrament (for that you say is turned into the body
and blood of Christ) but the form of bread and wine which remains, you say
is the sacrament of the same substance turned into ye body and blood of
christ. A syra, there said you well The form of bread and wine, is the sacrament
of Christ's body and blood. Now must we know, what the form of a thing
is. The Philosophers say, that the form of every thing is that inseparable
quality, that makes the thing differ, and to be known from al other things
not of the same kind, so that we may be bold to name the thing after those
inseparable qualities. But because it is so hard a thing to find these true
differences, that the Philosophers are constrained to say that there is no true
difference, that is to say, that there can be no quality so appropriate to any
one kind, that it may be found in that kind only, and in every of that kind:
we must of necessity take those qualities for the form of things which be
most appropriate to them, and are found in fewest things of other kind. As
the form of man, is the power to receive reason. Which power is found is
none other kind of thing saving in spirits Only spirits and man, have the
power to receive reason. Wherefore they only are called reasonable. By this we
se, that the form of bread and wine, must needs be that quality that is
most appropriate to the^, and that quality must needs be the power to
nourishe.

Which power as it is not found in the^ only, but in all other kinds of
sustinau^ce also: so is it found must chiefly in bread and broth, so that under
those names are contained all manner of things whereupon man feadeth, and
without these, no fode can be pleasant to the body for any long time.

The power therefore to nouryshe, is the form of bread and wine. And the
form of bread and wine, is the sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ. Therefore the power to nowrishe is the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ. If you allow this form of bread and wine to be the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ then am I of the same opinion with
you.

For no doubt Christ willed us to certifi our co^scie^ces by the nourishment we
feel in bread and wine, that his body and blood do in like manner nouryshe the
soul. But if you will have that form to be the sacrament of the body and
bsoude of Christ whythe consists in color, quantity, taste, and such
other: the^ I will say, you err, not knowing the scriptures. For the Manna
wherewyth the children of Israel were fed.xl. years in the wilderness was the
sacrament of Christ to come (as appears by the words of Christ John.vi.
when he said, I am that lyueynge bread that came from heaven* Your fathers
did eat Manna in the wylderues and yet are they dead, but he that eats of
this bread shall never dye) and yet was not the form thereof (which was as a
Coria^der seed) nor the taste (which was as honye) the sacrament of Christ
to come. But the wonderful strenght that it (being but a dew from heaven) had
to noureyshe alone without any other kind of sustenaunce. In like manner the v^.
candelstyckes, and the.vii. stars which John saw in his renelations, were
the sacraments of the.vii* congregations, and their preachers: and yet was it
not the fashion of the candelstyckes, but the use whereunto they serve, that was
the Sacrament of the.vii. congregations. For as the candelstycke serves to
bear and sustain the light of the place wherein it is, that all that enter in
there may se thereby: so does the congregation of Christ serve to bear upon
them the son of God the only light of the world, that all men may se
their good conversation. For he that takes his cross and follows Christ,
bears Christ and is a true Christofer, and his conversation is the light of
the world. So the seven stars not the fashion of them, but the propriety
they have to give light in the dareknes of the night, is the Sacrament of the
preachers of the seven congregations. For like as the stars do show light in
the darkness of the night, so do the true preachers of the co^gregations, show
light in the darcknes of ertoure, as well by their doctrine, as Godly
conversation of living.

Thus may you se (if you do not willinglye shut the eyes of your conscience
against the truth) that notwythstandynge we have the true Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ in this realm: Yet (in the abuse the thyuge that
is so tyranouselye defended to be it) is not it, but rather a most detestable
idol, for asmoch as, it spoyleth christ ^t his glory, for his most victoriouse
conquest, atchined on the cross, and is nothing agreeable to the institution
of Christ.


Shaxton. The.x. Article.
THE church of Christ may and does order some priests, to be ministers of
the sacraments, although the same do not preach, nor be not admitted thereunto.

Crowley. In very deed, that church which you take for the church of Christ,
may and does ordeine some priests (yea almooste all priests) to be ministers
of the Sacraments, although the same do not (nor can not) preach, nor be not
admitted thereunto. That your church has always ordained such priests,
appears by the great number of monks, friars and chano^s, and other
sacrificatours, which has been even sense that church of yours began first to
florysh. And that they may do it: appears by their daily practice. For as
many Idle knaves as they can get they annoynte, and yet they complain of the
scarcity, and lack of hyrlynges, chaplay^es, and morowmas gentilmen. At an
ordres ge^ynge, shall you scarsely se.iiii. that shall take holy orders, even in
the same place where were wont to be.lxrx. We shall, say they, with in a
while, have non to serve our cures And what call they serving of a cure? For
so the, to say mass, mattens, and euensonge on the holy day, to make holy
water, and holy bread, to conjure the font, and volowe the child, to
shrine, housell, and annointe the sick, to say dirige and mass, and burye
the dead.

But the chief point is to keep well the Easter book, and se that the tithes
be not slack lie paid. As for preaching shall be nothing of the curates
charge.

But one thing he must beware of. That he suffer none of the new learning nor
that use any english books in his paryshe, though he know not new from
old, nor whether the English books be good or not. Only he must present
the readers of them to the ordinarye, and say they be heritikes, because they
read english books, except it be Roden hode, Beues of hampton, Guy of
Warwyke, the nutbrown may their festifall, or some other like.

And all this may your church do, for there is no law to the contrary I am
sure. For if there were, they would not do it, be ye sure, for they know that
the breach of every law is deadlye sin. And where no law is there is no
sin. Wherefore if the law forbid them not to make such priests, they may
lawfullye make them, and commit into their hands, the benifices which they
may by the same liberty heap together.

This church I ^aye, you take for the church of Christ. But for as much as it
bearethe not the badge of Christ (that is to say) contempt of this world,
doueyshe simplicity, serpente like wisdom, humblenesof spirit, babyshe
submission, long sufferaunce, mutual love toward all men, su^ a^uynge of
wrongs, distrust of them selves, constaunte and sure trust in the merits of
Christ, the preaching, setting forth and confissynge of his word,
rejecting the fond inventions of men: we can not but say They went forth
from us: but they were not of ^s. Yea that more is: we are constrained to take
them as they be in deed) for Antichrists, because we se the^ wear the badges
of the enemy of Christ, in stead of the badges of Christ. Instead of the
con^e^pt of this world, they have put on insatiable desire, as appears by the
benifices they heap together. In stead of doueyshe simplicity: they haueput
on vultours rauen^e, as appears by the swifte suite they make upon the simple
preachers and setters forth of Gods truth. In stead of the serpe^tes prudence:
they have put on more then brutishe negligence, sufferyng their sensual
appetities to lead them captyue into al abominations. Instead of hu^blenes
of spirit: they have put on such hau^t ues of heart, as has led them up above
Emperors and kings. In stead of babeishe submission: they have put on
sturdye obstinacy, as appears by the great tumulties that they have always
sterred up, to hold themselves out of the reach of Emperors and of Kings. In
stead of long sufferaunce they have put on swyfte reuenge^^ue^t, yea
preue^tion of treaspase, as appears by the commissions that they have
purchased for the examination of certain suspecte persons, whom they have by
their subtyle circumuentions, tra^ned into their snares, and made away with
the innocente members of Christ. In stead of unfeigned love toward al men: a
cone^t and privy hatred toward all that be either hinderaunce or let to their
most vain glory, as appears by their persecutynge of those persons:
that seek the (...) of these things, ^he abuse whero^, is the ^pholdyng of
their glory. Instead of sustayning wrong^ plain extortion and open bribourye,
as appears by their beaderolles, mass pence, and dirige grotes, with other,
more then popeishe pillage. Instead of distruste in them selves, contempt of
Gods mercies, as appears by the abundance of merits that they have
continuallye sold to other.

Instead of the constant trust in the merits of Christ: distruste in the
same, as appears by the continual sacrifice they offer for sin. Instead of
co^fessyng, and preachinge and setting forth of Gods word persecutynge of
the confessors, preachers and setters forth of the same. In stead of the
reiectyng of men's inventions: the preferrynge of them before Gods most holy
word, as appears by their shyton ceremonies, which must take place* when
Gods most holy word must stand abacke.

Oh Shaxton, here maiste thou behold the Image of thy church lyuelye
counterfayted, who may (as they are wicked) ordeyne wyckedlye, ministers for
the vpholdeynge of their wyckednes. But the true church of Christ, neither
does nor may ordeyne any other ministers then ministers of the Gospel.

If the Gospel therefore need no such sacrificeyng priests: tell me the^ how
the church of Christ may ordeine any such. The Gospel says, that all
sacrifice was ended in Christ saving only the sacrifice of thanks geuinge,
which every true christian must continually offer upon our aultare Christ,
in the temple of his own her^e. If the church therefore may ordeyne any
ministers for any other purpose then to preach: no doubt it must neades be
to supplye the rowme of Stephane. And to supply that rowme, they must be full
of the holy Ghost, mighty in good worckes, and able to confound the
dispitfull enemies of the church, though not by the gift of preaching, yet
by the gift of exhorting and mighty declaration of the hope in Christ Jesus.
Such ministers does the church of Christ stand need of, that they baptisyng
and ministering sacraments: might do all things of knowledge, and not of
superstition, declaryng also to the people, the efficacy and strength of every
thing they minister: that the people also, might, receive their ministrations
of knowledge and not of superstition, But to have such a rout of reguler
rutterkins, some bellowinge in the quire, some muttering at the aultare, and an
other sortiettynge up and down to wait when my Lady shall be ready to se a
cast of their office. If these be the priests of your church, tell me whether
they be the priests of Christ or not.

The Prophet O see says (in the person Osee.iiii.
of God) that he will refuse that priest, that refuses understanding, and
such one shall be no longer his priest. Malachie says also, Mala.ii.
that the lyppes of the priest must be sure of knowledge, that men may seek
the law at their mouth. Then tell me, whether christ will allow this rablement
of rorynge bulls, with the other iettynge gentylmen, that know and profess
none other law, but the most blasphemouse statutes of that abominable
baude, their whoreyshe mother of Rome. But hark what the Lord says of
Osee.iiii.
this whoreyshe mother of yours. I will bring your mother (says he) to
scilence. And why? Because my people peryshe for lack of knowledge.

Now take your pen in hand, and declare if you ca^, that these drone bees
that swarm so thycke in every church: be not the priests that the prophet
speaks of, Declare that your mother (the holy church of Rome) is not this
mother that shall be put to scilence If you can not deny but it is she, and
that these dombe doges (you wot who^ I mean) be her children: then revoke
your Article, and say with the christian congregation, that the church of
Christ may ordeyne no ministers, but such as be full of the holy Ghost,
mighty both in word and operation.


Shaxton. The.xi. Article
Priests being once dedicate to God by the order of priestehod, and al such
men and women, as have advise dlye made vows to God of chastity or
wyddowehod: may not lawfully marye, after their orders received, or vows made.

Crowley. You seem in this Article, to assign two impedimentes of marriage. One
the dedicaon unto God, by the receyuynge of the order of priestehode. The
other, the vow of chastity aduisedlye made. For the first: I would gladelye
know of you, wheiher it were not the same manner of dedication, that was used
among the Jews in the time of Moses law, that you speak of. If it be the
same, then is it of no greater force now then it was then. That it took not
away the liberty of marriage then, is manifest. For it was reproach to a
Priest to be without yshue, and they had laws for their marriage. They
might marye no commune or missiuynge woman. They might mary us wyddowe: except
it had been the wyddowe of a priest. It can not be therefore, that this
dedicatio^, ca^ be an impedimente to marriage.

But here you will say perchance, that this is not the same. For. S. Paul
says playnelye, that for as much as the priestehode is traunslated no remedy
the law must also be traunslated. I would not wish your judgment to be so
sclender in the scriptures that you should take. S. Paul here to mean of any
chaungynge of any manner of dedicatange the priests to God: for Paul
endeuonreth none other, but to declare, that like as the priestehode is now
traunslated from the tribe of Leme, to Christ and his spiritual generation,
which are priests after the order of Melchelsisedeth: so must the law also
be traunslated. That is to say the ceremonial law, which prescribes unto
the Levites, the kind and order of their sacrifices must now be traunslated
or altered. For Moses prescribes nothing to this priestehode, that is after
the order of Melchisideth. The priests of this order must follow the exemple
of their first and chyefe priest Jesus Christ, who offered up his own body
and none other sacrifice.

So must we, if we be priests of that order offer up our own bodies, a
lyuelye and acceptable sacrifice unto God, always singing ^om.xii Collo.iii.
unto him in our hertes, and so shall we be the true honourers of God the
father and shall honor him in spirit and verity. Thus much have I said, as
concerning the tra^slatio^ of the priesthode and the law prescribed to the
much(...) same. Not so much because it apperteineth anithyng to the present
purpose, as because it has chan^sed me to be in presence where certain have
alleged the same text, to prove the Authority of the Romish church to be such,
that their holy father (or rather in these days, their holy mother the
church) might traunslate from the Jews priests unto our priests, the
ceremouiall law. And that like as they did by the commandment of that law
use many ceremonies, in offering of their crifices: so might their mother
holy church ordeine that about the sacrifice of the mass (as they call it)
our priests (but rather the popes priests) might (yea ought) to use all such
ceremonies, as we se daily used therein.

But now to our purpose. The dedication of priests in the old law, was not
of force to restrain the marriage of Priests: Ergo, it is not of force now to
with hold our priests from marriage. If you hauc any thing to the contrary of
this: I would you would set your pen to the paper, and try your ma^hode
therein. I ca^se nothing that can be wrested to your purpose, unless it be the
power to lowse and bind. Which your holy fathers have made so ample, that they
might therbi restrain al liberti, and set at larg all that the gospel binds.
If this were gran^ted, the^ would you say prettily to us in this matter. But you
must have some new scriptures made to establyshe this opinion, or else you are
not like to have it granted to you this year. For the old scriptures are
altogyther against you herein.

Seeing therefore, that it can not be proned by scripture, that the dedication
of the priests to God, does restrain marriage: it is of Antichrists fayeth,
to believe that priests dedicated unto God may not marye.

Now as concerny^ge your other impediment, the vow of chastity advisedly
made. In very deed, this has more appearaunce of truth then the other has.
And I think not contrary, but if a man should reason with you in this
mattier, you should sone be compelled to join this to the other and say,
that the strength that the other has, is none other the^ the vow of chastity
that you say priests make when the byshope says. Accipe ^^gum chastitatis
(that is, take the yoke of chastity) when he puts the stole about his
neck. And no doubt the scriptures are much one your side in this behalf.
For as vows are not forboden in the scriptures: so are they allowed and
commended, yea, and in manner commannded, and the breach of them threatened with
eternal torments.

For if it be so, that we shall render an account at the last day, for every
Idle word that we speak: much more shall it be required of ^^ for every Idle
how we shall make. A vow ^f not be made, but the blessed name of God must
needs be named the rein, and the rechersynge of the name of God in vain cannot
be but worthy of dampna^ion.

To make a vain vow therefore (which is not only to take the name of God in
vain but also to dissemble with God) how can it be any less worthy, then
eter^^ll dampnation? Upon this you may right well conclude, that all such
priests as have or shall make any such vows, and do not or can not perform
them, had great ^ede to repent and call for Gods merci. For if a greater
offense should ins^^e upon the perfourmaunce of their vows the^ if they left
of their vowed ^^rpose: I can not se how you can prove it good for the
priests to refray^e marriage for then vows sake, but you must also b^^d
Actu.xxiii.
the Jews (of whom is mentioned in thactes of the Apostles* that vowed,
neither to eat ^^^ (...), till they had slain Paul, to p^^ form their vow
also, and that it was not leafull for the^ to sustey^e their bodies, but to
(...) of (...), unless ((...) to they^ (...)) they might (...) Paul.

(...) you are brought into a narrow^ (...) For either you must (...), that
by Gods law it was not leaful for these me^ to suffer Paul to live, other else
that they might break their vow, and so co^seque^tly, that some vows
aduisedli made might be broken For if these men were bound by Gods law to
perform their vow: the^ might not they suffer Paul to live, for they had
vowed his death. But if by the law of God, these men might suffer Paul to
(...): the^ were they also at liberty to eat their meat notwythstanding
their vow, were it never ^o advisedly made. But gra^^t their conscience would
not serve the^ to eat the^r meat, but to co^tmue still in their selish vowed
purpose, notwithstanding they knew Paul was out of their reach If they had, I
say famished them selves for their vows sake: had they escaped the wrath of
God because they had famished them selves for their vows sake? Doubtless in
mine opinion) they had the^ been in worsse taking, the^ if they had s^ayne
Paul. For as the law would have condemned the^ for ^^^therers if they had
killed him, so would it have condemned the^, for killing the^ selves. Yea and
as it is a greuouse offense to kill an o^^er: so is it an offense of all other
most gre^ouse, for a man to kill him self. It is manifest therefore that these
me^ might not by any means per form their vow, were it never so advisedly
made, for the law of God forbids the (...) thereof on every side.

What was to be done in this matter? Was there no way for these Jews to
reco^eile the^ selves to God again? Yese forsoeth. They ought (even from the
botto^ of their hertes) to lament their (...) malitiouse intent and purpose,
to shede the innocent blood of that most godly man, and so commit the^
selves to the mercy of God, knowinge his mercy to be so obou^daunt, and his
cle^^e^cie such, that he both could and would (at the respect of their humble
and co^triete hertes) forgive their s^^es.

Eue^ so our priests. If they have vowed such a kind of chastity, as to
live v^terlye without the vessel that God has prepared for man's natural
operation, and yet feel in the^ selves such natural working, that it may be
justly said unto the^, it is better to mary then to burn: I say (and. S. Paul
bears me witness) they ought to mary wi^es, notwithstanding their vow, for
the word of God is contrary to the perfourmau^ce thereof. Peradventure you will
say, this is sooner said the^ pro^ed. In very deed, it is not so sone proved
as spoken.

But yet it is not so hard to be proned, but that it may easilye be pro^ed,
boeth by the testimonies of the ^^we and old testament. First tell me what.
S. Paul meante by Hebru.xiii.
these words in his Epistle to the Hebrews.

Wedlock is honorable in all persons and the bed there of undefiled. I know
your interpretation upon this place already (for I am sure you will not make
Paul to recant, as you did pore Basil at Paul's cross in London, for
exhorting all men to marriage, in his book of matrimony, not exemptyng the
vowed anowterers) and therefore I will answer unto it.

You will say, I am sure, that in the time of Paul, priests made no vows of
chastity, and therefore they did marye in those days and long after (as it
appears by cronicles) and their marriage was honorable, and the bed thereof
undefiled. But if the vow of chastity had been then used among priests,
Paul would have exempted the^ in his Epistle. A thing very lykely Paul wrote
unto the Jews, among who^ was nothing so much este^^d as vows (as we read
in the books of the kings, of Saul, David, and diverse other) and yet he had
not occasion to exempte votaries in his Epistle. But the circumstaunce of the
text gives rather the contrary interpretation, and that Paul did in this
place write this sentence by the universal sign, because the Jews were so
greatly given in the perfourmynge of their vows, that they thought all
things lawful that they had vowed to do, as appears by the vow of the
Jews, whereof I have spoken before. They thought it lawefull for them to slay
Paul, because they had vowed his death. And yet the priests and elders could
make this answer to Pilate when he bad the^ take our savior Christ, and judge
hyw according to their law.

They could, I say, answer him, that it was not lawful for the^ to kill any
man. And because they would not seem to be murderers: they found the means
to make Pilate their butcher (I say not that our prelates have used the same
practice) By like the way to vow men's death was not then invented. For if it
had: they might have rydde Christ, with less ado then they made. But I
think not contrary, but it fared by them then: even as it did by us of late
days.

For as the number of the true christians increased: so did the bishops and
high priests inuente ways to bring them to the pote.

There were appointed.iiii. sessions in one year more then were wont to be.
And for what other purpose (to speak of) them by a book oath to co^pel pore
simple co^scie^ces, to accuse christ's true disciples, that they might be
lapped in the chains of the syx Articles and so he brought to the slaughter
house, where no man durst once speak in their cause, Yea they had by this
means, so binded the power consciences, that they though they counde not do
greater service to God, then in accusynge one of the new learning (as they
call if) in so much that many simple and weak consciences, thought it a
sin irremissible, to co^ceale any such if they chan^ced at any time to have
knowledge of them. As it appeared by the^ that accused sir Gorg Blage, now
knight, but at the time of your Apostatie, most anworthilye accused, spedily
condemned, and had not the mercy of his prince and Master been more large upon
him then it was upon John Lassels: he had burned ene^ the^. I will not say that
you and other that were then in your taking, thought it no danger upon your
oath to confess all that you knew to be of that opinion, which you then
forsook: notwythstandynge you knew that, that your contession should be
their death. By this we may coniect how it came to pass, that the Jews
thought it lawful to vow a man's death, and then to kill him. For in
Christ's time it was not so as it appears by that the hye priests and elders
sought wytues against Christ, where as it vowynge would have served, they
might have mads a more spedie dispatche. They the^ selves might, or else have
caused other to vow his death, as I doubt not but some of them did procure
those deuonte votaries, which vowed Paul's death.

Take me not here (good master Shaxto^) as one that regards not an oath or vow
But take me as one that will another keep oath nor vow, the perfourmaunce
whereof is against the commandment of God.

If I therefore had vowed and sworn by all the books under the sun that I
would never marye, but live a lone life without the lawefull company of a
womanne: yet if the rage of the flesh were such that I should be ready to
ncye, as an horse, after every man's wife: I would not regard my foleishe
oaths and vow, so far above my strength, but the promise that I made to keep
the commandment of God, which forbids me the very desire of my
neighbors wife. But you will say, it is not moughe to say, I will not
regard my foleish oaths and vow: but it be houeth, that in this case I show
that I ought not to regard them.

True it is in deed the case requires so, and so may I fone do. For this is
plain if the commandment of God (which I take to be the whole Euangelye of
Christ) do forbid or dehort me from any kind of thing what so ever it be: no
oath, nor vow, be it never so advisedly made, can bind me to it.

The word of God forbid death all kinds of whoredom, and counsayleth, yea
commands all men, that feel in them selves the natural work of the
flesh* to chose the^ an honest and fayethfull yokefelowe, with whom they may
lawefullye company, so they do it not to take their fyl of the fleshly lust,
but only to avoid v^lawful desires of the flesh, which can not otherwise be
avoided. For such as give themselves wholly to the fleshly lust (notwythstandyng
they be married) do stynke before God. For they know not to possess their
vessels. They call them wives, but they use the^ as whores Christian matrimonye
must be chaste, modeste pure and undefiled. The christian yokefelowes must do
the work of nature, as compelled by nature, and not to satisfye the wo^ton
despre.

But to our purpose. If I had made a solemn vow that I would never labor
with my hands, should I beg or steal, rather then break this foleysh and
ungodly vow? God forbyde. And yet I think not contrary, but if the matter
were well known: the vow that priests make, byndeth them as w^ll to live
Iolelye, as to forsake marriage. For there was a decre made by their great
father of Rome (and I think it is per of strength in the making of priests)
that none should be admitted to holy or ^e^s, vnlese he were first in
assurance of ^ ly^ing, so that he should never be brought to beggynge, nor to
labor with his hands, though he were by any misaduenture so maimed that he
might not minister. Yea, the commune opinion of the people was such that they
thought him far unworthy the order of priesth^de, that would lay his fingers
to any kind of labor, though he were neither able to teach and enstructe
other, nor willing to learn him self.

This I^lenes I say, and refraynyng from labor seems to be a piece of their
vow as w^ll as the forbearynge of marriage, and yet S. Paul wylleth all men to
labor with their hands, and to eat their own bread (and not to be idle
bealies, burtheynge and over chargyng the congregation) according to his
exemple, in that he (takeynge importune pains in preaching the Gospel)
labored with his hands, and lived upon the sweet of his brow^s, because he
would not be an example of Idle^es among them that did not so greatly esteem
his painful travel in the Gospel

But what neadeth it me thus to labor in this matt^er, seeing that all the
world knows, that no manner of vow or promise can make whoredom, and the
desire of the fleshelye companiynge, lawful, sithe God has forboden them, and
that as (...) co^ti^^ in them shall not possess the kingdom of God?

I say unto you (says S. Paul) that (...). ^.
who so works such things, shall not possess the kingdom of God. Wherefore
serves your vow then? Shall it excuse you at the latter day? No no, It
shall be said unto you. A^oyde from me you viciouse votaries, you worckers of
iniquity. You forsware most pure and chaste marriage, and embraced most fylthy
and stinkynge whoredom and Sodemiticall buggerie. Yea, though you have not
defiled your selves with this fowl sin: yet if you burned in the desire
thereof your wyckednes can not be excused. For the law (which shall be your
accuser) says, thou shall not desire. No vow shall serve in this case.

But he that is found a traun^gressoure of the law: shall be condemned by the
law. Our own inventions shall take no place there. Only the observation of
Gods will, shall be required of us. No merit of ours shall be accepted,
took we never so great pain and travail: but only the merits of Christ
shall be of value. No sin can be excused there: were it done for never for so
good a purpose. No remedy all must be confessed. None shall be so bold in that
day as once to say I did it for this good intent ^^ that, or I did ^^ to
fulfill my vow (for then might Saul have an excuse for re^eruynge the spoil
which he was commanded to destroy, and Herod for beheadyng John the Baptist)
but when Moses, your accuser, shall charge you with concupiscence: your
conscience shall confess the same: and where are you than? Perchance you set
light of it now, as the Phariseis did, thinking it to be but a though: and
that therefore it may be washed away with holy water, and such other
tryncketes of your own making: but in that day you shall know what Christ
meante, when he said to his disciples.

Except your justice be more aboundaunte then the justice of the Scribes and
Phariseis you shall not enter into the kyngedome of God.

It is not Inoughe to refrain the Act, but the thought also. For what thing
is it that defiles the manne? Forsoeth the evil thoughts that ascend from
the her^e. To avoid these thoughts therefore: let every man (says S.
Paul) have his wife, and every womanne her husband. He says not every
lay man: but every man that co^teyneth not.

I conclude therefore, that all the vows, that are or can be made (be they
never so solemnly or advisedly made) can not make it unlawful for them to
marye, that have not the gift of wyueles life, but do desire natural company
and copulation: according to the words of S. Paul. Who so co^teyneth not
(that is, whose flesh is naturally sterred to generation, and upon that
perceyueth the ishue of natural sede) let the same mary. For it is better to
mary then to to burn.

Thus have I proved by the scriptures: the thing that you (master Shaxton)
and the whole assemble of the whole parliament agreed unto within these dosin
years last past, and do still to this day allow and agree unto in that they
suffer it (yea and commau^d it to be done. I mean the breaking of a vow
advisedly made. I pray you was not the vow that the monks, friars, and
chano^s, heremites, and nuns made concerning their apparayle: aduisedlye made?
And are they not constrained to change it? If they made no vow concerning
their prescribed garments: the^ tell me what was the cause that some of them
might not put of their garments in the night: but they must be laid on their
bed? Yea what was the cause that many of the^ must needs be buried in their
garments? The Anchors also, and charter monks, vowed they not to die in their
houses? And why are they turned out of their cubbes, if vows may not be
broken? I know well you will answer me, that these vows are broken because
they are supersticiouse. And yet we have no place in the scripture that
forbids any color or facion of garment. Superstion therefore, is a
sufficient cause to break a vow, and why should not whoredom do as much,
seeing it is so detestable in the sight of God, that the doers thereof are
threatened with eternal damnation? This had been inoughe for my purpose, were
it not that I would in no case be seen to build upon the Authority of man:
that thing that Gods word does sufficiently prove.


Shaxton. The twelfe Article.
Secret Auriculer confession, is expediente and necessary, to be retained,
continued, and frequented in the church of Christ.

Crowley. If you had said in the church of Antichrist, I would have holden
well with you For in deed, it is so necessary therein: that without it, that
whoryshe church could not long continue. In this corshrift are wrought al their
maliciouse mysteries. In it be the pore simple creatures taught to delyght in
ignorance, and to be ware of the reading or hearing of the scripture in the
English tongue, contrary to Christ. John.v.

In this secret schole are they confirmed in the hope of the popes pardons to
be set abrod again contrary to Christ in Math.xxiiii. Here are they
enstructed to believe, that your masses and diriges are meritoriouse boeth for
the quycke and the dead, contrary to the.ix. and x. chapter of. S. Paul to the
Hebrews. Here are they commanded to multiply prayers and repete our Ladies
psaltare upon their beads. Or if they dare not occupy beads, to number their
prayers on their fyngers, contrary to Christ. Matthew, vi, Chapter. Here
learn they to put difference between day and day, and meat and meat,
contrary to Paul in the.ii. chapter to the Collossians. Here are they taught
to worship God in Images, the making and having whereof is not only forboden,
but also accursed of God him self, in the.xiiii. chapter of the book of
wisdom, and the.xxvii. of Deu. In this hell house are the simple people taught
to yarne heaven by their will worckes. As by buildyng and enrychinge of Abbays
by fonndynge of chauntries and Anniuersaries, by payntinge and gildinge of
posts and by geuynge of book, bell, chalice, and other ornaments (as you call
them) to your Turkishe temples, contrary to the Lords express
commandment. Deuteronomy, v. chapter. Here are they taught to think them selves
well iuoughe, and their consciences cleant discharged of all sin whereof they
have made relation to the priests, though they never falte any part of true
repentance, but do incontinent return to their old vice, as the sow to the
puddel, and the dog to his vomit, contrary to Peter in the.ii. chapter of
his.ii. epistle.

To be brief in this hell, they learn all superstition and vain trust in
their own works and inue^tions: and forgette all the true and sure trust that
they ought to have in the only savior and redemer Christ, How necessary an
impleme^e this is, to be retained in the churh or congregation of Christ, let
the^ judge in who^ the spirit of God dwells, by whose inspiration, they know
what the church of Christ is. I am certain by the scriptures, that as it is
used, it is abominable in the sight of God And therefore not to be so used as it
is. And how it should be amended, otherwise then by taking it clean away, I can
not see, unless we have new ministers appointed, which are no favorers, but
enemies to the abuse.

It is necessary therefore, that this order be retained (yea newlye begone)
in the church of Christ: that wounded consciences may seek them an expert
and learned Physician to whom they may open their pain and grief, and at
whose hands they may receive the confortable medi^^^^^s of the spirit,
gathered out of the pleasant garden of the scripture. But to be bound to
resort perelpr to such blind pottcaties, as do neither know simple from
compounde nor medicine from poison: is neythere to^ be retained nor suffered in
Christ's church.


Shaxton. The.xiii. Article.
THe prescience and predestination of almighty God although in it self it be
infallyble) induces no necessible to the action of man, but that he may
frelye use the power of his own will and choice, he said prescience and
predestmation notwithstanding.

Crowley. Considering that men of great learuynge, have erred in this your
last article and have written great volumes in the defenc of their erroures
therein: yea and that there be at this day many (and that mea of a feruente
zeal to wards the truth) that are of your opinion: I can do no less, but ^^
devour with all diligence (so far as God shall assist me) to set forth the
true believe of the divine prescience and predestination.

First therefore, it is to be confidered, that as God is eternal without beg
(...) end: so is his prescience or for knoweledge also (...). That is, there
never was nor shall find, wherein he has not or shall not know all things
paste and to come, then as though then w^^^styl present.

Upon this (...) knoweledge, he has (...) all times, predest^^ted and
appointed before, al things (in heaven earth and heth that have been, are, or
shall be. And as his prescre^ce and forknowledge, is infallible, and cannot be
deceived: to is his predestination most certain, and can not be altered
chan^ged or let, in heaven earth, or hell, for all they are his creatures, and
are at his commandment. In whose power it is to rule; altar, and ch^^^ge, to
suffer and (...) strengthen and weaken all things at his pleasure, and when he
does any of all these things: he does it according to his prescience and
predestmation, nothing altering nor changing the order of things which he
has by his ^r^eknowledge and (...) wrsoonte, appointed from the beginning.
though it do sometime seem unto us, that tho^^^de our sy^^es, God is (...) and
(...) (as in deed if he were (...) to our (...) and (...) and as (...), it were
not (...) our (...) should do it) yet is he (...).

For as the (...) of time (...) make him eider one day, then he is an other
because time was not from the beginning with him, nor shall be with him to the
end but shall cease at the time appointed, and therefore has no power over him
as over al creatures: even so is he not subircte to any manner alteration or
chaung, but is ever one and the same, showing mercy unto thousands, and
plagyng the vessels of wrath, prepared thereunto, even from the beginning and
before the foundations of the world were laid.

These vessels of wrath shall not escape the vengaunge prepared, nor the
vessels of mercy be confounded. God has his number appointed, and their
names written in the book of life, who be so certaynely elect and chosen, that
it is not possible for them to Math.xxiiii.
be seduced, be they never so much tempted stirred, and provoked, for the
almighty hand of God their father, shall always sustain them and defend their
weakness from the cruel rages of their enemies, his aduengynge spirits: and
shall bring them salfe through the stormye sens of this world, into the sure
port or haven of death, and then receive them into the laud of pleasure
incomparable, there to reygne with him for ever.

The other sort, whom he has ordained the vessels of wrath: he shall give
over to their enemies the devil, the world, and their own flesh, reserning the^
to the day of wrath that the^ the wrath (whereunto they are prepared) may be
more ple^tuously poured out upon the^, whereby the mercy showed to the other
appears more abounda^^t.

This is the true belief of the presoience and dest^^atio^ of God, grounded
upon the scriptures, as shall hereafter appear. Now as concerning your
Article. You grant that the prescience and predestination of God be
infallible, that is, that God does so certainlye know before, and predestinate
things, that they cannot otherwise chance, the^ he knows and has
appointed, and yet you deny the necessary co^seque^ce, which is, that al
things are done of necessity, ge^^nge man power to use the liberty of his
own will and choice.

If you leave the scripture in this matter, and stick unto art: I would have
you show by your art, how you ca^ grant this Anticede^t and deny the
Argument. What so ever God forseeth and predestinateth, must necessarily come
to pas (for his prescie^ce and predestination are infallible) But he forseeth
and predestinateth al things: Ergo al things must come to pass of
necessity. The mayor you have granted in your Article. If you will deny the
minor: I shall not stick to prove it by manifest scriptures.

And then I report me to all Arcitoures what I may conclud. Even that al
things are done of necessity. And consequently that man has no such power as
you would gene him to use fre liberty of his will and choice.

Now to prove the minor, that God forseeth and predestinateth al things. I
think there is none that has so ^rreuere^te an opinion of the Godheade, that
he would once think that God should not always se all things (be they
paste, present, or to come, eue^ as they were still present. But if any man will
be so beastly: let the same heat the psalm. who says. Lord thou have proved
me, and halt ^sal.cxxxviii
known me. Thou have known my down sittynge, and mine vprpseynge. Thou
vnderstodeste my thoughts long senee. Thou have searched my path, and my
couch round about, and have forsene also my ways. For lo there is not a word
in my mouth, behold thou have known althynges. etc.

None therefore, will deny the prescience of God to be such, that he sees al
things as present, be they past or to come. Then remains only this thing.
That we prove by the scriptures, that he has also predestined and appointed
before, how all thyngee shall be done even till after the end of al time.
Which thing shall be easy to do, if we may first prove, that such things as
be already past were done by his, appoynsrent and predestination.

I might be short and say, that for as much as God saw befoe^, what ishue and
end, all things should come to, and did upon that forknowledge create them
and appoint them to be in their times by him appointed: he did also in this
creation, predestinate them to the pshue and end that they be or shall come to

But because I will not barelye affirm that which you deny without any
testimony of scripture to bear me: I will first begin with the first man,
of whom is written in Genesis, and descend to this time pronyng by the
scriptures that such things as have been done hythereto, have been so
predestined and appointed of God, that they could not be altered or left
undone. And because the greateste contention rises about the predestination
unto evil, and that most men thyake it impiety, to say that God (who is
merciful and just) should predestmate any man to be wicked: I will take
such examples chiefelye, as do prove that the most wicked persons that have
been, were of god appointed to be wicked, eue^ as they were and that he
nevertheless remains both merciful and just.

First of all therefore, let us consider Adam, the first man, whether he were
predestined of God to eat of the forboden fruit, and so to make him self
and all his posterity, the children of damnation and the enemies of God, or
not. The frewil men will say no. And for their assertion they bring a
scripture, Ecle.xv.
and that is this. God made man from the beginnynge, and left him in the hand
of his counsel. He game him his commandments and precepts. If thou wylt
observe the commandments, and keep acceptable fayethfulnes for ever: they
shall preserve the He has let water and fire before the: reach out thine hand
to which thou will. Before man is (...) But because I perceive that the whole
book is none other but a certain wholesome doctrine pathered out of the books
of the law and grophetes, I am persuaded that the spirit of God was his
leader in the wrytinge hereof. And therefore, I dare not reject it as no
scripture, but will with al re^e^e^t feate seek an interpretation which may
declare the writers meaning to agree with the doctrine of the prophets and
Apostles. Let us therefore scanne his words with indifferent judgment.

First he says, that God made man and left him in the power of his own
council. (...) that Moses has in the.xi. and xxx. Deute. Where are blessings
promised to them that keep the commandments, and plages threatened to the
trannsgressours. And he says. Before man is set life and death, good and
evil. Look what him likes shall be given unto him. If these words do set man
at liberty to chose wether he will keep the commandment or not: then tell
me how they agree wy^h that which follows. He has commanded no man to do
ungodly: neither has he given any man leave to sin. We must understand
therefore that the son of Sorach entendeth not to teach, that man of his
own strength is able to chose good and leave evil: but that through out the
whole law and prophets there is no commandment to do evil: neither any
liberty of sin given. To the^ that observe the co^maun dementes, are
promised blessings, and to the tra^^sgressours, are threatened plages. Then is
it said unto man. To which thou wyl^ strech out thy hand, what soever thou
likest, shall be given unto the. As though he should have said. Lo, thou
vnderstandeste what is good, and what is evil. Thou see that the blessings
promised to the obseruers of the commandments are good, and the plages
threatened to the contrary, are evil If thou be led of the spirit therefore,
so that thou delight in the observation of Gods commandments: then stretch
out thy hand to the blessyngs, and they shall be given unto the.

But if thou be led of the flesh, so that thou delight in the traunsgression of
Gods commandments: the^ stretche out thy hand to the plages, for they
shall be given unto the.

This is the true meaning of this place For neither Moses nor this Jesus,
went about to establyshe any power of man's free will: but their entente was to
set forth the justice of God, which is to reward the spiritual (his elect)
with the blessings promised, and the fleshlynges (the reprobate) with the
plages thretned. Otherwise if these words should set man at liberty to
sin or not to sin: how should they agree with the other that follow? God
gives no man leave to sin. For if I have free will to do what I will: why
have I not liberty to sin

But Gods law may give no such leave. Thus se we, that the fre will men's
scriptur: in this place, fails the^. And Adam, our first father must
(notwithstanding this scripture) be predestined to eat of the fruit
forbode^ For if he had not been predestinate of God to eat of that fruit: it
had not been possible for him to have done it, because the desire to sin, was
not as yet in his flesh, neither has Satan power to tempte any, until he
have leave of God so to do, and yet being lycenced, he may tempt no further
the^ he is appointed to do, as appears by the story of holy Job. Adam
therefore, being so perfect a creature, that there was in him no lust to
sin, and yet so weak that of him self he was not able to withstand the
assault of the subtle serpe^te, no remedy the only cause of his fall must
needs be the predestination of god. Now what shall we say of Caine? was he
predestinate to slay his brother Abel? No say the feewyl men. For the Lord
said to him. Thine appetite shall be subject unto the, and thou shalt rule
it. A plain text Gene. (...).
(say there) that he had frewyl to those whether he would ^^ea his brother or
not. In very deed if these were words of promise, as they are of
commandment, they would make for the purpose. But they are of
commandment, as appears by the circumstaunce of the text. First the text
has thus. Cayne was exteadynge angry, and his countenance lowered. Then said
the Lord unto him. Why art thou angrye? Why lowrest thou? If thou do well,
shalt thou not receive it? And if thou do evil, shall not thy sin be
with the incontinente? Thine appetite shall be subject unto the, and thou
shall rule it. As though he should have said Why art thou angry to se thy
brother accepted with me and thy self not regarded? Do thou not know that I
reward thein that do well, and punish the^ that do evil? Subdue that furiouse
affection of thine, and rule it. Thus gave he him a commandment to refrain
his anger: that by that commandment the traunsgressio^ might be known to be
sin. For we find not, that before that time either anger or murder was
forbode^. If any man think it strange to call this a co^mau^deme^te, let him
co^fer it with ^ commandments in the books of the law ge^e^ by Moses, and
tell me whether the phrases be not at one. Thou shalt have none other Gods but
me. Thou shall honor thy lord god. etc. But now sai the frewil me^, what have
ye wou by this? Grant it be a precepte. Yet must it give liberty. For to
what purpose were it to command, if the party to who^ commandment is given,
had not power to execute the commandment. For soth (eue^ as Paul writes) to
make sin abound Romans ^.
(For where no commandment is, there is no transgressio^) And that the fre
mercy of god might appear more abou^dant in remitting the syn which through the
commandment is so openly known. The commandment is given, eue^ to the^
that have not power to execute it: for it is given to man, who of him self, is
not able so much as to think a good thought, for all our sufficiency is of
God, who disposes unto every man, even as he will.

He takes mercy on whom he lusts, and whom he will he hardens. Can God
be vn^ygh tuouse? Are not all his creatures in his hand? May he not do by
them as he lusts: What tyranuye were to be ascribed unto God: if he did
presently destroy al his creatures, or turn the glory of the^ into perpetual
ignominy and shame? Truly none. For then might he be co^nted a tyrant for
destroynge his creatures in Noes ^^^ude. What had the pore beasts of the fyeld
that wrought but their kind, the fowls of the air, yea and the pore infantes
offended that they must all be drowned? Who could excuse God of tyr^^^y in
this deed, if it were possible that he might be a tyrant. The first b^rne also
as well of man as of beast in Egypt, what had they offended that they must
be all slain in one night?

Away with your fond imaginations of God therefore, ye vayue dreamers of fre
will, and let God be alwyghtye, subject to none humayne constitution. Take not
from him the liberty that you give to the pot maker, to make of one piece of
claye, boeth drinking pottes and pysse pottes. Why should not God
predestinate some to persecute, as well as he has appointed some other to
suffer? If Abell were appointed to have his innocente blood shed that he
might be a figure of Christ's church which shall ever be persecuted: why was
not Cay^^ appointed to shede his blood, that he might be a figure of the blood
suchars and raue^inge wolves of Antichrists church? What stpcke you so much
upon a co^maundem^t given to man, as though God were not just, if he
commanded that which is not. in our power to fulfill? Examyne your selves by
the fyeste commandment, and se which of you is able to do it.

Thou shall love thy Lord God, with al thy heart, with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength. Whythe of you is it that can do this? Yea when you be
moostle strenthened with the grace of God: which of you can stand up against
God and say I am clear from the (...) of this precept Yea it is necessary
that God command things above man's power, and that man never feel in him
self that he has thoroughly observes Gods commandment. For so comes it
(...), that the most pe (...) knows him self to be saved by (...) m^^cye,
and not by his perfection in obs^^ninge Gods commannde^eut.

Where as if the things that are commanded him were within his reach: he
might as^ri^^ the cause of his (...), to the observation of Gods (...) to gods
(...).

But here you will say perchance. All this is but daliau^ce. For although you
have ^nterpreted our scriptures: yet have you brought no scripture that does
with open words teach either (...), or else Cain his son to be so
predestined. Wherefore we may as well credit our own reasons as yours.

Truth it is, I know no scripture that does with express words affirm
either of the^ to be predestined to their traunsgression. Wherefore if you
require express words: I shall leave this exe^ple and pome to the, xi. sons
of Jacob who sold their brother Joseph into Egypt. And the^ if I show you
express words of the scripture to prove the^ predestinate thereunto: ye shall
have the less cause to suspect mine opinion in the other.

When Joseph had made him self known to his brethren in the land of Egypt: he
said Seen.x^^.
thus unto them. Be ye not abashed, neither let it seem unto you cruellye done
that you sold me into these quarters, for God sent me hither before you, for
your health. And a little after he says, not through your advise, was I
sent hither, but by the will of God. et c. Pharao also, whose wyckednes Exodi.ix
was most aboundaunt, what hears he in the scripture? For soeth even this.
For this purpose have I ordained the, that I might show my power upon the, and
that my name might be told thorowout all the earth. And what says the Lord
to Moses? Go in to ^harao. For I have hardened his heart and the hertes of his
servants that I may work Exodusx.
these my wonders upon him, that thou shouldeste report to thy son and to
thy ne^^wes, how often I ouerthrewe the Egyptia^s, and wrought my wonders
among the^. And you shall know that I am the Lord.

What scripture ca^ be more plain the^ this? Shall we patche out these places
with God suffered Pharas to hard his heart, because in the.viii. chap. it is
said. When Pharao saw that he had rest: he hardened his heart, and gave no head
to Moses and Aaron as the Lord had commanded? No God forbid. For if we
should trifle out of the scriptures on such sort: what manner of God should
we make the Lord? Forsotheue as uncertain in all his doings as we are our
selves in ours. But we must grant boeth these scriptures to be true. For God
by his eternal predestination hardened the heart of Pharao, and he being the
vessel of wrath in his wickedness hardened his own heart. What say we then to
Judas? was he not predestined to betraye Christ? Yes forsooth, eve as Christ
was ordained before to be betrayed. And therefore he calls him he son of
perdicio^. And as possible as it was that christ should not die on the cross:
so possible was it that Judas should not betray him. And as possible as it is
that the sayeynges of Gods prophets should not come to pass, so possible is
it that Judas should not betraye Christ.

For the Psalmist had said of him. Let his Psalm ^viii. and. cvii.
place be desert, and let there be none to dwell in it, and let an other take
his ministration.

But here begin the freewyl men to besturre them, and cry out upon such
private exemples to prove Gods universal predestination. We have universal
scriptures, for our part (say they) declarynge that God would have all men
saved -- and come to the ^. Timo.ii.
knowledge of the truth. Whereunto I answer, that your universal
scriptures, are not so universal, but that all your scriptures notwythstandynge
God may will the greatest number to be damned. For where saint Paul says that
God will have all men saved, he means not every particular person for the^
could none be damned, for as much as Gods will must needs be done, but his
meaning, is that God refuses no degree of men neither estate, but accepts
all asyke. Neythere does he accept Jew or gentyle, but accepts of al
nations and estates, such as he has written in the book of life. Apoca. xvii.


But if universal scriptures be so much esteemed among you, let us se
whether we have avie for our part. Murmur not among your selves (says
Christ) for no man can come unto me, except my father draw him. John.vi.
Compare this, no man, with your every man, and then tell me which of them is
most universal. Your every man stretches to as many of all nations,
kinredes, tongues, estates and degres as are written in the book Romansviii.
of life. And our no man stretches to all the^ that be not written in that
book.

Boeth therefore must be measured by the words of Paul to the To. We know
(says he) that to such as love God, all things Apoca.xiii.
do work together into good, to them I say, which being sanctified, are
called according to the purpose. For such as he knew before: he predestined
to be the lyuelye Images of his son, to the intent, that he might be the first
begotten among mani brethren. And such as he predestined: those he called.
And those who^ he called he justified. And those who^ he justified, he
glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be on our side: who
shall prevail against us. etc.

And again Ephe.i. Blessed he God and Ephesi.i.
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things in Christ, even as he has chosen us in him
before the creation of the world, that we should be holy and undefiled in his
sight in charity. Who also predestined us to be sons of adoption unto
him., through Jesus Christ, according to the purpose of his will. etc.

Yet have we mo scriptures of this kind if these satisfy you not. And first
hear what Eclesi.xxxiii.
is read in Ecclesiastiens the son of Syrach. All men are made of the
ground, and out of the earth of Adam. In the diversity of study has the
Lord disseuered them.

He has disseuered them and changed their ways. Some of the^ has he blessed
and exalted, some he has sanctified and claymed them to him self, and some
of them he has cursed and made low, and put them out of their estate. Like
as the claie is in the hand of the potter, and all the orderyng thereof at his
pleasure: so are ^^en also in the hand of him that made them, so that he may
give the^ as it likes him best.

Now mark what Solomon writes, in Prouer.xvi Prouer.xx. Prouer.xvi
his proverbs. Man deuiseth a way in his heart: but it is the Lord that
orders his steps. And again. The Lord orders every man's goinges: for
what man can understand his own way? And yet again. The lottes be cast into
the lap but the fall stands in the Lord. Now herke^ to Esai, who says in
the person of god I am the Lord, and there is none other. Esai.xlv.
It is I that created the light and darkness, I make peace and trouble. Yea eue^
I the Lord do al these things. And a little after. Woe be unto him that
chideth with his maker, the potsharde with the potter. Says the claye to the
potter: what makeste thou? Or thy work serves for nothing. Woe be unto him
that says to his father. Why begettest thou And to his mother. Why hear
thou? Are me of things for to come concerning my sons: and put me in
remembrance as to wchinge the worckes of my hands. I have made the earth, and
created man upon it. With my hands have I spread forth heaven, and given a
co^man^deme^t to all the hosts thereof. I shall wake him up with righteousness,
and order al his ways.

To conclude, thus says Jeremy, I know Ieremi.x.
Lord, that it is not in man's power, to order his own ways, nor to rule his
own steps and goinges. And after all this, Paul writing to Timothe says
thus. He that delivered us ii, Timoth.i.
and called us with an holy calling. Not according to our worckes, but
according to his purpose and fre mercy, which was given to us in Christ before
the world began. Now me thinks I hear the muttering of our frewil men among
themselves saying. What needs all this ado to prove the thing that we never
denied. We grant and ever have gran^ted, that God knows all things paste
and to come, even as present.

He has also predestined all things even from the begyunyng. And this his
forknowledge and predestination can not be deceived but all things must
neades come to pass even as he has forseene and predestined them: yet
notwithstanding we hold, that the will of man is fre and that he does all
things of fre choice and not of necessity. For grant that god knew before
al time what man would chose being set at liberty to chose what he would,
and upon this forknowledge, predestined him to the thing that he knew he
would chose: should this restrain the liberty of his will, and cause him to do
al things of necessity: Yea forsoeth, master Shaxton, and you al my frewyl
masters. For thought man in all his doings, do deliberate with him self, and
take aduisemente what is best to be done, coniectynge is his mind what will
follow upon the doing of a thing, and what upon the leaving of it undone:
yet by your own co^festion, shall he after all this consultation and advise
taken chose to do or leave undone the thing that God has predestined him
unto. Yea and I am sure, that you will grant me that if God do predestinate a man to do things rashlye and without any such deliberation, he shall not
deliberate at al, but run headlong upon it, be it good or evil that he does
And the^ I pray you what fredome has his will? I grant you, man knows not
whereunto he is predestinate before he has done it. And that makes you to
stand well in your own co^ceyte, thinking that this lack of knowledge is a
Liberty to chose, nothing considering the secret counsel of God, who has
appointed althynges before they come to pass, neither yet considering your own
corrupt nature, which being left to it self, cannot so much as think any
other the^ evil. Yes yes (say you) we consider all these things well inoughe
and we grant no less, but that without the assiste^ce of Gods grace our
will can do nothing well. But the^ we have scriptures that teach us that God
denies no man his grace, but says to al men* Apoca.iii.
Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the
door, I will come in unto him, and will sup with him and he Mat.xxiii.
with me, etc. Also an other scripture. Jerusalem Jerusalem, how often would
I have gathered the together as an hen does hor chickens under her wings: and
thou would not. And again. I will not the death of a Ezechi.xviii.
sinner, but rather that he convert and live.

To this I answer as Christ answered to the Saduces saying. You err, not
knowing the scriptures. For though he say that he stands at the door
knockyng: yet gives he not the keye to open it. For you know that the keye
that opens this door is the grace which God gives to the^ that embrace his
truth. And that he his elect only. For to the^ it is given to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of God, and not to the other. Mathe.xiii.


The knocking therefore is the calling to repentance, by sharp threatenynge
and confortable promises of the scripture, for therewyth does God daily
knock at the door of al men's consciences, and such as have the keye to open,
do open, And into them he enters and makes a mantion in the^. And where
John.xiiii.
you stick upon the words of our savior lamentyng, the city of Hierusale,
and of the prophet, declaring the will that god has to save sinners: you must
understand, that this will is not the eternal will of God which caused him to
create all things, and according to the which he predestined al things:
for that will can not be wythstanded but must neades be fulfilled in all
things. Of this will speaks Solomon in this wise. The Prouer.xix
thoughts of man's heart are many: but the will of the Lord shall endure for
ever. And Paul to the Romans. Who can resist his Roma.ix.
will. But the will whereby he would not the death of a sinner, and would
have gathered the Israelties under his wings and they would not: is the will
that the holy messe^gers of God, the prophets and apostles, preached thorowout
the world, that is his word and commandments. Of this will speaks John in
his epistle saying. He that does the will of God remains for ever. I should
be i. John.ii.
to tediouse if I should rehearse all the scriptures that you build upon, and
expound them one by one: for they are in deed very many in number, and some
of them as far fetched. Wherefore I will make this general expoof them all to
make short work with the^. Partly because I would not be over tediouse but
chiefly, because I would that some of the masters of this opinion, should
take in hand to writ their whole believe therein, with the scriptures and reasons
that they hang upon, and the (God wyllyng) I will take more pains with them, I
trust to the glory of God. All your scriptures therefore, are the words of
the fayethfull messengers of God, spoken to be a light to the footsteps of
his elect and a witness against the reprobate.

For the consciences of the most wicked do consent to the law of God, that
it is good (notwythstandeynge they destitute of Gods assistence, follow the
contrary) and these consciences be the books that John speaks of in his
reuelatio^s which shall be opened at the iudgmete, that al me may be judged
Apoca.xx.
according to the things writ therein. Now remains it, that we avoid
certain inconveniences that our frewyl men gather upon the opinion of
necessity, and then shall we make an end.

First they say, that if al things be done of necessity: what do we with
scripture, what do we with laws, why have we preaching or teaching? To what
purpose serve princes and public ministers in the common weal? If al things
come to pas of necessity: what ca^ al these things avail? Forsooth eue^ these
things that you set so light when al things come to pass of necessity, be
also ordained and mainteyned of necessity by the eternal wisdom of God. For
by the scripture, the chosen number of Christ are led the right way to the
land of promise (the new Jerusalem) through the wilderness of this world By the
laws: the wicked are kept under, so that eue^ for fear of temporal
punishments, they suffer the innocet La^bes of Christ to live among the^. By
the preaching and teachinge, are Gods elect called in their time, and the
weak and young scholars in Christ, made strong and mighty soldiers to
fight against our adversaries, the world, the devil and our own flesh. By the
princes and publyke ministers are the laws ministered to the auauncemente of
Gods glory, whether the laws be wicked or Godly. For by the administration of
the Godly laws, the wicked are plaged, amd by the wicked laws, the Godly are
chastised and scourged, that they may have the more cause to run unto their
shepherde Christ for succor. Thus can not these ordinances be unprofitable,
yea they can not be but most profitable, redoundynge always to the glory of
God. Yea and, as I said before they follow of necessity and can not but be. For
if Gods holy predestination and providence, had not preserved the scriptures
to be the lantern of light to the fotesteppes of his people, how should it
have commen unto us, through the hands of so many tyrants as have borne the
sword to scourge the flock of Christ, neglectinge their shepherdes pasture:
How could it have been, that so great and rude multitudes of barbarous nations,
should have submitted the selves to be under laws and rulers: had not Gods
predestination driven the to it? Ye and that most declares the divine
prouidece: how might it have been, that in all times of most cruel persecution
certain have not spared to speak the truth and shede their blood for it, if
Gods predestination had not been the cause thereof: Think you (master
Shaxto^) that it had be^e possible for the woma^like weakness of (...) Askue,
to stand so ma^fully to the truth (when your fatherlye wisdom forsook it) if
Gods predestination had not been, to confound the wisdom and power of this
world by the foleishnes and weakness of a womanne? And I pray you what caused
you to forsake that which you said you would stick to: if he that told Peter
that he should deny him, had not also determined to declare in you, what the
greatest of us can do without his assistence.

Well, here follows yet an other inconvenience, and that is this. If al
things be done of necess^tie: why should any man be blamed for miss doing?
Why should any man be dampened, sythen all they do is but the ordinance of God,
and that more is, they can not avoid the necessity, whereby they are
constrained to do all that they do. Wherefore if they should endeavor to
refrain the evil that they do, it were but all in vain, for they are
predestinate either to do it or else to leave it undone. Justly therefore can they
not be co^dem^ned, because the evil they do, is not of the^ self, but of the
ordinance of God. To this must we answer in this wise. If God were an
inferioure to any superioure power to the which he ought to reder an accomptes
of his doings, or if any of us were not his creatures, but of an other
creation besides his workmanshyp: the might we charg him with tira^ny because
he co^de^neth us and appoints us to be punished for the things we do by
co^pultio^, through the necessity of his predestination. But for as much as he
is subject to no superioure power, and we be al his creatures, so that to what
end so ever he has framed us, we are his instruments to do the work that he
appointed to be done, why should we stand up and reason with him, to know his
purpose in creating us, or why he made us to this or that fashion? to this or
that use? to be preciouse or vile? For this one thing we may be sure of, that
God has by his eternal wisdom, created nothing, nor appointed nothing to be
done: but the same shall redound to his glory in the end, seem it never so
contrary in the mean time. Let us herke^ to the words of Paul to the Romans
in this matter. What if God (says he) wyllyng to Roma.ix.
show what his anger can do, and to make his power known: be very well
contented to have vessels of wrath, prepared to utter destruction, to the
e^tent he might declare the richesse of his glory toward the vessels of
mercy which he has prepared to glory. et cetera,

The elect number of God therefore, do commit the^ selves wholye to the will
of God, and desire rather to be damned (as Moses Exodi.xxxii
did) then that the glory of God should by any means be obscured or darckened.

These me^ do not say, let us give over our selves to do the lusts of the
flesh, for either we be certainly predestined to be saved or damped. And to
live an hard life here, will not help if we be appointed to be damned, and to
follow the lusts of the flesh shall not hurt, if we be predestined to be
saved.

But they have always in their hertes this humble confession. Lord we are the
worckmanshyppe of thine hands, made to do the things, whereunto thou have
appointed us, by thy serrete will and purpose. Thy will be done in us. Thou have
reueyled unto us the things that do please the, and thou have showed us also,
the worckes that thou do hate: but unless thou pull us back by thy grace
Lord, we follow upon the worsse, though our co^scie^ces allow the better.

We confess Lord, that when we walk in thy ways, thou art our guide, and
gouernest our footsteps.

But when we go astraye, thou leauest us to our selves, that by our sore
falls we may know what need we have of the. Thus for our profit doeste thou
suffer us to fall, yea and doeste cast us down headelynge, that we may fear
the. And yet mencifull father thou leaueste us not thus: but so sone as we call,
thou hear outcry. Thou set thine holy Angels to go before us, and to
lead us through the sea of this world eue^ as by dry land.

Thou feadest our bodies, and geueste us clothinge, and the hears of our head
know thou by nu^bre. If we walk in thy paths thou art our leader, and
though we go astray yet are we thine. Do with us Lord eue^ what thy will is, and
as thou have appointed to mag ^ifie thy name, so be it.

Thus do the elect of God confess their own inhabilitie and weakness, and
Gods almighty power, puttinge the^ selves whollye into Gods hand to do with
the^ what shall please him, confessinge also, that though he thrust the^ into
the deep ^yt of hell: yet shows he great mercy unto them in that he
shows not his might more upon them, which is to add yet an hundred fold to
the pains of hell. As for the other sort that set up the^ selves against god,
and say that they are in their own hands, as men that would not lose the hier
of their worckes, but look to be rewarded for the good, as they are punished
for the evil: they are divided in two. The one part justify the^ selves by
their works and will be seen to have chose^ Christ, rather the^ that Christ
has chose^ them, affirmy^ge rather that Christ hangs upon their ^^^ming,
the^ they upon his calling, and that it is in the^ to refuse that, that God
has prepared for them, and to wythstande that God has appointed. These call
the^ selves Gods worck^fellowes, but take upon them to be his wor^ke
masters. For till they will, God can do nothing with them, though he would
never so tayue. They will have him stand ^^ocky^ge at the door, till they
shall vouchsufe to let him in.

And when he is within he may take no work in hand, till he be set on
work by them. Such is the arrogancy of these freme^, that to maintain their
fredome, the geuer of al fredome must be made bond unto the^.

The other part is far worse then these For they, though their conscience
give them that they be fre, yet they disse^ble for a vauntage, and say they be
bound because they think that thereby they may iustlye charge God wythall
their wy^kednes. And this is their saying. If I be wicked, what can I do with
all. I am but as God has appointed me, I am not able to resist his will I
must neades therefore do the thing that he has ordey^ed me to. And thus I
believe God sent his son to dye for sinners, and I acknowledge my self a
sinner, and I believe that though I do nothing else but sy^^e, yet shall
Christ's death save me, for it is a suff^cient ransom for the whole world.

And as for the predestination to damnation or salvation, I think to be such
that, we shall all be saved. For as by Adam all were condemned: so by Christ
were all men saved.

I hold it best therefore, to eat and drink and live after the senses, for
that is most pleasant in this ly^e.

For if there be any life after this: we are as sure of it so, as otherwise.
As for the threateny^ges for the tra^^sgression of the commandments: serve
but to keep the people in fear, that one should not rob, kill, and spoil
an other, so that the world should decay. Thus they say. Bet let these
counterfayte bondemenne know, that God sees their hertes, and beholds even
their secret thoughts, so that they ca^ not deceive him by their
dissimulation. Let them know also, that at the day of judgment, their own
consciences will not lie for the^, but will give evidence against the^ that eue^
when they fained the^ selves most bound (that they might charg God with their
wickedness) then did their consciences give the^, that they might chose whether
they would follow their wickedness or not* For it is not possible that the
conscience of a man that con^^^teth him self to walk in wickedness* should
acknowledge the bondage of his will, because such one is altogether flesh, and
this knowledge comes not otherwise then of the spirit, wherefore it reygneth
only in them that be spiritual.

As many therefore, as have mortified the sleth and do sele that there is nothing
living in the^ but Christ only ^ so many do most humbly confess them selves
to be in the hands of God, as the claye in the hands of the potter, and that
Gods council shall not be (...)
vain, but his whole will fulfilled. These are the bond me^ of god, and fre me^
of Jesus Christ.

As for the other that will be so fre from God and al his ordinances, that
they may ^^^se and leave what they lust: are most bound ^^e^ in those things
wherein they think the^ selves most fre. For even the very words that they
speak, are by the testimony of the (...).vii.
scripture bond to the decreed purpose of god so that though they think in
their hertes to speak one thing, yet do they eue^ of force speak often times
the clean contrary.

I conclude therefore, that the will of man is bond and not fre. And if any
find them selves grened withal: I desire the same to write me the cause of
their grief, and I trust (by Gods healpe) I shall be able (...) the^ therein.
If not, I shall with all redines be glad to emb^^ce such Godly knowledge as God
shall (...) to me by th^n as by his (...) thereto.


FINIS.

