TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY, THE LORDS SPIRITVAL, AND TEMPORAL, AND the House of
COMMONS in this present Parliament Assembled.

Printed the 1. of June. 1625.

Crokey being sorry if he shall offend by the tediousness hereof, a more
brief then which, he knew not how to compose, considering the so long, so many
and vexatious Suites wrongfully prosecuted against him; And in that Crokey has
in many places referred one place to another, according to the Sections and
proofs, he has done it the better to explain and give light to every
particular, which otherwise might have rested doubtful and obscure to the
Reader.

A True Relation of the passages in diverse Suites twelve years together,
Certificate from the City of Bristol under the common Seal, of Crokeyes good
estate, credit and respect, before his declining in estate, occasioned by the
said Suites.
prosecuted by Benjamin Crokey of Bristol Merchant, and especially upon the
Statute of Charitable uses, made Anno 43. R. Regine Elizab. for and on the
behalf of a free Grammar School at Wooton-vnderedge in the County of
Gloucester, founded by KATHERINE Lady Berkley an. 8. Richardi 2. against one
John Smith of Northnibley in the said County Gent: who has put in execution
many soul and impious practices, whereby he has most manifestly abused and
deluded his late Majesty of happy memory, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
the Lord Chancellor, the L. Certificat of Smiths powerfulness, cunning, and
contentiousnesse, and of Crokeyes intolerable charges for preservation of that
School: from the Mayor and Burgesses of Wooton, and fourteen Preachers
resident near thereunto.
the L. Keeper, and diverse Reverend Bishops, the most of his Majesty's Courts
at Westminster, and Judges thereof, and has committed many gross contempts
against the same Courts, and all to supplant the foundation of that School,
and to get the possession and inheritance thereof, and of the Lands thereto
belonging to himself; the same being of the value of 300. pounds per annum at
this day, and for which Crokey has now a Bill depending in Parliament against
Smith, for no other course of Justice (by all likelihood) will prevail against
him; as that which follows in this Relation will manifest.

May it therefore please your Majesty, and this Honorable Assembly, for the
honor of GOD, and maintenance of Justice, to vouchsafe the calling of Crokeyes
Bill against the said Smith to be read; and the rather, for that the
Parliament four years since was possessed with this cause, and gave order
therein, which by reason of the breaking up of that Parliament, Smith
defeated, and went on, and renewed his former practices; And that (for your
better information) it would please you to take notice of the particulars
following which Crokey will prove, and in fail thereof will undergo what
punishment soever this High Court shall inflict: all or the most of his proofs
being noted in the Margent to the said particulars in this ensuing Relation?
And in this suite Crokey is the more earnest, for that he is assured of great
opposition to keep this Cause from the hearing of your Majesty, and this
Honorable Assembly.

1 A Summarie and Brief of the undue practices by Smith before spoken of, for
supplanting the foundation of that Schole, and getting the possessions and
inheritance thereof to himself, discovered and opposed by Crokey, mentioning
every Section where the matters are at large related, but first, how Smith
entered and began to work.
1 One Grace Drew, the Relict of one John Drew, being by force of a Lease from
the School possessed of a Farm, parcel of the Possessions of that School,
called Warrens Court; and she being very aged, decrepit, sick in her bed, and
likely to dye; and Smith being a very young man, and then of little or no
value or estate, married the said Grace in her bed, two women holding her up
during the Ceremony, and thereby Smith possessed himself of that Farm, and in
this manner Smith began.

2 Then Smith got the original Lease of that Farm not appartaining to him,
out of Chancery by cunning, and untrue suggestions, where it was to have been
kept until the expiration. Sect. 8.

3 Smith bought two fraudulent Titles of the School and lands from two of the
Duports. And by that means entered upon the School and residue of the School
lands. Sect. 9.

4 Then Smith placed one Cowper Schoolmaster, and bought another fraudulent
title of the School and Lands from that Cowper, and from one Browning, and
from one Bolton, the Daughter of which Browning Smith had married. Sect. 10.

5 Smith then let Leases of the School Lands, and erected a Court Baron, and
the same kept diverse times in his own name, as Lord and owner of all the
School Lands. Sect. 11.

6 Crokey having an interest for the residue of a Term in the aforesaid Farm
called Warrens Court, and Smith keeping it from him unjustly, Crokey entered,
and for that entrey (to outface the world) Smith sued Crokey in diverse Courts
to weary him. Sect. 12.

7 Smith made many untrue reports against Crokeyes proceeding in behalf of the
School, and many false suggestions in Courts, for maintaining his said bad
titles to the School Lands, which plainly show Smiths intent for supplanting
the School and getting the said Lands. Sect. 14.15. and 17.

8 Smith commensed diverse fraudulent, and unjust suites in Star Chamber,
Chancery, Exchequer, and Common Pleas, for maintenance and strengthening his
said bad titles to the School and Lands, wherein he used many practices,
shifts and delays, which also show his said intent. Sect. 17.

9 Smith (being discovered of his said former bad titles to the School lands
by Crokeyes opposition) bought another fained title of one Bishop, of all the
School lands, and that managed (as the rest) against Crokey which also showed
his said intent. Sect. 17.

10 When Crokey brought his eiectment for Warrens Court, Smith obtained upon
untrue suggestions an Iniunction in the Starchamber, which stayed Crokeyes
proceeding at Law four years, and after that Cause was dismissed, Crokey
could not get a Jury to appear, until 48. Jurors were summoned. Sect. 17.19.

11 Smith interrupted Crokey three several times in the execution of his
Majesty's Commission, under the great Seal upon the Statute of Charitable
uses, and also in the execution of a second Commission upon that Statute,
notwithstanding his Majesty's especial directions. Sect. 20.

12 Smith practiced with Sir John Points, and one Henry Minors to find the
School Lands concealed, or to draw Crokey to a Composition, or to entrap
Crokey, that he might forbear any further prosecution in behalf of the
School. Sect. 21.22.

13 Smith made false shows to the Country of a pious intent for settling the
School, when he knew not how otherwise to answer his former practices against
it, and when he meant nothing less. Sect. 30.

14 Smith misused and euilly entreated one Prichard who served as
Schoolmaster, because he inclined to Crokey in behalf of the School. Sect.
27.

15 Smith by his undue practices hindered Crokey from obtaining a third
Commission upon the Statute of Charitable uses. Sect. 26.

16 Smith endeavored to get a Release from Crokeyes Lessee in the eiectment, at
the time when the Cause was to be tried, but not preuayling in that, Smith at
the trial stood upon all his bad Titles and aforesaid practices: abusing the
Lord Hobart, and the other Judges, by false reports and suggestions to them,
and practiced with one Gayre to raze a Record which was done. Sect. 28.32.

17 Smith still to delay Crokey, and to countenance his unjust dealings got
himself made a Burgess in Parliament of a Town 130. miles distant from his
habitation An. 1619. Sect. 35.

18 Smith to weary Crokey in the proceedings for the School, did set his
agents to see Crokey arested when Crokey was going on in the execution of his
Majesty's Commission by direction of the Parliament, and dealt underhand with
Crokeyes Creditors to assign Crokeyes Debts to him, or to some others his
Agents and Confederates, and otherwise practiced whereby to keep Crokey in
Prison, wherein he has prevailed against Crokey. Sect. 37.39.

2 A Summary and brief of the several abuses committed by Smith, against his
late Majesty, and against his Majesty's Courts, and Magistrates and Judges.
1 By surmising false matter oftentimes whereby to avoid several Orders of the
Starchamber for taxation of Costs there awarded against him, and for increase
of Costs. Sect. 18.

2 By detayning the said second Commission upon the Statute of Charitable uses,
and altering the Commissioners names. Sect. 20.

3 By deluding his Majesty, and the Court of Exchequer, under a show of a
pious intent. Sect. 24.31.

4 By surmising false matters to the Chancery, to hinder Crokey for obtaining a
third Commission. Sect. 26.

5 By surmising false matter to the Judges of the common Pleas, that they might
stay Judgment, and Execution upon the verdict for Crokey, contrary to the
Rules in Court by Smiths consent, which false surmises took effect. Sect. 30.

6 By surmising false matters in a Petition to his late Majesty, whereby Smith
crossed all former directions of his late Majesty, the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, and diverse Bishops, and other just and legal
proceedings in behalf of the School. Sect. 31.

7 By surmising false matter against the directions of his late Majesty, the
Archbishop of Canterb: the L. Chancellor, and other Bishops, for hindering of
Crokey in obtaining that third Commission before granted. Sect. 27.

8 By making the Court of Chancery believe, that the School Rent was brought
so low as 40. shillings per annum, and that he had increased it to 12. pounds
per annum, when as in truth the true and due Rent to the School, was always
at the least 23. pounds per annum, until Smith began his practices to supplant
it.

9 By abusing the Lord Hobart, and Master Attorney General by false reports and
suggestions, whereby they were persuaded of Crokeys double dealing in the cause
of the School, and thereby Smith obtained an Iniunction to stay all Crokeyes
proceedings in behalf of the School. Sect. 33.

10 By abusing the Lord Keeper, and Master Attorney General by false
Informations, whereby he obtained a Commission for a survey of the School
Lands, and the carriage thereof, which Commission was directed to Smiths
friends. Sect. 38.

11 By abusing the Lord Keeper, the Judges assistants of the Chancery, and
Master Attorney General, in drawing up and entering a Decree in Chancery, where
many untrue matters were incerted. Sect. 41. Numer. decret.

12. By procuring 52. pounds costs, to be taxed against Crokey in the
Starchamber upon Bill and answer, Crokeys suites being before stayed by
Iniunction mentioned in the said Decree, which Costs Smith has charged Crokey
withal in the Kings Bench. Sect. 42.

3 A Summary and brief of the several Contempts committed by Smith against
Decrees, Orders, Rules, Verdicts, and other just proceedings of several Courts
in the cause of the School.
1. For not bringing in the said original Lease, according to an order in
Chancery, Sect. 8.

2. For not staying the said suite against Crokey upon his said entry,
according to an order in Chancery, Sect. 12.

3. For disobeying several orders in Starchamber for hearing, and for his
boasting against the same, Sect. 17.

4. For not attending the Co^mittees assigned by his Majesty's directions, and
References for the school according to their several warrants, Sect. 26.

5. For disobeying the Decree by direction of Parliament upon the Commission of
charitable uses, and by his putting in new frivolous exceptions thereto, being
before waued by consent of Smith and his Council, Sect. 38.

6. For his many devises and slights by deferring the said Fynall trial, and
after the trial the Judgment, and after the Judgment, by not yielding
possession according to several Rules in Court made by consent of Smith and
his Council, in contempt of that Court, and for procuring the Record to be
razed, Sect. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32

All which matters Crokey hops this high Court of Parliament will take into
consideration, and the rather when Smithes said practices, abuses, and
contempts shall more fully by the particulars hereafter related appear.

But forasmuch, as upon the whole matter there may one maine question arise,
which is, that the now Lord Berkley being conceived to be the heir of the
Founder of that School, and Patron thereof; why should not his Lordship or
others for him have stirred in this cause of the School, and the same have
defended rather then Crokey.

As to that Crokey humbly desires he may be called to answer vina voce, when
he doubts not but to give good satisfaction therein.

There may be also an Objection, which is; That Crokey has followed the cause
of the School for some particular ends of his own, and especially in respect
of his title to Warrens Court.

As to that, Crokey does plainly make manifest, that he has not prosecuted
the Cause of the School for his own ends, but in the behalf of the School
only and at his own charge: for Crokey did well know his Title to Warrens
Court to be good, for the Statute of the first of Edward the 6. maintains all
Leases whatsoever made before the 28. day of November in the 37. of Henry the
Eight, as was the said Lease under which Crokey claims. The particulars of the
Relation are, as they do appear by the several Sections, the proofs whereof
are noted in the Margent.
1. AN Inquisition upon an ad quod damnum, Copy of the Inquisition.
dated die lune proxime ante festum Assentionum Domini, Anno 7. Regni regis
Ricardi secundi.

2. King Richard the 2. granted license of the 16. of June, Copy of the License.
in the 7. of his reign to Walter Burnell and William Pendock Chaplains, for
erecting of a free Grammar school in Wooton-vnderedge in the County of
Gloucester, and for indowment thereof, with the land and Tenements therein
mentioned for maintenance and sustentation of a Master, and two poor
Scholars, and their successors for ever.

3. Thomas Lord Berkley, Copy of the License.
Lord of Berkley granted License Dated 1. July Anno 8. Regni regis Ricardi 2.
to the said Walter Burnell and William Pendock, for erecting the said School,
and for indowment thereof with the Lands in the same License mentioned, for
maintenance and sustentation of a Master and two poor Scholars, and their
successors for ever.

4. That the 20. day of October in the said eight year of the reign of King
Richard the 2. Copy of the Grant.
a Grant was made by the said Walter Burnell and William Pendock, at the
charges and procurement of Katherine Lady Berkley, for erecting the said
School, and for indowment thereof with the Lands and Tenements in the same
Grant mentioned, for maintenance and sustentation of a Master and two poor
Scholars, for teaching of Scholars in the Art and rudiments of Grammar; the
Patronage of which School was intayled upon the heirs males of the said
Thomas Lord Berkley. An exemplification of a Record and Smiths Decree in
Chancery, Sect. 40. Numero 7.


5. In this estate the School continued for the space of 200. years, and
until Smith endeavored to alter the same; and the Lands belonging to the
School are worth 300. pound Certificate of the Archibishop of Cant: Bishops of
London and Winton to his Majesty.
per annum at this day.

6. That Robert Coldewell was Schoolmaster of that School, duly presented,
and was in right thereof seized of and in all the lands and Tenements thereto
belonging, and being so seized, by his Confessed by Smiths said Decree in
Chancery, Sect. 40. Numero. 8.
Indenture under the common Seal of that School, bearing date the 27. of May,
in the 37. year of the reign of King Hen. the 8. did demise one message with
the appurtenances called Warrens Court, in North-Nibley in the said County of
Gloucester, parcel of the said School lands, unto one William Thomas his
Executors and Assigns, from the feast of the Anunciation of the blessed Lady
S. Mary the Virgin then last past, for the term of 88. years, for the yearly
Rent of forty eight shillings.

That William Thomas by his last Confessed by the same Decree, Numero 8.
Will, Dated Anno Domini 1556. did bequeath the said Lease and residue of the
Term of 88. years, unto Alice his wife and Executrix for her life, and after
to Grace Daughter of the said William Thomas and Alice, and after to the
Children of the said Alice by John Moore her former Husband, and to the
suruiuor of them, which children were Richard, William, Katherine, Elizabeth,
Mary, and Ioice, and dyed. Alice proved that Will under Seal.
will, and entered into Warrens Court as a Legacy, and so left the same after
her death to Grace, who at the suite of the said Richard Moore, and the rest of
his said Brethren and Sisters being plaintiffes, against the said Alice and
Grace, were by an 2. Orders.
order in Chancery (where that suite was commenced) in the 26. year of the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, compelled to bring the said original Lease into
that Court, where it was by consent of Alice, and all the said Legatees to An
Exemplification of the Answers of Alice and Grace.
remain and safely there be kept for the use of them all; that they might take
the benefit thereof one after another, until the expiration thereof.

8. That the said Lease was so kept the space of 18. years, and until Smith
married the said Grace, which was in the 39. year of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and then Smith (perceiving that all other the ancient Leases of the
School lands were come to an end, except the Lease of Warrens Court) began his
endeavors and practices to get all the said School lands, and to that purpose
did by diverse practices and untrue suggestions in Chancery (there being then
none to oppose him) Order.
obtain the said Lease out of Chancery unduly, and the same deteyned in
contempt of the Order.
Orders of that Court.

9. That Smith (having so gotten that Lease) dealt and practiced with one Henry
Duport, that Duport should Copy of Smiths Answer to Bishops Bill in the
Exchequer, and of the Bill.
pretend some title to the Patronage of that School, and to the inheritance of
the Lands thereto belonging; whereupon Smith and that Duport gave forth in
speeches, that the said Duport had good tytles thereunto, and Smith also
practiced with John Duport, and James Duport (who then had possessed themselves
of the said School and Lands as masters and owners thereof) to set on foot
another title; and so Smith for some small matter to those three Duports got
possession of all the Schoole-Lands as his own Fee-simple, and likewise the
Patronage, and the better to color that his practice Counterpart of the
Conueyance, razed in the sum let down for consideration.
took conveyances from the Duports.

10. That Smith Anno 6. Regni regis Iacobi unduly placed one Edward Cowper
Master of that School, upon whose induction Smith caused Cowper to Copy of
Smiths Answer in the Exchequer, and of the Bill.
convey all the School Lands in Fee to one John Browning father to Smiths
wife, and to one Bolton, which Browning and Bolton soon after conveyed the
same and levied a Fine to Smith and his heirs for ever, and so Cowper
continued as Schoolmasters, but never exercised the place, or had any thing
there to do, but others as Deputies there were placed by Smith, and so Smith
made Cowper but as his stale.

11. That Smith (by color of the said several conveyances, and upon
expiration of all the ancient Leases about that time, viz. about Anno 6. Regni
regis Iacobi worn out, saving the said Lease of Warrens Court) Copy of Smiths
said Answer in the Exchequer, and of the Bill.
entered Smiths Patent.
upon 38. Tenements belonging to that School, having possessed himself of
Warrens Court before, and did let those Tenements for long terms upon Fines,
and the Tenants took Bonds of Smith for the quiet enjoying; Witnesses.
and shortly after Smith Witnesses.
called a Court Baron in his own name, as Lord and owner of all the School
lands, and summoned all the Tenants of the School lands as belonging to
Warrens Court, and kept Courts Baron in the Schoole-house.

12. That the said Ioice was last suruiuor of all the said Legatees, as Smith
has Smiths Decree in Chancery.
confessed, and the said Ioice (so being lawfully intytled unto all the remain
of 88. years in Warrens Court, which was 21. years then to come) did for
diverse considerations duly Assignement from ^oice to Crokey and ^^^^ant of
Attorney.
assign the same Lease to Crokey her Nephew (which Crokey, was son of the
said Katherine one of the said Legatees) and dyed intestate, and Crokey Letters
of Admi^^^^^ation.
administered, and this was about 12. years since, whereupon Crokey (being
interessed in Warrens Court, and Smith being in possession thereof, and the
said Grace his then late wife being dead, and by her death Smiths interest in
Warrens Court ending) Crokey commenced a suite in Chancery against Smith, and
made his entry thereinto, and depending the said suite in Chancery Smith (still
to color his bad tytles to outface the world, and to vex Crokey with suites)
brought an action of trespass against Crokey for that his entry; in which
suite Smith proceeded to trial without Crokeyes priuity, and so that Trial
passed by default, whereby Smith recovered of Crokey 7. pounds for costs,
though Crokey at the beginning of that suite obtained an Order.
order in Chancery for stay thereof, or to show cause to the contrary which
Smith did not, but in contempt went to trial as aforesaid.

13. By these suites with Smith for Warrens Court, Crokey took knowledge of
the foundation and state of the School, and withal of Smiths said practices
against the same, which practices of Smith stirred up Crokey more for defense
of the School, then for his own title as may well appear by that which
follows.

14. That there have been 33. several Several Records exemplified, and
Copies of Record.
suites touching the said Will of the said William Thomas, whereupon there were
Virdicts, Decrees, Non-suites, and Dismissions: and the question in all which
suites was, whether that the remainder of years in Warrens Court should go
and be to the Legatees, or to the Executors by the said Will, in all which
suites Judgment was always for the Legatees under whom Crokey claymes, and
Crokey has an approved good and lawful title to Warrens Court during the
remainder of 88. years, and Smith has no right thereunto, nor had since the
death of Grace his said wife; howbeit Smith by his untrue reports ordinary
with him, and by some false colors has so shadowed the matter, as that he
has made all men believe, that all the said several suites were in
affirmation of his unjust claim, under a pretended title from one Sprint,
colored by a Decree in Chancery 19. May, 43. R. Regine Elizab. obtained by
Smith deceitfully, as also by a dismission caused by color of that Decree,
which Decree and dismission were against one Moors Title, not against
Crokeyes; which Decree and dismission last spoken of, or his said pretended
title from Sprint, Smith in all his suites with Crokey, or in any of them could
never make good: though Smith has labored therein all he might, but the same
were always held and deemed deceitful and fraudulent.

15. That Crokey (for his own right, but especially in his tenderness and
zeal for preservation of the School and inheritance thereof) prosecuting the
before mentioned suite in Chancery against Smith, Smith (further to color
those his practices before spoken of for maintenance of his injurious dealing
against the School and Crokey) exhibited an Exemplification of the Trial.
Information against Crokey and the said Ioice Crokeyes Aunt to the court of
Common pleas upon the Statute of Maintenance and Champerty, which suite was
commenced 20. July Anno 12. Regni regis Iacobi; in which Information.
Information, he the said Smith set forth, that the first day of January in the
11. year of his Majesty's reign, and by the space of two years next before
he was, and then was seized in his demeasne as of fee of and in one capital
message called Warrens Court, and of and in 60. Acres of land, 20. acres of
meddow, and 30. acres of pasture, and 20. Acres of Wood, situate and lying in
North-Nibley in the County of Gloucester, and the Rents and profits of the same
Tenements with the appurtenances, to his own proper use for all the said time
of 2. years had and received, Smith pretending further thereby, that Ioice not
having any right or title, and notwithstanding pretending right and title to
the premises conveyed the same to Crokey, and so both Ioice and Crokey within
the Statute of Maintenance and Champerty; to which Information Ioice and Crokey
pleaded, and the cause came to trial at the Bar. 26. April Anno 13. Regni
regis Iacobi, and upon full evidence Smith was The same Exemplification.
nonsuited, and yet upon opening of the said suite in Chancery (which was but
3. days after the said trial) Smith by his indirect practices procured a
Order.
dismission to the Law without any further hearing.

16. That upon the said Dismission in Chancery, Crokey sealed a The Lease for
trial of the title.
Lease for 5. years to one Thomas Bodham whereon to bring an action of
eiectione firm, for trial of the title, and thereupon Crokey commenced a
suite in the Court of Common pleas against Smith; In which suite the Judges of
that Court (perceiving the many unjust suites and sinister practices raised and
prosecuted by Smith against Crokey and against the School) made several The
Rules.
Rules in Court (but with the assent of Smith and his Council) that if the
verdict upon that Trial should pass for Crokey, that then Crokey should
forthwith have possession, and no writ of Error should be granted, although the
said Lease for the eiectment should be expired.

17. That Smith (to weary Crokey in that suite with vexations and delays as
before in the rest he endeavored) in May Anno Regni regis Iacobi 13. commenced
a new suite in Chancery against Crokey for the same cause, which was Order of
Dismission.
dismissed in July, Anno 15. Regni regis Iacobi: And also another suite by
English Copy of Smithes Answer to the said Bill.
Bill in the Exchequer Chamber Termino Paso: An. 14. Regni regis Iacobi in the
name of one Edw: Bishop a friend of Smiths, and his chamber-fellow in the inner
Temple, which suite though it seemed to be commenced against Smith (for
therein he made himself defendant and answered the said Bill) yet that Bill
was exhibited by Smith himself fraudulently, and the same Bill Smith The said
Copy of Smiths Answer.
answered, and in that his Answer stood upon all his feigned tytles, and Smith
likewise took out a Order.
Commission for examination of witnesses, and s^^^^^ed diverse witnesses to
prove that Bill, and so proved the Bill, and thereby, that all the lands
belonging to the School were concealed and within the Statute of 1. Edw: 6.
and so that suite ceased, and all that suite was at Smiths charge, for therein
he made himself both plantiffe and defendant; whereupon Smith (for little or
nothing) bought Bishops title, but withal took letters Copy of the Letters
Patents. Copy of Certificate and Decree upon the Commission for Charitable
uses: and Witnesses.
Patens thereof upon the Commission of defective tytles to him and his heirs
for ever, for which he paid to his Majesty 5. pound, and was to pay xi. s.
Rent per annum, by which tytles Smith meant to hold the School lands as he
holds other Note from the Rolls.
land in Sussex by those tytles to this day; And further about the same time
(still to delay Crokeys said suite upon the Eiectment) Smith commensed (or
rather but revived his other foiled suite of Maintenance and Champerty, which
before he had brought in the common pleas) a suite in the Starchamber against
Crokey, and four others, Crokeyes friends for maintenance and Champerty,
therein surmising forgerie, and perjury, wherein Smith also pretended a title
of inheritance to Warrens Court, whereupon, and upon other false suggestions,
Smith obtained an Order.
Iniunction for stay of Crokeyes said trial upon the Eiectment, and by that
means the said Trial was stayed four years to Crekeyes great vexation and
trouble, and to his expense of four hundred pounds or thereabouts in that
proceeding, Crokey being enforced to attend that Court every Term with
council for desoluing that Iniunction, but could not, but in the end was
enforced to labor for a hearing, for which he procured four several
peremptory 4. Orders.
Orders in four several Terms for hearing of the said Starchamber cause so
commenced by Smith, during which delay Smith gave forth in Affidauit.
speeches, that he would weary Crokey by suites in Law, and that it was as
possible for Crokey to remove a Mountain, as to prevail against him the said
Smith.

18. That after four years toil and suite in the Starchamber, that cause
there depending by Crokeyes great travail and cost was heard, and Crokey, and
the rest of the Defendants were absolutely Order.
dismissed with good costs, but when the costs should have been taxed; Smith
so practiced and wrought, as that Crokey could not get them to be taxed, but
was enforced diverse times to move that Court for order therein, whereupon in
the time of the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Mandevile, and the (...) Lord Keeper,
Crokey obtained diverse Orders in open Court for the Costs Several Orders.
to be taxed, with increase of Costs for Smiths delays: which costs were
drawn up to Bills of Costs.
297. pound, and (notwithstanding the said Dismission and Orders) Crokey could
not obtain Costs to be taxed; whereupon Crokey in May 1623. Petitioned the
(...) Lord Keeper therein, but so far was his Lordship abused by the false
suggestions and practices of Smith, and so much incensed against Crokey, that
his Lordships Answer Crokeyes Petition, and the Lord Keepers Answer thereto.
to that Petition was, and so subscribed it, that Crokey deserved to have his
ears cropped off for abusing him, in that his Lordship never refused to tax
Costs at the end of every Term: And yet Grasvenor Crokeyes Attorney did
Affidauit.
affirm, that he often had presented the Bill of Costs to his Lordship to
be taxed, and that he was never more wearied then with urging his Lordship
therein, and for that his Lordship had denied to do it, he durst not move the
same again; But shortly after upon untrue suggestions by one Master Trotman of
Smithes Council, and by Smithes practices together, and without the priuitie
of Crokey, or his Council, or Attorney Smith obtained Order.
Order for remitting all the said Costs, which Order Crokey could not get to be
reuersed.

19. That (the said Starchamber cause being dismissed) Crokey labored very
earnestly many Terms for a Trial upon the said Lease of eiectment according
to the said Rules in Court, and to his great trouble and charge brought up his
Witnesses (some of whom dwelling one hundred miles from London) and diverse
Terms fee'd his Council and Copy of the Panell and Distringas.
48. Jurors were summoned before a Jury did appear, And so after four years
delay and more, the said cause was tried at the Common Pleas Bar, viz.
Termino Pase: Anno 18. Regniregis Iacobi, And upon the said Trial it was found
for Thomas Bodham Crokeyes Lessee in the eiectment, as is more at large related
in the 28, 29. and 30.. and how Crokey was delayed in the Judgment and
altogether defeated.

20. That depending the said suites, and Crokey having fully informed himself
of the estate of the School, and of Smithes practices for supplanting thereof,
and getting all the said School lands, Crokey (to restore the said School,
and to reduce all things into their former being, according to the said
foundation) Anno 1617. obtained a Commission to inquire of the whole matter
concerning the said School and the lands thereto anciently belonging,
according to the said Statute of Charitable uses; And for execution of the said
Commission, Crokey The Commissioners Warrants.
procured a day to be appointed, and provided his Witnesses and all matters
incident thereto, and also got a Witnesses.
Jury to appear, but all was defeated by the practices and power of Smith,
and a second time in like manner: Whereupon Crokey peticioned to his late
Majesty, and his Majesty (being graciously inclined to the furtherance of the
charitable and good course of the Law and Statute in that case provided) was
pleased according to his Majesty's Commission under the great Seal of England
before granted, that the Bishop of Gloucester and any 4. of the Commissioners in
that Commission named, should with convenient speed enter into the examination
of this cause, and according to the authority given to them in the same
Commission finally determine and effect the same, so as there should be no
cause given of any further trouble to his Majesty, as by his Majesty's
Petition and Direction.
direction signified by Sir Daniel Dun 5. September 1617. may appear; which
said Commission, and that his Majesty's direction notwithstanding, by like
practices of Smith was interrupted and defeated a third time, and so Crokey
lost that Commission, and all his labor and charge, and nothing done therein.
And in the year 1618. Crokey procured a Warrant.
Warrant for a second Commission from the Lord Chancellor for the same purpose;
which Commission.
Commission being engrossed in the Crown office, and ready for the Seal (
Crokey having then paid the charge thereof) was by like practices of Smith
there kept from Crokey for 2 months and more. And whilst the said Commission
was so stayed in the Crown office Smith Witnesses.
practiced with one John Hunt to alter the Commissioners names, contrary to the
Warrant delivered in by Crokey, and so that Commission was engrossed of new,
and some of the Commissioners names in the Warrant were left out in the
Commission, Commission under the great Seal.
and others of Smiths friends put in: howbeit Crokey took that Commission as it
was, and labored for the execution thereof, and a day Warrant for day of
Sitting Witnesses.
was appointed, and Crokey with Jurors and Witnesses, and all things else ready
on his part to have been done, but by the like practices of Smith there did
come to the place assigned for execution of the said Commission but three
Certificate of the Commission.
Commisioners of 7. that had signed the Warrants, when no less then four
could execute it, whereby that Commission was also avoided, and all Crokeyes
labors and charges lost.

21. That in the mean time the Commission was so kept back, Smith practiced
with Sir John Pointz Knight, and one Henry Minors to take a Commission forth of
the Exchequer, whereby to find the possessions of the said School to be
Witnesses.
concealed as Chantry lands given to superstitious use, and within the Statute
1. Edward 6. wherein Smith so handled the matter, as that Sir John Pointz and
Minors did take such a Commission forth of the Exchequer, and being Patentees
Bond from Sir John Pointz and minors to Crokey.
were also therein made Commissioners.

22 That the said Sir John Pointz and Minors, about August Anno 1618. went to
Tidbury in the said County of Gloucester for execution of their said Commission,
where (having a Jury Witnesses.
of simple men, some whereof being of Smiths kindred) yet that notwithstanding
they would not proceed at that time, because Crokey was there ready with all
things for defense of the School and possessions thereof, and amongst other
things with a Case Cas
drawn and resolved on^ by Sir Henry Yelverton and Sir Thomas Couentry his
late Majesty's Council at Law under their hands, affirming that the said
School and possessions were free from superstitious uses, and no way within
the said Statute of 1. Edward 6. whereupon Sir John Pointz soon after labored
Crokey very earnestly for a composition, which Crokey utterly refused, and
soon after that Sir John Pointz and Minors met again upon their said
Commission at Wickware in the said County of Gloucester, viz. the 13. of
Witnesses and Warrant from Sir John Pointz and Minors.
October 1618. At which time Crokey likewise attended, but before they sat
both Sir John Pointz and Minors earnestly pressed Crokey to a composition,
which Crokey again utterly refused as before, whereupon they proceeded with a
like simple Jury as they best pleased, notwithstanding Crokey stood in
Witnesses.
defense of the School in all he might, and so it was found, that the said
School and lands thereto belonging were given to superstitious uses, and
within the Statute of 1. Edw: 6. and yet the said Sir John Pointz and Minors
labored again at that time with Crokey for a Composition, and offered their
Bond.
Bond of 2000. pound to Crokey with condition for the assuring of Warrens Court
to Crokey and his heirs in Fee farm, and to set him in possession thereof;
And albeit Crokey well did know that all their offers were but to entrap and to
draw him from defending the School, and that by Smiths plot and practice, yet
Crokey also perceiving that they proffered him some advantage whereby they might
afterward entrap themselves, was content to take such a Bond, so as he might
have the drawing of the Bond and Condition which they assented gladly unto, and
so Crokey did cause the Bond and Condition to be drawn, wherein he caused Sir
John Pointz and Minors to be mentioned both Patentees and Commissioners, which
was all that thereby Crokey Witness Master Heart.
sought, to the end the practices by them and Smith might the better appear;
Crokey then knowing no other, or better way for discovery of their said
practices, neither did Crokey so much as promise, much less assure to them any
thing at all, but forthwith showed to the Lords grace of Canterbury the said
Bond, and fully acquainted his Grace therewith, and of all their other
practices against the School, as formerly he had done.

23. That thereupon his Grace sent his Soliciter Witness. Master Heart.
Mr. Heart with Crokey to the Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer for traversing
of the said undue proceedings, and reuersing of the said Inquisition, and
(according to the Lord chief Barons direction) Crokey moved that Court of
Exchequer by his Council, whereupon a day was given to Sir John Pointz and
Minors to come in for maintaining their said Inquisition which they refusing to
do, the said Inquisition, and Commission by an express Order.
order in that Court were suppressed and made void.

24. That Smith (to manifest his craft in dawbing) did then also move the Court
of Exchequer by his Council for making void the said Inquisition, and
Commission, whereupon in the said Order.
Order the name of Smithes Council was foisted, in stead of Crokeys Council,
as if Smith had been the chief and only opposor, and not the procurer of the
said last mentioned Commission and Inquisition, whereby Smith did not only
delude the said Court of Exchequer, but the Country also for when he perceived
that Plot with Pointz and Minors would not take, then Smith began to make a
show of a pious intent, to make and erect a new foundation of that School but
yet in his own name, and for his own glory, whereby to outface and blindfold
the world, that his former practices for supplanting thereof might not be
seen. And to that purpose endowed the School with Confessed in Smiths Decree
in Chancery, Sect. 41. number. ibid. 13.
12. pound Rent per annu^ out of her possessions of 300. pound per annum all
being in the hand of him and his Lessees. And for divulging of that dissembled
piety and bounty therein, ordained 25. Feoffees for establishing of that his
new false foundation of the School and possessions, wherein he had not, nor
has any interest lawful at all.

25. That Smith (knowing his own guiltiness) doubted that one Prichard, then
as Master of that School, placed there by Smith did incline to the assistance
of Crokey for righting the School, And in that doubt Smith set Witnesses.
upon Prichard with diverse high and threatening speeches, and warned Prichard
that at a certain day by Smith peremptorily prefixed, Prichard should depart
from the School as a professed maintainer thereof against Smith, or else that
Prichard must expect to be by Smith thrown out by violence, insomuch that (upon
Prichards slighting of Smiths threatenings) Smith (in outrageous and violent
manner being accompanied with some 20 Witnesses.
men) came to the School and threatened to vntyle the Schoole-house, and to
throw Prichard out if he would not presently depart, and by those means, and
by frighting Prichards wife (being then in childe-bed) Prichard was enforced to
leave the School to Smith, and so upon composition left it.

26. That Crokey moved the Lord Chancellor for a third Commission upon the said
Certificate from three of the Commissioners in the said second Commission,
which notwithstanding, and though Crokey had obtained diverse Commissions
before, yet upon Smithes untrue suggestions and like practices, it was so
ordered the Order.
16. of June Anno 17. Regni regis Iacobi, that thereby Crokey was not only
debarred for obtaining any further Commission in behalf of the School, but
also thereby disgraced, and all his proceedings therein as much as might be;
and Crokey (being so stopped and prejudiced) petitioned his Majesty to refer
the final hearing and determining the cause for the School to the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lords Bishops of London and Winton, and to the
Lord Hobart, or to any 3. or 2. of them, whereupon his Majesty was graciously
pleased, that the said Lords should take the contents of the said Petition into
their special consideration, and after hearing and examining all particulars
incident thereunto, should make report in writing unto his Majesty what they
should find fitting to be done, as well for awarding such a Commission as was
petitioned for, as for the certefying and determining the whole cause according
to Justice and good conscience; as by the said Petition and Petition and
Reference.
Reference signified by Secretary Naunton of the 24. of June 1619. appears,
which Reference Crokey diligently prosecuted, but Smith would not by any means
appear before the Committees assigned by that Reference, until Crokey had
procured four several The Warrants.
Warrants, Smith well knowing that Crokey had brought up to London many
Witnesses.
Witnesses, some of whom 100. miles distant from thence to his great trouble
and charge; and that Crokey had them in a readiness the first day appointed by
the said committees, and had feed his Council diverse times therein for the
better information of their Lordships in the behalf of the School.

27. That upon the fourth Warrant Smith appeared, and the cause upon the said
Reference came to be heard before the Lord Archbishop, and the other 2. Lords
Bishops; and upon opening the cause; and arguments and proofs before their
Lordships made by the Council on both sides, their Lordships Certificate.
certified his late Majesty of the powerfulnes and indirect practices of Smith
for getting the inheritance of all the School lands worth 300. pound per annum
for 5. pound Certificate.
In which Certificate their Lordships held fit, that Crokey should petition the
Lord Chanceilor, for a third Commission to settle the said School in her
ancient estate Crokey accordingly Petitioned, and thereupon obtained an Order
Order.
in Chancery of the 21. of Ferbruary, Anno (...). Regni regis Iacobi, that a
Commission should be awarded to the Bishops of Gloucester and Bristoll and
others: Whereupon Crokey labored for another Commission according to the said
Order, but could nor prauaile until he complained to the Parliament, which was
about 16. months after the said Order, and then he obtained another Order in
Parliament.
Commission which was duly executed as more particularly appears in the 37.
Section of this Relation.

28. That Crokeyes Trial upon the said Lease of Eiectment by Smithes indirect
dealing, was delayed 4. years and Copy of the Verdict and Judgment.
more, but after that delay it was tried at the Common pleas Bar, viz. in
Easter Term Anno 18. Regni regis Iacobi, though Smith earnestly labored by
himself and others to have avoided that Trial, and Smith then labored to
seduce the said Bodham Crokeyes Lessee to Witnesses.
release, upon which Trial, the matter was so strongly defended by Smithes
Council, that the Trial continued from 9. in the morning to 1. in the
afternoon, which was by reason Smith and his Council stood so mainely and so
confidently upon his said several bad tytles and practices.

29. That at that Trial the Lord Hobart and the rest of the Judges of that
Court used all good and just endeavors for discovering of the truth whereby
Smithes bad tytles (so strongly urged and insisted upon) were confuted, which
Smith perceiving, and that the Trial must needs pass against him, and thereby
all his practices come to light, and be brought to naught to his utter
disgrace and infamy: Smith cried Witnesses.
out with a loud voice in most earnest and pitiful manner to the Judges that
he was undone, if they would not have compassion on him, and withal besought
them in all he might to draw Crokey to some composition, or to refer the
cause to them: Whereupon the Judges in compassion of Smith earnestly moved
Crokey to refer the matter to them, but Crokey refused so to do, telling the
Judges that the cause concerned the School more than himself, and for which
he had undertaken, and was engaged both in his duty to God, for the common
good, and by his profession to his late Majesty, the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and others; And these motions by Smith to the Judges, and the Judges to Crokey
were between the time of the Iuries going from the Bar, and giving up their
verdict which was not given up until the next morning, and then it passed for
Copy of the Verdict and Judgment.
Crokeyes said Lessee.

30. That a day or two after the virdict, Crokey by his Council moved the
Court for Judgment and possession according to the aforesaid verdict and
Rules, made by the assent of Smith and his Council as aforesaid, which Rules
and verdict notwithstanding, and notwithstanding also the 4. years delay and
more of that Trial by Smithes means, and the Statutes of Ieofaile made 32. H.
8. C. 30. 2. Edw: 6. C. 32. 18. Eliz. C. 13. by which (as Crokey conceived)
Smith was debarred from using any further delay after the Verdict, yet Smith
(still p^^secuting his importunity (...) to the Judges, and upon his false
suggestions to them) was permitted to speak in arest of Judgment, whereby
Crokey was delayed both the Easter and Trinity Terms next after the Verdict,
and the said Lease of Eiectment (which was for 5. years) being then well-nigh
expired, Crokey in the latter end of August then next following Copy of the
Petition and direction.
Peticioned his Majesty for his Majesty's direction to the Judges in that
behalf, whereupon his Majesty was pleased to signify his pleasure by Sir
John Sucklyn then Master of Requests 3. Sept. 1620. which was, that the Lord
Hobart, and the rest of his Majesty's Judges of the Common pleas should cause
the said Rules of the said Court, so made in open Court by consent of both
parties, to be performed according to the true intent and meaning of the same;
In regard the Lease for trial of the title in the premises made to the said
Bodham, was that month of September to expire. Which directions from his
Majesty Crokey presented to the Lord Hobart before the expiration of the said
Lease for the eiectment, which Directions notwithstanding, and notwithstanding
also the said Rules, and the Statutes of Ieofaile and 4. years delay, before
the said Trial, Crokey could not obtain Judgment, until the said Lease for
Trial of the Title was expired, and then Judgment was awarded; But the said
Lease being by the said delays worn out, Crokey could not by Law have any
Writ for possession according to the said Verdict Rules, and his Majesty's most
gracious Direction and intention in that beholfe so signified, or the said
Statutes of Ieofaile; All which delay and stay of judgment, seeming only to
be but upon a mere suggestion by Smith, which Affedauit to prove Tippets name
so to be.
was that one of the Jurors names called Tippets was mistaken, and in the
Record written Tripets, and though Crokey did often during that delay of
Judgment offer to Witnesses.
prove, and to produce the Record to show the contrary, and in the end did
prove so much.

31. That during the said delay of Judgment, and between the said Verdict and
Judgment Smith (to cross all former proceedings of the School and the
Verdict) upon diverse untrue suggestions compiled in a Petition to his late
Majesty procured a Reference from his Majesty signified by Sir Sidney
Mountagu Master of Requests 25. Iunij 1620. The effect of which Petition and
Reference; Copy of the Petition and Reference.
As also Crokeys Answer thereunto next follow, viz.

NVM. PETITION. ANSWER. 1. That a Trial in Easter Term anno 1620. was had
in the Common Pleas, in an action of eiectione firm brought against Smith, by
Thomas Bodham Lessee to Crokey for a message and 50. Acres of land in
North-Nibley in the County of Gloucester, parcel of the Possessions of the said
School, wherein Crokey claymed a Lease for 12. years. 1. It is true that such
an Action was brought, but it was laid for the said Message and 130. acres and
a Mill, as before was laid by Smith himself in his Informatioon for Champerty
brought in the Common pleas, for which Crokey has offered proof, Sect. 15.
Crokeyes title was for 21. years when he made his first entry before related,
and so offered to be proved, Sect. 12. 2. That Smith had against the said Title
Verdicts, and Non-suites at Law, and Decrees, and Dismissions in Chancery. 2.
That this is most untrue will appear by that which Crokey before in the 14.
Sect. has truly related. 3. That at the last Trial Crokey had urged untruly
and impertinently, that Smith had indirectly endeavored the suppressing of the
School, and sought to convert 3. That Crokey in this urged nothing but truth,
is manifestly proved before in diverse places of this his Relation: But it will
appear more plainly in Crokeys Answer the possessions thereof to his own
private benefit. to the Decree mentioned Sect. 41. Numero decreti 19. 4. That
Smith (not having informed his Council in that point being no way pertinent to
the issue) Crokey obtained a Verdict against Smith, wherein no Judgment was
then entered. 4. Smith had informed his Council in all things, but used all
means possible to stay Judgment, of purpose to wear out the Lease made for
trial of the Title, or to bring Crokey to a composition, as before is truly
set forth. Sect. 29. 30. 31. 32. and 33. 5. That Smith was able to prove he had
been so far from wronging the School, as that he had done many acts to his
great charge for pr^seruing of it, and had bought in tytles that might have
troubled it, and was ready to establish the School in such sort as should be
fit. 5. The whole tract of this Relation and proofs prove this to be very
false, and that Smith has endeavored as much as in him lay to make good to
himself all those bad and feigned tytles against the School and for that
purpose did many acts, and those most vilde and unconscionable, for an incling
whereof, vide Sect. 40. Numero Decreti, 19. 6. Wherefore and for acquitall of
his reputation, and for settling a final end between Smith and Crokey, and for
auoydance of multiplicity of suites and other inconveniences likely to arise,
desired that the consideration thereof might be referred either to the Judges
of the Common Pleas, or to such others as his Majesty should think best for
such end and order as should be fit. 6. Smithes back being at wall, and all
his plots and devises being discovered, and when no better would be, he now to
save his reputation, makes a great show of innocence, his aim being by some
compromise to take off Crokey from further prosecution for the School, which
was labored as much as might be, but all in vain, for Crokey had then, and
still is resolved (by Gods grace) to right both the School and himself, that
neither may be subject to Smithes gins or devotion. 7. That his Majesty's
pleasure was, that the Judges of the Common Pleas taking consideration of the
Petition, should call the said parties before them, and thereupon take order to
settle the state of the School, and for avoiding of further suites to compose
the differences of the said parties if they could. 7. Crokey observed his
Majesty's Reference in all things. But Smith labored the contrary as may well
appear by the use he made of this his Majesty's gracious intention, which was
to settle the School according to the foundation, and to right Crokey, and not
to alter the same, or to prejudice Crokey, and so his Majesty before had
declared by the signification of Sir Daniel Dun, Secretary Naunton, and Sir
John Sucklyn.



32. That Smith used the said Petition and Reference to the intent aforesaid,
and as an Instrument to move the Lord Hobart further to press Crokey to a
composition, and to delay the Judgment, and so it came to pass, for at the
hearing upon Smithes said Petition and his Majesty's Reference thereupon, the
Lord Hobart pressed Crokey to refer the matter to him and the other Judges of
that Court, which Crokey refusing could not obtain Judgment (as before is
said) until the Lease was expired, and then obtained Judgment, but no
possession notwithstanding the said Rules Verdict, and his Majesty's said
express directtions for the same: But Smith procured one Gayre one of Master
Brownlows Clerks to alter the said Rules of Court, by razing and interlyning
the Rules.
Record; Whereupon, and upon proof made and Gayres confession in Court, the
Lord Hobart and that Court committed Smith to the Fleet, for not yielding
possession. But Smith shortly after obtained his liberty, and so was at large
until Crokey complained that Smith had not yielded possession according to the
said Rules, whereupon Smith was committed again, but shortly after was
released without performing the said Rules, and so Crokey cannot obtain
possession to this day.

33. That shortly after the Trial upon Smiths said Petition and his Majesty's
said Reference thereupon, ( viz. in Michaelmasse Term Anno Regni regis Iaecobi
18.) his Majesty's Attorney Decree hereafter. following, Sect. 41
General by direction of the Lord Hobart, exhibited an Information in Chancery
against Smith and Crokey, thereby supposing a confederacy Order.
between Smith and Crokey to take away or pervert the possessions of the said
School, and to supplant the same. To which Information Crokey answered,
Crokeys Answer.
and thereby cleared himself of that suggestion, utterly disclayming all other
interest in or to the School or Lands otherwise then by his said right to
Warrens Court, and his zeal for preservation of the said School and
possessions thereto belonging, and withal by his said Answer charged Smith
with his several practices against the School, and thereby also showed in how
many cases he had defended the said School against Smith and others, that had
gone about to supplant it. But Smith by his Smithes Answer.
Answer to the said Information set forth all his bad tytles herein before
mentioned, and thereto added many untrue suggestions, howbeit upon the said
Information (...) an Order Iniunction.
Iniunction against Crokey, and thereby stopped all Crokeys proceedings in Law
or Chancery in behalf of the School, or in his own behalf ever since
against Smith, which Iniunction Smith himself served upon Crokey, and which
Crokey obeying, Crokey forbore any further proceeding in Law, or Chancery in
that behalf; and by that means all Crokeys endeavors which he had so
faithfully, and zealously followed in behalf of the School were utterly
defeated, contrary to his Majesty's said directions, and contrary to the
Honorable and Charitable endeavors of the said Lord Archbishop, the Lord
Chancellor, and of the Lords Bishops of London and Winton.

34. That upon the motion Confessed Smiths Decree in Chancery. Lord Hobarts
Warrant.
of Master Attorney General (according to the direction of the Lord Hobart)
the Lord Chancellor awarded a Commission upon the Statute of Charitable uses,
leaving the nomination of the Commissioners to the Lord Hobart, Witnesses,
who nominated Commissioners, Crokey not assenting thereunto, But that
Commission (though sealed) was never put in execution, for the Parliament was
then at hand.

Not to be denied.
35. That Smith procured himself to be made a Burgess in that Parliament for
Midhurst in the County of Sussex 130. miles distant from his residence, and
this was anno 16^0.

36. That nevertheless Crokey presented a Bill Bill in Parliament.
in that Parliament against Smith on behalf of the School, and thereupon
obtained an Order in Parliament.
order of Parliament for another Commission upon the Statute of charitable
(uses so long before sought for by Crokey) to inquire according to the Statute
of Charitable uses, and withal ordered that the Lords Bishops of Worcester and
Gloucester and Bristoll, and their Chancellours, and others should be
Commissioners.

Witnesses.
37. That Crokey sued forth that Commission, and going on in the execution
thereof, and having (...) before had (...) losses, at Sea and other ways, and
Crokey being indebted to one Augustine Haruy 50. pound, for which Haruy had
Crokeyes Bond of 100. pound, Crokey was arrested upon that Bond, and detained,
and when Crokey offered to Witnesses.
satisfy the debt Haruy had made over that Bond to one Ashman, and Haruy, and
Ashman Order declaring the same.
together, had made over the same to one Fisher, and so Crokey could not know
with whom to deal, which intricasie (as it seems, and as Crokey is verily
persuaded) came by the means of Smith, or some of his Agents and confederates,
for that Smith had before by himself and others his confederates dealt with
others of Crokeys Creditors to buy Witnesses.
Crokeys debts, and Crokey is the rather so persuaded, for that at the time
Crokey was so arrested, one Bird (whom Smith has long used and employed in his
affairs) and one Archer a servant of Smithes were at that his arrest, and for
that also Smith has been very inquisitiue to know what matters were against
Crokey in the Kings Bench, and for that also Crokey has since endeavored by
all means to give satisfaction whereby to release himself but cannot, Orders
of the Chancery.
as may appear by that which immediately follows; For Crokey when he had so
offered satisfaction, and was notwithstanding so put off, and sued at Law in
the name of Haruy, Crokey co^mensed a suite in Chancery against Haruy and
Ashman in point of equity, and there Crokey having obtained an An Iniunction
under Seal.
Iniunction to stay the said suit at Law, Haruy and the rest without any notice
to Crokey, or any for him by untrue suggestions obtained a Affedauit.
Report, and so the cause was dismissed and that Iniunction was dissolved, and
which was at the very time when Haruy or Ashman should have showed cause, why
they should not have accepted the 50. pound Order.
principal. Whereupon Crokey upon his Petition obtained a Petition Reference.
Reference from his Majesty anno 1620. to Sir Edm: Boyer, and Sir George Paul
Knights to mediate, but Haruie though Affedauit.
served with their Warrant would not appear; Upon that Crokey obtained an
Iniunction under Seal.
Iniunction in the Court of Requests for stay of Haruies proceedings at Law
which Haruy also contemned and proceeded to a Judgment, Crokey upon that
obtained a Protection.
Protection of the Parliament; At which time Crokey going on in the execution
of the said Commission so awarded by order in Parliament was notwithstanding
his said Protection taken Witnesses.
in Execution when the Judges were gone their Circuit, and the Parliament
proroged. And the said debt being so made over, Crokey was so entangled, as
that when Crokey and his friends tendered the whole hundred pounds, and 7.
pound more for costs for his release of imprisonment, no other matter being
against him no penny would be accepted, and so Crokey lay five months in
Prison until the Parliament sat again, and then Petitioning to Petition to
the Parliament and discharge.
the Parliament, was released. And all this trouble came upon Crokey when he
was to have followed that Commission so awarded by order in Parliament and by
Smithes means, as Crokey is verily persuaded for the reasons aforesaid; yet
did not Crokey neglect that Commission, but to his great Witnesses.
charge of threescore pounds and upward employed others therein; And so the
said Commission was executed at Gloucester by the said Bishops and others, and
an Inquisition was found 19. Regni regis Iacobi by the oaths of 17. Jurors all
substantial and men of good estates of the County of Gloucester. Whereupon the
said Commissioners returned the said Commission and Copies of the Commission,
Inquisition, Certificate and Decree.
Inquisition, together with their Decree and Certificate thereupon, the same
being Dated 19. September Anno Regni regis Iacobi 19. which said Certificate
and Decree was to the effect following, viz.

That there appeared before them as well the said Jurors, as also diverse Tenants
of the said School lands and diverse Witnesses to testify on either side: As
also Crokey the prosecutor on behalf of the said School by his Council on
the one part: And the said Smith claiming the inheritance of the lands
belonging to the said School on the other part. Which said Smith at the first
took diverse exceptions against the proceedings upon the said Commission, but
afterward did then and there wayue and relinquish all the same and all other
exceptions whatsoever in that behalf, and consented that the said
Commissioners should proceed to Trial of the right, whereupon there was given
in evidence to the Jury the said 3. Grants of the 16. of June Anno 7. Regni
regis Ricardi 2. of the 1. of July Anno 8. Ricardi 2. and of the 20. October
Anno 8. Ricardi 2. as in the 2. 3. 4. Sections are mentioned; and also an
Inquisition upon an Ad quod Damnum as in the 1. Section is mentioned.

That Smith showed forth the said Grant from his Majesty to him and Gulston
made as in the 17. Section. and Smith then confessed that the lands therein
mentioned were the same that were given as aforesaid to the School, and that
Smith then showed forth also an Exemplification of a Bill, Answer, and
Depositions in the said suite brought by Bishop ( before mentioned in the 17.
Section, and that thereby and by diverse other ways Smith earnestly endeavored
to prove that the said School lands were given to his Majesty by the said
Statute of 1. Edward 6. as Chantry and concealed lands.

That it was inferred by the Council on the Schools behalf. That the said
suite was but a mere practice of Smith to draw the said foundation within the
said Statute of Chantries; and that there was further showed to the said
Commissioners and Jury, a Certificate subscribed by the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and by the Lords Bishops of London and Winton, wherein the said
Smiths practices for suppression of the School inter alia are mentioned.

That against which evidence for the School Smiths Council then urged and
gave in evidence a Copy of the Ordinances and Statutes mentioned to be made
touching the due government of the said School and of the lands wherewith the
same was endowed, and that amongst the said Ordinances Smithes Council stood
especially upon that Ordinance: That the Master of that School for the time
being, should be a Priest and celebrate for the Founders of the school. And
others in the said Ordinance, named after their departure hence, and whereupon
it was earnestly urged by Smithes Council, that forasmuch as in the deed of
foundation. the Lands were given to the Master and two poor Scholars and
their Successors, to their aid and sustentation according to the Ordinances,
to be made by the said Walter, William, and Katherine, that therefore the
foundation of the School and Lands was within the said Statute of 1. Edward 6.

For answer whereunto there was showed forth the opinions of Sir Henry
Yelverton then Attorney General, and Sir Thomas Couentry then Solicitor to
the contrary, and that it was then further answered on the Schools behalf,
that the said Grants and Licenses of the foundation, donation, and Ad quod
Damnum were absolute to the charitable uses therein expressed, without any
mention of any superstitious use at all, and that therein there was no relation
to any Ordinances to be made but only in the Habendum, whose proper Office is
to express the estate; And that therefore the Ordinances ought to extend only
to order the Succession, and not to make a new use, service or consideration.
Besides, it then appeared that the said Ordinances were made long before the
foundation of the said School, and therefore of little regard. And that it was
then also informed that the said School and the Master, and two poor
Scholars in the same, had continually been maintained according to the said
first foundation, until within 16. years last past, which was not denied by
Smith or his Council.

That thereupon the said Commissioners were and are of opinion, that the said
Lands ought to be restored, according to the said charitable and pious
foundation which continued 100. years before the said Statute of Edward 6. and
almost 60. years after, before it was questioned. And therefore according to
the said Statute of charitable uses, and the said Commission to them directed;
They did adiudge and decree, that the said Lands should be restored and
employed to the use of the said School, according to the said first
foundation. But forasmuch as the said Corporation was of late discontinued, and
the Patronage of the said School is claimed by Smith, and was before in
question, whereof the said Commissioners could not determine. And Crokey
claims a Lease of a Tenement parcel of the said School lands, whereof as
they were informed, Crokey has a Verdict and Judgment against Smith, but
cannot (as they were informed, by reason Smith was a Burgess of the
Parliament) obtain an execution thereof, and has (as they were also informed)
exhausted and spent his Estate in the prosecution, and desired recompense for
his great charges therein, they could not adiudge, therefore the same, they
humbly referred to the consideration and direction of the Court of Chancery or
of the Parliament, to which (as they were informed) Crokey had preferred his
Bill for further therein to be done. So as by the said Certificate and Decree
it may plainly appear, that the same Commission was not executed partially or
at randon, but equally and justly, and whereto Smith and his Council there
present consented, and thereby Smith concluded himself, Crokey then being
absent.

38. That shortly after the return of the said Commission so executed as
aforesaid by direction of the Parliament and Inquisition, Certificate and
Decree; thereupon Smith, (perceiving that the Parliament was soon after to be
dissolved) notwithstanding he had formerly wayued all exceptions to the
aforesaid Inquisition, Certificate and Decree, which is by the said
Commissioners certified as aforesaid, yet Smith upon the ending of that
Parliament, obtained an Order. Exceptions. Crokeys Answer to those Exceptions.
Order in Chancery of the 3. of December, to put in new exceptions to the said
Commissioners said proceedings, which Crokey in defense of the School
answered. And the Parliament (being then ended) Crokey applied himself to the
Chancery for a day of hearing, not doubting a confirmation of the said
Inquisition, Certificate and Decree, which day of hearing after much labor
Crokey obtained, And so the cause was by the Lord Keeper ordered Order.
to be heard before his Lordship and Justice Hutton, wherewith Crokey was well
satisfied, but when the cause came to be heard, Justice Chamberlain who
married with the Lady Berkley (Smith being her chief Steward) in stead of
Justice Hutton sat in Court, and so the cause was heard Order.
17. July anno 20. Regni regis Iacobi. At which hearing Smithes exceptions were
argued, and being found frivolous, no resolution was thereupon, yet was not the
said Decree so made by the said Commissioners in that Commission upon the
Statute of charitable uses confirmed, as Crokey expected; but at that time the
Lord Keeper granted Order.
another Commission upon that Information which was exhibited by Master
Attorney General two years before not prosecuted, by reason the same cause
was exhibited by Crokey in a Bill to the Parliament, where the same was Order
in Parliament.
ordered and proceeded upon, as before is said, Sect. 36. Which proceeding last
spoken of in Chancery, quite took away all Crokeys prosecution for the School
a second time. And in which Commission diverse of Smiths Witnesses.
friends were made Commissioners, some of whom had declared themselves open
opposors of the School, and Crokey by their demenour against the due execution
of former Commissions sued out by Crokey in the behalf of the School, which
Commissioners Crokey much Witnesses, Petition, and Answer.
labored both by Petition and motion in Court to have altered, but could not
therein prevail. And yet the Lord Keeper at that hearing very sharply reproved
Smith plainly telling him that he had left no practice vnatempted to supplant
the School as indeed is true.

39. That Smith (going on with that Commission upon the said Information)
practiced again with Haxuy, Ashman, and Fisher, or some of them to imprison
Crokey a second time for the said debt of 50. pound, for which Crokey was
before discharged by Parliament, whereupon Crokey commenced another suite in
Chancery against Haruy and Fisher. That cause was referred to Sir James Hussy,
Report.
who reported that it was reasonable Fisher should accept of the principal,
which was 50. pound. which Fisher refused, whereupon Crokey obtained a Warrant
from the late Lord chief Justice and others his Majesty's Commissioners
appointed to hear the causes of Prisoners for their relief, directed to the
said Haruy and Fisher for their appearauce before the said Commissioners for
Prisoners; But the said Haruy upon the first summons appeared not, nor did
Haruy appear at all, but upon the second summons Fisher appeared. And the
cause being heard Certificate of the Commissioners, and their opinions.
Fisher would not conform himself to any order; Whereupon the Commissioners
gave him further day, and then appearing also, would by no means or mediation
conform himself, but stood out in contempt of that Commission, then affirming
that he would have the extremity of the Law against Crokey, and which the said
Commissioners have The same Certificate.
certified, and of their opinions therein. And further, Fisher gave forth in
speeches, that he cared not for his debt, nor for the whole money upon the
Execution, for he would make dice Affedauit.
of Crokeys bones. And therefore, and for the reasons aforesaid declared in the
37. Section. Crokey is verily persuaded, that Smith had his hand in all these
matters between Crokey and Haruy, Ashman and Fisher, Crokey does know that one
Not to be denied.
Farrer a Clerk in Chancery, was a chief Agent in this confederacy.

40. That the said Commission. Order.
Commission so awarded upon the said Information, did bear Test, 24. July
anno 20. Regni regis Iacobi, and was grounded upon an Order in Chancery of the
23. of November. Anno Regni regis Iacobi 18. which was before the Parliament.
And which Order was granted upon his late Majesty's Reference upon Smiths
Petition, wherein were diverse untrue suggestions, as before Section 31. and
which are also there answered. And that his Majesty's Reference upon so false a
petition, should be so far extended in the behalf of Smith, that sought to
supplant the School, and to do all wrong, and that not only his Majesty's
former References, but also his several directions upon several true
Petitions presented by Crokey in behalf of the School, and Crokey, before
mentioned Section 20. 26. 30. should be altogether neglected and slighted, as
also the directions by Parliament between the time of the said Order, and the
time of the hearing (whereupon the said Order of the 17. of July, Anno 20.
Regni regis Iacobi, which was some 22. months after) Crokey most humbly
submits himself to the consideration of his Majesty, and this high and
Honorable assembly. And whether Smith in this business has showed his power,
his subtilty, and unconscionable practices, and consequently his abuses both to
his late Majesty, and his Magistrates and Judges. For the manner of the
execution of the last mentioned Commission: It was as Crokey before imagined it
would be, when he labored to have had an alteration of the Commissioners
names; But as to that Crokey has fully spoken in his answer to the Decree,
grounded upon the said Information and order of the 23. of November, and upon
the said last mentioned Commission thereupon, Sect. 42. number 4.

41. That for diverse indirect practices and misdemeanors done by the said
Smith and his confederates, tending to the supplanting and overthrow of the
said School, Crokey (being encouraged by the Archbishop of Canterbury, who had
well informed himself of the cause on the behalf of the School) exhibited a
Bill into the Starchamber against Smith and others, and served Smith with a
Subpena before the Parliament in anno 1619. But Smith having attained the place
of a Burgess in Parliament as before is said, Crokey was delayed for the time
of Parliament, and long after (which was about 16. months) before Smith could
be brought to Answer; In the end Smith answered. But so it was with Crokey,
that by that delay of Smithes, and Smithes other said practices together,
Crokey was disabled and decayed in his estate, and imprisoned in manner and by
Smithes means as aforesaid, Sect. 37. And yet Crokey (having a constant care
for restoring the said School and possessions thereof, and being desirous to
discover the practices and misdemeanors by Smith and his confederates,
opposors, and declared enemies thereto set forth by and upon his said Bill in
the Starchamber) took out 5. Subpenaes against the other Defendants. Dated 30.
January, Anno Regni regis Iacobi 20. upon which day the cause upon the said
Information in Chancery came to be heard the second time before the Lord
Keeper, Justice Chamberlain, and Justice Iohnes Assistants. Whereupon the
Court decreed not only contrary to, and against the said Commission so awarded
by Parliament upon the Statute of charitable uses, and against the said
Inquisition, Certificate, and Decree, upon the said Commission, but also
against Crokeys particular right. At which hearing, Crokey was not admitted to
produce any matter in behalf (...) of himself, but was enjoined to forbear
all further suites against Smith; Nor was there any further time spent upon the
said hearing, then opening the said Information, Survey, and Certificate upon
the said Commission so awarded upon the said Information; which Decree was in
effect as follows, And whereto Crokey has particularly Answered, which he
(for your better information in all humility as becomes) does present to the
consideration of your Majesty and this Honorable assembly.

1. That whereas the cause by his Majesty was referred to the Lord Hobart, and
the other two Judges of the Common Pleas, touching the re-establishing of the
School and possessions thereof according to the first foundation, and to
settle a final end between Smith and Crokey for Warrens Court between them
controuerted. 1. This is answered by the said Commission awarded by order in
Parliament, and Certificate, and Decree thereupon, and upon the wauing and
arguing all exceptions, Sect. 27. And by the Rules made by Smithes assent, and
concluding of Errors by like assent, Sect. 16. And by the Verdict and Judgment
thereupon with Smithes commitment for not yielding possession to Crokey
according to the Rules, Sect. 32. and according to Crokeys right affirmed by
Verdicts, Nonsuites, Decrees and Orders in 33. several suites before
mentioned, Sect. 14. 36, 37.

2. And whereas 14, July 18. Regni regis Iacobi, the Lord Hobart and other
Judges, did after several hearings direct, that an Information should be
exhibited in the Court of Chancery against Smith and Crokey for the said
causes. 2. It seems to Crokey, that this Direction is derogatory, as to the
words of that Reference, which was for avoiding of further suites, and not
warranting any or other, then were then depending.

3. And that in Michaelmasse Term following, an Information was exhibited,
whereunto Smith and Crokey did in the same Term Answer, and thereupon an Order
was made the 23. of November in the same Term whereby a Commission was to be
awarded to Commissioners to be named by the Lord Hobart for surueying of the
Schoole-lands, and of the Lands controuerted between Crokey and Smith. And
because Crokey attended not but betook himself to other courses, did not
nominate the Commissioners. But the Lord Keeper i^. Iulij 20. Regni regis
Iacobi, did confirm the former Order of the 23. of November: And that his
Lordship did in open Court nominate the Commissioners, and on the 19. of the
same July, his Majesty's Attorney did give special directions for execution
of the said Commission. 3. An Information was so exhibited, and orders so made,
howbeit Crokey had good reason to go on in that course upon the Statute of
Charitable uses wherein he had begun, rather then to assent to any other, much
less to any thing that might have withdrawn him from that course, and whereof
his Majesty, the Parliament, the Lord Archbishop, the Lord Chancellor, and
others reverend Bishops were possessed, and had taken notice, and wherein the
Parliament had given order; whereupon a Commission was awarded, and executed
duly: And upon that an Inquisition, Certificate, and Decree were made and
returned, which was a year before the said Order of the 1^. of July, and the
order of the 23. of November was 16. months before that of the 1^. of July, so
as Smith stirred not upon that Information during the Parliament, but it no
sooner was ended, but Smith then began again to revive and set on foot all his
former practices, all which, (...) Crokey had reason to Withstand.

4. That accordingly the said Commission was sued forth, and in September
following it was executed with great care and exactness and a Survey made,
which in Michaelmasse Term following was returned with the Commissioners
Certificate, declaring that they did appoint others sufficient men to Survey
the premises with the Metts and bounds, appointing them to attend with their
Survey at Wooton on the 10. of the same September: At which time they appointed
for the Survey (being approved of by Smith and Crokey) did deliver in the
Survey, which was read in the presence of Smith and Crokey, and of the Mayor of
Wooton and diverse others of the chief Townsmen there, and of many others sent
for at the instance of Crokey, and examined as witnesses upon their oaths,
upon Interrogatories by him exhibited, which upon their examina^ions did agree
with the Counterparts of Leases of the said possessions voluntarily produced by
Smith, and that they found the Survey to be just against which, neither of the
defendants or others their present did or could take any exceptions. 4. Crokey
did neither approve of that Survey, nor Certificate annexed, nor did the
Commissioners particularly examine Witnesses upon the Interrogatories, then
preferred by Crokey as the Commission required, though Crokey much pressed them
thereto nor otherwise, then when as the Surveyors had brought in their surely,
the same was read over, and then the Commissioners asked them then present
(which were only such as Smith would have there) whether they could say any
thing to the contrary, without any further or other examination, whereat Crokey
showed himself much discontented, and took exceptions at the then
proceedings, and the same altogether disliked and so told the Commissioners and
some there assembled, nor was there any depositions or examinations upon oath,
nor be any returned or upon Record in that cause, nor did Smith then produce
all the Courterparts of the Leases of the School lands, but only of such
parcels as he pleased, and would not suffer any Tenant of the School to
produce any other, nor did Crokey allow of the Surveyors, for they had made the
Survey before Crokey did know of any such matter, and they were Smithes near
neighbors and friends, and such as had some dependency on Smith: nor did there
appear above 6. or 7. of 39. Tenants that Crokey would have had there, and for
which purpose he tendered their names to the Commissioners in writing, but they
would not receive it, nor send for more then for such as Smith would have. And
in this manner was that Commission executed.

5. That the substance of which Survey declared in effect that the possessions
of the School did consist of 31. houses and 162. Acres and 10. pertches, And
that the yearly Rent of the premises then was 21. pounds 4. shillings 6.
pence. and that the yearly value of the premises to be improued above the said
Rents, was 121. pounds 17. shillings 2. pence, And that Warrens Court contained
one Message, one fulling Mill, and 54. Acres, and 10. pertches, and that the
yearly value of the same then was 38. pounds 1. shilling 4. pence, besides 48.
shillings and 12. shillings payable out of the same, And that of a Lease
formerly made thereof, there was then vnexpired 10. years at Lady day next
ensuing. 5. Smithes Patent from his Majesty does mention 39. Tenements as in
truth there be, and the land belonging to Warrens Court by Smiths own showing
amounts to 130. acres, as in the Section, and the whole value of the School
lands is certified by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops London and
Winton, to be 300. pound per annum or thereabouts, Crokey had 21. years in
Warrens Court, when he first began suite against Smith, But further as to the
present Reuenew of the School Crokey does affirm that it is at this day (re
vera) worth about 300. pound per annum and all in the disposition of Smith,
(...) as for Leases in being there be none, but only the remainder of the old
Lease of 88. years in Warrens Court belonging of right to Crokey, and such
Leases as Smith has (...) made. As for the Lease of 99. years supposed to be
bought by Smith of the Duports, that Lease is fraudulent and so always has
been found.

6. That upon the Information, Answers, Commission, Certificate, and Survey,
and by an Order made by his Lordship 12. December, in the said 20. year of his
late Majesty's reign for using of depositions formerly taken between Smith and
Crokey in Chancery, the cause was heard, and at large debated by his Majesty's
Attorney General in behalf of the School, Sergeant Crew, Sir John Walter,
Master Finch Recorder, and 6. others for Smith, and Sergeant Richardson, Sir
Laurence. Hide, and Master Farewell for Crokey. And upon the opening of the
Information, Answers, reading of the Certificate and Survey, and upon the long
debating and deliberate hearing of the cause and all the circumstances thereof,
the truth of the cause appeared to be. 6. This order as also the order therein
mentioned of the 17. of July. and the Certificate in that order of the 17. of
July mentioned, were made (as it seems to Crokey) to no other intent but to
bring in Crokey, and to make him liable to that suite brought into Chancery
upon the said Information for Crokeys own particular cause touching Warrens
Court. At which time Smith was imprisoned for not yielding to Crokey possession
according to the said Rules in Court, But there was then no debating or
deliberate hearing of the cause, nor was the cause otherwise heard then the
opening of the Information, Answers and reading of the Certificate and Survey
according to the Commission awarded upon the Information, howsoever the words
of the Decree do make show of.

7. That in 8. Ricardi 2. Katherine Lady Berkley Widow did obtain of the said
King and of Thomas Lord Berkley then Lord of the fee License for founding the
School, to consist of a Master and two poor Scholars Collegiatly to live
together, and to have a perpetual succession, And for indowing the School
with the said Lands 2. Feoffees were trusted by the Lady for purchasing the
said Lands, to hold according to certain ordinances by them to be made, and
that accordingly the School was founded, and the Lands assured by the Feoffees
to the Master and Scholars and their Successors for ever; to be holden
according to the said Ordinances: And that the School and possessions thereof
were employed according to the said foundation and institution, until the 37.
year of K. Hen. 8. 7. Crokey with this does agree in all, saving that there
were no ordinances made but long before the foundation, To which Ordinances the
foundation has no relation, nor were there any Ordinances to be made by the
foundation, saving the Habendum therein, which only declared the estate, as by
the Certificate and Decree upon the Commission for charitable uses expressed,
and before related in the 37. Section, Nor was the foundation or institution
discontinued until Smith began his practices to supplant the School. And Cold
well was lawfully presented and made Master of the School, and the Lease by
him granted of Warrens Court was good in law: there having been 33. several
Suites in Affirmation of the same.

8 That on the 18. of May in the said 37. year, Robert Coldwell then
Schoolmaster of the said School did demise Warrens Court unto William Thomas
his Executors and Assigns from Lady day then last past for 88. years for the
yearly Rent of 48. shillings, and to the chief Lord 12. shillings per annum.
And that the said Lease was by the last will of William Thomas, annum 3. and 4.
P^^^^ and Maria bequeathed to Alice his wife for her life, and after her
decease to his Daughter Grace for her life, and after to remain to Richard,
William, Katherine, Ioice, Elizabeth and Mary, children of the said Alice by
one John Moore her former husband, and made Alice his Executrix and dyed. 8
Crokey confesses all this to be true.

9 That afterward Alice intermarried with one Reignold Aphowell, and that
Reignold and Alice anno 5. Elilizab. did demise the premises to the said
Richard Moore for 21. years, and that after in the 13. year of Q. Elizab.
Reignold did grant the remainder and Rent, and all his estate in Warrens Court
to John Sprint then husband of Joyce. And afterward in the said 13. year of
Q. Elizab. dyed, that John Sprint in the same year did grant all his title to
Alice, and that Alice anno 21. Eliz. did grant all her estate to Grace, and
Grace being possessed anno 39. Eliz. did intermarry with Smith and dyed; And in
this manner Smith made his title to Warrens Court, and affirmed that he had
diverse Verdicts and Nonsuites at the Common Law, and one Decree, and three
Dismissions in Chancery for confirmation of his said title. 9. Whilst Grace,
Smiths first wife lived, Smith claimed no further or longer interest in Warrens
Court then for her life. And as for Sprints title, it is but a mere suggestion
and foysted into this Decree, which Smith could never prove: Nor did Smith in
this suite upon the Information (being a part of the ground of this Decree)
once endeavor or offer to prove any such title. Nor did Smith ever speak of
that title of Sprints, until all the rest of his tytles for the inheritance of
all the School lands failed him, upon which his tytles of inheritance to all,
he stood so long as possibly he might, and until he perceived all his
practices for maintenance thereof, were discovered by Crokey, as may appear by
that before related, Sect. 17. And by the Certificate and Decree upon the
Commission for charitable uses, Sect. 37. numero 1. 2. Besides it appears by
the several Answers of Alice and Grace in Chancery, Anno 26. Eliz. to the
Bill of all the other Legatees, that they made no further or other claim then
for their several lives formerly related, Sect. 6. 7. and 8. Nor has there
ever any Verdict, Nonsuite, Decree, or dismission passed in affirmation of any
title controuerted between Smith and Crokey.

10. That Crokey made his title to Warrens Court by a Deed from Ioice (being
Suruiuour of the 6. Legatees) by a Deed dated anno 11. Regni regis Iacobi, and
did affirm that he had a Verdict for his title. 10. Crokey does affirm this
to be the true and only title, for which he has had a final Trial, Verdict,
and Judgment upon a deliberate hearing, as is at large before related, Sect.
16. and 32. for which Smith has been twice committed to the Fleet for not
yielding possession to Crokey.

11. That it did appear to the Court that anno 34. Eliz. John Duport being
Schoolmaster, did demise Warrens Court and other the School lands (except one
Chamber and the Schoole-house) unto his brother James Duport for 99. years for
40. shillings per annum; And that James Duport, anno 2. Iacobi for 100. pound
fine, did make a Lease to Smith of Warrens Court for the residue of 99. years
10. days only excepted, and in 6. Iacobi, James Duport did for 300. pound
grant unto Smith his whole estate in all the premises. 11. If the School and
Possessions thereof, were never since 37. H. 8. employed according to the
foundation and institution, then had Smith no reason to deal with any title
from the Duports, much less now to urge any such, But in that Smith bought in
the Duports tytles, he must needs show his great desire to supplant the
School, and to get the possessions thereof, and thereby to ecclips all other
just tytles. And Smith (being a Lawyer) did always well know that the Duports
had no title to any part of the School lands, nor lawfully placed in the
School, Nor did Smith ever give 100. pound for all his tytles. As for the 40.
shillings Rent supposed by Smith, that was a rent only agreed upon by John and
James Duport, whereas the ancient Rent of the School was 23. pound per annum,
which James Duport deputy Schoolmaster to John Duport, did receive until
Smith had bought in manner as aforesaid the Duports out.

12. That it did further appear, that an Inquisition was found anno 30.
Elizab. That all the said Lands were come to the Queen by the Statute of
Chantryes made 1. Edward 6. And that the said Q. 21. Marcij anno 31. did grant
all the premises to Charles Badgehot and Bartholomew Yardley and their heirs
under the yearly rent of xj. shillings. And that from them it came to Andrew
Phillips, Thomas Chamberlain, and Edward Bishop and their heirs. And in the
15. year of his late Majesty's reign, Smith having been in possession of
Warrens Court ever since his said Marriage, did for 200. pound buy in the
several tytles and pretended estates. And for strengthening his title, did for
5. pound obtain another Patent upon the Commission of defective Tytles for xj.
shillings rent. 12. Smith practiced upon these tytles, as before upon the
Duports tytles, well knowing all to be naught as may well appear by the suite
brought in the Exchequer between him and Bishop, Sect. 17.

13. That it did also appear to the Court, that Smith did take a course for
establishing the School (as formerly for 9. years before he had increased the
Rent of 40. shillings to 12. pound per annu^ to the Schoolmaster) And that
whereas at that time by reason of the long Lease for 99. years the reuenew of
the School was but forty (...) per annum, Smith did convey all the Premises
discharged of the long Lease, except that which lies in Nibley together with
the fourth part of fines upon Leases, and all the residue to other charitable
purposes to certain Feoffees and their heirs to the use of the Schoolmaster
and his Successors; And that Smith both in his Answer, and then in Court
submitted his tytles to the disposing of the Court. 13. That when Smithes back
was at wall, and that he knew not what way to turn him by the opposition of
Crokey. Then Smith) to color and face out the matter as he ever before did)
might make such a show to the world when he meant nothing less, for if he had
meant truly to the School, and intended to have maintained her first
foundation, he would never have so practiced to have supplantad it as before is
showed. And well he might submit all his tytles to the disposition of the
Chancery (none of them being good but all fraudulent, and he having no right at
all) there consisting his only hope when all others had failed him. Nor has
Smith laid open or submitted all his tytles to the Chancery, for that title
from Cowper, Browning, and Bolton, Smith has concealed and still does conceal
the same, with intent no doubt, but the same to revive and stand upon in time
to come, for the inheritance of all the School lands when all matters now in
hand shall be dead and forgotten. As for the 40. shillings and 12. pound Rent,
the same is answered before, Numero.

14. And although Crokey for his own ends had prosecuted some Commissions upon
the Statute of charitable uses, yet it appeared by Affedauit Orders, and his
own Answer, that in the 16. of his Majesty's reign he did give in evidence
at Wickwar to the Commissioners for concealed Lands, and that upon his oath and
evidence by him produced, all the premises were found to be concealed, and that
he took a Bond of 2000. pound of the prosecutors of the said Commission. That
the Fee farm of Warrens Court should be conveyed to him and his heirs at the
yearly Rent of 40. shillings. 14. Crokey did not so prosecute for his own
ends, but in behalf of the School only, for Crokey did well know his title
to Warrens Court to be good for the Statute of 1. Edw: 6. maintains all
Leases of Chantryes made before the 28. day of Nouemb 37. Hen. 8. as was the
said Lease under which Crokey claymes. For the Aff^dauit supposed to be made,
Crokey cannot believe there was any such, and if any such matter were, then
whether the same should be so material, as whereupon to decree any point is
the question, But Crokey too well does know that Smith was never without
Affedauit Instruments. And for the Orders Crokey has before answered in the
26. Sect. Nor does any such matter appear by Crokeys Answer as is here foysted
into the Decree for Crokey by his Answer cleared himself. And for the evidence
supposed to be given in by Crokey, that is cleared, Sect. 22. and 23.

15. That upon consideration of all which the Lord Keeper and Court of Chancery
assisted by Justice Chamberlain and Justice Jones were of opinion, that the
said Lands did not come to the Crown by the Statute of Chantryes, And that the
said long Leases are void in Law and equity, for either the Master and
Scholars are a Collegiat Corporation, and then must join in the Leases, which
they did not, or else the said Master was presentatiue, and in that regard the
said Leases being made only by the Master and not confirmed by the Bishop of
Worcester, by whom by the foundation he was to be admitted, instituted, and
sworn to perform the said Ordinances are void also. And for that the long
Leases tend to the destruction of the School contrary to the intention of the
Founder. 15. It is not likely or probable, that it was the meaning of the
Founders, that the 2. Scholars should be joined with the Master in letting
Leases, for that there is no such matter in the Institutions or Ordinances, but
thereby the two Scholars were to be admitted at 10. years at least, and to
continue there but 6. years, and they were by the Ordinance subject to
correction by the Master. But it is plain, that the School lands were always
letten by the Schoolmaster only; and for the Bishops confirmation of the
Leases, it is as unlikely, nor can it be proved that there was ever any such
thing, nor does the foundation mention any such matter; nor were there any
Ordinances made upon by or after the foundation, but long before, nor was the
same ever in question or any part of the land. And yet Crokeys Ancestors held
Warrens Court for 70. years under Coldwells Lease: And therefore it plainly
appears, that all the said points in this part of the Decree are but only
mere suppositions and suggestions by Smith to delude the Court.

16. Therefore it was decreed that all the said tytles both under the said
Letters Patents and also the said Leases, and all other Leases and estates made
by any Master should be void, And all Bonds and Covenants made for securing
the same should be delivered up and cancelled; And that the same should be
called in, and all the possessions re-established in the School, and all the
lands mentioned in the said Certificate and Survey were decreed to the School.
And that if any other lands should be discovered for the School, the Court
would take such further order for establishing thereof to the School as should
be fit. And that all the premises should be surrendered to his Majesty, that
the same might be regranted to be employed for the establishment of the
School, and the Master and Scholars there, and for the maintenance of a
greater number of Scholars, according to the increase of the Revenues as
occasion should be. 16. This clause takes away Crokeys lawful title, It
makes void the final Trial, and Verdict and Judgment duly obtained and the
Rules of Court for possession by consent, as in the 16. sect. It alters the
ancient foundation, which appropriateth the Patronage of the School to the
heirs Males of the said Thomas Lord Berkley and the inheritance of the School
lands to the Schoolmaster of that School lawfully presented as the same
contin^ed for about 200. years, and to transfer the said Patronage and
inheritance by color of such a Surrender Crokey doubts whether it be
warrantable by the Statute of charitable uses, and whether the foundation may
be altered but by act of Parliament. And what a reach Smith has in this
point of the Decree for getting in all his Bonds and Covenants which he has
run into for maintenance of his unjust title to the Scho^le lands every one
may discern.

^7. And because it appeared by the Survey that diverse Messuages and parcells
of Land, part of the premises are and long had been in the possession of
diverse, whereof many are of mean ability having paid fines. And if they should
be removed from the same would impouerish them, It was therefore decreed, that
they should have reasonable Leases (not exceeding three lives) made to them
without fine for the increased Rent of a third part of the yearly value
thereof according to the said Survey, and the opinion of the said Judges
Assistants, and Master Attorney general, to whom his Lordship referred the
perfecting of this Decree. 17. The Fines that they have paid have been paid to
Smith, and therefore Smith should make them good being taken wrongfully, and
that to make new Leases other than according to the first foundation: Crokey
makes a question whether it be contrary to the meaning of the Founders. It is
not likely that Master Attorney General had any hand in this Decree, as it is
entered upon record. But that it was done by Smith himself and his Council.
And very likely it is that Smith has used some slight in procuring the same to
be thus entered. And that herein he has abused the Court, the Judges and
Master Attorney not caring whom he abuses to work his own ends.

And because Smith was in quiet possession of Warrens Court for diverse years
after his marriage, And that by buyin the long Lease of 99. years, and estates
of the Patentees he had been at 700. pound charge, and had bestowed great
charges in building, and that many parcells of the School lands lie in
several places intermixed and enclosed with his own Fee simple lands. 18.
Smith had never any quiet or lawful possession longer then his wife Grace
lived, who dyed about 12. years since, and then Crokey claimed and entered, and
ever since has sued for that his right to Warrens Court: Nor has Smith been
at above 100. pound charge as Crokey is informed in buying all the said bad
tytles, what he has bestowed in building was but to outface the world, and the
better to color those his bad tytles. Nor do the lands lie intermixed, but
those lands that Smith pretends to lie so, or the most thereof are lands also
belonging to Warrens Court (for Smith has made no account how he came by any
other lands there) and are the residue of the 130. Acres which Smith himself
has confessed as before is said in the 15. Sect. though in this business he
has caused the same to be found but at 58. Acres and 10. perches that Survey
being upon Smiths own setting out, and wherein Crokey had no hand nor thereof
any knowledge until it was done.

19. And that it appeared his intention was not to diminish the Revenues of the
School being by the said long Lease brought so low as 40. shillings per annum,
but to increase the same, It was therefore decreed that Smith should have an
estate in Warrens Court and of the intermixed lands in Nibley made to him for
such three lives or for years determinable upon such three lives as he should
nominate without impeachment of waste for a like increased Rent of a third
part. And the heirs and Assigns of Smith from time to time for ever upon
request, should have an estate of the same renewed to them in manner and for
the Rent aforesaid. 19. It plainly appears that Smiths intention was not
only to diminish the Revenue of the School, but utterly to supplant, for so
it appears.

1. By buying the Duports tytles mentioned, Sect. 10.

2. By buying the tytles of Cowper, Browning, and Bolton, mentioned, sect. 10.

3. By letting Leases of the School lands as his own, sect. 11.

4. By keeping of Courts in his own name as Lord and owner of all School
lands, sect. 11.

5. By his fraudulent suite brought in the Exchequer, wherein he claymed a Fee
simple in all the School lands, sect. 17.

6. By buying of Bishops title, and taking a Patent upon the Commission of
defective tytles of all the School lands, sect. 17.

7. By his Information brought against Crokey and the said Ioice in the
Common-Plea^, wherein he set forth a seizen in fee of Warrens Court, sect. 15.

8. By his Bill or Information in Star Chamber against Crokey and others,
wherein he made like claim, sect. 17.

9. By managing all those tytles from time to time, and so consequently his
own title for the inheritance of all the School lands, sect. 17. and
Certificate and Decree upon the Commission for charitable uses, sect. 37.
numbers 1. 2. 4. 6. and per ordinum 23. Non. sect.

10. By his laboring to make the School lands Chantry lands, sect. 17. 21. 22.

11. By crossing and withstanding at several times his late Majesty's
directions, and the directions and proceedings in Parliament Anno 1621. and of
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lords Bishops of London and Winton, the
Lord Chancellor and Lord Keeper, and all Crokeys endeavors in behalf of the
School, and by multiplicitie of causeless suites, and his many other
practices and delays, all which being before manifestly proved. By decreeing
and such an estate to Smith and his heirs, is utterly to take away Crokeys
title already duly determined and adjudged by Law, for Crokey after 12. years
opposition by Smith and against the opinion of the Lord Keeper mentioned, sect.

20. And because the said Leases were thereby dammed, therefore the Court did
forbear to determine the title between the Defendants otherwise then by
Decreeing the said Leases to be void, And did further order that all suites
and prosecutions touching the title between the Defendants should cease and
several Injunctions were awarded against the Defendants accordingly. 20. Here
is no difference made between Crokeys just title proceeding from the lawful
Lease of 88. years made by Coldwell and the unlawful Lease of 99. years made
by Duport 60. years after, and it had been all one to Crokey if the Court had
in plain terms taken away his title as to damme the Lease under which he
claymeth and by which he has right, and to debar him of all further suites
for his relief; As for debarring Smith from suites against Crokey there was no
cause, and therefore that is but a shadow laid on by Smith to make the
Injunctions seem equal.

21. And whereas the Judges and Master Attorney did certify his Lordship that
upon every Tenants improuement the third part will amount to the increase of
47. pound per annum, out of which they thought fit to assign 26. pound 13.
shillings 4. pence per annum, to the Schoolmaster and five pound a piece for
4. Scholars, and their stipends and number might increase as the Revenue
should increase by expiration of estates. It was therefore decreed, that 26.
pound 13. shillings 4. pence should be allowed to the Schoolmaster, But with
this that the Lord Keeper did think fit, and so did decree that there should
be five Scholars, and the stipend should be four pound per annum a piece. And
the stipend and number to increase as should the Reuenew; Saving always to the
Court power to direct and settle the Regulement and establishment of the
School. 20. Here is no difference made between Crokeys just title proceeding
from the lawful Lease of 88. years made by Coldwell and the unlawful Lease
of 99. years made by Duport 60. years after, and it had been all one to
Crokey if the Court had in plain terms taken away his title as to damme the
Lease under which he claymeth and by which he has right, and to debar him of
all further suites for his relief; As for debarring Smith from suites against
Crokey there was no cause, and therefore that is but a shadow laid on by Smith
to make the Injunctions seem equal.

May it please this High and Honorable Assembly to observe, that the said last
recited Decree is grounded upon a Commission of Suruay without examination of
any Witnesses upon Oath as the Commission required, neither are any depositions
of Record in that cause nor the Suruayers sworn.

Which Commission of Suruay and Decree, proceeded by virtue of Smiths cautelous
Petition to his late Majesty and Reference.

Whereupon the late Lord Keeper granted the said Commission of Suruay as
aforesaid, which is merely repugnant to the directions of the Lords Grace of
Canterbury, and proceedings of the late Lord Chancellor and diverse other
Reverent Bishops, and contrary to the directions of the most Honorable the
higher House of Parliament, and the proceedings thereupon by Reverent Bishops
and others, according to the Statute of Charitable uses, as by the inquisition
Decree and Certificate found for the said School appears.

Whereby Crokey humbly prays this Honorable Assembly to take in
consideration.

had little expectation of any good success by that suite in Starchamber,
being so foiled by that Decree in the ground and maine of all his suites
against Smith. And yet Smith (upon Crokeys forbearance in that Starchamber
cause) procured 52. pounds costs to be taxed against Crokey, though Crokey
proceeded no further then to Bill and Answer of 3. Defendants, with which 52
pounds Costs Crokey is now also charged in the Kings Bench.

Matters thus standing, and being in this conflict between Crokey and Smith.
May it please your Majesty, and the rest of this high and Honorable assembly
to consider by how many ways, all in places Judicature and authority may be
deluded, and abused in the administration of Justice, by Impostors, practices,
plotters, and deceivers, that bend their minds and endeavors wholly to
injury and oppression, without regard whom they delude, deceive, and abuse,
for their own impious ends, seeming not to dread any punishment either in this
life, or in the life to come, most impiously outfacing and deluding all Justice
and authority, as in this man Smith, your Majesty and the rest by this plain
Relation may discern.

Crokeys most humble suite wherefore, is in the conclusion as in the beginning:
And that the matters before spoken of, and wherewith Smith is charged, may be
examined by this high and Honorable Assembly that the right may appear, and
so be adjudged and determined, and in such sort as shall seem most fit,
wherein Crokey under reformation particularly offers to consideration the
particulars ensuing, viz.

That the Commission, Inquisition, Certificate, and Decree, upon the Statute of
charitable uses by direction of Parliament 16. may be maintained and
prosecuted; and that the said last recited Decree in Chancery to every point
whereof Crokey has answered, may be made void by authority of this present
Parliament.

That the School and possessions thereto belonging may be reduced according to
the meaning of the Founders, with such other additions as this high Court shall
hold meet and agreeable to the time.

That (...) Peter Bird, placed upon part of the School lands by Smithes
means, and Cowper now placed as Schoolmaster may be removed, for that they
have been, and are practicers with Smith in all or most of his designs for
supplanting the School, and his instruments always ready to execute any evil
act for Smith.

But what order it shall please your Majesty and this high Court to award for
Crokey, in respect of his long and great expense of his whole estate and more,
to the value of 2200. pounds for the rectifying of the said School, and
defending the title of the School, to the utter neglect of all his own
affairs, being before a Merchant of good credit and trading.

And for Crokeys right and possession to and in Warrens Court according to his
^^^^ence, and according to the Final trial, Verdict, Judgment, and Rules in
Court, and according to his Majesty's directions mentioned in Section the 30.

And for the mean profits of Warrens Court worth 80. pound per annum, by Smith
wrongfully kept from him since Crokeys first entry, which is 12. years.

And for the 297. pounds Costs which Smith was to pay Crokey for wrong vexation
in Starchamber some 7. years detained, as by the Dismission and several
Orders, and Bill of Costs mentioned, Section 18.

For the remitting of the 52. pounds Costs obtained by Smith unduly in
Starchamber against Crokey upon Bill and Answer mentioned in the 41. Section,
for Crokeyes great labor and toil both of his body and mind 12. years
together, with the wasting and consuming of his vital spirits in bearing the
assaults and insufferable wrongs of Smithes impiety, and improbiety in the
preservation of the said School being moved thereunto for Gods cause, and no
benefit to himself without contribution of any, with the blame of many of his
dearest friends for so great earnestness in a common cause generally neglected
and violently opposed, that unless the special mercy and great goodness of
God had assisted and strengthened his weakness in so sore a conflict, in so
just a cause, which Crokey holds to be more precious then life it self, (as
in the 4. Chapter of Ecclesiasticus the 28. verse) Strive for the truth unto
death, and defend Justice for thy life, and the Lord God shall fight for thee
against thine enemies.

Unto all which Crokey most humbly submits himself.


