A Sermon made in the Chapel at the Gylde Halle in London, the.xxix. day of
September, 1574. before the Lord Mayor and the whole state of the City, then
assembled for the choosing of their Mayor that should then succeed in the
government of the same City. Coneionatore Roberto Croleo.

Perused and licenced, according to the Quoenes Majesty's Iniunction.

Imprinted at London by John Awdeley. 1575

TO THE RIGHT honorable sir James Hawes Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London, and to his worshipful Brethren the Aldermen, with the whole state of
the same City, Robert Crowley wishes continuance in the fear of GOD.
BEing by the Lord Mayor (that then was) appointed to occupy the place of a
better, in your Chapel at the Gilde hall, on that day wherein; according to
your yearly custom you were gathered together to make choice of one to rule
your City, for the year then to come: I did bend all my speeches to the
instruction of as many of you as were to give voices in that Election, and of
him that was then to be elected. And although I did not then so well like of
mine own doing that I could think it meet to be penned and published to the
view of all that would read it: yet I perceived afterward, that many amongst
you were desirous to have it in writing, that it might remain in memory, and
be a rule for you and your posterity to follow in yout yearly Elections.
Being therefore requested by one (that seemed to me most desirous of this
common commodity) to set down in writing that which I had then spoken: I
could not deny that so honest and reasonable a request. But being then
oppressed with manyfold exercises, I differred the doing thereof almost to
long: even till memory began to be amazed, when she should make report to my
pen of those words which she not before wylled to retain. And then I began to
feel, that age cannot easily do that, whereof youth makes small account.

Yet notwythstandyng I caused my Memory to search out all her corners, and to
bring forth that which she found? and so have I penned (as my Memory tells
me) almost the same words that I then spoke, and in the same order that I then
did speak them.

And because I thought that this instruction might serve as well for all other
Elections, as for that which then was in hand: I thought good to add an
Appe^dix, wherein I have applied the whole matter of every Election to be made,
of any that must serve in any public calling, either Ecclesiastical or Civil.

If this my labor have or shall do any good, the praise thereof is due to God,
the doer of all that is well done: who first moved the minds of your Rulers to
think me meet to occupy that place at that time, and my mind to conceive and
utter such matter there, and the mind of him that first moved me to conceive
it in writing, and the minds of them that have thought it meet to be
imprinted.

To GOD therefore especially, I do dedicate this my labor, and generallye to
all you, whom he has herein used as his instruments: Beseeching his Majesty
to accept of that which he has made me able to do, and to employ both it and
me to the commodity of his Church, and you to take at his hand the fruit of
this my labor, whom he has in this matter used as his instrument to instruct
you how ye ought to deal, not only in this one yearelye election of your
Mayor, but in all your other Elections also.

The Lord Jesus Christ (whose Servants we all do profess to be) direct us by
his holy Spirit: that in all our works, words, and thoughts we may seek to
set forth the glory of his (and by him) our heavenly Father. To whom, with
the same his only begotten son, and the holy spirit be al honor and glory
for evermore. Amen.

Yours to command in the Lord, Robert Crowley.

A Sermon made in the Chapel at the Gilde hall in London, the.xxix. day of
September, in the year of our Lord God. 1574. before the Lord Mayor and the
whole state of the City, then assembled for the choosing of their Mayor that
should then succeed in the government of that City: Concionatore Roberto
Croleo.
IN the Psalm. 139. it is written thus, Psalm. 139
in the latter end of the Psalm: Do not I hate the^ (O Lord) that hate thee?
And am not I grieved with them that rise up against thee? Yea I hate them right
sore: even as though they were mine own enemies. Try me (O God) and seek the
ground of my heart: Prove me, and examyne my thoughts. Look well if there be
any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.

That Psalm (dearly beloved in our savior Christ) in the latter end whereof
these four verses are written, being in number.139. is one of those Psalms,
which are by order appointed to be read this morning at the Morning prayer: I
have thought good therefore to take a parcel thereof to entreat of, as offered
by order.

The Prophet David does in this Psalm show him self to be myndfull of the
marvelous and mercyful providence of God toward al his creatures: but
especially toward Man: in whose creation, preservation and government, he
does show both his infinite wisdom, and almighty power.

He shows him self also to be myndeful of the infinite and incomprehensible
nature of God, which cannot be comprehended in heaven, or earth, or in any
deep places: but fylleth all places, and is filled or comprehended of none. He
fylleth all, and contains all: and is not filled or contained of any. If I go
up into heaven (says he) thou art there: if I go down into hell, thou art
there to: Yea, if I shall take the wings of the morning (that is, if I shall
make as much speed as man can make to flee from thee) and so flee into the
uttermost parts of the sea, even there also thy hand shall lead me, and thy
right hand shall hold me. Whether shall I go from thy spirit, and whither shall
I flee from thy presence?

He shows also, how he estemeth of the dear friends of God, and on the
contrary, how he does hate and abhor Gods enemies: such as do hate and rise
up against God.

Thus you have heard a brief sum of this whole Psalm: that is, of the
chief points contained in this Psalm, being in number.139.

I do not entende (at this time) to entreat of all these things, or of any
one of them: but to apply these four verses (which I have now read, being the
last of this Psalm) unto this present Auditory, and to the present occasion of
this assemble. For I think it the duty of as many as shall occupye such places
as this, to apply all their speeches to their Auditories, and to the occasions
of their assembling.

Considering therefore that this Auditory is assembled to choose one to rule the
rest: I have thought it meet to apply the words of the Prophet in these
four last verses of this Psalm, to them that be assembled, and to the present
occasion of assemblyng.

And herein I must speak of another manner of hatred then the Prophet meant of
in these words, when he says: Have not I hated them that hate thee. etc. And
I am occasioned so to do by that which I read in the first chapter of the
book of prophecies of Malachie the prophet, where it is written thus: Mala. 1.
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.

It is not meant here, that ye Lord hated Esau with that hatred that David
speaks of in these words of the Psalm which I have in hand: but that he did
so hate him, that he would not choose him to be Lord over his brethren,
notwithstanding that by nature the birthright did belong unto him, for he was
the elder and the first borne.

And Jacob he loved so, that notwithstanding he was the younger, the honor of
birthright was given unto him, and he was made Lord over his brethren.

After this sort also did the Lord hate ye elder sons of Iesse, 1. Reg. 16.
which were in number.vij, and loved David that was younger then they all: and
he commanded Samuel to take his horn of holy ointment, and to anoint David
king over al Israel.

There was none among the brethren of David, that was not in the judgment of
man meet to be preferred before David, and therefore their father presented
them to Samuel one after another, and showed him self to make none account of
David: But the Lord so loved David, and hated his brethren, that he refused
them, and chose David to be king over his people.

Applying this scripture to you that be present therefore, I must first speak
of this hatred and this love: admonishing as many of you as are to give voices
in this election, that you hate with this hatred of refusal, all such as you
see to have in the^ those conditions as should not be in any that should be
chose^ to bear rule among the people of God, and that you love with this love
that I have spoken of, such one as has in him those things that by the
scriptures are required to be in him that shall be chosen to be a Ruler.

First, Deuteronomy. 17
in the fyft book of Moses called Deuteronomium it is written that the people
of Israel might not choose any to be their king, that were not their brother:
that is, descended out of the loins of Abraham, and one of the twelve kynreds
of Israel, A man circumcised, that thereby had made a solemn profession to
observe and keep all ye laws and statutes of the Lord his God.

If that people might not make them a Ruler of one that were not a brother by
blood and Religion: how may we that profess the religion of Christ, choose one
to be our Ruler that is not of one religion with us?

You therefore, to whom it belongs to give voices in this election, must have
regard to the religion of him whom you shall choose. He must not be an Athiste
(that is, a man that has no religion) he must not be a sectary, an heretic,
or sismaticke. He must not be a Papist: for of all Sectaries the Papist is most
contrary to Christ: I mean the right Papist, who does acknowledge the Pope to
be the universal head of the universal church of Christ, for that is, to set
the Pope in the seat of Christ, and so consequently to depose Christ, and to
set up the Pope in his place, and so is he become Antichrist.

S. Paul in the.2. chapter of his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, does
lively describe this Antichrist under the name of the man of syn. He shall
(says S. Paul) advance him self above all that is called God. That is,
above all Princes. Psalm. 82.
For in the Scriptures Princes are called Gods, because they be Gods
Leuetenants upon earth, and as saint Paul does term them: Roma. 13.
they are Gods reuengers, and bear the sword, that by the use thereof they may
revenge Gods quarrel, in punishing the transgressors and breakers of Gods laws.

Of Princes the Prophet David does in the Psalm.82. write thus in the person
of God him self: Ego dixi Dii estis, I have said it, you are Gods. And our
savior Christ him self does cite the same words, John. 10.
as we read in the Gospel: Wherefore, the Pope aduauncing him self above
Princes, does show him self to be that man of sin that saint Paul does
write of in that place, 2. These. 2
and so consequentlye to be Antichrist: for by that man of sin he means
Antichrist.

He sits also in the Temple of God, and boasts him self as though he were
God: and this he does in two points especially. First, in that he takes
upon him to dispose kingdoms: and then in that he presumes to pardon sins.
For both these things belong to God alone, and no creature may enterprise to
do either of these.

Prouer. 8
Per me regnant Reges (says Wisdom) and by Wisdom is meant God him self. By
God alone therefore do Kings raygne. And the Prophet David says, that
promotion comes neither from the East nor from the West, neither from the
North. Psalm. 75.
etc. but it is God that overthrows one, and sets up another.

The Pope therefore, in disposyng kingdoms, as he has, and would presently
dispose this kingdom (if his power would stretch so far) does take upon him,
that which belongs to God alone, and therefore sytting in the Church of
Christ, which is the temple of God, he boasts him self as though he were
God, and shows him self to be that man of sin that saint Paul speaks of.

He takes upon him also to forgive syns, which none can do but God only. In
his Bulls of Jubilee these words are insert: A pena, and a culpa, that is, from
the pain due to the fault, and from the fault also. So that he acquiteth and
discharges the sinner of the fault of his sin, and makes him as innocent as
if he had never committed sin. And herein he makes him self equal, or
rather superior to God him self: for no Inferior can pardon the trespass
that is committed against his Superior.

If any subject should presume to pardon the treason that is committed against
his Prince: what could yt Prince think of that Subject, otherwise then of one
that takes him self to be of greater authority then his Prince, or at the
least of as great authority.

By these two practices therefore, the Pope makes him self known to as many as
will know him, to be that Antichrist, whom S. Paul calls the man of sin.
And so by good consequence, whosoever is a right Papist, is most unmeet to
rule amongst Christians.

You therefore, to whom it belongs to give voices in this election, look well
to the religion of him whom you choose, and if any be a Papist, so hate him as
God hated Esau and David's elder brethren, that you refuse him, and choose him
not to rule you, because he is not a Brother, and therefore much more unmeet to
rule Christians, then any such was to rule the carnal Israelites.

In the second book of Moses called Exodus, Exodus 18.
and in the.18. chapter of that book, it is written, that such one as shall be
chosen to rule in any degree, must have in him these four qualities: First he
must be wise and active, then he must have in him the fear of God: thirdly,
he must be a true man, and last of all he must hate covetousness.

Wise he must be, such one as by long experience has learned wisdom, and is
able to rule wisely: and there must be in him such actiuity, as is meet for
him that shall occupy the place yt he shall be chose^ unto.

He must have in him the fear of God also, Psalm. 111.
which is the beginning of all wisdom. By this note may we know them that
have the fear of God in them: Ecclesi. 2.
they will (as Jesus Siracke writes) be careful to know the will of God: and
when they know it, they will be as careful to conform their lives unto it,
that the fear of God may appear in all that they do.

This fear is not that whereof s. John 1. John. 4.
writes in his first epistle, when he says, that love expels fear: for
that fear is joined with hatred, and whosoever fears in that sort, must
needs hate him whom he so fears, and that fear is of the schole men called,
a servile fear, such as is in slaves or bond men, that stand in fear of
stripes at the hands of their Lords or Masters, whose slaves they be. But
this is by the scohle men termed Filialis timor, a childlike fear: such as is
in good children toward their good and loving Parents: whom they fear
because they love them, and they love them because they fear them. So that
this fear is joined with love, and love with it, in such sort that they
cannot be separated, and it cannot be hid, but will show it self whersoeuer it
is.

Look therefore for these signs of Gods holy fear, and hate that person in
whom you find the^ not, so that ye choose him not to rule you.

Thirdly, ye must not choose him, whom you know not to be a true man: true in
his deeds, and true in his words. His yea must be yea, and his nay, nay. He
must not say and unsay, he must not swear to disceiue. His words must not be
wind, but there must be weight in them. He must not do (as to many use to do in
these days) deny both his words and his writing (if ye can not prove it)
though it be his hand and his seal, yet if he may gain any thing by denying
it to be his deed, it was never his deed. Would God there were none such to
be found in Israel, (I mean) among Christians.

Last of all, he that must be chosen to bear rule, must be a man that hates
covetousness. The common sort of men have none other note to know a covetous man
by, but rytches. If he be rich, then is he covetous, in the judgment of most
men. But riches is not a note to know a covetous man by. Riches is the gift
of God: and it is not a man's careful toil that can make him rich, Prou. 10.
as says the wise man, much less is it his covetous dealyng, but God gives
riches to whom he lusts. He makes some rich without any great care or
toil taken of them to grow rich: and some other, though they toil never so
sore, and be never so careful, yet can they never be rich. It is therefore
Gods blessing that makes men rich. Wherefore this reason holds not: he is
rich therefore he is covetous.

The Greeks do call covetousness (...), a desire of more. Luke. 12.
That man therefore that is not contented with that he has, but is still
desirous of more, is a covetous man. For (...) is the desire of more, and it is
an affection of the mind, and may be as well in the poor as in the rich.

Wheresoever therefore you shall see open signs of this desire of more, there
is covetousness. And that man in whom that is, must be so hated of you that have
to give voices in this election, yt you choose him not to bear rule. Eccle. 10.
For such one has his own soul to sell for money.

Saint Paul would have this desire of more, to be so far from all Christians,
Ephesi. 5.
that it should not once be named amongst them, that is, that it should not be
found amongst them, and so consequently have no name, for things that be not
have no names. And writing to Timothy he says, Tim. 6.
that the love of money, is the root of all mischief.

Of the fruits that spring out of this pestilent root much might be spoken,
and many examples brought out of histories, both holy and profane: But because
the time passes away, and I have determined to speak somewhat of the duty of
him that shall be chosen, I will make mention only of two examples, the one
profane, and the other written in the history of ye Gospel.

For the first, it is written that Polymnestor king of Thrasia, was of great
familiarity, and joined in synguler friendship with king Priamus of Troy: and
that when Troy was beseeged by the Grecians, and like to be won by them, king
Priamus sent his young son Polydorus to Polymnestor with a great mass of
gold, trusting that of friendship he would foster and bring up the young Prince,
and help him to recover the kingdom of Troy, if it should at that time be
won by the Grecians. But when Polymnestor perceived that Priamus was dead, and
Troy conquered, he slew Polydorus, and so possessed the gold him self. The
Poet Virgill writing of this, uses this exclamation: Quid non mortalia cogis
pectora, auri sacra fames? O thou pestilent hunger of gold, what is it that
thou do not enforce men's hearts to do?

The other example is written in the history of the Gospel. The traitor
Judas, notwithstanding he had seen the wonderful works yt our savior Christ
had wrought, and heard his heavenly doctrine: yet in a covetous desire he
betrayed him, and for money delivered him into the hands of those enemies that
sought his life. Such fruits does this pestilent root bring forth, and
therefore such as are to give consent in this election, should not agree to
choose such one to rule, as has in him the open signs of this so pestilent a
root.

Thus brieflye you have heard what is required in him that must be chosen to
bear rule: He must be a brother, not of no religion, neither of any other
religion, then the true religion of Christ. For if the Jews might not make any
man ruler over them that was not of their religion: much less may Christians
make that man their Ruler, that is not one of their religion.

He must be a wise and active man, such one as has had experience, and is
well able to govern, being endued with all those gifts that must be used in
government. If he have governed him self and his own familye well: then is he
the meeter to rule other. But if this be not in him, then is he altogether
unmeet to be chosen to public government.

It is also requisite that he have in him the fear of God, in such sort as I
have declared. Not that fear that is joined with hatred, but yt which is
matched with love: So that he does fear God, because he loves him, and does
love him because he fears him, Ecclesi. 2.
and with a reverend and loving fear seeks to do the will of God.

Moreover, he must be a true man, no false, no subtle, or crafty dealer: but
such one as deals truly in word and deed. And to conclude, he must (even
from his very heart) hate that pestilent root covetousness. And thus much for
that which I thought meet to speak, touching that which is to be done by the^
that have to give voices in this election.

Now as touching him that shall be chosen, he must look upon the example of
David, to follow it. He says, Do not I hate them (O Lord) that hate rhee? And
am not I grieved with them that rise up against thee? Yea I hate them, and that
right sore: even as though they were mine own enemies. Try me (O God) and seek
the ground of my heart: prove me, and examine my thoughts. Look well if there
be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.

This example of the Prophet David does teach him that shall be chosen,
especially two lesso^s: where of the one is how he must be affected toward
them that hate the Lord, and rise up against him: and the other is, what he
should continually crave at Gods hand in his hearty and earnest prayers to God.

For the first he says, Do not I hate them that hate thee? etc. And for the
other he says: Try me (O God) and seek the ground of mine heart. etc.

In the scriptures they are said to hate the Lord that give any part of his
honor to any creatures: as in that commandment wherein the Lord forbids
idolatry, he says thus: Exodus 20.
I will visit the syns of the Fathers upon the children, to the third and
fourth generation in them that hate me. etc. where they that break that
commandment either in making or worshipping of any Image, are said to hate
God, because they put that image in the place of God, and give that honor to
it, which is due to God.

The Prophet David also calls such sinners, when in the fiftith Psalm he
says thus: Psalm. 50.
The Lord said unto the sinner, why take thou my testament in thy mouth,
seeing thou hate to be reformed, and thou have cast my word behind thee. Thou
saw a thief, and thou rannest with him, and with the adulterer thou dyddest
cast in thy lot. etc. These be they that hate the Lord, because they have even
sold them selves to serve sin, and must therefore needs hate him, against
whom they commit sin.

The example of the Prophet David therefore, does teach him (that shall be
chosen to bear rule) to hate all such manner of men as these be: that is, that
do give them selves to serve sin, and will not be reformed by any manner
admonition or fatherly chasticement.

He must hate them therefore, not with such hatred as I have spoken of (that is,
to refuse them in elections) but with perfect hatred, even as though they were
his own enemies. That is, even as by the corruption of our own nature, we are
moved to hate them that be our enemies (for by the rule of our Religion, Math.
5.
we are taught to love our enemies.) In that they be the enemies of God,
therefore we must hate them so far forth as they be so: but their persons we
must not hate.

He therefore that shall bear rule, must so hate them that hate the Lord (in
such sort as I have said) that he use the sword that God has given him,
Roma. 13.
in punishing their wickednesses: For as saint Paul writes to the Romans, he
is Gods Revenger. And he must do this earnestly and diligently: Least he come
within the reatche of this curse: Ierem. 48
Curssed is every one that does the work of God negligently.

In his prayers to God, the Prophet David craved especially two things:
whereof one was that he might be thoroughly tried, and the other, that the Lord
would lead him in the way everlasting.

He therefore that shall be chosen, must in his prayers beg the same, with
desire to be purged of all evil: and that he may be lead by the good spirit of
God all the days of this his transitory life, and in the end thereof, into
that life that never shall have end.

Try me (O God) says the Prophet, and seek out the ground of my heart. etc. In
these words the Prophet shows him self to be wylling to walk before the
Lord his God, and to have his ways known unto him. It is not enough for us to
know that the Lord knows our ways: but we must be desirous that the Lord
would have such regard unto our ways, that he suffer us not to walk in any
way of wickedness, but that he do by such means as may please him, bring us to
the way everlasting, and lead us therein by his holy spirit, that is, in that
way, the end whereof is everlasting life, and that we may continually walk in
that way all the days of this our transitory life, and so in the end thereof
find everlasting life.

He that shall be chosen therefore, must learn by the example of David, to
crave this at the hands of God: and so shall he be always careful to walk
in the Lords ways, that when the Lord shall try him, there be no way of
wickedness found in him.

In that the Prophet desires to be lead in the everlasting way: he confesses
that of him self he is not able to walk therein. 2. Cor. 3.
This lesson therefore is to be learned (of him especially that now is to be
chose^, and of all other generallye) that none is able of him self to walk in
this everlasting way, but all that shall walk therein, must be lead by Gods holy
spirit, Roma. 8.
by whom who so is lead, is undoubtedly the child of God. Let us therefore all
pray continually that we may be lead by that spirit evermore, that our life
being acceptable to him, we may after the same shall be ended, be happy with
him for ever.

Thus as the shortness of the time would suffer, and as God has made me able, I
have by occasion of those words, which at the beginning I read out of the
Psalm. 139. noted those things that I thought meet to be noted in this
Auditory, and to be applied to the present occasion of our assembling at this
time.

The Lord for his mercies sake, so work in all our hearts by his holy spirit,
that we printing in memory, and practisyng in life these profitable lessons,
may in our several callinges so deal in all that we do, that God may in us be
glorified, and we in him everlastingly comforted, with that endless comfort that
he has prepared for his. Which comfort he grant that has prepared it: to
whom be all honor and glory, world without end. Amen.

An Appendix added unto this Sermon.
THus at the request of a friend (wishing the common commodity) I have (as nygh
as I could) committed my Sermon to writing, in such order, and (as my memory
would serve me) in such words, as I did utter it in the hearing of the Lord
Mayor and his Brethren the Aldermen, and the whole state of the City of London,
being then (according to their yearelye order) assembled to choose one to be
their Mayor for the year then following.

And because the text that I have handled, may as well be applied to al other
elections, as to that which then was to be made: I have thought meet (in the
setting out of this my Sermon in print) to add this Appendix, wherein I have
applied the words of the Prophet, generally to all elections: as well of such
as shall serve in the Ecclesiastical government, as in the Civil. Notyng the
duties both of them to whom it appartayneth to choose, and also of them that
shall be chosen to any government in either state. And first of them to who^
it belongs to choose.

The persons that, in any order, have to give consent to the choice of any that
shall serve in any public calling, must first consider the place that is to be
supplied by him that is to be chosen: with a due consideration of those
qualities that must be in him that shall be able to do the duty that belongs
to that place. And then their care must be, to find out such one as has in
him those qualities.

And if any shall offer them selves to take upon them the place, and enable them
selves thereunto: they are to be narrowlye looked unto, and thoroughly tried
before they be admitted, because they do by offering them selves, give occasion
to be suspected of some desire, either to be advanced, or else to be enritched,
which desire is most pernicious in him that shall serve in any public calling.
Isocrates (an Heathen man) instructyng Demonicus (a young Gentleman, that was
like to be called to public office) says thus unto him: A publicis
functionibus, no^ ditior sed gloriosior discedas. Depart not from a public
office, being more rich, but more honorable, then when thou tookest it.

But if any shall by words, writing, gifts, or any other ambitions mean,
seek to be admitted: the same has made him self altogether unmeet to be
admitted, although there be in him as much as may be in a man, otherwise to
make him meet: For such one being in place, cannot use any good gift that is
in him to any other end then that, which moved him so to seek the place.

They therefore that have to give consent in elections, must not be subject to
their own corrupt affections, so that they be lead by them to choose or admit
any in respect of consanguinitie, affinity, friendship, or friendly
familiarity: neither may they stand in awe of any man's person, and so through
fear of dyspleasure, or hope of some friendly pleasure, be enduced to choose or
admyt such one as they do not know to be meet for the place that they do
choose or admit him unto.

They must have still before their eyes, the Majesty of God, whose Ministers
they are, that occupy any public place: And therefore in chusyng or admittyng
them that shall supply any such place, the chusers and admitters must do all
that they do in the fear of Gods Majesty, even as they that know and do not
forget, that they shall answer to him for all that they shall do therein.

It is meet therefore, that if the election or admission be to be made by
many, the same do (before they proceed to election or admission) join them
selves together in public prayer, not of custom only, or supersticiously,
but with hearty desire to obtain at Gods hand his holy spirit to direct them
so, that they may find out and consent upon such one, as may be both able and
willing so to serve in the place that he shall be chosen unto, that Gods glory
may be set forth in all that he shall do in that place.

After this sort did ye Apostels behave the^ selves, when they thought it meet
to choose one to supply the place of Judas* Acts. 1.
(which had been one of them, but was by transgression fallen from his place,
and became a traitor to his Master, for which wyckednes he was so left to
him self, that he hanged him self, and by the gushing out of his bowels he
was made an horrible example to all traitors) they agreed upon two which had
been conversant with them (and therefore were well known unto them) and
because they could not discern which of the two was most meet for the place,
they prayed to God, and casting lots, they besought God that the lot might
light upon him, whom God knew to be most meet.

And if the election or admission, do belong to any one person, then it is
meet that that person, do not only make earnest and hearty prayers to God in
his own person, that in the choice that he shall make, he may be directed by
Gods holy spirit, to make such choice as may be to Gods glory: but that the
same do desire that as many as may take either commoditye or hurt by the choice
that he shall make, would in hearty prayers unto God beg, that in choosing his
heart may be directed by Gods holy spirit, to choose such one as in all points
may be meet for the place that he shall be chosen unto.

And whether the election belong to one or to many, this one thing must be
diligently looked unto by the Electours, that neither they them selves be
corrupted with bribes, neither enduced by the persuasion of any that is
bribed, to make choice of any, in whom they do not see those properties that I
have before noted out of the fyft and second books of Moses.

For he that is not a brother (that is to say, Deuteronomy. 18.
a true Christian) but a Papist, or an heretic of any manner sect: the same
must be so hated, that he be not chosen to supply any place in any public
ministration.

In like manner, he that is not a man of such wisdom and actiuity as is
required in him that shall supply that place that is to be supplied, Exodus 17.
and he in whom the signs of Gods fear do not appear: or that is not a true
man, nor one that hates covetousness: must be so hated of them or him, to whom
it appertains to choose or admit, that he be not chosen or admitted by them,
but refused, as a person unmeet to supply such a place. And thus much touching
them to whom it belongs to elect or admit any to serve in the common wealth
in any public calling.

The persons that shall be elected or admitted, must first consider in them
selves, whether they be such in deed, as they be supposed to be, and whether
those qualities be in them that be required in those persons that should supply
such places as they be called or admitted unto. And if they shall not find
them selves to be such, or that the qualities required be not in them: then
must they (if they will not provoke the heavy wrath of God against them
selves) either seek by earnest and continual prayers to God, and by all other
means to be made such, and to obtain those qualities that they lack: or else
utterly refuse to take upon them to supply a place for which they know them
selves to be so unmeet.

And if (when they have examined them selves) they shall find, that they be
in all points meet for the places that they be chosen or admitted to: they
must in the fear of God, consider what duty they have to do in these places,
and consecrate them selves to be occupied continually in doing those duties,
and not only beg at Gods hand his holy spirit to direct and strengthen the^
therein, but earnestly desire, that all the people, amongst whom they are
appointed to serve, do in all their prayers commend them to God, without
whose conduct and aid they cannot be able to discharge any part of their duty.

And according to the example of the Prophet David, these men must hate all
them that hate the Lord, that is, all such as give over them selves to serve
syn: For those persons do love sin, and none can love syn, but the same must
needs hate the Lord who hates sin.

With such hatred therefore as the Lord hates syn and such sinners, the Prophet
hated them, that in his days were such sinners, and therefore hated the Lord.
And every one that is elected or admitted to serve in any public place, must
in like manner hate all them that he shall see to be such sinners.

If his calling be Ecclesiastical, he must reprehend, rebuke, and enstruct
them: And if that will not help, he must lay before them the horrible
threatenings of Gods wrath against them. And this he must do (as David did)
without any fear, favor, hatred, or other fleshly respect, that they might
be moved to have toward their persons. They must always have in mind whose
ministers they be, and whose work it is that they have in hand. And they must
never forget, that who so does the Lords work negligently, is accurssed of
the Lord.

More over, they must still bear in mind the words which the Lord spoke to
Ezechiel the Prophet saying thus: Ezechi. 3.
Take good heed to the words of my mouth, and give them warning at my
commandment. If I say unto thee concerning the ungodly man, that (without
doubt) he must dye: and thou geuest him no warning, nor speak unto him that
he may turn from his evil way, and so live: then shall the same ungodly
man dye in his own unrighteousness, but his blood will I require of thine hand.

Yea, he must always be myndfull of the words of Paul to Timothy, where he
says thus: A Bishop, that is a Church Minister, must be without fault. etc.
And of the words of the same Apostle to the Elders of Ephesus, when he says
thus: Take heed to your selves and to the whole flock, wherein the holy
Ghost has appointed you to be ouersears, to govern the Church of God, which
he has bought with his own blood.

And above all things, he must take heed of that pestilent root covetousness,
which if it do once take hold in his heart, it will bring forth such fruit, as
will turn all the wholesome wine of his good doctrine, to most pernicious poison.
For he shall never be satisfied with living. Yea, though he have a great deal
to much, with more charge then many more able then he can be able to
discharge: yet will he still desire more, for that desire of more can never say,
enough, but still it cries for more.

Out of this pestilent root sprang all the Popes Dispensations, his Unions,
his Pluralities, his Trialities, and his Totquots. His dispensation of Non
residens, his Impropriations, and what soever else has been devised, for the
augmenting of the living of his Prelates.

The Minister of Christ's church therefore, must never forget these words
which Paul wrote to Timothe: 1. Timo. 6
Thou man of God, flee from these things, and follow thou righteousness,
faith, love, patience, and meekenes. And he must print in memory the words of
Christ, which says: First seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, Math. 6.
and all these things shall be ministered unto you.

To conclude, he must have written in his heart the words of Christ to Peter,
which are these: Peter, John. 21.
do thou love me? Feed my lambs, feed my sheep, feed my sheep. And the
words of the same Peter to al his fellow Elders, which are these: Feed the
flock of Christ as much as lies in you, 1. Peter. 5.
taking the ouersyght of them, not as compelled thereto, but wyllingly after a
godly sort, not for the desire of filthye lucre, but of a good mind: not as
though ye were Lords over the Parishes, but that ye be an ensample to the
flock, and that with good will. etc.

But if his calling be Civil, he must use the swoorde in punishyng sin
according to the laws of his Country: remembering always that he is appointed
by God himself, Roma. 13.
to be the revenger of his quarrel upon earth. And therefore he must ever be
myndfull of the curse that Jeremy has pronounced against all that work the
Lords work negligently. Ierem. 48


He must also be myndfull of the words of Esaias, which says of the Rulers of
Jerusalem in this wise: Thy Princes are the companions of thieves, Esaias. 1.
for they love brybes, and they hunt after rewards. And the consideration of
these words must move him to hate all manner of briberye and bribers, as haters
of God.

Moreover he must not forget the words of Moses, who says thus: Bribes do
blind the eyes of the wise, Deuteronomy. 16.
and pervert the sentence of the ryghteous. Exodus 23.
And in judgment he must neither fear the face of the mighty, nor pity the
case of the miserable: for judgment is the Lords.

Thus much I have thought meet to add (in order of Appendix) to that Sermon
which I made the.29. of September.1574. as before in ye title: Beseching the
almighty, in mercy toward his Church, to move the minds of his reuengers upon
earth, that they may bend them selves in all that they are able to reform
first in them selves, and after in all other, all manner of corruptions in
elections, both of church Ministers, and of civil officers also.

So may we hope to see all corruption banished out of all manner ministration,
and Gods glory advanced thereby: which he grant for his mercies sake, to whom
be all honor and glory for ever. Amen.

Imprinted at London by John Awdeley, dwelling in little Britain street
without Aldersgate.

1575

The.7. day of January.


