TIME WELL SPENT IN Sacred Meditations, Divine Observations, Heavenly
Exhortations.

SERVING TO Confirm the Penitent. Inform the Ignorant. Reform the Obstinate.
Convince the Hypocrite: Encourage the Fearful. Resolve the Doubtful. Comfort
the Afflicted. Uphold the Tempted. And, Cherish the true-hearted Christian.

By that late able, painful, and worthy Man of God, Mr. EZECHIEL CULVERVVEL
Minister of the Word.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher for H. Skeleton in Little-Britaine: 1634.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL and truly religious Mrs. MORE.
Right Worshipful and worthy Mistress More:
THe Church of God has not only benefit by exact and just treatises knit
together in a Methodicall dependancy of one part from another, but likewise of
sententious independent speeches, that have a general luster of themselves as
so many flowers in a garden, or Jewels in a casket, whereof every one has a
distinct worth of themselves; and this makes them the more acceptable, that
being short they are fitter for the heart to carry, as having much in a little.

This moved this reverend man of God, to spend what spare hours his sickness
would afford him about thoughts in this kind. He was many years Gods prisoner
under the gout and stone, such diseases, as will allow but little liberty to
those that are arrested and tortured by them. So fruitful an expense of time,
in so weak and worn a body is seldom seen, scarce any came to him but went
away better than they came; God gave much strength of spirit to uphold his
spirit from sinking under the strength of such diseases. It were a happy thing
if we that are Ministers of Christ, would in all conditions and times think of
our calling, that our office is not tied to one day in a week, and one hour or
two in that day, but that upon all fit occasions we are to quicken our selves
and others in the way homeward, as guides to heaven. We read not of the opening
of heaven but to some great purpose. So it should be with the man of God, he
should not open his mouth and let any thing fall (so far as frailty and the
necessary occurrences of humane life will permit) but what might minister some
grace to the hearers.

The reason why I made choice of you to dedicate them unto, is not that I might
discharge mine own debt unto you with another man's coin, but that I could not
think of any fitter than your self, whom this ancient minister of Christ
esteemed always very much for eminency of parts and grace, and you him as a
man faithful and one that maintained his ministerial authority with good
success in his place; God allotting your habitation in your younger years in
that part of the country where he lived, and where you first learned to know
God and your selse. In those times though those parts were in regard of the
air unhealthfull, yet The hundreds in Essex.
that air was so sweetened with the savory breath of the Gospel, that they
were termed the holy land. Hereupon I thought meet to commend these sententious
speeches by your name, to others. Which though (diverse of them) may seem
plain, yet what they want in show they have in weight, as coming from a man
very well experienced in all the ways of God. The Lord follow you with his
best blessings, that you may continue still to adorn the Gospel of Christ in
your place.

Yours in all Christian service. R. SIBBS.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, THE PUBLISHER HERE OF wishes, Grace, mercy, and
peace, from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.
CHristian Reader, Thou have here offered unto thee (a rare box of precious
pearls) on most subjects, many sweet, grave, acurate, wholesome, fit, and
choice passages. What the Author was, what his care for Gods glory, his delight
in Gods worship, his desire of the good of others, his hatred of sin, his
grief for sin, his zeal and fervencie in prayer, his knowledge of the word,
his contempt of the world, his experience of Satan's subtle. ties, his
compassion toward the afflicted members of Jesus Christ, his skill in
exhorting, dehorting, reproving, comforting; his joyfulnesse in the society and
company of Gods children, his usual endeavors and employments, his daily
meditations, his ordinary speeches, his grouth in grace, and measure of
sanctification, etc. may be easily perceived, and plainly discerned by this his
ensuing Treatise. Well knew he the worth of time, well knew he in like manner
how to employ the same to his best advantage. Apparent it is, that he thought
that time to be ill spent, wherein he was not doing some good to himself or
others, and therefore endeavored always to be thus employed. Was he alone?
then was he either occupied in prayer, reading, meditation, or such like
Christian exercise. Was he in company? then were not his words idle, vain,
worldly, unprofitable, but gracious, poudered with salt, tending to
edification. Was he at dinner or supper? then would he take occasion to speak
of the use of Gods creatures, the thankfulness we owe unto God for the plenty
we enjoy, together with the usual abuse of Gods mercies by most men and women.
Was there a question propounded unto him? in the resolution thereof would he
take occasion to dehort from some one or other vice, exhort to some one or
other virtue. Did he observe in himself any thing defective? how did he labor
for humiliation; for a supply? Did he observe sins in others, which were not
in himself? how did he pity and pray for them, bless God for himself, yea
be hereby persuaded that the Lord loved him, as through whose goodness he was
made see and hate such things as are so highly esteemed in the world, and
pursued by men of this world, whence he became desirous This Book (being of M.
Culverwel's own hand writing) do I find to have been begun about 40. years
ago, and to have been written at several times, and upon several occasions,
some passages, being night-meditations, some uttered at dinner or supper, some
upon occasion of a question propounded, as others upon occasion of some one or
other trouble. etc.
the more to love the Lord with all his heart, and to be so delighted in him,
that he might esteem nothing without him, nor be carried away by any thing
from him, in whose favor is all fullness of joy for evermore. A faithful
Steward he was of the mysteries of God, and who well knew, how to divide the
word aright, and give every man his due portion. Thus much no doubt and much
more might be said by any of those which entirely knew him, my self having at
no time otherwise seen him than in his works, this especially, warranting all
that I have affirmed of him. Whatsoever thou art, whatsoever thy condition,
thou may here have suitable matter which concerns thy good. Here may
parents learn their duty, children theirs. Here may Pastors learn their duty;
people, theirs. Here may all learn, both young and old, rich and poor. This
will inform thy judgment, this in like manner stir up thy affections. Thou
then who would learn to perform thy duty toward God, thy duty toward thy
neighbor: Thou who would learn at all times to employ thy time well: Thou
who would know with whom thou should converse, and what use to make of
good company, etc. come here, and enjoy thy hearts desire: What is here offered
thee, despise not, but bless God for the same, accordingly making use thereof
to his glory and thine own good. Farewell.

A. SYMSON.

THE AUTHORS PRAYER AT the writing of this Book.
MOst gracious God, and loving Father, pardon and forgive all my sins, and
write those things in my heart by thine holy Spirit, which shall be written in
this book, that as this book shall through thy grace help my memory, so thy
Spirit may sanctify my meditatious, that through this grace I may hear to
understand, understand to be moved in my affections, and not for a time, but
for ever to remember, meditate and practice thy word, with an holy and humble
perseverance, through thy dear Son, and our only Lord and Savior, Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Time well spent.
THe lips of the righteous feed many. Prove. 10. 21. He that wins souls is
wise. Prove. 11. 30. The Preacher was wise, he still taught the people
knowledge, yea he gave good heed, and sought out and set in order many
proverbs. Eccles. 12. 9. Meditation.
I will meditate also of all thy works and talk of all thy doings. Psalm. 77.
12. O how love I thy Law! it is my meditation all the day. Psalm. 119 97.
Observation.
Who so is wise and will observe those things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm. 107. 43. Exhortation.
Preach the word, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort, 2 Timothy 4. 2. THE PRINCIPAL heads of all things contained in this book.
A.
ADmonition. Page. 1 Affections. Page. 2 Affliction. Page. 3 Angels. Page. 11
Anger. Page. ibid. Assurance of Gods favor, Election and salvation. Page. 12
Atheism. Page. 24
B.
Baptism. Page. 24 Benefits or blessings. Page. 26 Birthday. Page. 31 Buying
and selling. Page. ibid.
C.
Calling. Page. 33 Christ. Page. 34 Christian. Page. 36 Christianity. Page. 36
A Civil life. Page. 40 Comforts. Page. ibid. Communion. Page. 46 The Commnnion
of Saints. Page. 48 Compassion. Page. ibid. Complaint. Page. 49 Concupiscence.
Page. ibid. Conference. Page. 50 Confidence. Page. 53 Conscience. Page. 54
Consent. Page. 57 Contempt of grace. Page. ibid. Contentation. Page. 59
Contracts. Page. 60 Corruption. Page. 62 Good Counsels. Page. 63
D.
Holy Days. Page. 64 Death. Page. ibid. Decay in grace. Page. 68 Delay Page.
73 Delight. Page. ibid. Devils. Page. ibid. Discerning. Page. 77 Discipline.
Page. 78 Despair. Page. 79 Distrust. Page. 80 Doctrine. Page. 82 Doubting.
Page. ibid Dreams. Page. 99 Dullness and deadness. Page. 100 Duty. Page. 102
E.
Earnestness. Page. 102 Ease. Page. 103 Elect and Reprobate. Page. ibid.
Evils. Page. 104 Excuse Page. ibid. Examples. Page. 105 Exercise. Page. ibid.
F.
Failings. Page. 106 Faith. Page. ibid. Falls. Page. 133 Familiarity. Page. 135
Fasts. Page. 136 Fear. Page. 137 Feasts. Page. 139 Feeling. Page. 140
Fellowship with the wicked. Page. ibid The Flesh. Page. 141 Flock. Page. 142
Friends. Page. 142
G.
Gift. Page. 143 Gods favor. Page. ibid. Gods goodness. Page. 144 Gods glory.
Page. ibid. Gods mercy. Page. 147 Gods patience and long-suffering. Page. 148
Gods providence. Page. 149 Gods will. Page. 150 Godly. Page. 151 Godliness.
Page. 153 Gospel. Page. 158 Grace with the growth therein. Page. 159 Grief.
Page. 182
H.
The Heart. Page. 184 Help. Page. 185 Heretics and Heresies. Page. ibid. An
Holy life. Page. 187 Hope. Page. 188 Humiliation. Page. 189 Humility. Page. 193
Hypocrisy. Page. ibid.
I.
Ignorance. Page. 193 Indifferent Things. Page. 196 Infirmities. Page. 197 Joy.
Page. 198 Judge. Page. 202 Judgments. Page. ibid.
K.
Knowledge. Page. 205
L.
Law. Page. 205 Learning. Page. 206 Love. Page. ibid. The Lords day. Page. 210
M.
Magistrate. Page. 211 Man. Page. ibid. Marriage. Page. 213 Means. Page. ibid.
Meditations. Page. 214 Memory. Page. 218 Mercies. Page. 219 Ministers or
preachers. Page. 220 Mirth. Page. 230 Mistrust. Page. ibid. Mortification.
Page. ibid. Motions. Page. 231
N.
A good Name. Page. 231 Nurcery of the Church. Page. 240
O.
Offenses. Page. 240
P.
Parents. Page. 241 Patience. Page. 242 Peace and joy. Page. ibid. To please
God. Page. 246 Poor. Page. 248 Popery. Page. 249 Praise and dispraise. Page.
250 Prayer. Page. ibid. Pride. Page. 260 Privileges of the Saints. Page. ibid.
Profession and professors. Page. 263 Promises. Page. 265 Punishment of sin.
Page. ibid.
R
Reconciliation. Page. 267 Regeneration. Page. 269 The Regenerate and
unregenerate. Page. ibid. Remembrance of good. Page. 277 Renewing. Page. 278
Repentance. Page. ibid. Reports. Page. 279 Reproof Page. 280 Riches, Page. 282
S.
Sacrament. Page. 282 Saints. Page. ibid. Salvation. Page. 283 Satan's courses,
subtilty, and temptations. Page. 285 The Scriptures. Page. 295 Self-love.
Page. ibid. Sickness. Page. 299 Sin. Page. ibid. Slander. Page. 304 Sorrow
for sin. Page. ibid Soul and b(...). Page. 318 Spiritual decay. Page. 319
Disquiet Sp(...)rit. 320 Godly Strife. Page. ibid. Students. Page. ibid.
Suffering. Page. 321 Selfe-Suspition. Page. 322
T.
Table-talke. Page. 323 Tears. Page. 323 Temptations. Page. 324 Thanks. Page.
328 Thoughts. Page. 329 Trial of a man's self. Page. 331 The truth, Page. 335
Time. Page. 336
Y.
Virtue. Page. 337 Visions. Page. 339
W.
Warfare. Page. 340 Watchfulness. Page. ibid. Wishes. Page. 341 The word of
God. Page. ibid. Worldly mindedness. Page. 346 Worldly wisdom. Page. 347
V.
Young children. Page. 349
Z.
Zeal. Page. 350

TIME WELL SPENT.
Admonition.
1. MAny can stir up themselves, Not every one is fit to admonish.
which cannot admonish others, much less they which admonish not themselves,
can admonish others.

2. Having admonished our brother in meekness, How to deal with those that
follow not counsel.
and not prevailing, its good to require him to try his conscience after his
sleep, what peace he has in refusing our admonition.

3. To speak to the consciences How a man may speak to the conscience of
another.
of others, and to rip up secret smnes, a man must mark diligently his own
heart, whereby he shall see the secret corruptions of flesh and blood which
are in all men.

Affections.
1. An excellent trial of The trial of our affections.
our affection of anger, grief, joy, etc. is by this, whether they make us fit
to serve God or not.

2. Its a notable point of Our affections are in company to be made known as
little as may be.
wisdom to make our affections known in company as little as may be, as did
Joseph, and not to be extraordinary at the table either in joy or sorrow,
without special cause, but privately with some godly friend, or only with the
Lord to power out our hearts.

3. Every excessive affection The hurt of affections when they are excessive.
brings his own punishment, anger, grief, love, jealousy, and the rest, as
daily experience shows.

Affliction.
1. The only way to moderate How to moderate and sanctify our vvorldly
grief.
and sanctify our earthly and natural sorrow (which in it self is not
unlawful, but necessary as a means to make us seek to the Physician of our
souls) is this, so often as we feel the pricks thereof (which be in none
continual, but have their fits;) so often we should consider of the end why the
Lord has sent them and so continues them, that so by laboring The end and
use that is to be made of affliction, is to be considered.
to make the right use of them, not only our minds may be withdrawn from
vain discoursing of our loss, but also by making some profitable use of them
we may sooner attain to the end why they were sent, which alone comfort
the Christian heart, for otherwise it were a double grief, to suffer these
things To suffer and not to profit thereby is fearful.
in vain, yea not to profit by chastisements is and ought to be a fearful
terror to our consciences.

2. As for such as have Simil. Dangerous to be without affliction.
running sores to be without physic is dangerous for festering, so for us that
have running sores of sin, to be without afflictions.

3. All outward afflictions The end of afflictions.
serve to work the inward grief for sin, which if it be, the other is
needless.

4. An especial remedy The prefit of preparation for trouble
in trouble is to be prepared to undergo the same, whenever it comes.

5. Our woeful experience Afflictions unvvelcome to flesh and blood.
daily shows how unwelcome any affliction is unto the outward man, and
therefore what need we have to be well armed in the inner man, against
greater trials, lest we sink under them.

6. It cannot be denied Psalm. 89. 31, 32.
but that sin is the only deserving cause and occasion, of whatsoever evil
befalls us, and therefore the Lord is just in all the evils he brings upon
us, howbeit he has many ends why he lays them as well on Why the Lord
afflicts as well the godly as the ungodly.
the elect as reprobate. The wicked he plagueth to show his justice on them,
to increase their sin and condemnation, as also to make them inexcusable. The
elect he chastises to turn them from sin, and Job. 33 17. 1 Cor. 11. 32.
keep them from damnation: to make them partakers Psalm. 94. 13 Heb. 12. 10.
of his holiness, and preserve them from further 1 Pet. 1. 7. Psalm. 119. 67.
danger: to exercise their faith, manifest their strength or weakness, and
draw them nigher unto himself.

7. When we are in affliction, we are not so witty Man's scottishnesse in the
time of affliction.
of our selves, as to see the cause of it, or if we see the cause, we see not
the mercy of God, that his hand which is upon us is not a destroying hand, but
a delivering hand.

8. Whereas all Gods children be in continual battle against sin more or
less, it falls out for the most part, that as earthly Simil.
soldiers living at ease in their camp, the enemy has more vantage, and more
prevails; so in our prosperity the flesh usually prevails over the Spirit,
but when God sends some Affliction a special means to subdue the flesh.
affliction its as a fresh band of men to help the Spirit against the flesh,
whereby they daily get more victory.

9. This is a special comfort What comforts the Saints in their troubles.
in all afflictions, when first we believe that Gods meaning is to make us
better; and Secondly we find by experience that we be so, and daily hope for
more gain thereby.

10. The gain we are to What gain we are to make by our afflictions.
make by our afflictions is to be brought to more sight of our chief sins,
and sorrow for the same, to seek more earnestly for pardon thereof, and power
to amend: to fight the more against them, whereby they may be the more
overcome.

11. When God lays Why God lays his hand upon us.
his hand upon us, its that our faith and patience may be the more tried and
exercised to his glory, the example of others, and our own comfort.
Afflictions are to be taken as Physic to cure our infirmities


12. Howsoever God has diverse ends in the afflicting of his, and all are not
for the same, yet its safer for most Christians to take them as Physic to cure
their infirmities, which else would fester.

13. We must take all Afflictions dravv us nearer to God.
afflictions as means to pull us near unto God from sloathfulnesse.

14. The visitation of such Prosperity more to be feared then adversity.
as grow in grace is not so much to be feared, as their deliverances, lest
through unthankfulness and ease they lose the fruit they have so dearly
purchased of the Lord.

15. A Christian in the In affliction a Christian cannot judge of himself
aright.
time of his affliction, for the hardness of his heart, cannot judge of
himself, no more then a man sleeping of that he did waking, Simil.
whence it is, that many deceive themselves in looking to fee always the like
measure or greater of Gods graces in them, for there is some intermission in
the work of the new birth though the Spirit never depart, yet must not they
be secure herein, for this must humble them, though not dismay them.

16. No affliction so much What afflictions do most work on the godly.
crucifieth a true hearted Christian, as his own corruptions and temptations.

17. Its good for afflicted consciences to remember Remembrance of our future
state a comfort in trouble.
the state to come, that they which sow in tears shall reap in joy.

18. Its a common fault to be more touched when Private troubles do more
affect us then the public.
the cross privately touches us, then when the whole Church suffers.

Angels.
How the good Angels of How the Angels vvarch over us is not curiously to be
searched.
God watch over us, is not curiously to be searched after, but we must pray,
that by faith we may feel that they pitch their tents round about our
Tabernacles.

Anger.
Whether our anger be How spiritual anger may be discerned from carnal.
carnal or spiritual may be thus discerned; If it hinder not but quicken our
holy exercise of prayer and other religious duties, if it interrupt not our
meditations, nor withdraw us from performing our duty to the party offended,
neither make us peevish to others, its spiritual not carnal.

Assurance of Gods favor, Election, and Salvation.
1. As it is a most blessed estate to be hid under Gods What it is to be hid
under Gods vving.
wing, that is, to be sure by faith of Gods favor and protection, that he
will keep us from danger, or preserve us in it, that it hurt us not, and so in
the end deliver us, and make it profitable; So its hard to How hard it is to
have an assurance of Gods favor.
come to this, and harder to keep it, whereof amongst others, these may be
the causes: We too little think The causes hereof.
of such matters, or prise them not when we do; yet either we despair, or
presume and post off; if we go about them, yet through ignorance or sloth
attend not thereon. The remedy The remedie^s.
is to labor and pray to see 1.
the gain which might make our pain, pleasant; till then all will be tedious.
Wherein this may further: to consider our present 2.
days wherein no small store have been suddenly taken away from all they sore
toiled for. And seeing our father has allowed us 3.
sufficient of thesc things below, what childish folly is it to spend our time
in play as it were, and leave our chief duties, wherein we should most please
God, and most procure our own welfare, present peace, and What we must find
in ourselves to assure us of Salvation, and that we are beloved of God.
eternal happiness.

2. For our comfort in the assurance of salvation, we must consider what work
of Gods Spirit we do certainly find in our selves, as in particular, these.
1. A sound knowledge of the doctrine of Salvation. 2. a true belief of it. 3.
Joy and comfort in it. 4. desire and care to glorify God for it, in hating and
striving to forsake all sin, in loving and endeavoring to do all good, in
every of them, being humbled by reason of our weakness, yet comforted through
the measure of Gods grace in us.

3. As Gods children be The Saints infirmities hinder the^ of comfort that God
is well pleased with the^.
hindered many other ways so this way not the least, that by reason of our
common infirmities in our best actions we have not comfort that God is pleased
with us, and so are discouraged, and find not that joy in our profession we
might do, for redress hereof know we thus much, that herein we offer great
injury to God and our They are injurious ^o God which think nothing will
please him that has infirmity.
selves, in thinking God so strait and hard, that nothing will please him which
has infirmity, whereas indeed as he knows what we do or can do, so has
he revealed himself to be as ready to be pleased with the meanest
endeavors, and to forgive and bear with wants, as ever parents were. Again,
if we had not infirmities, Through Christ our infirmities are covered
what need we Christ one main benefit of his, being to cover our infirmities
Whence it comes to pass that so fevv be assured of Gods favor.
so then we ought to believe that God in Christ will forgive and accept us.

4. To have a sweet feeling of Gods fatherly love and so to know and be assured
our names are written in heaven, that we cannot perish, being (as Christ
teaches) the matter of greatest joy, as whereon all other comforts depend, and
without which there can be no sound joy, no marvel though so few attain
thereunto, it being reserved for such of Gods children as be deepest in favor
with him, the rest but seldom, and the hypocrite never soundly, but in fancy
enjoying the same. Though this be the free gift of God, given to whom, and so
long as pleases him, yet be there many lets which keep men from it, and
means to attain and keep it. Besides the common contemners, even in those
that feign Lets of this assurance.
would have this assurance, and often mourn for it, there be many lets. 1. A
great 1. Ignorance in most how or vvhereon to build it.
part be ignorant how or whereon to build this assurance, the most building
their faith on their life, which cannot be sound, and often fails and can never
be constant; whereas the true building is to build life on faith, and faith
only upon Gods mercy and truth revealed in his word, not to the righteous and
godly, but sinners and ungodly: thus, Seeing the Son of God The true
foundation thereon.
who has given himself to work man's redemption has freely offered himself
to save me a wretched sinner void of all grace, and subject to damnation,
promising fully to save me, if I will come to him, and wholly cast my self
upon him, receive him for my Savior, Lord, and Husband, and giving my self
wholly body and soul to be his to serve him for ever, therefore knowing and
believing that he both can and will indeed fully perform his promise, and
defiring to enjoy the same, do faithfully give and betroth my self to him,
and thereon do build my assurance, that I in him shall obtain Gods favor,
and all the fruits thereof, for my present comfort, and eternal happiness. 2.
Another great and common 2. Many will not go to the price of it.
let of this spiritual joy and comfort in the Lord even in those that often
complain of the want thereof, is this, that they will not go to the price of
it, that is, valuing it above all we can ask or think, therefore to sell all
for it, forgo any thing for it, and seeing what will keep us from it to put
it away, though as dear as our right eye, our gain, credit, ease, and
pleasure; and knowing any means that will help us to it, to spare no cost, no
time, no labor, but constantly to use all means till we get it, and so to
keep it. Now seeing this is tedious to our corrupt 3. Many are forgetful
therein
nature, many through mere forgetfulness (minding other things too much) let
all this care and travel alone, seldom or slightly minding this matter.
Others of mere slothfulness 4. Slothful
neglect to take the pains for it, whereas without much pains it will not be
gotten and kept, and none can be too much. Others too much in love with the 5.
In love with the world.
world, seeing the attaining and keeping of this assurance of God favor, will
not stand with the use of any unlawful gain, credit in the world or vain
delight, or with the abuse of lawful, therefore the covetous, ambitious, and
voluptuous* loath to forgo any part of their wealth, pomp, and state, of their
braverie, feastings, pastimes, and the like, can never get or hold this
precious treasure of rejoicing in the Lord. Among those may be reckoned such
who not so much choked with these, yet seeing that to hold this confidence
will cost them sore trouble and many afflictions, of mere fearefulnes 6.
Fearful and over-tender.
and over-tendernesse, being loath to suffer any thing, are discouraged from
seeking it, and so content to live without it. Others through mere distrust
that they 7. Distrustful.
shall never attain or hold it, faint and give over. In some there has been
some 8. Given unto some foul and reproachful sin.
foul and reproachful sin which lies as a thorn in the flesh, that til it
be pulled out there is no ease, which they loath to see, and more loath should
be seen, and they should bear the shame of, do so hide and smother, that in
the end it flameth out to their greater confusion. In all, the Lord has his
stroke, who for these or other most just causes often hides his loving
countenance from his own children, and though he love them, will not let them
see it, lest they should abuse it, and to make them set more by it, to seek it
earnestly and above all when they want it, and to keep it charily when they
have it. The remedies of all the former diseases be the earnest The remedies of
the forementioned lets.
labor for the contrary virtues, more to value this pearl, more to mind it,
to spare no pains in prayer, meditation and other good exercises, love and
desire nothing in comparison hereof: to hearten our selves against al
discouragements, and to be content to suffer any thing for it, and to rest on
Gods mercy and truth, that as he has given an heart to seek, so we shall in
the end obtain, and therefore to be patient and constant to the end, to pull
up any stub in our conscience, by wise means clearing our selves before God
and the world as need requires, and lastly to consider the many tokens we have
of Gods love though he seem to frown upon us, and to hide his face.

5. He that most denies Who may have most assurance.
himself, and of love yields himself wholly to God, may have most assurance
of his effectual vocation and election.

6. He that feels his heart fully persuaded of How to try the truth of our
assurance.
his Salvation must examine whether it breed answerable love, zeal, and care
to please God, with grief for offending his Majesty, else may it be but
presumption.

Atheism.
Atheism is more to be Atheism more to be feared then Popery.
feared then Papisme, seeing many renounce Popery, who yet care not for
Christianity.

Baptism.
1. The Ministers badnesse hinders not the efficacy of the Sacrament.
A Godly man may have his child baptized of a minister though unreverently
handling that holy mystery, that being alone the ministers sin, and which
cannot hinder the blessing of Gods ordinance: the Apostles being very ignorant,
baptized.

2. The Fathers presence is requisite at the baptizing The Fathers presence
requisite.
of the child to promise for it; or if he cannot come, to certify the
congregation that he would have his child baptized, and make that promise by
others which present he ought.

3. Baptism is a seal of the Cross of Christ. Baptism a seal of Christ's
Cross.


4. The child of an harlot may be baptized, though not for her sake, An
harlots child may be baptized.
yet for the forefathers within the same generation.

Benefits or Blessings.
1. In all our mirths and rejoicing we are to remember We are to be mindful
of the Spanish invasion and gunpowder treason.
the great benefit of our deliverance from the Spaniards in 88. and from the
Gun-powder-treason on the 5. of November, by means whereof we enjoy those
blessings we daily partake of.

2. As our hearts must We must be persuaded that Gods blessings flow from his
love in Christ.
rejoice in Gods benefits, so we must be persuaded that the same flow from Gods
fatherly love in Christ, else can we not give spiritual thanks, but either
none at all, or only carnal.

3. Being persuaded that Gods benefits toward Our love must be kindled
thereby.
us proceed from his love, the same should so kindle our love, that we should
heat thereby all that come near us, as fire does, the want whereof shows our
great unthankfulness.

4. Whereas the most Abuse of earthly blessings an hinderance from growth in
grace.
professors be in nothing more hindered, from growth in grace, yea and most
from true happiness, then by the abusing of those earthly blessings they enjoy,
health, wealth, beauty, strength, wit, learning, credit, friends, which through
their sin further their misery, and shall witness against them, this must
be accounted an high favor to a true believer Rightly to use them is Gods
special blessing.
to have grace so to use those, that they all may become his friends to further
his happiness, whereby he shall become more assured of Gods everlasting
favor, and have so many witnesses of the same.

5. This right use stands either tovvard
God
1. That they be received thankfully, so as every way Wherein the right use
of blessings consists.
they bind us more to him, more to love him, rest upon him, seek to him, and
serve him. 2. That they be all used to Romans 12. 1. 1 Cor. 10. 33.
his glory.
Man
Our selves
Temperatly: so as they no way hinder our Luc. 21. 34. 1 Cor. 9.
proceeding, but make us fitter. Providently Soul Body Luc. 16. 9. Ephesians. 4. 28.

Neighbors
Justly, Psalm. 15 Mercifully, Prove




6. Whereas there is no one thing which more Earthly care a maine hinderance of
our spiritual life.
hinders our spiritual life, then our care for earthly, its the special
favor of our Lord Jesus, to free us from this care, and to show us a way how
we may be abundantly provided for of all things necessary for this present
life, that so we may more seek spiritual: this he does by teaching us thus
to pra^, Give How the Lord freeth his therefrom.
us this day our daily bread, whereby he puts as it were a privy key into our
hands, to open all Gods treasures that by prayer of faith we may fetch from God.

7. Many times the Lord Why the Lord sometimes blesses ev^n above means.
above all means does bestow a blessing upon his children, even more then they
could look for, that they should not stay too much upon the means, but
acknowledge every good gift to come from him, and therefore stay themselves on
him, and to the same end also many times he crosses them in Sometimes erosseth
in the means.
the means, that either they cannot use them, or using them they prevail not,
even to humble them that he may be God above all.

8. When God bestows any good gift upon us The cross seasoneth Gods
blessings.
its good to feel some cross to seal and season it in us.

9. We often want outward Why many want outvvard blessings.
blessings, because we so little esteem inward graces.

10. Its a common thing God blesses before he punish.
with the Lord to bless before he punish.

Birthday.
The celebration of a How a man's birthday may be celebrated.
man's birthday may be used of some and at some times, without pomp,
superstition or carnal pleasure.

Buying and Selling.
1. In buying and selling we must be careful that Rules to be observed in
buying and selling.
every one may have benefit; and in selling rather to be under the market,
then otherwise.

2. In buying and selling this may be a good rule to guide us, to do as we
would be done unto, for example, when we sell consider we whether knowing the
marketable The trial of the rules.
price, and goodness of the thing, we would gladly give so much as we
demand, if we would not, we deal not justly; so in buying: but herein take
we heed that our hearts deceive us not, whereto we be very prone.

3. Its a sore disease common The love of gain h^vv common, dangerous, and
prejudicial
and dangerous among the best professors, that they for love of gain, do many
ways injure their neighbor, and allow themselves many practices contrary to
love, as buying a thing dear to sell for more then its worth, when they sell
it, and so casting their loss on their neighbor.

4. In buying and selling this is a sure rule, to be We must be sure our
neighbor gain by us.
sure our neighbor gains by us.

Calling.
1. IF earthly men in earthly Cheerfulness required in our callings,
especially the Ministry.
things do swallow up great troubles, and with cheerfulness undertake and
accordingly undergo many hard travells for the satisfying of their desires in
pleasure or profit, how much more ought we which be Christians, especially
Ministers to cheer up our hearts with the hope of our gain, that with glad
hearts we might study, pray, preach, and perform the like exercises.

2. They who have The rich must be most painful in their callings.
double allowance of food and wages, should do double service, therefore the
rich should more pain fully labor in their vocations.

3. No troubles unless they be in case of mere We must not forsake our
callings.
ungodliness may make us forsake our callings, which are never free from
trouble.

4. Whenever we be out of our calling Satan How dangerous to be out of our
calling
has fit occasion of tempting us.

Christ.
1. Two things are necessarily What do espouse us to Christ.
required to espouse us to Christ, the one, to use the pure means, the other
to use these means with pure hearts.

2. The only way to The way to come and receive Christ.
come to and receive Christ, is upon good knowledge of his excellency to
desire him, and by the free offer and faithful promise of himself to us poor
sinners, to give credit to his word, taking him for our Lord and Savior, to
give our selves wholly body and soul to him to be his faithful Spouse and
servants for ever.

3. By this among many How one may know whether he has received Christ.
other notes, may one know whether he indeed has received Christ, If he find
such affection to Christ in heaven, as is in a betrothed virgin to one whom
she dearly loves being beyond sea, thinking the time long till she enjoy his
sweet fellowship. This is too too rare.

Christian.
It were a very profitable The anatomy of a Christian in his several parts
how needful for us.
labor for our selves and others, to have the whole Anatomy of a Christian,
laid forth distinctly in all the virtues pertaining to him, in all the
corruptions cleaving to him, with all the promises of God, and privileges both
in this life, and the life to come, for encouragement: as in like manner all
the threats and miseries of the wicked here and hereafter, to enforce
abstinence from sin; every of them gathered clearly out of the Scripture with
the quotations.

Christianity.
1. It may be justly complained, that if the whole course of our best
professors (except very rare men, ministers and people, here and there one)
were rightly examined, that they are so far off from that course which is by
precept and example laid out to us in the Scriptures, that the most have need
to begin Most have need to begin all again.
all again, and to lay a better foundation in the assurance of their
salvation, for want whereof woeful The want of a good foundation what woeful
effects it produces.
effects follow, generally such a contentedness in their estate, because of
some conscience of duty remaining in them, that there is no sighing after a
better life, and therefore no great endeavoring for it, which breeds an
unco^fortable reckoning in the end, and indeed from hence it comes that the
secret ways of the Lord are not known nor sought after, but so it is for the
most part, that if a man have any grace more then is in the common multitude,
he is highly reckoned of, though he come more short of the true Christian
course which he should attain to, (and some careful Christians do) then he
goes beyond the multitude, and to such a pass is our Christian profession
come, that if any should step beyond this common coldness and backwardness,
he is thought worse of; as if in godly grief, too melancholique; if in zeal,
too heady and undiscreet; if in humility, too silly and foolish; if in love
and liberality, too careless of his estate; and so in other particulars.

2. Christianity seems Christianity the only liberty.
a bondage, that a man may not do what he list, but is forced, yet indeed its
the only liberty to the re generate, who would not do otherwise: to whom
only sin is a bondage. Those having within them a good conscience, (which is
a continual feast) do find here even in this life no small pleasure in the
service of God. Besides their joy in the assurance of the reward to come, which
is unspeakable. Contrarily, there is no peace to the wicked, The wicked Satan's
bo^dslaves.
though to outward appearance they live pleasantly, yet are they Satan's
bondslaves, and after this life shall be tormented with him and his angels
world without end.

A civil life.
Many living a civil honest life, (as its termed) Gods goodness in making
civil men on their deathbed reveal their hidden sins.
and yet lying in some secret sins, do at or before their death often detest
the same, and shame themselves, which is Gods goodness, to show the truth of
his threatening, to stop the rage of the wicked, and keep his from security.
Whence it comes to pass that the godly live not merrily in this world.


Comforts.
1. Its much to be lamented that God having provided that his children might
live merrily in him, few find this more then in prosperity as worldlings do,
which comes by our ignorance, or light regard, or want of faith of obtaining
those sweet co^forts the Lord has provided for us.

2. They be few that Why so fevv have assurance they be in Christ.
have good assurance they be in Christ, which comes by our mere negligence in
making sure our calling and Election, no marvel though such feel small
comfort in their profession, contrarily, who so has this assurance, it must
needs be great ignorance or sloth which deprives them of the same.

3. To an afflicted conscience this is comfortable, that although it come to
pass after some travel in the new birth Gods graces be not so sweet, nor
sin so grievous as it was at our first entrance into regeneration, but we
are now weaker in the less assaults, then at the beginning in our stronger
temptations, yet are we not to despair, considering that gratiousproceeding
comes from God, who showed Why God shows himself more favorable in the
beginning of our conversion then afterward.
himself more favorable in our first beginning, lest he should discourage us,
and for that we wholly rested on him, even in our least temptations, denying
our selves, and now hides himself for a season, to make and give us try all of
our strength when as we less forsake and suspect our selves; no not in greater
temptations, that we taking the foil might be humbled, and acknowledge the
continuance of our health to come only from him.

4. Many hinder themselves from true comfort All true comfort comes from Gods
rich mercy.
in feeking it from their own worthiness, which they do in being without
hope because of their unworthiness, when as all true comfort comes from Gods
rich mercy with whom is plentiful redemption.

5. As its dangerous to persuade our selves of comfort, when there is no
feeling of inward corruptions, so it is perilous to refufe all comfort when our
sincere purposes are defiled with many corruptions in our practices, and
therefore they from who^ Satan labors to steal away the sincerity of their
Its sometimes Satan's policy that we should still complain and grieve for our
corruptions.
hearts must take heed they be not still complaining and grieving for their
corruptions, as that they obscure the work of Gods spirit (which must
encourage us against our manifold faintings) and make them to walk
uncheerfully in their callings, seeing that the glorious bloodshed of Christ is
not so impotent, as being of force to save the greatest sins and sinners, it
should not be able to purge the smaller infirmities of the Saints, and if any
think their prayers and obedience all but in fashion, this sense with grief
shows that it is not altogether in fashion, and the sense of this
imperfection does more please the Lord, then the imperfection does displease
him.

Gods children often see The godly are often deprived of the comfort which they
had before.
no comfort in their life though they have had true comfort, and have forgotten
it, or suspect it, who though they should die, without that sense of comfort
they desire, yet their salvation is not to be doubted of, seeing they shall
not be judged according to the instant of their death, but the course of their
life. We are not Gods mercies toward such in their death not to be
mistrusted.
therefore to mistrust Gods mercy in death, be we never so uncomfortable, if
so be it has been before sealed in our vocation and sanctification.

Communion.
1. For sitting or kneeling at the communion its The peace of the Church to be
sought.
good to seek the peace of the Church, lest the remedy of evil be worse then
the evil it self.

2. A good minister will A minister must prepare his people before hand.
take great care to prepare his people for the Communion, both privately and
publicly, marking their proceeding thereafter.

3. These promises are Promises to be required of Communicants.
fit to be taken of them who first are received to the communion, and that in
the sight of God, and presence of some faithful witnesses, that they would
labor, 1. To grow in 1.
knowledge of the word. 2. To depart from their 2.
former sins, and to lead an holy life. 3. To keep 3.
the Sabbaths in godly exercises as much as may be, and come to be instructed
publicly and privately. 4. If they fall into any sin 4.
to abide the censure of the Church, yea not profiting in knowledge to be
suspended from the Sacrament.

4. After we have partaked Examination required after our participation
thereof.
of the holy communion, we are to examine our selves, whether we received the
same worthily, and that whether we had Christ, the trial whereof is by our
comfort Whether or not we have received Christ therein.
of all good from him, and our conscience to yield our selves wholly to be
his, and to serve him; Oh the happiness of such as have received him, they
watch and pray lest they enter into temptation.

The Communion of Saints.

Its a principal part of the communion of Saints We must still be doing or
receiving good.
to be most careful either to be doing or receiving good, therefore when we
joy to see our friends, this must humble us, that we want this Communion.

Compassion.
We must learn to We are to sympathize with others in their grief
pity them that being grieved with themselves, and find no peace with God,
are grieved with others and impatient, for this was in David and others of Gods
dear servants.

Complaint.
1. We complain of We make little use of our complaints.
many things amiss, but see not, nor search for the cause, much less labor
to remove it, and so make little use of our complaints.

2. It cannot be but a most dangerous estate, to How dangerous to complain
of our weakness, and yet therevvith to please our selves.
be ever complaining of our weakness, and yet therewith to please our selves,
though we find no prevailing against the same.

Concupiscence.
To avoid concupiscence, By what means concupiscence may be avoided
continually examine thy self by the law; meditate with reverence on the word;
walk painefully in thy honest calling, shame thy self before thy friends; use
temperate diet, sleep, apparel; watch over thine own eyes, ears, and other
parts of thy body; have a zealous jealousy of places, persons, and all
occasions, to avoid the evil, and seek the good; humble thy self with shame
of sins past, grief of sins present, and fear of sins to come, with a
diligent use of fasting, prayer, and watching as need requires.

Conference.
1. Its too commonly seen even among dear friends and those also true
Christians that in much talking even about good In conference contention often
arises.
things also, there fall out diversities of opinions, which commonly (if great
care and conscience be not had) breed contrary reasonings, in which most
offend by stiffenesse in maintaining thereof, and hard it is not to let slip
some inconsiderate speech, which if it be ill taken makes breach of love, and
falling out many times when no ill was meant, whereupon considering me thinks
the The fault is principally in the ill taking of things spoken.
greater fault is in the ill taking of any thing spoken or done, rather then in
doing or speaking, for this proceeds rather from temeritie and
inconsiderateness, upon a sudden motion, which a right good man may offend in
against him whom he dearly loves, and proceeds not simply from so great want
of love, as might be thought; even as we may see in a loving mother to her
child. But ill taking proceeds from more deliberation and reasoning The reason.
of the matter, and more manifestly bewrayes want of love to take any thing
worse then is meant in either party. Its a sin Three several faults compared
together.
to speak inconsiderately that which may offend, a greater to take that speech
in ill part, and the greatest for the first to take in ill part that his speech
was ill taken. Prayer requisite before conference.


2. Being to confer of any weighty matter, we are to prepare our selves by
prayer both to speak and hear.

3. The viewing, touching, Suspicion of evil to be avoided
or familiar talking with a woman, especially religious, either without
necessary occasion, or then without prayer for holy affection is dangerous.

Confidence.
1. Its a sinful fearfulness How dangerous it is not to confess our
confidence in God.
in any sound Christian, not to profess his confidence in the Lord, and not to
glory in his portion, and to have no comfort that he glorifieth God. This is
found very dishonorable to God, unprofitable to themselves, and hurtful to
good and bad.

2. It seems that of all Confidence and comfort in God he Christians crown.
the gifts of the Spirit, our confidence and comfort in God, should especially
be called our crown, as every way the chiefest for our selves.

3. Herein may we be How to be confident about Gods judgeme^ts.
confident, that God has provided a way, whereby we may be assured either to
escape the judgment which falls upon others, or at least to be bettered
thereby, that it do us no hurt.

Conscience.
1. The testimony of A good conscience may breed joy, a bad sorrovv: with the
reasons of either.
a good conscience may, ought, and does breed joy, because it confirms to a
man that he does believe, and ought not make him believe who did not. So the
accusation of man's conscience, that his life shows no sound fruit of faith,
may, ought, and does often breed sorrow and fear, for that it bewrayes the want
of faith, and ought not hinder him from believing, who does not at all, or very
little; whereupon follows, that all such as be so careless in their life,
ought to doubt What the careless in their life are to do.
whether they truly believe, and so be grieved for it, that they rest not,
till they by application of Gods promises unto them do soundly believe, that
thereby their life may be amended, and their hearts soundly rejoiced; by all
which appears that true Godliness increases not faith, but shows faith,
True godliness increases not faith; nor ungodliness decrease it.
and so makes more sure of salvation then bare faith: neither ought any
ungodliness decrease our faith, but rather show the want of faith, and thereby
drive men to seek more soundly to believe, lest they perish.

2. In affliction especially when the conscience How to comfort the conscience
in time of affliction.
(though persuaded that the Lords intent hereby is to make us better) can
hardly find comfort of Gods love that he is not offended, its good to apply
this comfort, that, being in Christ nothing shall be laid to our charge,
neither any thing condemn, seeing God in Christ is fully satisfied.

Consent.
Ifonce we give consent to sin, we are made Dangerous to give consent to sin.
ready to fall into more and many sins, and making no conscience of one sin,
we shall not make conscience of many and great sins, and so being once
inwrapped in sin, its an hard thing to get out of Hard to get out of the
devils clavves.
the claws of the devil. Lord give us grace to see and resist the very first
sin.

Contempt of Grace.
1. Though it be wonderful Whence it is that many do not embrace pardon and
life offered to them.
that any sinner knowing pardon and life to be offered to him, should at least
not embrace it, yet both Scripture and experience daily show it to be so, even
as in many earthly cases is to be seen: let a Prince offer pardon to many
rebels, or a father reconciliation to his disobedient son, or a Physician
healing medicines to his diseased patients, not a few of them reject the same.
The causes of this contempt may be 1. From ignorance
many; some men of mere ignorance know not the excellency of the benefit, and
therefore neglect. Other 2. From fear it would cost too dear.
would be glad of it, but judge it would cost them too dear, too much travail
and pain to come by it. Others through infidelity (naturally running 3. From
infidelity.
in all, till God give more grace) do distrust they shall never have it, and
so deprive themselves of it: by all which and the like means it comes to
pass, that though grace in the Gospel be offered to all, and many know so
much, yet very few truly embrace it, even such alone whom God draws.

2. Such is the corruption of our nature that the best things wax vile by Why
the Gospel is not now so respected as before.
the commonnesse of them, no marvel then that the Gospel have no such credit,
and be so loved, reverenced, and embraced now, as it was at the first entrance
thereof amongst us.

Contentation.
1. Unless a man be persuaded by faith that he dischargeing his duty How to
use this world well.
for his maintenance, that portion which God sends is fittest for him, and
that he can be content to be poor, he can never use this world well.

2. To breed contentment with our condition How to be content with our
condi^ion.
whatsoever; weigh we, 1. That nothing comes to pass without Gods decree and
providence. 2. That the same is not only good in respect of God, but also for
the best to all Gods children, wherewith therefore we ought to be contented.

Contracts.
1. Contracts before Directio^s touching Contracts before marriage.
they be published by the Minister are to be known of him, and therein this
is a good orderly proceeding before some honest witnesses to demand, 1. How
near or far off in consanguinity they be. 2. Whether they together 2.
or either of them to other have been precontracted. 3. Whether they 3.
have their parents consent, without the knowledge whereof he is not to
proceed. 4. Whether they 4.
purpose to solemnize their marriage in the congregation. These being granted
before the parents or their 5.
vicegerent to proceed to 6.
prayer, and exhortation to some general duties of men and women, and so to
contract according to the common Liturgy in the sight of God with prayer The
exhortation (after the defense of this duty belonging to the Minister) may be
briefly a discourse of the doctrine of the law and faith applied to their
estate of marriage, and so their special callings, and most need.

2. They which contract themselves without their The Parents consent to be had.
governors or parents consent, if they be alive, are to confess their fault
publicly before they be married, that others may hear and fear.

Corruption.
1. Such is the corruption of our nature that Men do less esteem Gods graces
when they most abound.
though we be wonderfully delighted with Gods graces, yet when we abound
with them, we less esteem them, then when we begun to enjoy them.

2. Our corruption is Our corruptions like the wantonness of children.
like to the wantonness of children, who either will do as they list, or else
leave all undone.

3. Its a common corruption Immoderate grief occasioneth forget fullness of
former mercies.
so to grieve at evils present, that unthankfully we forget former mercies.

4. Its too common a Dangerous to reveal some* conceal our greatest
infirmities.
corruption that we can disclose many of our infirmities, and keep the
greatest close.

Good Counsels.
Believe to be saved, as a Publican; live as a Justiciarie: How to believe to
be saved, live, pray, labor for grace, provide for our souls.
Pray as idle beggars who live by begging: Labor for grace, as worldlings toil
for wealth: Provide for thy soul as thou do for thy body, rest, food,
apparel, and such like necessaries; feed Note.
to be fitter to labor: so labor, as to get a stomach to thy food.

Holy Days.
IN those, we must redeem the time in resting The use of holy days.
from our callings.

Death.
1. This amongst others ought often to be thought on, to have all things in a
We are to be in readiness against our departure out of this world, daily
preparing for the same.
readiness against our departure out of this wretched world, and therefore not
only to set our outward estate in order (which natural wise men do) for the
good and peace of our posterity, but especially to set our spiritual state in
such a readiness, that we may with continual care and comfort, wait for our
change, and our Saviors second coming, and withal to leave to our posterity
some testimony of Gods satherly dealing with us, and fidelity in performing
his promise to us, the seed of faithful parents, that our posterity may be
hereby stirred up to serve the Lord God of their fathers.

2. We can better away To meditate on death or judgeme^t, which best liked.
to meditate on death which Satan covers with eternity following; then on
the day of judgment where we all must make our accounts.

3. The bare meditation of death does so far move us from suffering with
delight to dwell on earthly things, as reason disswadeth us to make any cost
about a tenement, where we know we shall dwell but a while, yet such
imaginations of death build up in the mean time the kingdom of pride in us.
Wherefore it shall be How to meditate on death profitably.
more availeable, when we meditate of putting off this Tabernacle, we think
also of putting on the Tabernacle of Righteousness, and how without that we
shall never stand with comfort before Christ in his Kingdom.

4. As we are so to How to think of life and death.
think of life that we be content to die, so we are to think of death,
that we be contented to live. The fear of death is no more to be disliked,
then The fear of death not to be disliked.
not to fear, for both may be with good conscience, and in faith, if they
exceed not; for its allowed by grace and nature to fear Gods judgments.

5. To call to mind old sins of them which are The use to be made of dying
people.
a dying is necessary to be done of those which visit them, for if they have
truly repented them, then are they not guilty of them, and others may profit
thereby. If they be guilty, the trouble of their mind shall turn to their
good, in that they find their judgment in this world, and escape the
everlasting judgment to come.

Decay in grace.
1. A most grievous A great judgment it is not to thrive by the many helps
we have of our spiritual nourishment.
judgment of God it is (though secret and therefore not to us so sensible)
that having many excellent helps for our spiritual nourishment, yet Gods curse
seems to be thereon, in that we thrive so little thereby, wherein
notwithstanding the Lord is to be cleared, who (giving his grace ordinarily by
means) does most justly The causes hereof.
keep it from us, partly for our unworthiness, either for some old sin 1.
unrepented of, or some present corruption not resisted, 2.
and partly for our contempt of it, in that we setting so little by it, have so
slightly sought it, and having received it in any measure, were no more charie
and careful in keeping it, but through our carelessenesse lost it, and through
our pride and presumption provoked the Lord to take it from us, let our earnest
purpose and The R^medie.
prayer be, for the better obtaining of it, to avoid the letts, and to use
more carefully and constantly all good helps, and particularly holy conference,
which by experience we shall find to be exceeding profitable.

2. The causes why many The causes why many decrease in godliness.
decrease in godliness be diverse, as namely the neglect of those means 1.
which before they used especially of the private dealings with themselves, and
brotherly conferences in such strict manner as before, whereof we be soon
weary, in that by nature we seek our ease, and through custom grow cold,
and through security and pride wax blind and see not our need thereof. So
also that we by Satan's 2.
suggestion and our own corruption do privily fall into a good liking of our
estate in regard of former grace received, whereby it comes to pass, that we
feeling our selves to be freed from the danger of sin and condemnation, do
not so fear it, neither are terrified with the sight of it in us, but through
a privy presumption of our safety, we easily pardon our selves, and deal not
so straightly with our selves as before, and thus sin creepes sore upon us to
our great hurt. Some there be, though the 3.
fewer, who more then they ought torment themselves for their little growth.
Others (and those the greater sort) 4.
who have and do continue in a careless peace, whom indeed it much concerns
to be humbled for their little growing in grace. The mean wherein a man may
with some The Remedies.
comfort stay himself must partly arise from a wise judgeing of himself by
comparing his former and present estate both in the use and profit received by
the means: wherein this may fitly be considered, that a young plant does more
sensibly show his growth, then an old tree, but the old tree brings forth
more sound fruit in his season; the decay or want whereof we must thus
remedy, even by calling our selves to a strait account, to see upon what
warrant we enjoy our peace, and so to fear our hearts with such testimonies
of Scripture as do tell us that this life is not the life of a Christian, who
must be a new creature, and must walk in the spirit, and must mortify the
deeds of the flesh, that so we may withdraw peace from our consciences till we
see some change of our troubled state, and recoverie thereof.

Delay.
Many times when we Why the Lord often delayeth comfort.
have used all good means the Lord deferreth the success, that we being the
more humbled, may be the fitter to receive comfort.

Delight.
Who so delights in Who the Lord delights in
the Lord, in him does the Lord delight.

Devils.
1. By creation good A description of the devils or evil spirits
Spirits; by their fall damned and wicked spirits changed into evil: finite,
immortal, invisible, adversaries to man's salvation, exceeding many, of great
power, Lions, able to do any thing not above nature; in respect of their
malice, compared to Dragons; their subtlety, Serpents; their experience,
termed old, using secret ambushes with shows of good; tempting the profane,
never to mind salvation; the civil to rest in common honesty, as the carnal
protestant in outward holiness; the weak believer either to be scrupulous, or
to take vice for virtue through ignorance; the strong to sin against knowledge
and presume, to hinder a greater duty by a less, to use good actions to bad
ends, to do evil that good may come thereof, to grieve so for one sin as to
neglect others; so running into extremities; yea to wink at sin, to think
it tolerable, to taste it, to commit it, to continue in it, to defend it.

2. This is much to be lamented, that in time of superstition men were more
feared with the devil when they heard of his horns, claws, hollow Of old,
men were more afraid of the devil then now.
voice, and such like, then now in the Gospel when they hear of his privy
working and fighting against men's souls, which is much more dangerous, and yet
is nothing feared, and yet we can never believe and feel the gracious Note.
help of Gods holy Angels, till we believe and feel the hidden assaults of
Satan and his Spirits.

3. As God and his good Angels are about us, so is The protection of the good
angels comfort in well doing; as the evil spirits being about us humbles
in evil doing.
the devil and his evil spirits; and as good Angels have been seen, so have
and may be the wicked spirits, not souls of men, but devils in the air; and
the knowledge hereof is greatly for our comfort in well-doing, that being in
great danger void of all help of man, yet God is with us, and his Angels, for
our humbling in evil doing, that though no man see or can hurt us, yet the
devil and his spirits be about us.

Discerning.
1. Many are outwardly Man sees not as God sees.
well, that is, rich in this world, which are inwardly ill, that is, poor in
Gods account, and many hate outward evil things, which for want of spiritual
knowledge, or the spirit of discerning, see not the corruptions of the heart.

2. Wisdom must be Wisdom and charity requisite
desired in discerning of men, but charity in judgeing and praying for them.

3. They with whom we would converse may Three notes whereby to try those
with whom we would converse.
be tried by these three notes, 1. Whether in professing godliness, they
speak upon grounded knowledge. 2. What feeling they have of their inward
corruptions. 3. How loving they are to others in being ready to do them good,
and wary to speak of their infirmities, and that with grief.

Discipline.
1. We are bound to be thankful to God for that discipline we have, (though
there be great want of it) for its the Lords will to advance his glory hereby,
in taking that to Gods vvisdome in affording no stricter discipline.
himself, which if we had stricter discipline we would attribute to it, for
besides that he does that by his word and prayer which may be done by
discipline, it may be discipline would hide many hypocrites, which now are
discovered, and cover many a Christian heart which now are known, for they
that be godly now, be godly of conscience, being a discipline to themselves,
but many may seem godly under discipline which do it for fear rather then
for love.

2. This is a good order A good order of discipline.
of discipline, first generally to declare that, 1. Sin is broken forth. 2.
To name the sin. 3. The party offending, after to admonish him, then to
suspend him, lastly to leave him to Satan.

Despair.
1. Its a fearful and dangerous policy of Satan to make men continue in
sin without care of recoverie, in taking from them all hope thereof, which he
How the devil drives to despair.
does by persuading them that their sins be so great, so many, and of so
long continuance that they cannot be forgiven.

2. A dangerous policy of Satan it is to provoke Satan tempts at sometimes
to desperation, as at other to presumption.
men to despair inperswading them they have no faith at all, because they have
it not in this and that particular: again in provoking to presumption to
persuade them thus, I hope I have faith in general, and therefore my faith is
sound in every particular.

Distrust.
1. Distrust is a doubting of Gods help in our How capital a sin distrust is,
need: its a capital sin above others, robbing God of his truth, power,
wisdom, mercy, and his other attributes, drawing others by our example to
distrust, which in like manner robs man of his chief comfort in all
distresses.

2. How prone we are We are prone to it.
to it may appear in our trials of pain, debt, and the like, wherein we
trust to means.

3. We fall into this by How we fall therein
resting too much on means, neglecting to meditate on Gods truth.

4. To trust on God is How to remedy it.
the special remedy to cure this malady. Gods former liberality does not
prejudice his future mercies.


5. Its a common temptation to afflicted consciences to persuade themselves
after some few deliverances that they can look for no more, because the Lord
has been so liberal, but these must know that God is not like man, for his
gifts are without repentance, and when he begins to show mercy he will never
cease. Note.


Doctrine.
When there is a doctrine general or equity in the word, the examples though
particular may be generally applied.

Doubting.
1. What manner of doubting may stand with Hard to discern what doubting
stands with faith.
faith, though it weaken faith, and what doubting quite shuts out faith, is not
easily seen, and more hardly uttered to the sight of the weak.

2. Although this be by the wise providence of God that many of Gods true
children, who therefore have had sound com Gods children doubt and vvaver
oftentimes, which the Lord disposes to good.
fort in Christ, do especially in their infirmity often greatly waver and doubt
and so become uncomfortable, which the Lord for good cause disposes, lest by
their sudden change from so damnable State and uncomfortable, to so happy and
joyful, they should be lifted up, made conceited and secure, and so
presumptuous, the forerunners and causes also of a fearful fall; yet this is
certain, that this is their sin, a weakness which To doubt is a sin, and
to be withstood.
must be withstood and overcome, for the attaining whereto, the cause of this
doubting must be searched and so removed, which ordinarily is our own
infirmities, neglect and How to remove the same.
weakness in good duties, too great pronenesse and strength in sin,
whereupon the tender conscience fears his former comfort was vain, and so
doubts of his estate; for the right removing hereof, this is duly to be
considered that as the root of our comfort in Christ is not the strength of
our Christian life, so the weakness herein ought not to breed doubting of our
salvation by Christ. But Causes of Salvation.
for so much as all our comfort stands in this that God who justifies the
ungodly has freely given his Son, and in him is reconciled to us being his
enemies, and has by his Gospel called us, and by his spirit wrought faith in
our hearts to receive Christ so given unto us, whereby we being dead in sin
and having no goodness in us, were made alive to God, and so were newborn,
and then do begin to be changed first in affection, and then in
conversation by little and little, from a child growing to a riper age in
Christ. Therefore if we The assurance of our new birth a remedy against
doubting.
have this assurance of our new birth, though we feel much weakness of the
spiritual life, yet we ought not to doubt whether we be Gods children,
seeing he that is so newborn as aforesaid, can never die; but rather we are
to remember, 1. We are but children, and therefore weak. 2. We are very
subject to many spiritual diseases, some such as take away sense of life, and
therefore must seek to be cured and not despair of life seeing we cannot
perish. This cannot breed security Sense of our weakness and infirmities no
breeder of security.
in sin to any, for he that seeing himself miserable does believe to be
saved by Christ, cannot but love God, and for love study and travel to obey
him, no more then fire can be without heat, so that they who say they thus
believe and live not Christianly, are liars and the truth Faith and an holy
life go together.
is not in them. If any tender conscience, ignorant and weak (for so must they
needs be) should say, I am such a one, because they Comfort to a tender
conscience
feel so little grace in them, they may manifestly be disproved by the true
effects of faith, which no faith can be without, true love of God, his Word,
his Saints, desire to please God, grief for former and present sins, and
such like. If any hypocrite The hypocrite disproved.
will say he thus believes, and in some measure thus lives, let him try his
inward affections why he does all duty, it will be found not in love to God
and recompense of his kindness, but either for the credit of the world, or
mercenarily for obtaining Gods favor, whom his security, jollitie,
presumption, and want of sense of his infirmities and of an holy fear of
falling and care to please God in secret will descrie.

3. A true believer falling into sin, ought (if he can) Having fallen into
sin to doubt of Gods favor will not raise up.
hold his confidence, though he be foulie fallen, and rather lament that he
Gods child should so dishonor his father; for the doubting of Gods favor
cannot raise him from his fall, but the beholding of it, is that alone which
will breed holy and acceptable sorrow for sin and conscience of amendment.

4. Its evident that many They who most suspect their own weakness prove
strongest in the time of trial.
of the carefullest Christians seeing their infirmities, do most doubt whether
they have faith, who yet for the most part in time of trial find more then
others who be more secure and confident, but yet this is their fault, that
they look too much to effects and not to the cause of their justification, and
in beholding the effects The saints look too much on the effects, too little
on the causes of justification.
through ignorance and fear, judge amiss, not seeing the true effects of
faith in them, being blinded with their wants.

5. This is found in many true Christians, that they often doubt of their
salvation, and fear they be not Gods children, because they see such sins
and wants in themselves, and hereupon be often moved to greater care of an holy
life thinking that otherwise Many seeing much corruption in themselves,
weaken their faith that they might by fear be made more careful in life,
who should indeed increase their faith, that they might be more quickened
thereby to an holy life.
they may not believe; and on the other side, that if they see more
mortification of their corruptions, and more strength to good duties, that they
may boldly believe: wherein they pitifully deceive themselves many ways, 1.
That they often obtain not their desire in mortification. 2. That if they by
this means prick themselves to more care for a season, yet so soon as their
fear is slacked their care is ended. 3. That if their care should continue,
yet this is not that which can either cause them first to believe, or else any
way increase their faith, only this can more certainly prove, that they have
and do indeed believe, and so may comfort them; for there is nothing that can
beget or increase faith, but Gods promise, and seals thereof truly applied.
They therefore who doubting do thus think to increase faith by leading a
better life, do take a wrong course, and plainly show that in their holy
life, they seek themselves and not the Lord, and are not moved thereto by the
true love of God, which is the chief mother of true obedience, whereas they
ought rather, (having good cause to doubt whether they have soundly believed,
seeing they find in themselves no comfortable fruits of their faith) to labor
more steadfastly to believe, that so their faith, as fire increases by the
heat of it, may send forth more fervent effects of love to God and obedience,
which shall then effectually comfort them, seeing such fruits of such a root.

6. In the deepest thoughts of our salvation A principal means of vveakning
faith.
this often rises up to weaken our faith, that God having ordained some to
destruction, and yet (to make the sole cause of man's perdition to be in
himself) prepared a remedy for all, and in his testament bequeathed it to all,
and publicly proclaimed it to the world, though for his part determining to
give grace to receive it only to his chosen, and to leave the other to
themselves, what warrant we have to believe, that we are of them to whom God
has determined to give his grace, and who indeed shall receive it, and not of
those who herein deeply deceive themselves, whereunto the The removal thereof.
soundest answer is this, that, the secret determination of God is to
himself, and not to be enquired in to of us, who cannot know our election till
we know our effectual calling; who to this end must attend to his revealed
will, wherein he certifieth all to whom the Gospel comes, that he would have
none perish, but believe, and therefore inviteth all of them, exhorts,
entreats the^ by his ministers to be reconciled unto him, and sore threatens
if they believe not. Upon all which this may be concluded, that its great
sin and folly for him to whom the Lord has revealed his will concerning his
salvation, and by many means prepared him thereto (as giving him sight and
sense of his misery, knowledge of, and unfeigned desire of Christ the only
remedy, calling and commanding him to receive him, together with clear
knowledge that he in his word has promised this remedy to him) for him I say
its great sin notwithstanding all this (upon no ground, but only a
suspicious fear) to doubt that God will not yet save him, but does this to his
farther condemnation, whereof there is no fear, but to such as contemn this
grace, or receive it in vain, not being drawn thereby in truth to love and
seek Gods honor by unfeigned obedience to his will, whereas all they who
knowing the benefit by Christ in respect of the greatness of it, and their
own great unworthiness do fear they shall never obtain it, though they
above all desire it, they I say ought to be bold and count it no presumption
Its no presumption to give credit to God in his Word.
to give credit to God in his word, that he will according to his promise
bestow his Son, and in him eternal life upon them; for such does Christ
expressly call unto him, Mat. 11. 28. yea hereupon ought they boldly without
fear to adventure their souls health and eternal happiness, that by this
persuasion they may be drawn to love and obey God, and so be confirmed, yea
more to fear their hearts from this horrible sin of unbeleefe (the greatest
of all other) Unbeleefe an horrible sin.
whereby they knowing what God has said, yea unto them, do yet in not giving
credit to him that he will be as good as his word, make him a liar, and so a
false God; much more such as have received the earnest of Gods Spirit renewing
their heart^ and lives, ought to be of good comfort and shake off such doubts.
The cause of this Causes of distrust.
distrust is in many their own unworthiness, which bewrays great ignorance
and error, that God gives his Son to the worthy, though not of merit (which
no Protestant holds) but ofmeer mercy to those that truly repent them,
(which is petie Popery) whereas the truth of God is, that he having given his
Son to none but such as had no grace nor repentance in them, that they by
receiving Christ by faith, might receive grace to begin to repent, and so
daily to grow therein, therefore as none ought to believe because they have
repented, so none ought to be afraid to believe because of his Our unvvorthines
must not let us from believing.
unworthiness, the sense whereof does make him most fit to believe, and
receive Christ. The want of knowledge and due regard of this one point is a
principal cause of distrust on the one side, and vain presumption on the
other, both works of perdition.

7. For removing of How to remove doubts of Gods favor.
our doubts of Gods favor either generally or in some particular actions*
there must be, 1. A sound judgment to direct when we ought to doubt or not,
and 2. A daily labor according to our judgment to doubt and believe as cause
is.

Dreams.
Of dreams which make some deep impression in The use to be made of dreams
whether
us, and abide longer, its good to make some profit, and they may be thought to
come from God or the devil, according to their diverse ends and effects. An
evil,
evil dream shows an evil heart, in some sin either committed, or whereto
we be subject, and may shortly follow. If they be terrible, they may terrible,
forewarne of some evil to come, that we may avoid it by good means, yet so
as we neither fear or
them too much, nor quite contemn them: so for the good, that we persuade not
our selves of having it, good.
nor yet neglect it. The same may be said for the event of witcheries and
slanders.

Dullness and Deadness.
1. A common thing it is in Gods children after Dullness when chiefly found.
their greatest joys to feel great dullness and deadness of mind. When the
same seiseth upon us, 1. We ought to search the cause, whetherdoing some The
causes thereof to be searched
evil, leaving off some good to be done, neglecting the means of salvation,
not seeing or not repenting some sin seen, or not repenting so soundly; or
for unthankfulness for former graces. 2. We must use the remedy, not The
remedy to be used.
pleasing our selves in this deadness, but stirring up our selves as from
slumber, calling to mind Gods special mercies on us, and our unworthy
receiving and using of them, using all good means to quicken us. 3. In using
the means to offer our selves to God, Gods help to be vvaited for.
waiting patiently for his help, esteeming neither too little nor too much our
Note.
affliction.

2. It falls out that Gods children are sometimes more dull with the Why the
godly are sometimes more dull with the public means then without.
public means, then without, which may arise from hence, that either they
are too remiss in the use of the private, or else fall to loathing the
public, because they have them so often, or put too much confidence in such
places, which the Lord corrects by denying the use, and such like.

Duty.
For infirmities sake to leave a duty undone is to The omission of a duty for
infirmities sake how dangerous.
cover sin, not to overcome it.

Earnestness.
IN our earnestness its In earnestness the heart is to be searched
necessary to searth our hearts, whether it be of the Spirit, or of the flesh,
and if we cannot see the depth of our hearts, it argues want of prayer and
travailing with our affections to know them.

Ease.
Long ease will bring either Long ease how dangerous.
superstition, profaneness or heresy through our corruption.

Elect and Reprobate.
A Reprobate of knowledge Difference betvveene the faith of the elect and of
the reprobate
lying in despair, may believe that both Christ can and would ease him, if he
could believe and come unto Christ to be eased, but distrusting this, comes
not, turns away from God. But the elect believing that Christ will ease all
comers to him, is drawn by Gods Spirit to apply this to himself, and make
reckoning he coming shall be eased, and therefore indeed seeks with faith
to Christ, and is eased; to come to Christ is not simply to believe, What it is
to come to Christ.
but (believing Christ will be as good as his word) in spirit to go unto the
throne of grace, and desire the same, as a beggar invited comes for relief.

Evils.
These be two evils very dangerous: To pretend Two dangerous evils.
great comfort, and make small conscience in our life, and to confess our
faith is weak, and yet to be content therewith.

Excuse. Unvvillingnesse to do good to be striven against

When we are unwilling to do good, an excuse is too ready, its good therefore
earnestly to strive to overcome this, and then to take opportunity to do the
same.

Examples.
Particular examples Particular examples when to be made general instructions.
may be made general instructions, when the cause of the mis general.

Exercise.
As God has given great variety of heavenly The variety of heavenly exercises
tedious to our nature.
exercises, and matters to be exercised in, so we shall find such
irkesomenesse in our nature, that we care not to use this variety for our
relief.

Failings.
WHen we see wherein we have failed What use is to be made of our failings.
in any part of our daily practice, we are not to make slight thereof, or
favor our selves therein, but labor speedily to recover, lest we grow hardened
and incurable.

Faith.
1. Such as by hearing of witches and fearful A proof of a vveake faith.
practices of Satan be sore frighted, are to know their faith is weak and
comfort small (for the sound believer shall not fear for any evil tidings)
and therefore they must never cease striving for faith and comfort, till they
find a sweet and bold resting in the Lord their father who will preserve them.

2. Faith being the band What benefits we enjoy by faith.
of our union with Christ, we do thereby enjoy peace with God, are favorably
accepted of him, joy in the hope of happiness, have comfort in affliction,
patience, experience, hope, boldness to pray, love to God and delight to serve
him, we please God, long for heaven.

3. The way to increase How to increase faith.
faith is to apply to our selves Gods promise in his word and Sacraments, by
hearing the word, praying, meditation, conference, and the like, and to this
end also every one who desires to find strong comfort in the Lord, and M^anes
whereby to be encouraged unto all godliness.
thereby good encouragement unto all godliness is daily to consider deeply,
1. His own miserable estate 1.
by nature, that thereby he may be stirred up to cry with the Apostle, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? And
2. he is no less to regard the remedy here of in 2.
Christ, that beholding the singular benefit thereof, he may more uncessantly
desire it: and so 3. the truth of Gods promise, that he 3.
may be more and more assured that Christ is his and he the Lords, that this
may comfort and encourage him in all godliness.

4. There is great difference Difference betvveene knowledge and faith.
between knowledge and faith, for a reprobate may know by the word of God, and
so believe that God has promised his Son to him (as well as to others) and
yet not lay hold on this promise, which is true faith, which he only does who
so receives Gods promise that thereby he is certainly persuaded that he shall
have the thing promised, which makes himself stay for his salvation hereon,
and patiently to wait and look steadfastly for the same.

5. The true doctrine of The true doctrine and practice of faith a stranger.
faith is a stranger, much more the practice of it, that men seeing themselves
most cursed wretches, yet should be assured that God has given them his Son,
and in him eternal life, for he that has this assurance, cannot but have much
comfort even in afflictions; and this only is it, which will make a man willing
to deny himself.

6. Its a matter very Fevv know or do every thing in faith.
weakly known, much more weakly practiced of most Christians to do every
thing in faith, which must needs deprive them of much comfort, if they live
not securely, contenting Four things to be labored for of him that would do
any thing (...).
themselves with opus operatum, for remedy hereof this is to be known and
labored for of him that does any thing in faith, 1. That he know 1.
the thing he does in omitting or committing be commanded of God, and
therefore endeavor to please God therein. 2. That 2.
he know and remember Gods promise made in Christ to such obedience. 3. That he
give credit to this promise, that God for 3.
Christ's sake will accept his true though weak obedience. 4. That he with
this persuasion do offer 4.
up his service to God in the name of Christ. How infinitely in all we all do
fail is lamentable to consider, especially that we Note.
do not the things we do in faith, and therefore no marvel it is, though God
withhold many sweet co^forts, which otherwise we might find.

7. True faith in my judgment is never so True faith never thoroughly quenched.
quenched, that neither the owner nor any other can see any life thereof, but
there is ever some fruit of the Spirit to be seen if we mark it.

8. An holy life cannot make any unbeleever to An holy life shows in what
sort we beleev, as iniquity who believe not.
believe, neither properly increase faith, but only as fruits prove the tree
good, and show in what sort we believe: so no iniquity ought to hinder any from
believing, but only Hindrances of faith 1. Security occasioned thorough
ignorance, neglect, or contempt.
shows who believe not.

9. Hindrances from faith are these, 1. Security, making no reckoning of it,
or too small, or both, either of ignorance, neglect, or contempt, and therefore
either never go about it, or too slightly, using some means, not all, or not
constantly to the end. And 2. in such as 2. Presumption or discouragements.
make reckoning of it, either presumption, (that they have it when they have it
not, or may and shall have it without such means used, as without which it
cannot be looked for) or discouragements, 1. That it is impossible for any, or
for them either so weak, that they shall never hold out, or so unworthy that
God will not give it them. 2. That it is over tedious to attain to, will cost
too much pains, or bring too much trouble, by forgoing all delights and gain,
or falling into many dangers and persecutions. To remedy Remedies hereof.
which, 1. we must make chief reckoning of it, as 1.
the pearl for which we will sell all. 2. Consider 2.
the difficulty, that we suspecting our false hearts, and weak strength, may
use all means to attain it. 3. Comfort our hearts by the word of the Lord, 3.
that its not only possible but easy, even for us in our own eyes most
unworthy, through him who is able to perform what he has spoken, and is more
willing to grant, then we to seek, as appears by his inviting us, who seek
not after him.

10. Faith is well likned to fire, whereof if a man Faith likened to fire.
have a spark covered in the ashes, if he shall content himself therewith,
not laboring to increase it, in time it will go out, and if not, he shall
yet have but small use of it, and often have much to do to find it; So they who
find some faith in them, and therewith content themselves shall soon leese it,
or be so to seek of it, that they have small use of it in their lives, either
to comfort them they are the Lords, or to guide their lives; whereas every one
ought to kindle his little spark, so that he might always have the heat of
it, and warm others.

11. Whosoever arms How dangerous not to be armed with faith.
not himself with faith, shall live securely or fearfully, not comfortably.

12. Qu. Whether is this speech, I will go to Whether this speech, I will go
to my father, be of faith or before it.
my father, of faith, or may it be before faith? An. The parable is to be
understood of professors such as the Jews were, who were in profession the
children of the covenant, and had God for their father, and therefore the
ungodly among Whence it is that being persuaded that God is true in all that
he says, we should yet not believe some things which he says.
them and us, are like the prodigal child who returns to his Father.

13. It seems strange that a man being fully persuaded that God is true in
all that he says, should yet not believe some things which he knows God does
say, and so make God a liar, which is yet the sin of all men who know God, and
his word. The cause hereof is not easily seen, and therefore so hardly
removed: indeed if God speak any thing which our judgment cannot object
against why it should not be, we do readily believe, as of al things past, and
many to come, that our bodies shall rise, and we come to judgeme^t, the wicked
be damned, the godly saved; but that we being ungodly shall be justified by
Christ, this is hardly believed, not only because we be naturally moved to
fear that God for sin will condemn us, but also because we measure God by
man, that he will not love such as hate him, and do good to his enemies.

14. Our most holy faith is worthily compared to a Faith compared to a noble
princess.
noble princess, who has ever harbengers, going before to prepare for her,
and a goodly train after, so faith has knowledge, sorrow, fear, desire of
pardon, going before it, as Graces* preceding and succeeding faith.
all the honorable Ladies of virtue; peace of conscience, love of God and men
for his sake, and such others follow after.

15. The easiest trial By the temper of the heart faith may be best tried.
whether our faith be alive and burning, not half dead and cold, is by the
temper of the heart; for if faith be lively, then shall we find our hearts
cheered and ready to serve God in any duty, prayer, heareing the word, and the
like* yea then will our zeal burn to be thankful to God, and willing to
die, ready to forsake all: but if the heart be dull, drowsy, or dumpish, then
is faith cooled; For how can any have feeling of Gods love, and not be
quickened in love to God Note.
again, which will constrain us to deny our selves, and to seek his glory,
and to please him in all things. Many deceived in thinking they have faith, and
have not.


16. We do in nothing more deceive our selves then thinking and quietly
resting, herein, that we have faith, when indeed if we saw the want thereof it
could not but shake us.

17. Musing what is the chief cause why we so Chief lets of faith or causes
why so fevv believe.
hardly believe, and put not such confidence in Gods word and seals, as we
do in man's, I observe these, 1. That this is our feeble nature, that we 1.
can hardly but fear so long as there appears any danger, that may fall on
us, though we have great security against it, as a man at sea, or on an high
scaffold Simil.
or tower, when we look downward we cannot but fear though there be great
safety. Howbeit as they who have had often experience and be acquainted with
these do fear less, so in matters of the soul some are hardened and
desperate, others remain quaking and fearful, the best keep the mean
between both, so fear the danger as that they are made careful to avoid it,
and that with hope of escaping. 2. That 2.
this also is in all by nature till it be defaced, that sin condemns and
drives We more easily believe what God has said shall be, though it be above
nature, then things concerning our selves if they be contrary to nature.
from God, and its as much against nature for a sinner to look for favor from
God, as fire to be cold; we more easily may believe that shall be, which God
has said shall be, though it be above nature, as our bodies to arise, but in
matters concerning our selves if they be contrary to nature, we ever fear that
evil will come, which we have deserved, and we shall not have that benefit,
which we are unworthy of, though God by his word and seals give us great
security to the contrary. And this I note the maine error, that we measure
Gods goodness by some worthiness in us, whereas his truth should be set
against all in us whatsoever. Although I doubt not but that there be diverse
measures of faith in diverse men, and in one and the same at diverse times, yet
there is no faith without some certainty, and none with all, but the best
faith has fear and doubting, when we look upon our vile unworthiness.

18. Faith to our spiritual life is in many things Faith like unto fire in
sundry particulars
like to fire in the natural, then which what is more necessary, for without
it, what comfort can we have? It is it which makeeth our prayers, and all our
Christian endeavors acceptable. As fire will go out, so faith, therefore it
must be daily repaired as the Levites holy fire, which else will be hardly
recovered. The way is, to How its to be kept.
lay on matter enough, often to renew the fire, this is by often meditation on Gods
goodness promised and performed.

19. The way to get faith, (whether yet none or but weak) is this, that
knowing what true faith is (namely to know by Gods The way to get faith
word that God is our Father in Christ) 1. We examine whether we have any, 1.
and then how weak: which may be most soundly known by causes and effects,
among all, the purging of the heart by faith the surest. 2. Finding either 2.
no faith or weak, deeply weigh the great misery of want of faith, and
benefit of true faith, as whereby all grace, and whatsoever is to be desired,
without it none, that this may breed an insatiable desire of faith, and daily
increase of the same. 3. Being thus 3.
desirous of faith, but having no ability to get it, (it being the gift of
God) run to Gods word, and see there to whom God promises to give it, where
you shall find, God hears the desires of the poor, Psalm. 10. 17. and
satisfies the hungry with good things, and bids us ask and we shall receive,
whereupon all that feel a true desire of faith may take hold even upon Gods
word, that he will give them faith, which is indeed a beginning of faith. 4.
Hereby they must be moved to use these two 4.
means, prayer, and labor to get true saving faith, they must pray to God to
work it in them by his word and spirit, meditating on Gods mercy in free
offering Christ to all sinners, and on his truth in bestowing Christ on all
that come to Christ with a true heart in assurance of faith; both which being
continued, will certainly obtain faith in the time and measure which God
sees most meet.

20. Its without question many be deceived whether they be in the faith, The
surest proof of faith is by the causes and effects thereof.
most presume, some few mistrust. The surest proof is by the causes and
effects both joined, otherwise no certainty: under causes we comprehend all
works of Gods Spirit, by which he leads men by faith, which The causes
principally be these three, 1. True humiliation. 2. Earnest desire of Christ.
3. True believing in him: in all which many be deceived with shadows in stead
of substance, or at best with tastes for full feeding. The best evidence we can
think of that all those be sound be these; The trial of our humiliation.
for humiliation, if a man carry about with him a true feeling of his
wretchedness. Romans 7. 24. For The trial of our desire of Christ.
his desire of Christ, if he be not full, but having tasted, hunger more after
Christ. For his drawing The try all of dravving to Christ.
to Christ by the spirit, if after all storms to draw him from belief, he yet
finds Gods word and spirit causing him to rest on The effects.
Gods faithfulness. Now for the effects which be many, the principal is the
receiving of the Spirit, not as a stranger to do a work and so away, but as an
inhabitant to dwell for ever, which spirit is as the sap which comes from the
vine Christ to the faithful the branches, this spirit compared to fire has
two effects, light and heat, joy and love, comfort and conscience: many times
when the fire is covered there appears no light, but if you come near there
will be some heat; So is it with weak believers, they have still some love,
though joy be covered, not felt: as in the causes so in these effects many be
deceived, with false fire in both. There be comfortable notes of soundness in
Comfortable notes of a sound heart.
both, which though a deceived person will dream to be in himself, yet where
they be indeed it will not be hard to find, and therein we may rest quietly.
1. One special 1.
mark of a sound heart is a fear of being deceived, which breeds care to
search well our selves, and to be glad to be tried by God and men. 2. Upon 2.
sight of our selves that we have some grace, that we have a sight also of our
poverty; a mourning for it, and mean judgeing of our selves with better
esteeming and love of those, which have more grace, and an hunger after more.
3. In our whole life to approve 3.
prove our selves to God more then unto men. 4. Not to rest in the deed, but to
have more care of 4.
the right manner how we do any thing. 5. To 5.
make conscience to be the same in secret by our selves, which we be before
others. 6. To make conscience 6.
of leaving our dearest sins, and doing such duties as the flesh most shunnes.

21. This is the exceeding A special point of Gods mercy.
mercy of God, with increase of temptation to increase our faith, as with
decrease of faith, to decrease also the temptation.

22. Experience shows that we prove our How to prove we have says.
selves to have faith, when we mourn for want of it and thirst after it: and
then our faith may be least when we seem to have most, for then we least fear
and suspect our selves, and so are in greatest danger, lying open to Satan's
temptations; this is an excellent comfort for such as are grieved through want
of faith, which grows partly through feeling of the word and humble thanks,
and by humbling our selves before God.

23. Though sometimes we feel small or no A reverend estimation of Gods
mercies to be-retained
faith in us, yet we must retain a reverend estimation of Gods mercy, and
most vile account of our sins, and wretchedness, for to him that thinks
nothing more vile then his sin, nothing so precious A svveet comfort.
as Gods mercy, assuredly there is no sin, but is pardonable.

24. When God afflicts our minds, if we In affliction of mind what is to
be done.
have received knowledge, then must we be thankful for it, and pray for
faith, and though we have no feeling, yet must we wait for it, and that long
time, for in the end God will surely send it to those that wait for it, which
cannot be without great faith, for the greatest faith is, where there is least
feeling; The greatest faith is where there is least feeling.
for it is more easy in glorious feelings to believe.

Falls.
1. No man can promise No man but may fall, they soonest that think least of it.
unto himself but he may fall foullie, and be so sore shaken from his comfort;
which soonest befalls them that least think of it, therefore fear, watch, pray
always.

2. Seeing the Lord in these our days exercises his displeasure in so
grievous manner upon many who have seemed long sincere professors, that many
are given up to adultery and other grievous sins, yea even to Apostasy,
What use to make of the falls of others.
and sundry to madness, and so to woeful ends, it ought to be an earnest
admonition to us all to look to our state, that we deceive not our selves,
nor provoke God to humble us so low being his.

3. Seeing the dear children of God, Noah, He that stands is to take heed
lest he fall.
Moses, Ezekiah, and many other excellent men did fall in their later days,
every Christian ought to use all means, most carefully, and be admonished
hereby, lest he in like mander fall.

4. There is no man so good, but that the Lord Even the best have some slips,
the worse some goodness.
sometimes lets him slip, that he may be humbled; nor so evil, but that
sometimes the Lord convaies goodness into him, that his condemnation The elect
hardly fall twice into one gross sin.
may be the juster.

5. It hardly falls out, that a Christian effectually called and of sound
knowledge should fall twice into one gross sin.

Familiarity.
1. The familiarity Familiarity with sin how dangerous.
with sin brings punishment of sin; for this ought to fear us, that if
the wicked which be without the tuition of God, and stand only upon his
long-suffering, and every Fellowship with the ungodly how fearful.
minute of an hour lie open and subject to Gods curse and vengeance, be our
companions, that when they are punished, we shall not escape.

2. We may have familiarity with some, in With what sort of persons and how
far we are to converse.
whom though there be no great love of religion, yet there is no misliking of
religion, nor love of heresies, yet must our acquaintance be in outward things,
and we be wary lest theirs draw us from our familiarity with God.

Fasts.
1. We must not come Hypocrisy is to be avoided in fasting.
to fast until the Trumpet be blown, the bell be rung, but we must fall
down at the trumpet of Gods word, at the bell of our guilty conscience, for
without this private exercise we are but hypocrites in public fasts.

2. By fasting though we have not obtained all Benefits by fasting.
our desires, yet have we had some mitigation of those evils which have been
laid upon us; and if no reformation, yet continuance of the Gospel, and
especially to our selves a recoverie of our loss in grace.

Fear.
1. Fear and mistrust Difference betvveene fear and presumption.
of our false hearts is painful, but safe, presumption of our care to be
good, is pleasant but dangerous.

2. The children of God How profitable to fear even those things which never
come to pass.
often fear those things, which never come topasse, the which is very
profitable, for thereby God gives us to see our hearts, as if the things feared
came to pass indeed, and hereby we have experience of his graces, and of our
own corruptions, and hereby we are prepared to suffer the like when they come,
which will not so much afflict us when they were before feared, so that we are
not to account those frivolous fears which have not their event, but to regard
the use of them seeing that by these the Lord humbling his children before
hand, keeps many Those fears which have not their events not to be
accounted trivial.
times the plague away which was feared, and on the other side, he often both
more suddenly and more violently brings punishment upon those who never
feared them: yet herein we must beware of the other extreme immoderate fear,
which We are to fear though not immoderately.
rather hinders faith then beats down security, and the mean is to be
embraced, that is, to fear and forethinke of evil to come, not of necessity
to fall upon us, because either God could not or would not deliver us, but
acknowledging our just desert thereof do humbly submit our selves to Gods hand
resting in his fatherly love, that as he is able so he is most willing, even
then to succor us, when we most fear, for as a wise father does the Lord make
his hand heavier in correcting according to the stubbornenesse of his child.

Feasts.
At such meetings we ought to consider the What use to be made of feasts.
bountifulness of God to wards us in comparison of many of his dear Saints,
neither when we are fed must we kick against our owner, Lord and master, but
be more thankful and obedient, considering we partake of those and all other
blessings in the right of Christ for the comforting of our hearts.

Feeling.
We must not cease to pray against want of feeling, Want of feeling to be
prayed against.
but stay ourselves by faith on Christ till he send feeling, seeing that God
makes the sense of sin by degrees; they are to be suspected which are much
moved with every little Note.
sin.

Fellowship with the wicked.
1. The nature of the wicked is, that there grows their love, where Where and
why the ungodly love or hate.
they be not gainesaid, and reproved for sin, and where they be admonished
there grows their hatred.

2. Great inconveniences Affinity with the wicked dangerous.
follow the joining of our selves in affinity with the wicked, as appears
by Iehosaphat who made affinity with Ahab.

3. The friendship of the wicked is such, that to The friendship of the wicked
deceitful.
save themselves they will endanger their friend, so did Ahab with Iehosaphat.
2 Chronicles. 18. 29.

The Flesh.
Its our great corruption that we so much savor The flesh is to be beaten
down, the motions of the spirit to be entertained.
the flesh; to which we are not debtors, wherein we injure our selves, and in
savoring the flesh quench the Spirit, whereas otherwise in daily beating down
the flesh, that is, all motions of sin, we provide much for our safety and
comfort and so kindle with much increase the Spirit in us.

Flock.
Being demanded of the welfare of those committed The duty of ministers
toward their flocks
to our charge, its good to take occasion to pray for them, to be thankful
for them, and to examine our hearts, what means we use present and absent for
them.

Friends.
1. A common fault it is A fault in friends meeting.
in friends meeting, so to rejoice therein, that the spiritual fruit in
edifying How to have comfort of our friends.
one another is lost.

2. The best way to have comfort of our friends is to pray continually and
earnestly for them.

Gift.
1. A Gift of thankfulness What gift may be received.
after our labor may be received.

2. When we bestow any Upon the event of spiritual blessings upon any, how to
behave our selves.
spiritual gift upon any we must watch what success it has, and to be
comforted when our travail finds a blessing, and to be humbled when it
wants.

Gods favor. Whence it comes to pass that we are more affected with man's
favor then Gods

A sore evil it is in our nature that we are so much affected with the favor
of mortal men who may pleasure or annoy us; and make so small reckoning of
Gods favor wherein is life (Psalm. 63. 3.) as in his anger, death, (Psalm. 2.
12.) which comes to pass especially by not considering those particulars,
for then should we labor more to get in and to keep our selves in Gods
favor then in any man's.

Gods goodness.
To think oftand deeply To meditate on Gods goodness how profitable it is.
on Gods goodness to us will stir up in us faith and love.

Gods Glory.
1. Its a matter much to be bewailed of us that whereas the honor of God ought
to be the most precious treasure in our eyes, and above all desired, it is so
horribly defaced in the world, and lightly regarded Christians are to be
humbled for their light esteem of Gods glory.
even of Gods children, who do not so burn in zeal after it as were meet. It
shall be therefore highly needful for us deeply to weigh our sin, to fear
and shame us, that we poor wretches should more greedily seek our selves then
the honor of God, which should be so in request with us, that if the Lord
should grant us, but one thing at request, it should be that one thing which
above all we desire.

2. When we think that our chiefest care is to glorify In glorifiing God we
seek our own glory.
God, we indeed seek our own glory.

3. It cannot be expressed Gods glory still to be aimed at.
how little conscience is made to make God glorious in the world, and therefore
in all our speeches of God we must as well for manner, as matter, yea and to
such end, so behave our selves as may most further the same.

4. God is glorified both in private and public, How to know when God is
glorified
when we do acknowledge his goodness, confess our sins, seek of him all
good things, and so exercise our selves in his word, prayer, and the like,
wherein if there be a willing mind to please God, it shall be accepted, though
accompanied with many wants. This is much more when it is in the great
congregation so as to excite others. And herein this is a great encouragement,
An encouragement to glorify God.
that in those we do feast the Lord, who is more delighted in our poor
service which is presented in faith, then we can be in the best graces he
bestows upon us, which is his love and praise, but our great blame: yet this
should exceedingly move us to bring the Lord the fattest of our flock, and as
to be humbled we have no better, so to be comforted that being in truth, the
same shall be accepted.

Gods Mercy.
It is not with the Lord God in showing mercy is far unlike unto man.
as it is with men, who for one displeasure will not remember the former
obedience of their servants, but cast them off, such is his mercy that for one
sin or offense he will not cast us off.

Gods patience and long-suffering.
1. Its exceeding necessary often to remember, The use to be made of Gods
long-suffering.
why the Lord has reserved us, and given us a longer time of repentance, even
that we may labor to make such gain hereof as the Lord would, in making us
fitter for the Lord, wherein we must think how short this time is.

2. If we play with our own affections, sin in How dangerous it is to play
with our affections.
the end from sport will spur us to confusion, for though we are given to
flatter and presume of our selves that being twice or thrice spared we dare sin
again, yet we must know Sero sed serio.
that the Lord will recompense his long tarrying with wrath.

Gods Providence.
1. An excellent practice of Christianity it is Gods providence in every thing
is duly to be weighed.
for every Christian duly to weigh the wise providence of God, as toward
others, so especially in himself and those that appertain to him, both in his
blessings, and chastisements; that in every of the^ we may see the end of all
Gods works, and so make that right use of them, for which God has sent them,
registring the special: by which practice a good Christian shall not only be
able readily to see the proper end of all Gods dealings, but with all have
plentiful store of heavenly matter at any time fit both to humble him and
raise him up.

2. The providence of God may be highly regarded Gods providence to be observed
in the speeches of our enemies.
even in the abrupt speeches of our enemies, which to a diligent observer will
bring their profit, though presently none be seen, as Pharoahs to Iosia.

Gods Will.
The secret things are for the Lord; the revealed Secret things are for the
Lord: the revealed for us.
belong to us. In the conversion of a sinner this is most manifest, for herein
we are to look to Gods revealed will, in which we shall see how he would have
all men saved, and has prepared a remedy, and freely offered it, and invites
all to receive it, which makes much to set out Gods mercy so proclaimed in the
Scriptures as to make all to believe, which is so comfortable to the elect, and
which shall make all refusers unexcusable.

Godly.
The godly are in many things like children. 1. As Wherein the godly are like
children.
sucklings they feel unquietness in the want of the milk of the word, are 1.
contented and quieted with it, yea and desire to lie at it. 2. As weaned 2.
children (though naturally corrupted) not so much to be devisers of sin; as
to sin by imitation, as it were violently drawn unto it. 3. Being grown 3.
to man's state to leave childishness both in knowledge and manners. Again, as
children be 4.
brought to good and withheld from evil, either being won with fair words,
or allured with trifling benefits, or awed with a check, or feared with a
frowning look, or stilled by seeing another beaten before them, or quieted by
the rod, so must Gods children, else its to be feared they are no children or
babes in Christ, but more carnal then spiritual, or degenerated. And further,
though they 5.
be most liberal children which are easily reclaimed with fair means and
more moved with promises to serve God then drawn by threats, yet are they
children also, which not profiting so much by Gods ways, are reclaimed by his
corrections.

Godliness.
1. Whereas every thing There must be a growth in godliness.
has his time of growing, and his growing in time, its most unreasonable that
any godliness should be so straightened, that no growing is to be looked for in
it, yea also its a gross error that in knowledge In knowledge of the truth
there must be no stay.
of the truth there may be a stay and rest, in true zeal too great a
fervencie, in holiness of life too great preciseness, when as our knowledge
shall always be in part, our zeal too cold, our conversation too much
corrupted, be we never so precise.

2. This is a good comfort to any Christian heart There is to be no liking of
our estate but in the practice of godliness.
never to be quiet or liking his state when he feels not some readiness and
cheerfulness in the practices of godliness.

3. That we may be furthered That we may be furthered in godliness what
things we are to consider.
in the practice of piety, consider we these particulars. 1. That the
enjoying of earthly treasures is uncertain and dangerous, the dealing 1.
with them great hindrances, the great delight most hurtful. 2. That the 2.
unchangeable purpose of a godly life is a continual consolation. 3. That the
bold reprehension of sin 3.
in others is a notable bridle to our selves. 4. That the daily use of all holy
exercises, 4.
prayer, meditation, reading, conference, are the only nurses of a Christian
life, and of much comfort and assurance of Gods favor to our salvation. 5.
That seeing the 5.
Lord is at hand we must not be weary of this course, but labor so to hold
out to the end, that we may be found thus occupied. 6. That the daily 6.
consideration and use of these will make our battle against sin more easy
and fruitful, for our very hearts will be better kept in order then otherwise.
7. That if we well 7.
behold what exceeding comfort and joy through the assurance of salvation we
find in this godly life, and what heaviness in the neglect thereof, its
reason sufficient to persuade us to hold on to the end, yea this present sense
and further hope of the unspeakable reward to come makes Christ's yoke easy.

4. He has most profited who spends most time Who profits most in godliness.
in this practice of godliness, denying himself, and taking no thought to
satisfy his carnal mind.

5. Except we keep this in the purpose of our How necessary it is to have a
resolute purpose to practice piety.
hearts, and resolutely bind our selves hereto, it cannot be we should stand
fast: but many things, as the rareness of this course in others, and our own
dullness, will beat us from it, and sore shake us.

6. We have great need The Apostafie of others must avvaken us to bevvare.
to take heed of leaving off seeing so many fearful examples, who harkening
to the world, seeking themselves, and waxing weary of this strait way and
practice of repentance have given over their diligence in teaching, fervencie
in exhorting, zeal in prayer, painfulnesse in private instructing, and
readiness in conference for the edifying of others in meetings, and daily
meditation, lamenting their own and other men's sins, earnest desire of
forgiveness, daily purpose of amendment, meekness, patience, liberality,
great rejoicing in God, with earnest thanksgiving and the like. The often
perusing of those will awaken us, when we are fallen asleep.

Gospel.
1. The letter of the The bare history of the Gospel not applied by faith how
burtfull it is.
Gospel, that is, the bare history thereof being received without the Spirit
thereof, that is, the true use thereof applied unto us by faith, does no less
kill then the Law, for what comfort can it bring to a wounded conscience, to
know Christ dyed, etc. nay it wounds them more if by faith they apply it not
to themselves.

2. Nothing more The Gospel strange to Reason.
strange to reason, then the Gospel of salvation by Christ.

Grace with the growth therein.
1. This may be justly The means considered greater growth in grace might
have been got then is
complained of by many good ministers and people of our times, that exceeding
much more grace of wisdom and strength to every duty and experience for
guiding others, might have been obtained under so long peace, and many helps,
had they not trifled out much time unprofitably, and been as sloathfull in
pains taking as afraid to be ill occupied.

2. Its our shame and ought to be our grief, that we having had so many helps
above others, are so far behind them, that hardly we can follow them, whom
we should have gone before, for what is it but our own sin that Why there is
so little growth of grace amongst us.
we are not as patterns for others to follow. A principal cause hereof is
this, our too great respect of all earthly things which must needs hinder this
godly proceeding, as also that we are not capable of such a lifting up being
too much conceited for the little grace we have, and not humbled sufficiently
with our many wants.

3. Considering with my self what the cause should be why almost all
Christians do very little grow since their first calling though they use
ordinarily the exercises of religion, and many of them dwell under a profitable
ministry; me thinks this may be said, that either Most Christians use not a
full but an half diet, or else by some ill means hinder the same.
they use not a full, but an half diet, or else by some ill means hinder the
same. There is no Christian who uses not some means whereby he maintains
life; and by Gods blessing on his ordinance all holy means have their profit,
therefore the more is our sin, in not using all whereby we might be fat and
flourishing in Christianity. But Simil.
as it fares with crasie bodies, they must have a diet prescribed, and rules
to order their whole life, else can they not long hold out but weakness and
diseases will oppress them, whereas otherwise by precise keeping their diet in
all points they be much preserved, and freed from much grief and pain. So for
all the world it is with our souls, the best whereof is so crasie that without
a good direction precisely followed, long health and peace cannot be held, but
our lives will be filled with many griefs and troubles. And if these be not
felt at first, the longer they fester inward, they will cost the more pain and
grief before they be cured. It shall be our wisdom therefore never to rest
till we have a good direction fit to preserve our souls Christians must seek
and keep an holy diet and direction for their lives.
in peace, and good estate, and then precisely to keep it in all parts, lest
the neglect of one mar another and so we much hinder our selves. At least
this Christians must not be as men sold to their appetite.
care must be had, that we do not as men sold to their appetite, who to
please their taste will leave that which is wholesome, and take that which is
poison to their nature, who therein for a short pleasure bring long and tedious
pain, which makes repent too late: when this yet is more, that some be so
far spent that they having once or twice broken their diet and finding no
present pain, do wilfully proceed, saying, As good be sick for something
as for nothing; and in the end cast off utterly all care, and so bring upon
themselves incurable diseases, horrible pains, and certain death. That this
former advice may be the more profitable, that is, that we may see what good
cause we (who be What things we are to consider that we may keep an holy
diet, and direction for our lives.
Gods children) have to seek after and precisely keep an holy diet and
direction for our lives, these things are most needful to be thought on* 1.
How crasie and feeble souls we have, how seldom 1.
in any good temper, how soon distempered, how hardly recovered to any good
plight, all which may be seen by looking back into our lives, and considering
how our lives have been much out of frame, seldom a good stomach, ever weak
unto any good duty, and ever some diseases breaking out upon us, some sores
ever running, never long without pain, without some deadly palsies benumming
our senses, ever in fear of death and such like. 2. How unpleasant 2.
an estate this is, and little to be desired, is duly to be weighed, that
hereby we Our emptiness in grace, barrenness in good works, many and
strong corruptions too too palpable.
may be much more quickened to seek the remdie aforesaid.

4. How empty of Gods grace we be, and how full of noisome thoughts and lusts,
how negligent and unprofitable in all heavenly exercises, may we our selves
perceive; as in like manner our barrenness in all good works, that few are
moved to bless us and God for us, does appear unto others; as likewise our
many and strong corruptions no less to be seen in our profession, then spots
in our face, such as our apparent negligence and drowsinesse in all holy
duties, our overmuch lightness and mirth, our vain talk, pride,
covetousness, frowardness, hastiness, impatience, and such like.

5. A principal cause of the little growth of most A principal cause of the
little growth in grace.
Christians do I find to be this that whereas all the strength of a Christian
comes from his food Christ, and this food is received by faith only, insuch
sort that the morestrongly we believe, the more we receive Christ, be
nourished by him, and so on the contrary: yet few they be who so much as know
how to edify themselves in their most holy faith, more then to hear and pray,
which are found insufficient, as if a man in a ditch should cry for help and
use no other means, or pray for meat and seek none, and how then can they
resume the shield of faith as the Christian Soldier is exhorted, yet many take
a wrong way which brings little help, namely to increase their faith by
repentance, whereas there is no sound repentance which comes not from faith,
and therefore rather No sound repentance which comes not from faith.
we must by our faith increase our repentance, which as the fruit shall
justify the tree good. The only right way that I can The only right way to
increase faith.
conceive of to increase faith is to remember, and duly weigh all Gods
promises general and particular, that beholding what the God of truth in the
word of truth does say unto us, we may give credit unto it, and so be assured
of receiving whatsoever he has promised; which cannot but singularly comfort a
Christian, and so encourage him to all cheerful obedience. This being so, the
chief cause I speak of, of our little growth in Christianity is this, that
of all matters in the Scriptures, Gods promises are least remembered Of all
matters in the Scriptures Gods promises are now least regarded.
and regarded in our private meditations or conferences, yea I may say in our
public ministry; whereas these above all other as the nurses of our faith,
and so of all Christianity, are daily to be meditated on and dealt with: and
for this cause I do commend it to every true Christian as a singular means of
bettering his whole course, that he labor by all means to have in memory
store of Gods promises general and particular, that whatsoever Store of Gods
promises to be had in memory, about every particular duty.
he take in hand, to hear, read, pray, confer, fast, give alms, admonish,
correct, exhort, and the like, yea also in all his outward and earthly
affairs, that, I say, before he set on any of these, to lay before him Gods
promises, that so he may do all in faith, and therefore with comfort of Gods
blessing therein: the practice whereof what change it will bring let experience
show, sure I am it will be great.

6. Forasmuch as we know but in part, and believe in part, and therefore even
they who are regenerate must grow up in Christ, therefore it is a duty
belonging to them also, as well as to the unregenerate, Even the regenerate
must daily desire to be further partakers of Christ.
daily to desire more and more to be partakers of Christ, that they may be more
cured.

7. That which even What we are to strive against.
the best are to strive against, be vain wanderings of the mind about
needless matters, and a sloathfull neglect of good meditations, and other
private exercises the nourishers of all grace.

8. The earnest panting The earnest panting after grace compared to the breath
of the body.
and desire after grace is fitly compared unto the breath of the natural
body, which is always in him that has life, though weaker at one time then
another, yea sometimes in a swoune seeming quite gone.

9. All graces are like to Graces like to tender plants.
tender plants, whereof many will so go into the ground, that all their life
is in the root, which in time will spring out again; and others, if they be
not cherished, and have the sun to shine on them, wither.

10. We pray often for many graces but either Means to obtain and increase
grace.
know not or use not the fit means to obtain and increase the same, as 1. For
knowledge to read, hear, 1.
study and confer. 2. For 2.
having God in due remembrance, to stir up our minds often to think of him
in all things. 3. To 3.
meditate on Gods greatness and glory for reverence. 4. On his promises 4.
for faith. 5. On his power 5.
and truth for trust and hope. 6. On his Wisdom 6.
and Righteousness for patience. 7. On his 7.
love to us for love. 8. On 8.
his glory for zeal. 9. On 9.
his truth and justice for fear.

11. Our growth in Growth in grace wherein it chiefly appears.
grace does in nothing more show it self then in our continual care to please
God in all things, for they that seldomest look to their ways how they please
God, show they least love God: and Note.
they be forwardest, and may have most rejoicing who most care to please him,
wherein as many be ignorant how to please God, so even of them the fewer have
such regard as were meet.

12. A great enemy of our growth in grace is a An enemy of growth in grace.
light regard of our disease, as in the bodily, if we think it small we look
not for help, but if we Simil.
fear it is deadly we use all means for recoverie.

13. There can be small joy to any of their life if Nothing harder then to get
grace.
they gain not grace, yet nothing harder: Its so contrary to nature and has
so many hindrances, yet there be means which well used we shall surely grow,
else not, but indeed either we use the means too seldom, or too slightly, a
special gift of God it is to keep a constant delight in them.

14. Its not enough for the comfort of a Christian that he is persuaded he is
newborn, but he must see that he grow up in Christ, and be increased in It
is more then apparent that who so grows not in grace is not in Christ.
grace, for its a sore token he is not in Christ, who grows not, but is well
contented, for they that have tasted how sweet the Lord is, cannot but desire
more, howbeit this is very hard and rarely seen; therefore few true Christians.
As all trades some more Simil.
some less be not easily learned to become skillful in, so that we allow
seven years to be apprentise thereto, so much more the Christian trade wherein
Among Christians many botchers.
we see many botchers, few cunning to make the wedding garment meet, wherein to
grow is not seen of most who look not after it. The Scriptures often sum all
to these two In what particulars our growth must appear.
heads, faith and love: more particularly. 1. Our growth must be in cleerer
sight of our own vileness and 1.
herein specially what most hinders, which cannot be but by a tracing out the
ways of our hearts and lives, and to this end to take the glass of the Law,
and not as blind, but having the light of knowledge to examine our selves, and
that particularly in every one, so shall we see matter more to humble us, and
drive us to Christ. 2. Spread before 2.
us, and deeply and often meditate on Gods promises to heal the wounds of the
Law, and to comfort us, that we may rest on God, for this life and that to
come. 3. In thanks and obedience 3.
studying to please God in all things both to know and do his will.

15. Its a common and just complaint of many true Christians, that oftentimes
they see their whole course is far out of frame and such as yields them small
comfort, though they be well thought of by their neighbors, which as they
grieve at, so they have many purposes to do Most seeing their want of grace
yet profit but a little therein.
better, but in the end these come to nothing, and they never the better, and
so go on from year to year with little growth, much less, such as their
profiting might appear to others: which is especially to be observed of us
Ministers: casting with our selves what might be the best remedy hereof, we
searched what might be the causes The causes hereof.
which chiefly hinder the profiting of such, who saw and sorrowed for their
wants, and purposed a better course, which we found these three, besides that
common, that men see not in particular their chief defects. 1. That 1.
being thus pricked and wounded we did suffer this to close up, and quickly let
this purpose die, and so we fell to our old course again, and so the longer
the worser. 2. That we 2.
neglect or carelessly use the means, whereby our course might be better, and
grace increased; as specially, private prayer, reading, meditation. 3. That we
harbor some master sin 3.
which robbes us of all our gain, and keeps back Gods grace and blessing
from us. The remedy Remedies.
then is, 1. To keep the 1.
wound open by thinking often what will be the fearful end of this course,
continual unco^fortablenesse, and some foul fall. 2. While the wound is open
2.
to ply carefully all good means to cure our souls, and to perform our holy
purposes. 3. To 3.
search out what special sin spoils us, and to strive most to keep it
down.

16. We have so lost our time, and neglected the We are like to die beggars.
means that we are like to die beggars, and never attain to such grace as
others do, and we might: the principal use whereof is, to keep down our
pride, and quicken prayer.

17. Its an excellent care of a good Christian Our after fruits must exceed our
first.
that his after fruits of the Spirit exceed the former, that he may answer to
the good opinion conceived of him.

18. The care for inward graces and obtaineing What the care for inward graces
vvo^keth.
of them will breed a godly neglect of outward commodities.

19 Many be barren in Why many be so barren in grace.
grace, because they be barren in prayer.

20. Knowledge, Faith, What graces do not alvvayes succeed one another.
feeling, joy, and practice do not always succeed one another.

21. The graces of God Gods graces are the sweetest in our new birth.
are sweetest in our newbirth, because we fall again somewhat to the flesh,
otherwise it is not so, and its the work of Gods Spirit, when and in what
measure; although in respect of our selves, that we differ from the world,
that they think that their present pleasures are sweetest, we that the present
feelings of the Spirit, always least, whereas on the other side we think our
present temptations and corruptions ever greatest, though in both we may be
deceived.

Grief.
1. If we will truly lament the sins of others, How we may lament the
sins of others.
we must first be touched for our own, and as touching others so to lament as
the sin requires, and with love not contempt of the person, and pray for him.

2. When we have no The want of fear or grief how dangerous.
fear or grief, we can hardly profit in any godliness.

3. In cares of extremity by bodily pains and The use to be made in cares of
extremity.
griefs, and fears of the mind, we must make this use, to try our hearts,
wherein particularly we have deserved this chastisement, and so to humble our
selves: or having no such particular accusation, to prepare our selves for the
Lords trial; who forewarneth us of his coming to us, or that he will pass by
us, and therefore we must arm our selves especially with prayer, the effect
whereof is exceeding great: but we must take heed in such cases, lest we make
have to end our prayer, as desirous to be rid out of it, and so commit our
selves to God.

The Heart.
1. ITs vain to control The heart chiefly to be controuled.
the outward senses without rebuke of the heart.

2. The Lord is best The Lord best pleased with the heart.
pleased with their intents which prepare their hearts to seek him.

3. A true token of an hard heart, when the consideration A sign of an hard
heart.
of all Gods mercies cannot bend us to duty.

4. Hardness of heart is the sorest plague, common, An hard heart how
dangerous it is.
infectious and deadly, if it break not, or stop up again: our remedy is to
take the opportunity The Remedy thereof.
of this time and helps we have, to deal more effectually then before, to
search our sin, mourn for it, seek to God in Christ by prayer of faith for
pardon and amendment, and then shall we with more boldness and comfort of
speeding pray for the poor sheep that so perish.

Help.
Then is the fittest time The fittest time for God to help.
for God to help, when all hope of help is gone, for this most sets out Gods
glory and nurtures our faith in resting upon him who is above all means.

Heretics and Heresies.
1. We must humble our selves to see heretics What use to make of the
practices of heretics.
do more for vaineglory and for their sect, then we will do for Gods glory
and for his truth.

2. As there were in the books of the fathers dispersed The ground of heresy.
sentences, which as a seed did lurk in them, and by an evil spirit being
gathered together did make an heresy, so in the writings of others. For the
family of love has drawn their sects out of writers new and old: As the
Gospel first began in Heresy now to be feared.
simple men and after came to the more learned sort, so heresy beginning now
in the simple people, may for so little love of the truth, invade the best
learned, and a lying spirit may as soon through Gods judgments fall upon 400.
learned men (such as Ahabs priests may be thought) as on the common Israelites.

An Holy life.
1. Considering what the Scriptures in sundry Such are not in Christ which are
alive unto sin, dead unto God.
places witness, of all those that be the members of Christ, namely that they
be dead and buried unto sin, but alive to God, I cannot but wonder how any
can so securely assure themselves to be in Christ, who be so living to sin,
that they serve it; so dead to God, that they are far off from all obedience.

2. A principal hinderance Presumption an hinderance to an holy life.
to an holy life, is a presuming of Gods fatherly affection that he will spare
us, whereof this may be the remedy, to have The Remedy.
often before us the terror of his judgment, to nourish a continual fear of
provoking his anger, a nurse of an holy life.

3. The commodities of a godly life be such as will The commodities of a godly
life inducements thereunto.
enforce any, that knows them, thereto, namely liberty, tranquillity,
pleasure, and such like; whereof whosoever truly tastes he will think no
pains too much to bestow therein.

Hope.
1. True waiting must be 1. Outward as well as Four properties of true hope.
inward. 2. On the word, for many wait rather for hope of some profit then for
Gods glory. 3. Continual, though God defer long. 4. Without weariness and
vehemently.

2. We are not to be without hope of any that Hope of others how long to be
continued.
has sometimes showed effectual works of Gods child, till all be blotted
out.

Humiliation.
1. Among many frailties of our nature remaining in Gods children, A grievous
frailty in travailing about some duties to forget and neglect others.
this is a very dangerous and grievous one, that when we have by much travail
gotten strength to one duty, we forget or neglect another as needful as the
former, whereby our comfort is much abated, and we are or ought to be much
humbled, which in measure the Why the Lord thus exercises his Saints.
Lord leaves in his dearest Saints, to exercise them in true humility for
their wants, in faith to depend upon him for grace, and in prayer to seek it
from him continually.

2. Such ought to be humbled after an especial manner, which having through
Gods blessing on Christians must not be content with the doing of some duties
but grow in all.
their travailes in Christianity, attained unto some graces and conscience of
discharge of duty in some things, specially, common and ordinary, such as
private prayer, conscionable dealing with men, and the like, do so content
themselves with these testimonies of their faith, that they enquire not after
others to grow up into full holiness in the fear of God, whence it comes to
pass, that happily they are very zealous, yet very Note.
much wanting in love, very just dealers, but hard hearted, having little mercy
or liberality, not so forward in some, as backward in other duties.

3. We cannot obtain How to obtain Gods special mercies.
Gods mercies in special measure, unless we use to humble our selves in
special means.

4. Though danger At what time danger works most.
work in a man much, yet it never prevails more then when it comes with
the word of God, which may both give a more lively and clear sight of sin,
and show us the mercies of God withal, to deliver us from our evils, the
profit whereof is so great, that we prevail The profit of humiliation.
more by humbling our Souls, then by all chastisements of the Lord whatsoever,
for Iebosapbat was more humbled by the speech of Iehn the Seer, then he was
being compassed with an host of enemies. 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.

5. This fruit of humbling our selves is to be An effect or fruit of
humiliation.
looked for, even to enter upon a far better course of Christianity, to be
more like the faithful in former ages, in comfort of faith, in mortification,
in love, in zeal, that so we may shine as lights in this dark world.

6. To be touched with A note of true humiliation.
the sense of sin in particular is a note of true humiliation.

7. This is a note of a man truly humbled, when he is ready to shame himself
that God may be glorified.

Humility.
A true trial of humility is this, to be content A true trial of humility.
to be taught of our inferiors, and admonished of our faults.

Hypocrisy.
Its hypocrisy, in public Hypocrisy in dispraising ones self.
to dispraise ones self, seeking thereby a secret praise.

Ignorance.
1. ITs to be lamented that after so long preaching Palpable ignorance in these
times.
of the Gospel, the most, yea many true Christians, are yet so ignorant of,
and therefore so much wanting in the practice of many special duties, and
indeed so far off from that strait course not only which God requires, but
the faithful in times past and some too now a days do carefully and
constantly walk in: for example, to go to the public assemblies How to go,
and come from the house of God.
as to a feast, with such hunger, and careful trimming of our souls, as we
use for our bodies, and to come from them so cheerfully, as men refreshed with
good cheer. How to work on the ignorant, by setting before them the joys
of heaven, and pains of hell.


2. By often proof this is found a chief means, to pierce the hard skin of the
heart of the ignorant sort to set before them the joys of heaven and pains of
hell, as forcibly as may be, and then showing that they when they die (which is
like to be sooner then they be aware of) shall go into one of these, to ask
them what warrant they have, God will have mercy on them, and so to strip them
of all vain confidence, to teach them that they can never have the least hope,
that God will save them, till they feel such a fear of hell, and desire of
heaven, as moves them above all to seek how to be saved, and therefore so long
as they go on as they have done, with no more care for their souls, they can
have no hope of mercy.

Things Indifferent.
1. Whatsoever is neither Why at sometimes they may be done, at sometimes not.
forbidden nor commanded in the word, may sometimes be done for maintenance of
love, and sometimes be undone for avoiding of superstition.

2. Where the Scriptures give general rules, the Church may give particulars;
From general rules particulars may be drawn.
keeping order, decency, and edification: so that hereby a man of authority
may have his assistant a Chaplain, and the father in Baptism may have an
helper to witness and promise for his child, and afterward to help him in
his education, being such a necessary duty of love; and gloria patri may be
used to show our Church an enemy to Arrianisme, so we may to avoid Anabaptisme
have witnesses to testify to the Church that we are Christianly baptized.

Infirmities.
1. Its to be labored What the sense of our wants ought to work in us.
after that the sense of our infirmities and many wants may abase us before
God, and bring us nearer to him.

2. It were not possible The fight of our selves a means of perseverance.
for us to continue in a good course, if God did not give us to see our selves,
and so abased to come to him.

3. Particular infirmities How particular infirmities are no hindrances.
do not hinder the preparing of our hearts for the Lord, if we have a true
love of his word, as Iehosaphat had, and Hezekiah.

4. This will teach us How to speak charitably of others infirmities.
to speak charitably of others infirmities, when as we remember the like may
befall us, and to be often teaching it to others and to remember the reason of
the thing, if we would remember the thing it self.

5. Gods children cover many infirmities under Difference betvveene the godly
and ungodly about the infirmities of others.
one good gift in another, the wicked contrarily bury good gifts in another
under one infirmity, and that a small one.

Joy.
1. We read in Scripture of two chief causes of Two chief causes of joy.
rejoicing for a Christian, One that he is by faith 1.
made Gods child without any righteousness of his own: the other, that he
has received the grace 2.
of Gods spirit, to lead an holy life; either of which alone can give no sound
rejoicing, but both must go together. Romans 5. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Gal. 6. 14.

2. No Christian professor Comfort in the remembrance of Christ's second coming.
can have any sound comfort of his faith, if he find no such matter in the
remembrance of Christ's coming as does rejoice his heart, and so in some
measure stir up in him a longing after his appearance; for howsoever a true
faith may be without some other effects, yet this being the very principal of
all, cannot be wanting, the want True faith cannot be without this effect.
whereof showing the want of faith is the cause of that little profiting, and
so of that little comfort which is to be found in many, whereas if this were
more labored for, and so more attained to, it would soon cause a great change
in any man's profession, and hereby indeed the face of our profession would be
even almost renewed, the alteration would be so great in all respects public
and private.

3. There is no well ordered course in Christianity, Godly sorrow and joy fit
companions.
where godly sorrow and joy be not continual companions, for severed we run
into some extremity.

4. Whatsoever is the The matter of joy and thaksgiving one
matter of true joy ought to be a matter of thanksgiving to the Lord.

5. This is much to be lamented, that even among Many want delight in Gods
service.
such as make some good profession, very few find that comfort in the Lord as
to serve him with delight and so rejoice in their portion, as might draw others
to desire the like. This comes to pass The cause.
by our security, contenting our selves with our course of living without open
reproach, and our slothsulnesse loath to strain our selves any further. The
remedy must The remedy.
be by considering better our state how short we come and be wanting as in
many duties, so in many comforts, and find not that full contentment in the
Lord for this life, and that to come, which others do, and so leese the sweet,
and have the sour of our profession.

Judge.
1. Its not safe to judge of our selves or others for Not safe to judge of one
action
one action, but to wait Gods leisure in revealing the truth.

2. For the most part hard judging and false is The effect of hard judging.
the fountain of all breaches between Christians.

Judgments.
1. The Lord will spare his judgments in them in whom he sees a true love In
whom God will spare his judgeme^ts
of true religion, for they that love religion, will hear, and hearing the
word will not lie long in any known sin.

2. Its the greatest A great judgment to thrive in sin.
judgment that can be to thrive in sin.

3. Let the wicked rebel Gods judgeme^ts shall seize upon the wicked.
as they will, and think how by their subtilties they may escape Gods
threatened judgments for a while, yet they shall be pursued from far, and
shall taste the heavy hand of God both fearfully and wonderfully, as came to
pass in Ahad. 2 Chronicles. 18. 33.

4. In denouncing Gods judgments against any, How we are to be affected in
denounceing Gods judgeme^ts
we ought to be so affected that we earnestly pray for them, that they may be
delivered from them.

5. The careful beholding What profit to make of Gods judgeme^ts on others.
of Gods judgments on others is very profitable, as whereby observing the
causes thereof, we may warily avoid them, lest the like fall on us.

6. The not observing of Gods judgments makes Not to observe them, how
hurtful.
so little either to fear them, or love his mercies.

7. Who so makes not conscience to walk uprightly, Not to make conscience of
our vvayes how dangerous.
I will not free him from poverty, from sickness, from heresy, for as well
can and will the Lord punish the mind as the body.

Knowledge.
KNowledge must go Obedience must follovv upon it.
before obedience, obeeience must follow knowledge apace.

Law.
1. THe Law is often taken for the moral Law of The Law; Gods precepts,
judgments, or righteousness how taken.
God, his precepts for the ceremonial, his judgments or righteousness for
the sanctions of the Law, whether the Lord either accomplish his promises to
his children, or executes his wrath on his enemies. The preaching of the Law
necessary.


2. In these days offecurity, the preaching of the Law is the nearest way to
draw men to Christ out of themselves.

Learning.
The greatest Scholars have often most unstable Defects in the greatest
Scholars.
minds, fullest of doubting, and least staid in that they know, and not able
to keep themselves from foul fallings, or being fallen to comfort themselves
or others. Therefore the greatest Divinity What is the chiefest divinity.
is in teaching or learning the word of God as the word of God, comparing
spiritual things with spiritual To do good unto others is the end of all
duties, without which all our profession is vain.
things.

Love.
I. All our travail in Religion, to know God, to believe in him, to love and
fear him, and all our prayers, exercises in the word, and the like, are
referred to this, to do all good to our neighbor in our several callings,
agreeable to that, He that loves another has fulfilled the Law. Romans 13. 8.
and Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father, is to visit the
fatherless, etc. James 1. 27. Therefore as we are to be careful of all those
duties we owe to ourselves, so to others, good or bad: for all zeal in Gods
service, and profession of our love to God is vain, unless it make us
careful for the salvation and bodily preservation of our neighbor.

2. There are no stronger How to live in love and peace.
means to make man and wife, or two brethren or sisters living together, in
peace and love, then to join together often in prayer and christian conference.

3. By musing upon that which often the Scripturesdoe The excellency of love.
teach us concerning love, that it is the fulfilling of the Law, and, to give
all we have to the poor without love is nothing, and especially, that when our
faith and hope shall cease, love shall remain and most flourish in the life to
come, I do grow to an admiration of the excellency thereof, the sense whereof
I most feel, when as by some good means (as some sweet conference) my
affection is enlarged to any of Gods Saints, me thinks I taste of the
happiness to come, then which, what more delectable? How great therefore is
our folly and sin, who provide no Note.
better for our selves by increasing this pleasure.

4. The Lord does often Love draws love, as hatred does hatred.
so work that the good affection we bear to others does breed the like love
in them to us, and so the contrary, they of whom we think hardly, have in like
manner an heart burning against us.

5. We must beware Those are to be loved whom God loves.
that we never further sin, but if we love God, we must love them whom God
loves, hate them whom God hates, Psalm. 15. 3. and 139. 21, 22. how dare they
then in whom are some good things, hand over head be friends with Gods enemies?
Prove. 29. 27.

The Lords day.
1. Seeing by the appointment of the holy The Christian Sabbath, a memorial of
Christ's resurrection
Ghost the Apostles did change the Jewish Sabbath on the seventh day, unto the
next day, for the memorial of the Resurrection, therefore we are bound
especially on that day to keep a memorial of Christ's resurrection, with
thanks unto How to be upheld in a conscionable sanctification of the Sabbath.
God for the same.

2. There be two things specially needful to be much every Lords day in our
minds to uphold us in a conscionable sanctification thereof.

1. The gain to be gotten thereby, which is glory to God, grace to our selves
and others.

2. The sweetness of the duty, to be all day sucking honey.

Magistrate.
A Magistrate having a A Magistrate may conceal a fault.
thing privately told him may upon some occasion keep it close. Man the most
excellent creature does most dishonor God, Gods justice herein.


Man.
It seems to many men a wonder that man in the whole frame of his soul and
body excelling all the creatures upon earth, and in most wonderful manner
expressing the image of his Creator should yet in highest measure dishonor
him, and be thereby most loathsome unto him, yet this is most just with the
Lord seeing he preferred man by creation above all earthly creatures, for his
rebellion to take away all grace from him, for whereas he was most able above
all other earthly creatures to glorify his maker, his sin must be the
greater, and by Gods justice his punishment answerable for so wilful
disobedience and this commonly is seen among men, the more excellent natural
gifts any man has, if they be not Natural gifts not sanctified make the
possessor thereof more odious.
sanctified, the viler that man is in Gods sight above others, and his sin
more grievous: for armed iniquity is more dangerous then naked. Note.


Marriage.
Such as find themselves When to submit ones self unto this condition.
unfit for this condition are to use all lawful means, and that a good while,
and so not prevailing to submit themselves to Gods ordinance.

Means.
1. There is a corruption Why many are more dull when they have most means.
of nature which makes us most dull when we have most means, which arises
from hence, that when we have the means publicly, we esteem less of them
then when we wanted them, using the private means, likewise more sparingly,
yea because we put too much confidence in the outward, the preaching of the
word, not so earnestly seeking the inward and principal, which is the blessing
of Gods most holy Spirit.

2. Its not safe to tie the working of Gods Spirit to Gods Spirit not to. be
tied to any one mean.
any one particular mean, seeing all must be used.

Meditations.
1. Christians must often meditate and consider Upon what things Christians
are to meditate.
what blessings and what afflictions they have in private and in common, and
how they undergo both, and what use they make of them, likewise, to what
corruptions they be most carried, and what means they use against them, and
what profit they find by them, also how constant or unsettled they be in a good
course, and what be causes of either.

2. What infinite store of heavenly matter is to be meditated on, seeing Most
are unskillfull in the art of meditation.
every doctrine in the Scripture contains more then ever we can sufficiently
consider, and yet so unexpert are most professors in this exercise of
meditation, that they are empty of any fit matter to meditate on. A principal
The cause hereof.
cause whereof is, they savor the things of the flesh, and very little the
things of the Spirit.

3. Those things we hear and read are other When the things we hear or read
become our own.
men's, until by applying them unto our selves by meditation, they be our own.

4. Matters fittest for daily meditation be such What things be fittest for
for daily meditation,
as every man in his condition has daily most need of, as to humble or breed
sorrow in us, to comfort us, to awake us being asleep, and when we think our
selves senseless or benumbed, to soften our hardness, to pull us back from
any evil way, to weaken any corruption, to strengthen such graces as be
weakest in us, to weane us from the love of this world, to teach us a sober use
of our prosperity, to arm us against and uphold us in adversity, and such
like.

5. Meditation is a study to get grace, whereby What meditation it.
upon all occasions we make some good use of all that comes to our mind,
whereof the frequentest use shows the most heavenly soul, as contrarily the
neglect thereof the carnal.

6. We are to meditate at set times, and on special The oftener we meditate
the better.
occasions, the oftener the better, but hard to do it well.

7. To have our meditation How to meditate on the word.
tied to the word we must occupy it upon some particular matter, and
reverently consider that we as it were draw near the Lords privy chamber.

8. To read, and not to meditate* is unfruitful, Reading, meditation, and
prayer must accompany one another.
to meditate and not read is dangerous for error, to read and meditate
without prayer is hurtful.

Memory.
Whereas many complain of ill memory in good things, thinking thereby to
cover many How to remember good things.
wants, this is found the only remedy, that we must first reform our hearts,
and bring them to affect such heavenly doctrines, and then valuing them as they
be, they would as well remember, as a worldly Simil.
man hearing of a good bargain, whereby he is assured he may have great
gain, will hardly forget the same, yet hereto let this be added, an hiding of
Gods word, and treasuring of it up in our hearts, which oftrecounting with our
selves and others, the same shall not be forgotten.

Mercies.
1. In speaking of any of Gods mercies toward At what time we are to speak
of Gods mercies, and what then we are to think upon.
us, its profitable to think upon our sins, lest we be too proud, and rob
God of his glory; and also a fit opportunity in respect of others must be
chosen, lest the same be not believed, and so edify not.

2. Of all the mercies of God this is a principal, not to be left without some
favorable exercise of Favorably to be exercised in conscience is a
principal mercy.
conscience, (though it be grievous to the flesh) thereby to be drawn nearer
to God, if for Paul it were so necessary, how much more for us?

Ministers or Preachers.
1. Its a matter whereof we that are Gods ministers Many in teaching others do
not teach themselves
may justly complain, that in teaching others we do not so carefully teach
our selves, but too often bind heavy burdens upon others, which we our selves
will not set our hands unto, urging the people to many excellent practices of
Christianity, and not so carefully urging our selves to the practice of the
same, that we might by experience commend the excellency of such heavenly
medicines, and so persuade by our practice as well as doctrine, which is in our
days most necessary, seeing men look most to our lives. A chief The chief
cause here of.
cause of this evil is, that through our corruption we deal with the word as
merchants do with their wares, they seek after the best wares, not to use
them themselves, but to utter them to others, so we seek out most heavenly
instructions not to use our selves, but to commend to others. The remedy The
Remedies.
whereof is, when we first find out some precious matter which we like of,
then to make use of it our selves, and as it were try the medicine on our
selves so shall we better commend it.

2. To content our selves with preaching profitably to others, and not to
practice those things Not to practice what we preach how dangerous it is
our selves, is very dangerous, and cannot be free from hypocrisy, and must
needs breed hardness, and so a very bad course, the end whereof is miserable
and woeful. In any hand therefore we are to be disquieted with such an We
must be tronhled hereat
estate, else no amendment: and it must fear us that we be not disquieted,
when as we hear Gods children profess that they have no longer peace, then
they themselves be ready to every Christian duty, and Note.
have some delight therein: and therefore we must The Remedy.
by all means in such an estate before said, deny our pleasures, and provoke
our selves to humiliation till God reform us (this being indeed a just cause
of fasting) and generally not to rest in any exercise of religion whereby the
heart is not bettered.

3. We should so esteem the benefit of How we are to esteem the preaching
of the Gospel.
preaching the Gospel, that we should redeem it with our loss, travailes,
grief, as S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8. and therefore be far from refusing to
preach to those that would, but cannot releeve us for want of How we may
delight in our ministry.
living.

4. That we may be occupied in this high service of the ministry with the
greater delight, and so rejoice therein, we are to remember that its a most
high honor to be admitted and used of God as his instruments in saving souls;
that no work is more profitable; that hereunto the Lord himself called us,
not we intruded our selves; that the Lord in some sort blesses our labors,
bestowing upon us not a few encouragements therein.

5. The external ministry must proclaim salvation Difference betvveene the
external ministry and inward work of the Spirit.
by Christ to all without exception, and compel all, but its the inward
operation of the Spirit, to draw and incline any* one to apply by faith the
general to himself.

6. They that teach not Who are unfit teachers.
themselves cannot teach others

7. Where the people To whom the Lord sends careful or careless teachers.
heartily desire by prayer the ministry of the word, the Lord will send them
faithful ministers, and will multiply his graces in them* but if the people be
careless, they shall have a minister which for ability either cannot, or for
affection will not deliver the truth unto them.

8. Although the Lord In begetting or increasing faith Gods wisdom is not to
be tied to the ordinary means.
has promised a special blessing to the public ministry of his word, yet
we must not tie his wisdom to the ordinary means either of begetting or
increasing our faith; but if any shall at any time have more effectual
feelings by private conference, let him neither contemn nor neglect the
public ministry, but with all holy and humble thankfulness yield this
sovereignty to the Lord, that he is to dispose his gifts, when, to whom, by
whom, and where it pleases him.

9. It is not to be doubted but that God has pardoned How to know whether
the Lord has pardoned the sin of ra^h ent^ance into the ministry.
the sin of rash entrance into the ministry, unmeet through want of gifts,
when as he blesses the minister both with able gifts and a pure mind, and
also gives a blessing thereby unto his people. Therefore though one have no
assurance for his first calling, yet from hence may he gather that God now
accepts thereof.

10. A minister must be Wherein a Pastor must resemble a plovvman.
like a wise tills-man, who having sown his feed, long after looks for the
fruit of his labor.

11. Two things especially The truest trial of doctrines.
may warrant both the speakers and the hearers of their doctrine; If their
calling be good and godly, and if the general course of their doctrine be
sound and pure, Ier. 16. 17.

12. When there is no Who they are that shall be saved, who not.
vision the people perish, those then only to whom the feet of them which
bring glad tidings of salvation be precious, shall be saved, others that
neglect them, neglect salvation.

13. In bringing men to God, first show them that there is certain salvation
An order in bringing men to God.
for them if they will, then that there is a way thereto, which is by the fight
of sin, wherein they must be humbled as low as may be.

14. A minister coming in a new place ought first to preach the truth, thereby
to win credit in the What a minister is first to preach when he comes to a
place.
consciences of the people, then to envey against corruptions, which may breed
man* hurts to himself and others.

15. In examining a man's conscience a minister How to deal with a man's
conscience
is thus to proceed; by the law to try whether he has a knowledge, feeling
and misliking of his sins, or not: whether he has any fear of Gods judgments
for sin, or faith in his promises: whether by particular applying of these
things to himself he can show any effects by prayers, Sacraments, new birth
and repentance.

16. Its a greater thing in a Pastor to deal wisely Whercin the skill of a
minister does most appear.
and comfortably with an afflicted soul, and soundly and discreetly to meet
with an heretic, then to preach learnedly.

17. Its a fault of our time that too hasty trial Too hasty trial of a man's
gifts hurtful.
is made of a man's gifts in the ministry to the great hurt of the Church.

Mirth.
We must be merry in the Spirit, not in the flesh.

Mistrust. What mirth is requisite.

In mistrust, its good to set before us Gods ways What course to take in
mistrust and presumption.
upon others; in our presumption Gods judgments.

Mortification.
Its very profitable to quicken us in mortification to set our old sins How
to be quickened to mortification.
often before us, and to search the bottom of our corruptions in day sins,
night sins etc. that shaming our selves we may be humbled, and seeing the
height length, and depth of sin, we may the nearer comprehend the same
measures of Gods mercies to us in Christ.

Motions.
1. When good motions Good motions are to be drawn into practice.
are stirred up in us, its good as soon as may be to draw them to practice
lest either we forget them or want opportunity to do them; and for help of
memory to set them down in writing.

2. The cause of much Weakness in body and mind whence it comes.
weakness in mind and body comes not from Satan always, but from our selves
in wandering after the motions of the flesh.

A Good Name.
THese be two effects of Favor and a good name two effects of godliness.
godliness, and notably maintain one another, favor and a good name, which
be better then riches, as at all times, and in all persons may be seen,
without which all gifts help little.

2. We ought in no case to hurt the good Our brethrens good name not to be
empaired.
name of our brethren, as whereby he is more wronged then by the loss of Note.
goods.

3. We ought to be most careful by all good We must be careful to
maintain our good names.
means to maintain our own good name, and therefore learn how it may be
gotten and preserved, as also if we be discredited what profit to make thereof.

4. Seeing a good name arises of a good life, without Whence a good name
arises.
this to be well reported of, is a fierce punishment of God, being a great
Hurtful to be well reported of undeservedly.
hardening of the heart in sin and hinderance from repentance.

5. The first step to a good name is to avoid The first step to a good name.
carefully and continually all evil outward and inward, and especially
whereunto we be by nature most inclineable: for as one Simil.
dead fly corrupts an whole box of ointment, so does some one sin often
crack the credit of a man of good report before. Gods children are especially
Why the godly must carefully avoid evil.
to be careful herein, because of the hatred of the world, who will commend
their own though never so profane, if there be but any natural gift, but
contrariwise if any of Note.
Gods children be never so full of grace, if he have but one infirmity or be
once overtaken with some sin, the world will count him a wicked man, and
thereby take occasion to speak evil of their profession. As open, so secret
Even the corruptions of the heart do bring us out of Gods favor.
sins and corruptions of the heart do bring out of favor with God, who will
soon detect us, and make our secret sins come to light, as he often has,
for he can make his dumb creatures reveal them: or our friends to fall out
with us, and so reveal them, to whom before we made them known: or our own
mouth to confess them, either at unawares, or in sleep by dreams, or in
sickness by raving, or in frenfie to vomit out thine own shame, or else the
torment of thy evil conscience shall wring it out, yea if all these should,
fail the Lord is able to raise a strong suspicion in the hearts of others that
thou art such a one, and thereby discredit thee: as this is a good means to
provide for a good name, so is it a good rule of all godliness to be afraid
of secret evils, yea in heart and thought. A second step of procuring and
keeping The second step to a good name.
a good name is to have a godly jealousy over all our doings that they give no
occasion of suspicion of evil, though we do not that which is simply evil,
procuring things honest, following and seeking after things of good report, so
also to be plentiful in good works, one or two being insufficient, our light
must shine before men. Mat. 5.

6. In doing good, we must look that it be with In doing good what is to be
looked unto
a sincere affection, and 2. with discretion: the want of eithertakes away the
credit of well-doing by Gods just punishment; so that a simple soul shall see
the shifts wherewith the wise worldlings bleare men's eyes.

7. When we are ill reported What we are to do when we are ill reported of
for well doing.
of for well doing its good first before we clear our selves, to examine our
hearts in what manner we did it, and finding wickedness therein, to be humbled
for it before the Lord, and receive it as Gods correction to amend us: if we
find our heart upright, then let us learn that God tries us whether we will
leave doing well for ill report, and therefore with patience to endure this
trial, and commend our innocence unto him who maintains good and honest
hearts.

8. They which are so past shame that they care Who do^ little profit by the
magistrate.
not for the Church discipline for their open sins, little profit by the
Magistrate.

9 Many that are put to Why men are sorrowful being put to openshame
open shame are sorrowful therefore, but not aright, for it is not because they
sin against God: others are sorrowful for their sin which wrought them
shame, but the devil bewitcheth them that their sin is not so great, and
many do worse; and this shame will not continue long, prove a wonder but of
nine days continuance, whereby they be hindered from repentance, and though at
the first they without dissembling promised amendment, yet neglecting the
means to further their repentance, thus bewitched they fall to their sins
again. They that will profit by What they are to do who would profit by
open discredit.
such discredit, are to labor that as their faces blush before men, so their
souls may be confounded before the Lord, that being humbled by* godly sorrow,
it may please God to raise them up. Now to try godly sorrow these be two rules,
1. If we can with contented minds take the punishment Two rules whereby to
try godly sorrow.
as correction from the Lord, and yet mourn for our sin, and that in such
manner, as giving place to Gods justice in punishing, we can labor for
forgiveness of sins. And 2. if when we can conceal our sin, yet we
freely with David confess it: when a sin is committed, yet so closely as none
can probably suspect him, the offendant may conceal his sin, if it can be
done without another sin, but if an oath be lawfully required, the truth must
be told.

Nurcerie for the Church.
It were an happy nurcerie A minister to train up some tovvard Scholar in his
house.
for the Church if every grounded Pastor would train up in life, learning,
doctrine, discipline, some toward Scholar to make him more fit for the Church
as Moses did Joshua, Elias Elisha, Jeremy Baruch, Christ his disciples, Paul
Timothy.

Offenses.
IN private offenses a Private offenses must not hinder private pray^^s.
man may go to his private prayers before he be reconciled, till opportunity
be had.

Parents.
1. WHen children have What Parents are to do about their childrens infirmities
infirmities their parents are to see whether they have not received such
sins from them, if they have, they are rather to pray for their children,
then too much to correct them, lest they persecute their own sins in their
children.

2. The Lord often in The immoderate love of parents to their children punished.
his children corrects the immoderate love of parents to their children, for
natural causes, as Abraham with Ismael, Isaac with Esau, David with Absalom
and Adoniah; so of husbands to their wives.

3. If a maid may not Contracts not to be without the parents consent.
perform her vow to the Lord without her fathers consent, much less her
contract to man.

Patience.
1. In greatest troubles there is no greater ease Patience an ease in trouble.
then patience and sufferance: as a great cause of madness is impatiency of
mind, or Gods sudden wrath for sin against conscience.

2. Patience then possesses the soul when our When patience possesses the
soul.
outward wants are thereby supplied.

Peace and Joy.
1. Its not to be marvelled though so few attain Why so fevv rejoyc^ in Gods
love
to the joy in the holy Ghost, and to such sweet rejoycings in Gods love which
is the height of our happiness here, so that the more this is felt and kept,
the more heavenly is the life and death. 1. The worser sort have no knowledge
nor care whether God like or dislike their ways, but blindlie hope all is well
till evil come; and some of these though they fear, God is angry with them,
yet shake it off and forget it, at least flightly appease him. 2. A second sort
be grieved hereat, and this takes away their joy as it ought, but seldom come
they to sound comfort and less rejoicing, though fearful to offend. 3. A
better sort be warned by their harms, and so more wisely keep their peace,
not willingly angering God by leaving undone their duty or presuming to do
contrary, but indeed to please God, those usually walk with much peace, and
can come boldly in Gods presence, and so sometimes find a glorying in the
Lord, and exultation in the Spirit, best of all. The way then to maintain our
peace and How to maintain our peace and so rejoice.
so rejoice, is to consider how we please God: if not, then 1. not to be quiet,
but mourn, 2. not to languish in sorrow, but seek reconciliation. 3. to be
chary in maintaining peace, which in time will breed rejoicing, for which
labor we by due meditation on Gods love: for infirmities ought not to break
our peace, so as there be a true bewailing and striving against them, but
presumptuous sins; and God much more will bear with many faults where there
is a care to to do better.

2. Although the love Gods love the original of our salvation, yet the grace
of Christ does first assure us thereof.
of God be the original cause of our salvation, yet in respect of us the
grace of Christ is the first to work assurance thereof in our hearts; for this
cause in blessing the people that is set in the first place (The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ,) which they first conceive to be the beginning of their
blessing.

To Please God.
1. Its a common and a sore evil, that there is so Little care or labor to
please God.
little care whether God be pleased or not, and therefore so little labor to
please him, without which there is no fruit or comfort of prayer.

2. That we may please God, there must be first Three things required in those
that would please God
an endeavor to pray according to his will. 2. when we do best, yet to
dislike our works as unworthy the Lord. 3. a belief that God will pardon our
wants and accept us in Christ's worthiness; not one of many thus please God,
most few in prayer.

3. The true means to What things join us to God.
please God, is true religion, and a true heart in religion which join us to
God, for if either our heart be unclean, which is abominable before God, or
religion be corrupted, which is loathsome in his sight, we cannot please the
Lord, how glorious soever we be in the sight of the world.

4. Who so would please Obedience required in those that would please God
God must both in deed, and manner of doing endeavor to obey him.

5. The chiefest thing that God is pleased with, is What thing God is most
pleased with.
to be truly religious, to love the truth with singleness of heart and a
prepared mind, to be obedient to it: without the which though a man could live
an Angels life in outward show, yet by how much the more it is praised of the
world, by so much it is the more abominable in the sight of God.

Poor.
1. For releeving beggars at the door or by the How far and what sort of
beggars are to be releeved.
high way side, I judge this a good course, seeing the law has well provided
who should be releeved and who not, for many great damages to the land by
releeving such, and therefore has set a penalty on such releevers, therefore
to releeve such as be allowed by law in a godly discretion according to their
necessity, unless we can on some good ground avouch them to be counterfeits,
and then as we may to see them punished: as for the other not licenced, not to
releeve them, except we be assured of their present necessity, which is also
by law excepted.

2. In our lawful labors The tenth to be given to the poor.
whatsoever we get, its good to give the tenth to the poor.

Popery.
1. Many think it religion Not enough to leave popery and stand on faith
without f^uits.
enough to leave popery, and stand on faith without fruits, so hard is it for
flesh and blood to admit a continual struggling, a going on forward.

2. The mystery of iniquity The ground of Popery.
began even straight upon the Apostles times; by this means, that holy men and
the fathers of the Church were not so wary in deliverie of the truth, but gave
advantage to Satan, some one way, some another, whereby out of all their
errors joined together was at length raised up the Kingdom of Antichrist.

Praise and dispraise.
Its our corruption as well to praise some too We are neither to praise nor
dispraise too much.
much, especially such of whom we have received some good things, as to
dispraise some too much, especially of whom we have been some way hurt.

Prayer.
1. As it is dangerous when we like well our Two extremities to be avoided
about prayer.
prayers to be therefore persuaded God likes them, seeing they have their
spots which not seen defile our prayers, so contrarily when we dislike them.

2. How few prayers Fevv prayers made in faith.
are there made in faith? not one of many; for besides all cold and careless
prayers, even then when we see and feel our wants and earnestly desire grace,
yet hardly can we be persuaded that God so loves us, and likes our prayers,
that he is well pleased and will accept thereof: Its true, when we please our
selves and At what tim^ we think God is ple^sed with us, at what time not.
feel not our wants, we easily rest, and say, God is with us, (which for the
most part is either security or pride and presumption) but when we feel our
unworthiness and have our conscience accusing us of many wants, then we
fear, the Lord regards us not, but abhors our service, which likewise for
the most part is mere unbeleefe, although I say not but in either of those
there may lie covered some spark of faith not seen: but in our best prayers
to see our wants, to abhor them, and in our greatest defects to see Gods
Spirit to comfort us therein, and so in both truly to be persuaded that God
will for the merit of Christ pardon our wants, and accept the work of his
Spirit, this is true faith, seldom seen in our prayers.

3. Prayer is as the Prayer the Christians pulse.
pulse showing the state of the heart. If the spiritual life be weak, such
will our prayers be, and contrarily, whosoever is very godly has great life
in prayer.

4. As a sick body feels no relish in good meat The sick soul relishes not
prayer.
and drink: so the sick soul in prayer, whereby, who so finds sweet taste,
comfort and strength, is in good case.

5. We often pray Though we too often fail, yet is there a constant course
to be kept in prayer.
more for custom and company then drawn by our wants, yet its good to keep a
constant course, that as in meat one morsel may get down another, so by
praying we may get more stomach to pray.

6. The unregenerate Difference betvveene the godlies and ungodlies coming to
God by prayer.
may come to God in prayer, with knowledge that he is a merciful God to his
enemies, specially to all that seek to him, and so may desire and sue with
fear, for some favor; but the faithful are to come as to their father with
joy and comfort of favor.

7. The Lord our God tendering our good, has among many means, Prayer
commended unto us by many arguments.
commended unto us prayer to be an help at hand in all our necessities, Phil.
4. 6. and because we by nature be altogether unapt to it, it being so heavenly
and we so earthly, he has by all arguments commended it to us, as 1. from his
own precept, Psalm. 50. 15. Mat. 7. 7. 2. from its nature, a most heavenly
work of the Spirit. Ephesians. 6. 3. that its a chief means of Gods glory. Psalm.
50. last, 4. that its the most gainefull trade. James 5. 5. that it has great
promises. ibid. 6. that its most practiced of the most godly, and may be had
when all other means be taken away.

8. There be two common Two common evils about prayer.
evils, either we know not how to pray, or we want conscience to use our
knowledge.

9. Prayer is a speaking What prayer is.
to God in Spirit according to his will, or a crying of the heart to God, which
sets out the matter and manner, not cold but fervent.

10. The voice is but an The voice not of the nature of prayer.
help sometimes, not of the nature of prayer, yea its more then a minding what
we say or hear, for the heart must be occupied, else no prayer.

11. These three affections must be specially Three affections to be occupied
in prayer.
occupied in prayer, joy in Gods mercies, sorrow for our sins and punishment
thereof, desire of mercy.

12. Pure prayers are Prayer melodious.
sweet melody.

13. As one man excells another in music, so in In prayer one may excel
another.
skillful prayer.

14. There is a double gift in prayer, one of A double gift in Prayer, of
speech of Spirit.
speech effectual for edification of others, which so far forth is to be
labored for, but this may be in a reprobate. The other, in Spirit, whereby
specially our selves be inflamed, and so do heat others with whom we pray,
which is rare and proper to the elect: this God likes.

15. As they who would Frequency brings skill in prayer.
be skillful in any thing must be much exercised therein, so in prayer.

16. Its a matter of singular Matter of comfort and terror in prayer.
comfort to a true heart that God sees our meaning Romans 8. 27. as of terror,
that God sees our corruptions in prayer: both must breed conscience.

17. As its a rare mercy To pray in faith is hardly got and kept.
to pray in faith, which God gives to none but to his children, and not always
to them, but when he is well pleased with them, so this is hardly got and
kept, and therefore such as will enjoy it, must spare no cost for it, and be
careful not to displease God.

18. Its not meet in variety of Gods dealings, to Prayer upon occasion to he
varyed.
have always one form of prayer, but upon occasion to vary the same.

19. Repetitions in prayer are not unlawful, Repetitions in Prayer not
alvvayes unlawful.
when as they arise upon some great sense of sin, or our wants, or seeing our
selves to have prayed before in fashion, would now desire to pray in truth, or
if it be through forgetfulness of what we prayed for before, else they are
vain.

20. To avoid tediousness in prayer it is good How to avoid tediousness in
Prayer.
to pray briefly and often, as our Savior did in the garden, yet as in long
prayer we must take heed of custom, superstition and ambition, so in short of
profaneness and carelessenesse.

21. If it come to pass that the Lord cross our Why the Lord often crosses
our fervent, blesses our cold and vveake prayers.
fervent prayers, and bless our cold and weak ones as often he does, it is not
to quench our zeal, and favor our coldness, which is the way to heresy and
prophannesse, but to teach that on the one side we lean not too much to our
prayers, as tying the Lord to them, and on the other side to heat our
coldness in prayers, that seeing the Lord hears our cold prayers, how much
more will he hear our fervent and faithful prayers.

Pride.
1. If God prefer us In prosperity pride to be avoided.
and lift us up, take we great heed of pride, lest God cast us down into
some foul sin or reproach.

2. The Lord has suffered many strong, pure, Why many have fallen by women.
and wise men to have fallen by women, to punish their pride in his graces.

Privileges of the Saints.
1. Assurance of salvation, Gods protection, a Ten privileges of the Saints.
godly life, to be kept from reproachful falls, to enjoy the helps to
godliness, to delight in Christianity, to use prosperity well, as also
adversity, to increase in grace, persevering therein.

2. Its a sore evil that Most think not of, know, o^ glory in their
privileges.
we who persuade our selves to be heirs of salvation, do so little think of,
therefore so little know, therefore so little glory in our privileges, and
comfort our hearts in the expectation of them, and so by all good means hasten
for the possession of them, the want of all which is no small cause of our so
little profiting in godliness.

3. The Saints are free: Seven other privileges.
God is their father, loves them, will withhold no good thing from them; will
save them, are protected by him, are taught to live godly.

4. They which be in Diverse ptiviledges out of the eight to the Romans.
Christ are freed from condemnation being justified by him, Romans 8. 1. They
have Christ's Spirit dwelling in them, and guiding 1.
them so to live as pleases 2.
God, whereby their corrupt nature is mortified, and a new nature quickened in
them. ibid. 9. By the same Spirit they be 3.
boldened to call God their sweet father, ibid. 15. being sure they be his
children, and therefore coheires 4.
with Christ, that suffering with him, they may be glorified also. ibid. 17.
They be taught also by the same Spirit to sigh 5.
waiting for their adoption even their full glory. ibid. 23. and truly hoping
for 6.
is with patience to abide it. ibid. 25. likewise they 7.
be taught so fervently and faithfully to pray as God will accept thereof.
ibid. 26 8.
Howsoever God deals with them, and whatsoever befalls them, God disposes
it so, that its better so then otherwise, which comes to pass by the eternal
determination of the Lord accordingly effecting the same in every degree. ibid.
28.

Profession and Professors.
1. Four sorts there are Four sorts of professors.
of Professors, 1. false brethren, great professors but 1.
gross hypocrites, knowing they dissemble. 2. such 2.
as are choked with worldly cares of honor, riches, and the like. 3. such as
are 3.
forward in Christian exercises, but neglect the practice of godliness. 4.
which so hear, that they do understand, 4.
and that do they practice in their words, works, thoughts.

2. If we will have joy in our profession, the word How to rejoice in our
profession.
must win ground daily in us, in subduing sin, even in the root of the
heart, as well as in the branches, otherwise we do only draw nigh with our
lips.

3. This seems a sound difference between true Difference betvveene true and
false professors.
and false professors, the true preferring grace before all vanities, and
thinking them that have most, most happy, ever complain of their spiritual
poverty, thirsting and laboring for grace more and more. The false, they rest
in that little grace they think they have, and are drawn to the earnest
pursuit of vanity.

Promises.
Promises properly appertain Difference betvveene promises and threatenings.
to the renewed part, threatenings to the unrenewed.

Punishment of sin.
When our sins proceed What sort of sins the Lord does especially punish.
of particular and not of general defects, if we offend of infirmity and not
of presumption, the Lord will not punish so straightly in temporal things for the
particular sin brings not wrath, but the being in that sin, and not
repenting for it, which drawing in other sins withal, may draw wrath from
the Lord, so that one sinner is said to be spared, five punished, if for his
particular sins he being admonished shall be humbled as David by Nathan, 2 Samuel 12. Iehosaphat by Iehu. 2 Chronicles. 19. Or being afflicted shall profit
thereby, because in this case he seeks not to draw other sins, but
labors to put away that one sin punished, when notwithstanding admonitions
for mercy, and threatenings for judgments, he makes a way for the Lords
indignation: so that we may comfort Comfort against particular offenses.
our selves for particular offenses, if in the general course of our life we
follow the Lord: neither have the wicked here any liberty to nourish sin
secretly, who use to sin by degrees: but when they presume Gods judgeme^ts on
the wicked.
to lie still in one sin, thinking that for it they shall not be punished, it
is the judgment of God to suffer them to fall from one sin to many, so from
little sins to gross offenses.

Reconciliation.
1. IN reconciliation making, this is the best way How enemies may become
friends.
that either party weighing their own sin (which shall most hurt them) do
chiefly accuse themselves and excuse the other, and withal do profess they
will no more so offend, but will love, though they should not be loved again.

2. Its in vain to speak unto God for others, unless How needful
reconciliation with God is.
we our selves be reconciled unto him through Christ.

Redemption.
Unless a man see himself even utterly lost, unable any ways else to be By
what means a man may pri(...) demption.
delivered, he never priseth redemption, whereof this is the power, profit, and
praise, that when all helps fail, and all creatures be against us, yet a full
ransom is given to our hands, and perfect restitution beyond all hope.

Regeneration.
In regeneration or dying The trial of the heart in regeneration
unto sin, we then come to the trial of our hearts, when we come at those
things wherein either nature or custom does breed delight.

The Regenerate and unregenerate.
It often falls out by the wise providence of Hard to discern betvveene the
regenerate and unregenerate.
God, that the unregenerate be in outward appearance so like the regenerate
that they cannot be discerned one from the other, these falling so low in
sin, those rising so high in obedience: which the Lord so disposes for Gods
ends herein*
the good of his children that they should never be so contented with their
measure as to cease their travail for increase and so to wax secure, but
rather that they might hereby be stirred up to make their calling and election
more sure, and so work out their salvation in fear and trembling. In
consideration hereof we must not We must not be dismayed at the falls of others.
be dismayed when as we hear and see such to fall away, of whom we have
thought very well, for the foundation of God remains sure; neither must we be
disquieted for that beforehand we cannot descry such, who deceive themselves,
but charitably judge the best, yet wisely tarrying till the Lord shall descry
them. Notwithstanding this is evident by the Scriptures and experience, that
there be certain notes and marks so proper to Gods children, that every
child of God may be led to see them in himself, and no unregenerate person
can in truth have, howsoever many of them do fondly dream they have them, and
so deceive themselves who for the most part may by wise dealing with them be
clearly convinced in their own consciences, though through pride they will
not confess it. These marks we speak of, are of diverse measures in Gods
children according to their growth in Christ: we must take the least measure
of them (in this question) lest in seeking to shut out the unregenerate, we
also shut out many of Gods truly begotten children though young and weak, and
yet on the other side, lest in Two marks whereby the regenerate may discern
th^^ they are regenerate, namely from the causes of their new birth and proper
effects thereof.
letting in the one we admit the other, we must take such as be most special
though rarely to be found in professors. Of this sort there be two, the causes
of our new birth, and the proper effects thereof: the causes be more certain,
the effects more apparent proofs thereof. The causes of Regeneration be these
and in this order. God the Father of all the regenerate The causes of
regeneration.
when he will ordinarily beget any sinner and child of wrath to become his
child, does of his own mercy freely send his word and holy Spirit to effect
the same, 1. Working in 1.
him the sight of his misery and sound grief of heart for the same, which
breeds a fervent desire to be delivered. 2. The knowledge 2.
of the remedy with a like desire of obtaining the same. 3. A sound 3.
knowledge that God has given them this remedy, and therewith a certain
persuasion it is theirs, which they receiving are delivered from their misery,
and so made Gods children, being now new The effects of regeneration
borne. The effects of this new birth be these. 1. A special joy of heart in
the 1.
benefit received. 2. An 2.
unfeigned love of God the sole Author of so great a benefit. 3. Which breeds
for the time past a deep 3.
displeasure for dealing so wickedly with so merciful a father. 4. For the 4.
time to come an earnest desire and care to please God, with 5. True obedience
to his holy word, 5.
even of mere love. So also 6. A conscionable use of all such means as be 6.
known fit to further this obedience. 7. A godly sorrow in the sight of our 7.
inabilitie to please God; and a longing desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ: all which are in their measure in every regenerate person, and do at
least in some measure grow more and more till he be dissolved. Now if Not any
one of the preceding effects must be vvanting.
any unregenerate shall fondly dream all these to be in him (for if he be
utterly wanting in any of them, then thereby he may be convinced to be
unregenerate) he is as narrowly by his life to be searched as may be, and a
thousand to one he shall be convinced, but if such cannot descry himself, nor
be by others; let him hold his comfort so long as he can, till it shall be
manifest he deceived himself. If yet any shall think Their estate is not good
whose very life shows the contrary.
himself in good estate, when as his life shows the contrary, then is it to
be avouched to him that he utterly deceives himself, imagining that to be in
him which is not, even as it is with an hungry man, in his dream he thinks
he eats, and when he awakes his soul is empty, Isay. 29. 7. even so this
worldling rockt asleep, Simil.
with his present peace, thinks himself in good case, but when he is awaked
by Gods judgments, then he finds himself most miserable, such were many of
the Church of Laodicea, which said they were rich, etc. and knew not they were
wretched. Rev. 3. 17. Again, me thinks it fares Simil.
with these men, as it is with many in some dangerous disease which has
deprived them of the sense of their pain and weakness, who therefore say,
they be well, and fear nothing; so these being deadly sick in soul have no
sense thereof, and think themselves in a good estate: or as it is with one
that is drunk; They have stricken me, but I was not sick* Prove. 23. 35. So
these, drunken with the world, feel not the wounds of sin, see not their
own misery.

Remembrance of good.
1. Seeing there is no action of our life for which Upon every occasion we
must have some good matter in store to be remembered.
we have not l^arned at some time or other some profitable direction for the
same, its much to be endeavored that such matter may be present with us as is
fittest for the time, otherwise much danger must needs ensue.

2. The best means to remember the word is to How to remember the word best.
be truly touched with it, either in grief or joy; for they leave strongest
impression.

Renewing.
Its an happy thing to redeem the renewing of How to redeem the renewing of
our inner man
the inner man with the decay of the outward.

Repentance.
A Godly Physician having How a godly physician brought his diseased patients
to a sight of their sins.
patients grievously tormented, willed them first to be reconciled to God
before they sought his help, which they neglecting, and he knowing them open
sinners, dismissed them, saying, The Lord having laid his rod upon you, I dare
not take it off you without the show of some fruits of repentance, which they
doing were healed.

Reports.
1. Men by ill reports What use to make of ill reports.
raised of them must learn to be forewarned lest they fall into such a sin,
and thankfully must receive the correction, that whereas God might have made
them suffer for ill, he does rather for well-doing.

2. This is Gods great Gods mercy that ill reports are sometimes raised
against us.
mercy, that when men have evil thoughts, God does cause them to be evil
spoken of for the act, whereby they ought to be moved to search their hearts,
and finding it within, though it never burst forth, they are to profit hereby
to correct their hearts, and to be thankful to God, that has kept the^ by
this means from the act, which otherwise might have broke forth to their
discredit.

3. God by false reports does often correct us for Why God lets false
reports be raised against us.
sin long ago committed and yet not fully repented, or for some contrary
corruption, or generally he would have us see and amend some sin we saw not
before.

Reproof. Reproof does not alvvayes profit for the present.

1. It falls out often that some, grudging at reprehension, profit afterward
when their choler is past: others, receiving it well, after neglect it.

2. At a table its good for them whose duty it is, How to reprove sin at table.
so to rebuke sin that it may be reformed, rather than the person shamed,
without there be necessary cause so to do.

3. No reprehension What to be observed in reproving.
must be but upon good ground, and according to a man's calling, with care not
to discredit our brother, and prayer unto God for a blessing thereon.

4. For the most part A note of an unquiet spirit.
its a note of an uncharitable and unquiet Spirit in those that govern, to
admonish, rebuke, or chide as we call it by ironies, questions, and scoffs.

Riches.
The love of riches or The abuse and use of riches.
earthly things, hinders us in good things, but the use of them furthers us
therein.

Sacrament.
I. A Pastor may not debar any from the Sacrament When a Pastor is not to
debar therefrom.
for a secret offense though being admonished he repent not.

2. The Sacraments of Difference betvveene ours and the Jews Sacraments.
the Jews were obligations to bind them; of Christians, to absolve them.

Saints.
In comparing our selves In comparing our selves with. Gods Saints how to be
affected.
with Gods Saints we must not despair in our weakness, because we be not
like them, nor presume to be like them.

Salvation.
Even of those that have knowledge and sense of Diverse sorts of people deceived
about their salvation: with the remedies to be used herein.
their misery, and of Christ the only remedy, yea of Gods large and free
offer of salvation unto them, and faithful promise to save them if they will
come to him, not a few never be saved, for that not believing if they go not,
or go amiss, not as Heb. 10. 22. but some ignorantly, some fainedly, some
doubtingly, some profanely, some not constantly, and therefore have no answer
or a denial and an heavy answer; who can have no comfort. But besides these,
even such as have in their persuasion a gracious answer from God that he will
save them, which they shall find by the inward comfort it brings them, are to
look whether this be not a lying Spirit, wherewith thousands be beguiled, one
sort taking their comfort and building their persuasion that God will save them
only and chiefly on this, that their lives be amended; which as it may be true,
so it may be false, and is no good ground of our persuasion, but at the best a
prop: whereas the true Spirit teaches us to build all our persuasion on Gods
goodness freely offered and faithfully to be performed, of both which we are
assured by the Gospel the word of truth, the only ground of our assurance.
But further seeing how many be beguiled having a good ground, but building
loosly thereon, this is to be tried by the effects of the true Spirit, whereof
all (though many) may be referred to this one, a conscionable study to please
God in all things.

Satan's courses, subtlety, temptations.
1. Our common adversary Satan never ceasing Satan's proceedings to dravv men
and women to destruction.
to seek our destruction does chiefly labor, 1. to rock us asleep, and so
quiet in security, that we may not see the state 1.
of our souls. 2. if we be 2.
awakened and look about how it is with us, then through our privy pride he
draws us to think better of our estate than it is, and by that means gets us
asleep. 3. If this prevail not, but our infirmities and 3.
many wants do humble us, then does he with all his power beat us down to
discourage us and weaken our profession. In all which several conditions, 1.
Some do wholly and Who are ensnared by him, and yield unto them and who not.
long lie, and either asleep see nothing, or are too well pleased and jocond, or
else altogether cast down and uncomfortable. 2. A better sort goes through
all these, sometimes asleep, sometimes too much contented and so fall asleep
again, sometimes oppressed with grief, and after a while either lifted up or
fall asleep again, and thus they spend their days unconstantly, and
therefore indeed with little sound rejoicing, and do hereby lie open to many
temptations on every side. 3. A third sort, and indeed the best, through the
strength of grace received seldom fall asleep, so as they see not how they
walk, neither be so lifted up as to forget their wants; nor so cast down as
to have no joy in the Spirit; but wisely considering what is the condition of
Gods true children in this world, and watching over their hearts especially do
rejoice in trembling, and go on constantly in their christian course, though
with infirmity, yet rarely or never falling into any offensive trespass or
doubting of Gods favor.

2. Satan under a pretense of Repentance, Satan's policy driving some to be too
strict, others too lavish in the use of Gods creatures.
brings many unto extreme sadness and strictness in the use of Gods
creatures, as under a pretense of lawful liberty he stirs up others to
excessive and unsanctified mirth, and an untemperate use of Gods creatures.

3. We must pray that the Lord give not out that How far we are to pray
unto God to restrain Satan.
measure of leave to the devil to tempt us, which we give out to sin to
work rebellion in us against his majesty, but that God would make Satan a
Surgeon to open our sins.

4. Its the policy of Satan to hide Gods present Satan's policy in hiding Gods
blessings setting before us our wants.
blessings upon us, that we may be unthankful, and to set before us greater
which we want, to make us murmur against God.

5. Satan is most ready What we are most unwilling to.
to make us unwilling to that which shall be most for Gods glory, and the good
of his Church.

6. This is a common Satan's policy in hindering from the performance of one
duty by setting men on another.
practice of Satan, whereby he much hinders Gods children from many duties,
even both by outward object and inward temptation to draw them to some other
thing, (though lawful) than at that time ought to be, and therein to hold them
what he can whereby he may keep them from the duty, and also accuse them of
neglect of duty, and so at least disturb their quiet, and make them unfit for
other duties: it shall be therefore high wisdom for every true Christian,
both to discern what is to be done in his time, and to watch straightly that he
The remedy.
be not any way pulled therefrom. But if he cannot keep men from doing their
duty, yet will he not His endeavor to corrupt men in doing their duty.
cease to corrupt the^ in the manner of doing, either through hypocrisy or
carelessenes, and so either make the^ content themselves with that which is
naught worth before God, or else oppress them with fear that they have not
done their duty in such sort as they ought. The remedy The remedy.
is manifest, To have special care over our hearts that they be sound and
fervent, humbling our selves in our wants, and comforting our hearts in the
testimony of a good conscience.

7. Through the subtle Faith and obedience jointly to be urged.
malice of Satan working on our corrupted nature it comes to pass, that if
faith be taught, most abuse it to liberty in sin; if obedience be urged, to
put confidence therein for justification, they are therefore jointly to be
urged, yet faith as the isntrumental cause of justification, works as the
effects of the man justified.

8. Its a matter much to be bewailed as cause of A fault in most that they like
and embrace Satan's assaults.
great danger to many a soul, that Satan our sworn enemy in every part of our
life so annoying us, yet most, seldom or never, see or avoid his assaults but
rather like and embrace them.

9. Satan being a Spirit Satan's familiarity with us.
has a very familiar though secret communion with our spirits.

10. Its safest in all temptations to keep the Thecourse to be taken in every
temptation.
mean, neither to be quiet without grief, for then Satan will account we be
his without any pains, neither to be too unquiet as without comfort, for then
Satan will be the prouder and bolder to take more pain to overcome us.

11. As Satan tempting Adam, overcame him A comparison betvveene Satan's
tempting of Christ and Adam.
and all in him, so tempting Christ, as he could not overcome him, so neither
shall he us in him.

12. Satan's temptations follow our affections: Satan's temptations follovv our
affections.
if we lightly account of him he bleares our eyes with Gods m^rcies, if we be
pricked with conscience of sin, then he ladeth us with the judgments of God
making us as ready to aggravate our sins, as by the former to extenuate them.

13 Subtilty, and violence Distinctions betvveene Satan's and the fleshes
temptations.
are the chiefest distinctions between the temptations of the devil, and of
the flesh.

14. When Satan cannot drive into security he Whom Sat^n cannot one way
vanquish he seeks to overcome another.
labors to discourage that they may have no heart to good exercises, and so
make small use of them, for as they who eat with ill stomachs have least
strength by their meat; so nothing more hinders our profiting by good
exercises than want of comfort in them. This policy of Satan many not Many
hereby ensnared.
observing, do of purpose discomfort themselves, thinking the same best, and
so take corrasives for cordials. The remedy The remedy.
hereof is this, that such as be hindered by discouragement should in their
meanest discharge of duties feed on these comforts. 1. the nature of God so
proclaimed and proved more tender, pitiful and ready to bear with, pardon,
and accept our least endeavors (in truth) than parents the frailties of their
children. 2. that in our weakest duties* there is some conscience and fruit.

The Scriptures.
1. Men that dig in mines for any treasure even The Script^res the vein of
hevvenly treasure.
for the hope of gain labor sore before they find any vein, and many times
miss, but when they find the silver vein with what cheerfulness do they
labor? it makes them forget their pain though sore, and otherwise tedious:
now we who study the Scriptures are even in the vein of heavenly treasure,
how much then should we be encouraged?

2. The Scriptures barely read without particular Not enough barely to read the
S^riptures.
looking into the several doctrines contained therein is like a coming into a
treasury, wherein we see many costly things folded up, and some ends appearing
out, but when they be all uncovered then does their glory more affect us for
the present, and leave a deeper impression of their excellency: so in the
Scriptures by the particular view of the excellent doctrines, our memory is
more confirmed, besides our present use thereof.

3. Its a most worthy A worthy travail for Students in divinity
travail for Students in divinity to refer all their study first for the
true sense of the Scripture, which only will make a man a grounded Divine to
teach, and confute all error; and secondly for the right use in himself and
others for amendment of life and all godly duties.

4. We must redeem Time to be redeemed to read the Scriptures.
time even from our ordinary callings to read the holy Scriptures.

Self-love.
This is a dangerous deceit and bewrayes an unsound To abstain from sin for
by-respects dangerous.
heart, that when our sin is like to be reproachful to us, then we can
hold in for our credits sake, but in our private dealings there is no such
stay: and indeed if it be observed we shall find that this self-love is a
greater cause of leaving much ill, and doing good than the true love of God
which arises from a sound faith.

The number of Seven.
The number of seven is often used in the Scriptures, Why the number of seven
is often used in Scripture.
for that God foreseeing man's unbeleefe provided many things to call him to the
remembrance of the creation, and so bring him to meditating, believing, and
trusting in God.

Sickness.
Its most meet in the A necessary course to be taken about the providing a
minister to instruct the infected.
time of a contagious sickness that there be one Minister to teach the whole,
and another to visit the sick, and that by choice of the people: if people
admonished will not take this order, a godly pastor may in wisdom to his
power provide for both, speaking to the infected a far off: if any danger
come, he is free.

Sin.
1. As he that once could not abide to taste bitter or sour things when he
was in health may justly suspect that his stomach and body is out The trial of
a man's self by his love or hatred of sin.
of frame when he can well away therewith: so he that could not once abide any
corruption of sin in himself or others, and now can, is to fear his soul
is sick; and therefore no man though never so godly otherwise, but is to
suspect himself and to be grieved when he can pass over his infirmities, or
see sin in others without earnest grief.

2. He that will profit in true repentance, must not by viewing the sins
What must be done of him that would profit in true repentance.
of others, whether preachers or people, be drawn from sight of his own in
his particular calling of Magistrate, Minister, Parents, etc. but must so see
those, that first he cast out the beam out of his own eye.

3. The Lord punishes Sin not repented, punished.
every sin not repented of, either in our selves or in our posterities.

4. The conscience of Conscience of sin what it breeds in the godly.
Gods graces, with the conscience of sin breeds an hell in the hearts of
Gods children: when we are given to sin we are blind even in the sight of
our own dangers and custom of sin, which preach such iniquity unto
Miserable to be given to sin.
us, that neither Gods judgments can terrify us, nor his mercies move us.

5. We shall never How sin may be left
thoroughly leave sin, until we know and acknowledge sin to be sin, and
be truly sorrowful for the same.

6. This above many things is to be lamented in The ache of sin will be
carried to our graves.
the lives of most professors, that by long custom in sin it is so
confirmed, that we shall carry the ach thereof to our grave, as bruised men in
their youth.

7. We may comfort our selves for particular How to comfort our selves for
particular sins.
sins, if being admonished we be humbled for them as David and Iehosaphat;
but if being admonished we still lie in sin, and so tie one sin to another,
then are we to fear Gods wrath, for it is the general falling into sin,
not one particular which displeases God.

8. There is no sin, The seed of every sin is naturally in every man.
whereof every man has not the seed in himself which without the Lords mercy
would in time break out.

9. A good help to avoid sin is to remember How to avoid sin.
what punishments we have felt for sin, and what are threatened.

10. Though it be very How to find out our special sin.
hard to find out our special and secret sins, yet by often examining our
selves, acquainting our selves with our own estate, by often prayer that God
would reveal them, by often hearing, reading, meditating the word, by marking
the checks of our consciences and reproaches of our enemies we may be much
helped therein.

11. Some sins against knowledge are of frailty The kinds of sin.
and be remissible; others are not, being of a rebellious and final
obstinacy, which is not in those who fear it, and carefully avoid Who sin
not of final obstinacy.
it, rejoicing that its not in them.

Slander.
By well doing to stop the mouths of slanderers How to stop the mouths of
slanderers.
is the only remedy of all slanders.

Sorrow for sin.
1. It is observed that even of those that are Many are more grieved at sin
because of the danger of it, than otherwise.
grieved for sin the cause is in most, for the danger it brings them unto,
and not for dishonouring of God whereby it comes to pass that when they gather
hope of deliverance from the danger, then the grief and fear for sin
decays, which if it were otherwise would daily increase: for the more we are
assured of Gods love the more we love him, and the more we love him the more we
desire Gods honor, and therefore the more are we grieved with our sin which
offends him. This may be a most sufficient answer to that doubt which
troubles Why many a^e more grieved at sin at first than afterward.
many, why diverse of those that be true Christians were moved to fear sin
and be grieved at it more in the beginning than after. How dangerous to make
light of finne.


2. There is no greater bane of sound godliness than to favor and make light
of our sin, not being grieved thereat.

3. It is found by woeful experience that a principal Why most Christians are
unwilling to lead the strict life of godliness.
cause why many, who hope to be saved by Christ and be indeed true though weak
Christians, are so sloathfull and unwilling to take any pains to lead the
strait life of godliness, and to come under and precisely keep the Christian
diet, namely that holy direction that prescribes how we are the whole day long
and so all our life long to be well occupied: the cause I say hereof is
manifest to be this, that they be little grieved with their diseased estate,
and feel not such smart of their sins as should make them never cease till
they found some ease by this sovereign diet, which is proved so sufficient to
releeve and refresh a true Christian heart. This therefore above others is
Grief for sin is to be labored for.
to be travailed in, that we may feel our sin so bitter and grievous unto us
that we may never be at Means to attain the same.
rest till we come under this diet and thereby also may be held to a constant
keeping thereof. To this end these things are with all conscience continually
to be thought on, 1. that our sins be most dishonorable to God, such as much
offend him and grieve his holy Spirit whereby we are sealed. These if they be
not grievous unto us we may justly 1.
fear that either we be bastards and no true children, or at least that we
are fallen into a deadly security, which will hardly in long time be recovered,
and will cost us much grief and sorrow to bewail our decay. 2. that 2.
they be very hurtful to man, our selves and others, both good and bad; to
our selves, as which hinder good things from us, earthly and spiritual, bring
judgments temporal and eternal; to others, provoking Gods wrath on our Land,
Church, Congregation, Family, Kindred, Posterity, offending the godly, as
whereby they are made sorry; the wicked, making them reproach our profession;
the weak also being strengthened in sin by ill example.

4, It is a special sin amongst most professors The hurt that prosperity
works in many professors.
that by reason of outward prosperity and peace they do not walk humbly with
God; so little grief of heart or fear of God is any ways to be found:
indeed sorrow is tedious and unwelcome, and therefore except there be great
cause and that outward, we put sorrow away and soon ease our selves of the
hurthen, whereby it comes to pass that men being loosed as it were from the
Lords bands live securely, and serve God carelessely and spend their days in
jollitie which is the bane of all godliness and enemy to all heavenly
rejoicing, whereas God gives grace to the humble, and he will dwell with those
that be of a contrite spirit. In regard hereof I judge it highly necessary for
the most of us by all means to turn our laughter Occasions of carnal
rejoicing must be shunned that we may truly grieve at sin.
into mourning and our joy into heaviness, which that we may do we are to put
away and withdraw our selves from all occasions of carnal rejoicing, as
pastimes, merry-meetings, bravery, belly-cheere, foolish jesting, and other
such companies as might make the heart light and merry, and instead hereof to
occupy our mind much upon our old and late sins, to see how far we come
short in grace of others, and more short of that which God requires, and by the
means which we have we might attain to, and herein particularly to deal so
much as may be. Herewith to consider the Necessary considerations provoking to
godly sorrow.
terror of Gods wrath, hear how many ways he may make our lives bitter unto
us, by bodily and spiritual plagues on our selves, or such as be near us, our
wives, children, parents, kindred, families, and acquaintance, and in the world
to come the torments of hell how extreme and everlasting and easelesse, in
what danger hereof we be who have so little or no faith at all, and so little
pray to escape this endless woe; how God is angry with us and regards not our
prayers, and this is the more that we offend so merciful a father. Besides
these causes of grief for our selves, this should grieve us for others, either
the faithful, their infirmities and grievous punishments of God upon the^
bodily and spiritual, deprived of the means of salvation, and the like; or
the wicked that they live so prophanly and licenciously persecute the godly and
cast away their own souls whose care if we did pity it would move to many
tears and prayers for the^. In all these this ought to be chief, that the
honor Note.
of God, which is the most precious treasure that can be, is not only so
lightly esteemed, but defaced and contemned.

5. There is a double A double sorrovv for sin.
sorrow for sin, one specially in respect of the punishment, which goes
before faith, and may be in those who never come to faith, in whom it either
wears away of it self, or is eased with a false faith; or if it continue, it
drives to despair; and this also remains after faith, by reason of the
weakness of faith, which is sometimes more or less. The other sorrow for
sin ever follows faith, which thus arises; that when we consider Christ's
love to us (which breeds love in us to him with a desire and purpose to please
him) then seeing how by our corrupt nature we fail, it cannot but grieve us
accordingly; and this sorrow only is a proof of faith.

6. These be two rules Two rules to try godly sorrovv.
to try godly sorrow, 1. if we can with contented 1.
minds take the punishment as correction from the Lord, and yet mourn for our
sin, and that in such manner, in giving place to Gods justice in punishing,
we can labor for forgivenes of our sins: 2. if when we can con 2.
ceale our sin, yet we with David freely confess it.

7. When many are more grieved with the Dangerous to grieve more at vvorldly
things the^ at sin.
loss of worldly credit, the motion whereof is sin, than with the sense of
their sins and loss of Gods glory, the Lord strikes them with the want of
that which is most precious to them, when they make no conscience of his
honor, which is most precious unto him.

8. If we will truly lament the sins of others, How truly to lament the
sins of others.
we must first be touched for our own; and as touching others, so to lament
as the sin requires, and with love, not contempt of the person, and pray for
him.

9. When we have cause of sorrow it is good not to How long we are to grieve.
cast it off, till we see the fruit thereof.

10. Heavenly sorrow it is, to talk of good things Kinds of heavenly sorrovv.
which we want, or ill, which we have.

11. We cannot heartily be grieved for that sin Whence it is that we are not
grieved at sin in others.
in others, whereof we have made no great conscience our selves.

12. That is a true godly sorrow for sin when no outward pleasure can True
sorrovv for sin how tried.
steal it away, nor continuance of time waste it, but only Christ.

13. This ought to be always in Gods children The want of affection to any
good to be grieved at.
that in the want of affection to any godly exercise when they should have it,
that at least they should be grieved thereat.

14. Two notes there Two notes of godly sorrovv.
are of godly sorrow, 1. that it be for a just cause, and 2. a proportionable 1.
measure to the cause: for 2.
it is a subtle policy of Satan against tender consciences, to urge them to a
continual sorrow, whereby he may more prevail in his accusation against them:
for when they sorrow so much for little offenses, he will dismay them in their
greater faults, or accuse them of hypocrisy in making no more account of great
sins Its Satan's policy to make us grieve continually.
than of common infirmities: we are then, to take heed how we give our selves
to sorrow continually, especially seeing we are commanded to rejoice always,
and never to sorrow always, although there be a necessary time of sorrow: and
moreover, this ought to be considered, that God will not account of men for one
particular Note.
defect, but according to his general course and tenor of life.

Soul and Body.
1. It were great wisdom and grace to be More care is to be had of the
soul then of the body.
more careful to feed and provide for our souls (which even a world cannot
ransom) than our bodies, not feeding these till those be fed.

2. There is never any corrupt action in the body, The soul first finneth.
whereof there has not been first a corrupt motion and affection in the
soul, so that the soul is the enemy of the body in using it to sin, and not
A preposterous course in most professors.
the contrary, as many falsely complain, and therefore punish their bodies and
spare their souls, whereas we ought rather to nourish the body as the friend
to the soul for the exercise of repentance, of mortification and of
sanctification.

Spiritual decay.
Its high wisdom when we see any plague upon Upon the sight of any plague
earthly or spiritual what is to be done.
us earthly or spiritual, as loss of our spiritual comfort and
cheerfulness in well-doing, or wound of conscience by sin remitted, then to
turn to the Lord and crave help of him, both to show us the cause and to teach
us truly to remove it, that so humbling our selves, we may obtain mercy and
be freeed from the plague.

Disquiet Spirit.
A punished mind is a A disquiet spirit what
disquiet Spirit.

Godly Strife.
Seeing we are naturally unwilling to any good What we are to strive chiefly
to do.
thing, it is good to strive to that thing which we are most unwilling to do.

Students.
This course have I by A necessary course to profit in learning and be more
and more fitted for the ministry.
experience found profitable, and resolved upon, namely to be diligent in
reading the holy Scriptures, and of them at the least every day four chapters;
in like manner (for the increase of my knowledge) to spend three hours in the
forenoone in searching out the sense of the hardest places, as two in the
afternoon in the searching out the proprieties of the tongues, and other two
in perusing the tracts and commentaries of learned men; one in meditation and
prayer; what time remains to spend the fame in brotherly conference.

Suffering.
They that will suffer great things in persecution How to be fitted for great
trials.
and that of Papists, must suffer smaller in peace and that of Protestants.

Selfe-suspition.
He that can neglect the Who may justly suspect that their state is bad.
private means, and use them without any lively touch, and he that can hear
the word without any check of his conscience when the word rebukes his
corruption, or he that has his heart accusing him of sin, and can be merry,
and follow the world, and pass over his sin, is greatly to suspect himself,
and to deny comfort to his heart till God truly humble him. The best may accuse
themselves, and this is Nate.
comfortable, if we truly judge our selves in this case.

Table-talke.
SEeing all are anointed Every Christian is at table to move and further good
matters.
with the same oil and not the Minister alone, all men at a table are to move
and further good matters with reverence and discretion.

Tears.
Howsoever we please our selves with small grace, Most are scantie in tears.
yet if we compare our selves with that we see should be in us, and is in
some, we are exceeding short, as in this one thing, that so few tears come
from us in any cause; we are too ready to excuse our selves hereby, that we are
not so prone to weep as others, and yet for earthly things we can readily.
What was it in Paul that drew so many tears continually How we may abound
therein.
from him, but his tender love to God and his Saints? Let this be in us, so
shall we weep.

Temptations.
1. As it is a great comfort that no temptation What may comfort and humble us
in temptation.
invade us, but that which takes hold of the nature of man, so this ought to
make us with profit humble our selves, that there is no temptation in any man
which may not take hold on us in time.

2. We are never the further from temptation for misliking it, but the How to
prevent temptations.
nearer, unless as in judgment we mislike it, so in affection we humble our
souls in fear and prayer before the Lord, as knowing the same in time may
invade us.

3. Satan in good causes Golden temptations.
does use golden temptations to allure the children of God, as in prayer he
affords meditation, in meditation prayer, in hearing almesgiving, in reading
admonition, and still envyeth the good thing whereunto we are called.

4. As there is a vicissitude A vicissitude of comforts and temptations.
of the means and comforts of our salvation, so is there of temptations, which
being repelled will come again. Temptations sometimes take away feeling.


5. As some sickness takes away all sense of life, so some temptation may take
away the feeling of spiritual life.

6. In any grievous temptation we must flee What course the Saints are to take
in time of temptation.
to prayer, and to reading the word, that part thereof which is fittest: and
this not prevailing, to confer with some faithful brother, and be diligent
in these means: when if yet we prevail not, then must we follow our callings
diligently, and with patience wait the Lords leisure, not reasoning with our
temptation, lest thereby we be made dull or desperate, neither yet wholly
contemning it as a trifle, lest we fall into security, and Satan overcome us
without wrestling: for if we fear it too much he overcomes us before we fight.

7. All temptations come Whence temptations come.
either of ignorance or want of feeling.

8. As Jacob left not striving We must not faint in temptation.
though his thigh were loosed till he had the blessing, no more must we faint
in our temptation, though we be humbled, till we obtain the victory.

9. As striving against our temptations they soon To strive against temptations
how profitable, not to resist them how dangerous.
depart, and for little pains we enjoy longer ease and quietness, so in not
resisting the temptation, the same increases, and our little pleasure is paid
with long grief and bitter.

10. This is a sure experiment whether the sin How we may know whether or
not we shall yield to temptation.
which often tempts us shall prevail or not; if the more we be tempted, the
more we be grieved for it, strive against it, and labor more for the contrary
virtue, it shall not long continue: but if the first coming of sin wrought
this care and grief, and the second waxed less, the^ it will prevail,
unless the former course be speedily repaired.

Thanks.
Such are mere mockers of God, and deep dissemblers, Thanksgiving in words
not accompanied with obedience, discovers ^ypocrisie.
which make great profession of thanks in words, but have little or no care by
their lives in obedience to testify the same.

Thoughts.
1. A man is not to spend his thoughts after Thoughts not to be spent on the
world.
the abundance of these earthly things, for the roving of the heart after the
world is a wonderful hinderance to a godly course.

2. It is found by many Why its found hard to keep our thoughts on heavenly
matters.
true Christians a very hard thing to keep their minds upon heavenly matters,
the reason is manifest, that being by nature earthly, our minds sink down
thither as the stone downward, and will not without force be carried upward.
Our only help must The Remedy.
be, that we do acquaint our minds to ascend upward, that at length they may
be acquainted with the path, and so as readily go in it, as in the former.

3. A principal cause Whence it is that many in their holy exercises are
troubled with by-thoughts.
why so many be troubled in their holy exercises with by-thoughts is this, that
they be not exercised at other times to govern their minds in chasing away
vain and evil thoughts, and in holding their minds and hearts to good things,
without which travail I see not how the former disease can be cured: on the
other side, he that shall bestow good travail this way, shall find the yoke
of Christ easy, and no tedious thing to live godly, but shall be freed from
many falls, reproaches, sorrows, and discouragements, which many daily
meetwith, and be filled daily with such comforts, as many professors seldom
taste of though they would.

Trial of a man's self.
1. Then may a Christian At what time a Christian may judge his state good.
soundly judge his state good, when he finds all heavenly matters a
recreation to him, and his earthly affairs his labor.

2. There is nothing more necessary than daily How we may clearly see our
state whether good or bad.
more and more to make sure our calling, which most professors be either
ignorant of, or negligent in, deceiving themselves. Let every one therforeduly
examine himself in these points, whereby he shall clearly see his state, as
whether he be careless of his state toward God, such not knowing or not
regarding how it is, are most miserable; or careful, whether fearful,
(either not knowing or not assured how to be saved, both dangerous and damnable
to such as die so, Rev. 21. 8.) or comfortable, whether upon faith alone, or
works alone, both deceitful; or upon faith confirmed by works, which only i^
sound: for trial whereof, consider, what thou beleevest, that thou shall be
saved by Christ, this only justifies, the belief of nothing else: why thou
beleevest, because thou knowing thy self miserable, and Christ as willing as
able to ease thee laden coming to him, does therefore in heart come unto him,
with assurance to be eased, seeing he promised. Whether thou have thy
conscience bearing thee record, and because the heart is deceitful, if thou
see the effects hereof in the change of the heart, peace in God, love, fear,
and the like, and both thy self and others may see thy course hereupon amended
and daily bettered.

3. The soundest trial whether we have received How to try whether or not
we have received Christ.
Christ is by our comfort and care, 1. such as find neither, must bewail
their state, else no hope, 2. such as be in doubt must never give over till
they find those. 3. such as find those must increase them, which will not be
easy; for prosperity and adversity will quench joy in the Spirit. Thus must
we seek for comfort by removing all that may discomfort, and using all means
to maintain it, as above all to think often and deeply on Gods goodness to us,
which will stir up faith and love.

4. Its a godly wisdom A point of godly vvisdome.
to suspect and try our willingness and unwillingnes to any thing* so strong
and deceitful are our affections.

5. Many are altogether We are to look as well to outvvard as inward
corruptions.
looking to the outward corruptions, others to the inward, the mean between
both is best: as a man is in trial and temptation, Note.
such a one is he.

The Truth.
1. The best thing in us Why we ought to love the truth.
is to love the truth, and to hate heresies, and that not because the time does
so serve, as to praise, profit or prefer them that love the truth, though all
the world loved heresies and heretics; though all be against us and love them.

2. As for the love of Want of love of the truth whereof it may make us
afraid.
the truth the Gospel proceeded from fishermen to be embraced of the more
learned sort, so for want of love thereof its to be feared that heresy
beginning in the simpler sort, will infect the learned: and if God purpose to
punish the blindness of our age, he can as well send an heretical Spirit
into 400 of our learned preachers as he sent a lying Spirit in 400. Prophets.

Time.
1. To have a watchful eye over the expense of How to walk with God all day
long.
our time that no part of it slip away without doing some good, and that
especially which most appertains to us, is a notable means to make us walk
all the day long with God as the holy fathers did.

2. As the wicked will The time to be redeemed.
dearly buy the time to commit iniquity, and that secretly which they dare not
publicly; so Gods children in the midst of sinners, if they want that
strength to profess publicly, yet ought they to redeem all opportunities,
for exercise of godliness, prayer, and fasting.

Virtue.
AS the right way is but Virtue is but one, the contraries there unto many.
one, and by-ways many, so the virtue commanded being one, the sins contrary
thereto be many, which as its to be seen in all other, so in true
liberality, and that kind of goodness which pertaines to the goods of our
neighbor; The virtue required is that we have an earnest desire that our
neighbor may have a benefit as well as our selves, and therefore that we
procure their good as our own, but the contrary vices be many, not easily
seen, for our hearts be deceitful, for when we find our selves
indifferently void of one sort of covetousness, we imagine we are as free
from all, when as it Note.
is nothing so: for many in buying and selling can deal conscionably, and be
worthy commendation who yet in free giving are very backward, who thereby may
see their love to the world; others be frank enough in giving, and hard in
buying and selling, too much seeking themselves, who may besides their
covetousness suspect their hearts be false, and moved to give for some
finister respect, as privy pride to be well spoken of, or secret merit to
please God thereby, or that their conscience could not else be quiet but fear
Gods displeasure, whereas the true root of this grace ought to be faith in
Christ love to his needy members, for which cause only Who they are that truly
releeve others.
freely to relieve is in none but Gods dear children. Again some are not so
scraping in getting, as pine at their losses, and are miserable in spending;
others prodigal, be extreme in getting by hook or crook: so that this love of
the world shows it self in many things. How far visions are to be credited.


Visions.
There may be visions now, but extraordinary, which must have no credit
without the word, for Satan will twice or thrice show the truth, that thereby
in weightier matters he may seduce.

Warfare.
HE that feels not his life a battle, and so fears Our life a warfare.
his adversary, and is grieved with the wounds of sin, can have small
comfort in Christianity.

Watchfulness.
1. Watchfulness is a looking to our selves for What vvatchfulnesse is.
our souls health often required, standing in avoiding all hurtful things, and
procuring all good.

2. As security sets open The contrary effects of security and vvathfulnesse.
to all danger whereby many fall, as appears by the examples of David,
Solomon and Peter, so through watchfulness are many upholden.

3. Watchfulness is either The kinds of vvatchfulnesse.
general, which must be in every action, or special at set times, and upon
special occasions.

Wishes.
We must be careful There is care to be had thereof.
of our wishes, lest the Lord grant them, when we would not have them, as often
falls out.

The word of God.
1. It is ever best to note The general virtue of the word to be noted.
the general virtue of the word, and not to use exceptions, but upon
particular and constraining necessity.

2. The cause why we Why we profit not in the word.
profit not in the word is because we pray not to have our hearts stricken
therewith.

3. Who so hears the The effect of careless hearing.
word carelessly, no marvel though he have no delight therein.

4. The word of God of it self does only as a light The word and spirit must
go together.
reveal Gods will, and cannot work on the heart but that is only the work of
the Spirit, who by the word, lighteneth, humbles, fears, comfort,
persuades.

5. This sore evil have I observed among many Why most profit not by hearing
the word.
diligent hearers of whom is to be well hoped for some work of grace in them,
as a chief cause why they hear much with little profit, and therefore no
growth can be seen in them, yea rather a decaying, namely that they content
themselves with such a marking of that which is delivered, as that they can in
any measure report what they heard, and approve thereof, which as its
necessary, so its insufficient and can little edify the soul in sound
godliness, and therefore ought not to pacify the conscience, whereas that
only hearing can soundly edify and ought to pacify, when as our hearts be
delighted in the knowledge revealed or confirmed, and our consciences pricked
with the sense of those sins whichbe rebuked, in such sort that we can at our
most convenient time turn aside and bewail them and labor by prayer with the
Lord for forgiveness and power unto amendment, or otherwise be drawn by
hearing of our duties to de^^re and purpose to perform them, and so make new
covenants with the Lord hereof, wherein this care is so much the more
necessary, for that this fruitful hearing is the The benefit of fruitful
hearing.
principal nurse of all Christianity. Besides this there is another great
danger, in that we so soon let slip our hold, forget or neglect our purposes,
and so soon wax weary in good courses. But its to be hoped that they who have
in truth purposed Note.
and begun well shall be recovered from their falls, and quickened afresh by
new instructions, which especially does commend the necessity of continual
hearing or living under an ordinary ministry.

6. As nothing more The word is food for the soul.
concerns our bodily life then food, so for our spiritual life the word.

7. Our chief default A chief default in hearing.
in hearing is that we are not so affected with sorrow or comfort, as that we
be persuaded to leave the sin, and do the duty spoken of. Whether we are to
go to Churchon the week days or not


8. Touching the hearing of the word on the week days, this may be resolved,
that if our work be such as cannot at another time be done, or be for the
present well omitted, its lawful for us to stay therefrom. A trial whereof
may be had in this, if a man of honor, or great credit with us should require
us at such times to come to him, whether we would deny him or not, if we would
not deny him, how can we with good conscience deny the Lord our presence in the
congregation?

Worldly-mindednesse.
Its a matter much to Worldly mindednes a common sin among professors.
be lamented that among so many Professors we see so exceeding few, scarce one
of a thousand who has apparently overcome the world by his faith, setting
light by these things below, the heavenly having wholly his heart Though it be
our desire to have our hearts withdrawn herefrom, yet so weakly do we labor
the same, that with shame we may bewail our want.

Worldly-wisedome.
Its the shame of our holy Gods children not so wise for their souls as are
worldlings for their bodies.
profession that the children of the world are in their kind wiser than the
children of light. The wisdom of worldlings for this world is admirable, how
deep a reach have they to see into their matters? how quick to spy out all
advantages, to forecast all doubts, to prevent all that may cross them, and to
follow all opportunities to attain their desires, and to make all sure, O but
how retchlesse and babish be most Christians for grace and happiness! Some
securely defer all to God, taking no thought what shall become of them: others
content themselves with bare shows to have a name of Christianity: others,
with small beginnings, as though every little were enough: most deceive
themselves with foolish conceit their care is better then it is: few or none
match the worldling in prying into the privy commodity of Christianity, and
so valuing it aright, in deep reach to compass these, in forecasting all
doubts, and preventing all impediments, taking and pursuing all occasions,
sparing no cost, time, pains of attaining, and never give over till we be
sure, and then with all watch and ward to hold fast that we have gotten and
daily to increase the same.

Young children.
YOung children may be Instruction of young children.
taught things concerning God.

Zeal.
1. SEeing the most zealous in time do cool, its a Prayer to be kept from the
sins of the time.
most necessary prayer that God would keep us in our age from the sins of the
time we live in.

2. We are to take heed that the love of men's persons There must be both zeal
and love in rebuking
slack not our zeal in rebuking sin in them, and that our zeal against sin
slack not our love to the person.

3. Its a godly zeal to Zeal to Gods glory wherein manifested
Gods glory to fear every least thing in our brethren and yet in love to hope
the best.

FINIS.

