royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

THE COPY OF A LETTER TO THE RIGHT Honorable the Earl of LEYCESTER,
Lieutenant general of all her Majesty's forces in the united Provinces of the
low Countries, written before, but delivered at his return from thence:

With a report of certain petitions and declarations made to the QVEENES
Majesty at two several times, from all the Lords and Commons lately
assembled in Parliament.

And her Majesty's answers thereunto by her self delivered, though not
expressed by the reporter with such grace and life, as the same were uttered by
her Majesty.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty. 1586.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the Earl of Leicester, etc.
ALbeit with earnest desire of my heart (right honorable my very good Lord) I
have always endeavored to do your Lordship some acceptable service, for the
honor you first vouchsafed me from beyond my cradel, and after confirmed with
the favorable opinion wherewith you have always countenaunced me ever since,
even thus far onward on my days, which also together with my years has
increased faster then mine ability to perform, being crossed in nothing more
deeply, then when I was let by the overmuch tendering of me by my parents,
to attend your Lordship in your late voyage and honorable expedition into the
Low Countries: yet have I been ever since most studious to observe and
apprehende some good occasion, or fit opportunity, to testify the duetifull
reverence I bear to your Lordship: wherein if hitherto I have been slack in
performance during your absence, it has proceeded of the care I had, not to
entertain your Lordship with matter either frivolous or vulgar: though things
of that nature might best become my condition, and well agree with my
understanding.

In which cogitation it came to my mind, that the report of the speeches
delivered by the Queens most excellent Majesty in a late and weighty cause
dealt in this Parliament, in answer to the petitions presented to her Majesty
the 12 and 24. of November at Richmond by the Lord Chauncelour and Speaker,
respectively, in the name and behalf of both Estates, accompanied with diverse
of either sort, would doubtless be a thing to your L. most grateful, as one
ever pleased justly to admire the rare perfections of her mind, and approved
Judgment, wherewith, according to your Estate and place, deservedly, your L.
has been usually acquainted: as also worthy of eternal monument and
everlasting memory, for as much as on the sudden they were delivered by her
self, for answer of a matter propounded, debated, resolved, and digested,
with great labor and premeditation, of the greatest, grauest, wisest, and most
choice persons of the whole Realm. Whereof although I have but sle^derly
purtraied the lineaments, without expressing to life the external ornaments of
her Royal speech, accompanied with all Princely and graceful accomplementes:
yet doubt I not but your Lordship will easily find her inward virtues, whereof
it is impossible for me to make the least adumbration.

And because in the daily expectation of your Lordships return, I rested
uncertain how these might come safely to your Lordships hands: I did therefore
advise to have this my letter with the included copies to be ready to attend
your first arrival, in gratulation of the safety thereof, which has been
long desired. Wherein, as I strive to perform a particular duty to your
Lordship, so trust I you will have that honorable consideration, that in the
communication thereof with others, there grow not any prejudice to me for my
presumption, in aduenturing to be a reporter of that, which in the delivery
wrought so great astonishment to all the hearers, as it exceeded the fulness of
every man's expectation: and therefore, without some favorable construction of
mine attempt, I might incur great blame by my slender manner of report, so to
have blemished the excellency of her Majesty's speeches, whereof I humbly
beseech your Lordship to have favorable regard. Thus referring them to your
Lordships disposition, and my self to your favorable protection, I humbly
take my leave. 25. Nouemb. 1586.

Your Lordships most humbly in all duty to command. R. C.

THE BRIEF OF THE Lord CHANCELLERS first speech, at the time when he
delivered her most excellent MAJESTY a petition in writing, for, and in the
name of the Lords and Commons: Which speeches were of more length then here
are by me collected: but sure I am, the substance thereof is here truly
expressed.
THat the Lords and Commons having of long time to their intolerable grief,
found, by how many practices the Scottish Queen had compassed the destruction
of her Highness most Royal person (in whose safety next under God they
acknowledged their chief felicity to consist) thereby not only to bereave
them of the sincere and true Religion in this Realm professed and established,
but to bring back again this noble Realm into the thraldom of Romish
tyranny, and to overthrow the happy estate thereof: wherein, although her
Highness of her abundant gracious natural clemency and Princely
magnanimity, has either lightly passed them over, or with no small indulgence
tolerated, notwithstanding the often and earnest instances of her Nobility and
Commons in sudry Parliaments heretofore: and further has protected her from
the violent pursuit of her own people: she yet, as a person obdurate in
malice (as it appears,) continued her former practices, as had been lately
manifested by certain wicked conspiracies plotted by one Anthony Babington,
and diverse desperate persons, that had combined and confederated themselves by
vow and oath in a most horrible enterprise, by murder to take away the life of
her Majesty: wherein the Scottish Q. did not only advise them, but also
direct, comfort, and abbette the^, with persuasion, counsel, promise of reward,
and earnest obtestation. Whereupon, her Majesty at the earnest request of such
as tendered the safety of her royal person and the quiet of the Realm, did
direct Commission under the great Seal to sundry Lords and others of her
Majesty's privy Counsel, and a great number of Lords of Parliament, of the
greatest and most ancient degree, assisted with some of the principal Judges
of the Realm, to hear, examine and determine the same, according to a Statute
in that behalf made in the xxvij. year of her reign. Who, to the number of
36. having attended the execution of the said Commission, and diverse days and
times heard the allegations against the said Scottish Queen in her own
presence and hearing, (she being permitted to say what she would in her own
excuse,) did with one assent, find her culpable both in priuitie and consent
to the said crimes objected, and also in compassing the Queens Majesty's
death. Which sentence, by her own directions upon the hearing of the proves
and process in Parliament, was judged to have been most honorable and just,
and thereupon they all beseech her Majesty, that forasmuch as the said Queen
of Scots, was the very ground and only subject, whereupon such dangerous
practices and complots had been founded, against her Majesty's most Royal
person and the Estate of this Realm for these many years, to the overthrow
of sundry of the Nobility of the land, and danger of Christian religion, and
that they could see no hope of her desisting, and her adherents, hut that
still her Majesty's safety must be hazarded, and stand to the event of the
like miraculous discoueries:

Therefore, as most humble and instant suppliants, they did upon their knees at
her most gracious feet, beseech and request in most earnest manner, that as well
for the continuance of Gods Religion, the quiet of this kingdom, preservation
of her person, and defense of them and their posterities, it would please her
Highness to take order, that the said sentence might be published, and such
further direction given, as was requisite in this so weighty a cause,
according to the purport and intent of the said Statute. Wherein, if her
Majesty (pursuing her wonted clemency) should now be remiss, besides the
imminent danger to her person, she might by the stay thereof, procure the
heavy displeasure of Almighty God, as by sundry severe examples of his
Justice in the sacred Scriptures, does appear. And so he delivered, to her
Majesty's own hands, the petition in writing, which he said, had been with
great deliberation assented unto, by all the whole Parliament.

A SHORT EXTRACT OF such reasons, as were delivered in speech by Master
Sergeant Puckering, Speaker of the Lower House, before the Queens most
excellent Majesty in her Presence Chamber at Richmond, the xii. of November
1586. in the xxviii. year of her Reign, containing diverse apparent and
imminent dangers, that may grow to her Majesty's most Royal person, and to her
Realm from the Scottish Queen and her Adherents, if remedy be not provided.
First, touching the danger of her Majesty's person.

1 BOth this Scottish Queen and her favorers, do think her to have right,
not to succeed but to enjoy your Crown in possession: and therefore as she is
a most impacient competitor, so will she not spare any means whatsoever, that
may bereave us of your Majesty, the only impediment that she enjoys not her
desire.

2 She is obdurate in malice against your royal person, notwithstanding you
have showed her all favor and mercy, as well inpreseruing her kingdom, as
saving her life, and saluing her honor. And therefore there is no place for
mercy, since there is no hope that she will desist from most wicked attempts:
the rather for that her malice appears such, that she makes (as it were)
her testament of the same, to be executed after her death, and appoynteth her
executors to perform it.

3 She boldly and openly professed it lawful for her to move invasion upon
you. And therefore, as of invasion victory may ensue, and of victory, the
death of the vanquished: so did she thereby not obscurely bewraie, that she
thought it lawful for her to destroy your sacred person.

4 She thinks it not only lawful, but honorable also and meritorious to
take your life from you, as being already deprived of your Crown by the
excommunication of the holy father. And therefore it is like she will (as
hitherto she has done) continually seek it by whatsoever means.

5 That she is greedy of your Majesty's death, and prefers it before her
own life and safety: for in her direction to one of her late Accomplices, she
advised (under covert terms) that whatsoever should become of her, that
tragical execution should be performed upon you.

The danger of the overthrow of the true Religion.
1 IT most perilous to spare her, that continually has sought the overthrow
and suppression of true Religion, infected with Popery from her tender youth,
and being after that a Confederate in that Holy league when she came to age,
and ever since a professed enemy against the truth.

2 She rests wholly upon Popish hopes to deliver and advance her, and is
thereby so devoted to that profession, that as well for satisfaction of others,
as for feeding of her own humor, she will supplant the Gospel, where, and
whenever she may: which evil is so much the greater, and the more to be
avoided, as that it slays the very soul, and will spread it self not only
over England and Scotland, but also into those parts beyond the Seas, where
the Gospel of God is maintained, the which cannot but be exceedingly weakened,
by the defection of this noble Island.

The peril of the state of the Realm.
1 AS the Lydians said, Vnum Regem agnoscunt Lydi, duos autem tolerare non
possunt: So we say, Vnicam Reginam Elizabetham agnoscunt Angli, duas autem
tolerare non possunt.

2 As she has already by her allurements brought to destruction more Noble men
and their houses, together with a greater multitude of the Commons of this
Realm, during her being here, then she should have bin able to do, if she had
been in possession of her own Crown, and armed in the field against us: so
will she still be continual cause of the like spoil, to the greater loss and
peril of this Estate: And therefore this Realm neither can, nor may endure
her.

3 Again, she is the only hope of all discontented subjects, she is the
foundation whereon all the evil disposed do build, she is the root from
whence all rebellions and trecheries do spring: And therefore whilst this hope
lasts, this foundation stands, and this root lives, they will retain
heart, and set on foot whatsoever their devises against the Realm, which
otherwise will fall away, die and come to nothing.

4 Mercy now in this case toward her, would in the end prove cruelty
against us all, Nam est quaedam crudelis misericordia, and therefore to spare
her, is to spill us.

5 Besides this, it will exceedingly grieve and in a manner deadly wound the
hearts of all the good Subjects of your land, if they shall see a conspiracy
so horrible not condingly punished.

6 Thousands of your Majesty's most liege and loving Subjects, of all sorts
and degrees, that in a tender zeal of your Majesty's safety, have most
willingly both by open subscription and solemn vow, entered into a firm and
loyal association, and have thereby protested to pursue unto the death, by all
forcible and possible means, such as she is by just sentence now found to be:
can neither discharge their love, nor well save their oaths, if your Majesty
shall keep her alive: of which burden your Majesty's Subjects are most
desirous to be relieved, as the same may be, if justice be done.

7 Lastly, your Majesty's most loving and dutiful commons doubt not, but that
as your Majesty is duly exercised in reading the Book of God, so it will
please you to call to your princely remembrance, how fearful the examples of
Gods vengeance be, that are there to be found against King Saul for sparing
King Agag, and against King Achab for saving the life of Benadad: both which
were by the just judgment of God deprived of their kingdoms, for sparing those
wicked Princes, whom God had delivered into their hands, of purpose to be
slain by them, as by the ministers of his eternal and divine Justice: Wherein
full wisely Solomon proceeded to punishment, when he took the life of his
own natural and elder brother Adonias, for the only intention of a marriage,
that gave suspicion of treason against him.

Herein we your Majesty's most loving and obedient subjects, earnestly depend
upon your princely resolution, which we assure our selves shall be to God most
acceptable, and to us no other, then the state of your Regal authority may
afford us, and the approved arguments of your tender care for our safety
under your charge, does promise to our expectation

A REPORT OF HER Majesty's most gracious answer, delivered by her self
verbally, to the first petitions of the Lords and Commons, being the Estates of
Parliament, in her Chamber of Presence at Richmond, the xij. day of November
1586. at the full almost of xxviij. years of her Reign: Whereof the Reporter
requires of all that were hearers, a favorable interpretation of his intent,
because he finds that he can not express the same answerable to the
original, which the learned call Prototypon.
THE bottomless graces and immeasurable benefits bestowed upon me by the
Almighty, are, and have been such, as I must not only acknowledge them, but
admire them, accounting them as well miracles as benefits, not so much in
respect of his divine Majesty, with whom nothing is more common then to do
things rare and singular: as in regard of our weakness, who can not
sufficiently set forth his wonderful worker and graces, which to me have
been so many, so diuersely folded and imbroydered one upon another, as in no
sort I am able to express them.

And although there lives not any, that may more justly acknovvledge them
selves infinitely bound unto God then I, whose life he has miraculously
preserved at sundry times (beyond my merit) from a multitude of perils and
dangers: yet is not that the cause, for which I count my self the deeplyest
bound to give him my humblest thanks, or to yield him greatest recognition:
but this which I shall tell you hereafter, which will deserve the name of
wonder, if rare things and seeldom seen be worthy of account: Even this it
is, that as I came to the Crown with the willing hearts of my subjects, so do
I now after xxviij. years Reign, perceive in you no diminution of good wills,
which if happily I should want, well might I breath, but never think I lived.

And now, albeit I find my life has been full dangerously sought, and death
contrived by such as no desert procured: yet am I therein so clear from malice
(which has the property to make men glad at the falls and faults of their
foes, and make them seem to do for other causes, when rancor is the ground)
as I protest it is and has been my grievous thought, that one, not different
in sex, of like Estate, and my near kin, should fall into so great a crime:
yea, I had so little purpose to pursue her with any color of malice, that as it
is not unknown to some of my Lords here, (for now I will play the blabbe) I
secretly wrote her a letter upon the discovery of sundry Treasons, that if she
would confess them, and privately acknowledge them by her letters to my
self, she never should need be called for them into so public question.
Neither did I it of mind to circumuent her: for then I Knew as much as she
could confess, and so did I write. And if even yet, now that the matter is
made but to apparent, I thought she truly would repent (as perhaps she would
easily appear in outward show to do) and that for her, none other would
take the matter upon them, or that we were but as two milk maids with
pailes upon our arms, or that there were no more dependancie upon us, but
mine own life were only in danger, and not the whole Estate of your
Religion and well doings, I protest (wherein you may believe me, for though I
may have many vices, I hope I have not accustomed my tongue to be an instrument
of untruth) I would most willingly pardon and remit this offense.

Or if by my death, other nations and Kingdoms might truly say, that this
Realm had attained an euerprosperous and flourishing estate: I would (I assure
you) not desire to live, but gladly give my life, to the end my death might
procure you a better Prince.

And for your sakes it is, that I desire to live, to keep you from a worse.
For as for me, I assure you, I find no great cause I should be fond to live:
I take no such pleasure in it, that I should much vvish it, nor conceive such
terror in death, that I should greatly fear it: and yet I say not, but if the
stroke were coming, perchance flesh and blood would be moved with it, and
seek to shun it.

I have had good experience and trial of this world: I know what it is to be
a subject, what to be a Sovereign: what to have good neighbors, and sometime
meet evil willers. I have found treason in trust, seen great benefits little
regarded, and in stead of gratefulnes, courses of purpose to cross.

These former remembrances, present feeling, and future expectation of evils, I
say, have made me think, An evil, is much the better, the less while it
endures: and so, them happiest, that are soonest hence: and taught me to bear
with a better mind these treasons, then is common to my sex: yea, with a
better heart perhaps, then is in some me^. Which I hope you will not merely
impute to my simplicity or want of understanding, but rather, that I thus
conceived, that had their purposes taken effect, I should not have found the
blow, before I had felt it: and, though my peril should have been great, my
pain should have been but small and short: wherein, as I would be loath to dye
so bloody a death, so doubt I not, but God would have given me grace to be
prepared for such an event, chance when it shall, which I refer to his good
pleasure.

And now, as touching their treasons and conspiracies, together with the
contriuer of them, I will not so preiudicate my self and this my Realm, as to
say or think, that I might not, without the last Statute, by the ancient laws
of this land, have proceeded against her, which was not made particularly to
prejudice her: though perhaps it might then be suspected, in respect of the
disposition of such as depend that way.

It was so far from being intended to entrap her, that it was rather an
admonition to warn the danger thereof: but since it is made, and in the force
of a Law, I thought good, in that which might concern her, to proceed
according thereunto, rather then by course of common Law: wherein, if you the
Judges have not deceived me, or that the books you brought me were not false
(which God forbid) I might as justly have tried her, by the ancient Laws of
the land.

But you Lawyers are so nice in sifting and skanning every word and letter,
that many times you stand more upon form then matter, upon sillables then
sense of the Law. For in the strictnes and exact following of common form,
she must have been indicted in Stafford Shire, have holden up her hand at the
Bar, and been tried by a Jury: A proper course forsooth, to deal in that
manner with one of her Estate. I thought it better therefore, for avoiding of
these and more absurdities, to commit the cause to the inquisition of a good
number of the greatest and most noble personages of this Realm, of the Judges
and others of good account, whose sentence I must approve: And all little
enough: For we Princes, I tell you, are set on stages, in the sight and view of
all the world duly observed: The eyes of many behold our actions: A spot is
soon spied in our garments: A blemish quickly noted in our doings. It
behooves us therefore, to be careful that our proceedings be just and
honorable.

But I must tell you one thing more, that in this last Act of Parliament you
have brought me to a narowe straight, that I must give direction for her death,
which cannot be to me but a most grievous and irksome burden. And least you
might mistake mine absence from this Parliament (which I had almost forgotten)
although there be no cause why I should willingly come amongst multitudes, for
that amongst many some may be evil: yet has it not been the doubt of any such
danger or occasion that kept me from thence, but only the great grief to
hear this cause spoken of, especially, that such a one of State and kin,
should need so open a declaration, and that this nation should be so spotted
with blots of disloialtie. Wherein the less is my grief, for that I hope the
better part is mine, and those of the worse not much to be accounted of, for
that in seeking my destruction, they might have spoiled their own souls.

And even now could I tell you, that which would make you sorry. It is a
secret, and yet I will tell it you, although it is known, I have the
property to keep counsel, but too well oftentimes to mine own peril. It is
not long since mine eyes did see it written, that an oath was taken within few
days, either to kill me or to be hanged themselves: and that to be performed
ere one month were ended. Hereby I see your danger in me, and neither can nor
will be so unthankful or careless of your consciences, as not provide for your
safety.

I am not vnmindeful of your oath made in the association, manifesting your
great goodwils and affections taken and entered into, upon good conscience, and
true knowledge of the guilt, for safety of my person, and conservation of my
life: done (I protest to God) before I heard it, or ever thought of such a
matter, until a great number of hands with many Obligations were showed me,
at Hampton Court, signed and subscribed with the names and seals of the
greatest of this land: which as I do acknowledge as a perfect argument of
your true hearts, and great zeal to my safety: so shall my bond be stronger
tied to greater care for all your good.

But for as much as this matter is rare, weighty, and of great consequence, I
think you do not look for any present Resolution: the rather, for that, as
it is not my manner, in matters of far less moment, to give speedy answer
without due consideration: so in this of such importance, I think it very
requisite with earnest Prayer to beseech his divine Majesty, so to illuminate
my understanding, and inspire me with his grace, as I may do and determine
that, which shall serve to the establishment of his Church, preservation of
your estates, and prosperity of this common wealth under my charge. Wherein
(for that I know delaie is dangerous) you shall have with all conueniencie our
Resolution delivered by our message. And what ever any Prince may merit of
their Subjects, for their approved testimony of their unfeigned sincerity,
either by governing justly, void of all partiality, or sufferance of any
injuries done (even to the poorest) that do I assuredly promise inuiolablie to
perform, for requital of your so many deserts.

The occasions of the second access.
This Answer thus made by her Majesty, the Lords and Commons were dismissed.
And then her Highness some few days after, upon deliberation had of this
Petition, being (as it appeared) of her merciful disposition of nature, and
her Princely magnanimity, in some conflict with her self what to do in a
cause so weighty and important to her and the Realm, sent by the Lord
Chauncelour (as I heard) and by the mouth of an Honorable person, and a right
worthy member of the lower house, this message to both houses: moving and
earnestly charging them, to enter into a further consideration, whether there
might not be some other way of remedy, then that they had already required, so
far disagreeing from her own natural inclination. Whereupon, the Lords and
Commons in either houses assembled, had sundry consultations, both in their
several houses generally, and by private Committees deputed specially, and
after conference had betwixt the said Committees, it was resolved with
unanimity of consent amongst them in the lower house, and by universal
concord in the upper house, (the question there propounded to every one of the
Lords) that there could be found no other sound and assured mean, in the depth
of their understanding, for the continuance of the Christian religion, quiet of
the Realm, and safety of her Majesty's most Royal person, then that which
was contained in their former petition. The reasons whereof, were summarily
these that follow: which are more shortly reported, then they were uttered.

A BRIEF REPORT OF the second access the 24. of November 1586. and of the
answer made in the name of the Lords of Parliament, to a message sent from her
MAJESTY by the L. Chauncelour after her first answer.
THE Lord Chauncelour accompanied with above five or six and twenty Lords of
Parliament, came before her Highness in her Chamber of presence, to deliver the
resolution of all the Lords of Parliament, concerning a message which he had
not long before delivered from her Majesty, for further co^sultation, whether
any other means could be thought of, or found out by any of the^, how the
Scottish Queens life might be spared, and yet her Majesty's person saved out
of peril, and the state of the Realm preserved in quiet, declared, that
according to that he had received in commandment from her Majesty, he had
imparted the same to the Lords assembled in the upper house, whom he found by
their general silence much amazed at the propounding thereof, considering the
same had been before in deliberation amongst them, and resolved upon, and as
appeared by their former petition exhibited to her Highness, wherein they had
expressed the same resolution. Notwithstanding, for her Majesty's further
satisfaction, they had entered into a new consultation, and for that purpose
selected a great number of the choysest persons of that higher house of
Parliament, to confer thereof, either privately or together with the lower
house: which also was done accordingly at several times. At all which
conferences it was concluded by them all, and so afterward by the whole
assembly of both houses, that there could be no other assured means for the
preservation of her Majesty's life, and continuance of Gods Religion, and quiet
of this State, then by the full execution of the sentence according to their
former petition, instantly pressing her Majesty with many arguments and
reasons tending thereto, all which, though by distance from his Lordship I
could not well conceive, yet this I did remember precisely and especially was
one, that as it were injustice to deny execution of Law, at the suit of any
one particular, and the meanest of her people: so much more, not to yield to
the earnest instance and humble prayers of all her faithful and loving
subjects. And so concluded, with earnest petition for her Majesty's resolute
determination and answer, for a present and speedy direction by proclamation,
and otherwise also, according to the form of the statute.

A SVMMARIE REPORT of the second speech, uttered by the Speaker of the Lower
House, by direction of all the Commons.
THat if her Majesty should be safe without taking away the life of the
Scottish Queen, the same were most likely and probably to grow, by one of
these means following.

1 First, that happily she might be reclaimed and become A repentant convert,
agnising her Majesty's great mercy and favors in remitting her heinous
offense, and by her loyalty hereafter, perform the fruits of such
conversion. 2 Or else, by a more Straight guard be so kept, as there should be
no fear of the like attempts hereafter. 3 Or, that good assurance might be
given by Oath, Bonds or Hostages, as cautions for her good and loyal demeanor
from henceforth. 4 Or lastly, by Banishment, the realm might be voyded of her
person, and thereby the perils further removed, that grow to her Majesty by
her presence.
The moments whereof being duly pondered, did yet appear so light in all
their judgments, that they durst not advise any security to rest in any, no
not in all of them.

For touching her conversion, it was considered, that if piety or duty could
have restreined her from such heinous attempts, there was cause abundantly
ministered to her on Majesty's behalf, when she not only protected her against
the violence of her own subjects, who pursued her to death by Justice, but
covered her honor, when the same by public fame was touched, and by very
heinous and capital crimes objected and proved against her before certain
Commissarie delegates assigned to examine the same, more then blemished, and
spared her life, when for her former conspiracies and confederacies with the
Northren Rebels, her highness was with great instance pressed by both the
houses in the xiiii. year of her Majesty's reign, to do like justice upon
her, as now is desired, and as her treasonable practices then, had most justly
deserved.

And where the penalty of this Act sufficiently notified unto her, should
have terrified her from so wicked attempts, she has nevertheless insisted in
her former practices, as a person obdurate in malice against her Majesty, and
irrecouerable: so as there was no probable hope of any conversion, but rather
great doubt and fear of relaps and recidiuation, forasmuch as she stood
obstinately in the denial of matter most evidently proved, and now most
justly sentenced against her, and was not entered into the first part of
repentance, The recognition of her offense, and so much the farther off from
the true fruits that should accompany the same.

As for a surer guard, and more strait imprisonment, it was resolved, that
there was no security therein, nor yet in the other two means propounded of
bonds and hostages: for as much as the same means that should be practiced to
take her Majesty's life away (which God forbid) would aptly serve both for the
delivery of her person, and release of the bonds and hostages that should be
given for cautions in that behalf: which being unhappily achieved, and to our
irreparable loss, who should sue the bonds, or deteine the hostages? or being
detained, what proportion was there in bonds or hostages whatsoever, to
counteruaile the value of so precious and inestimable a Jewel, as her Majesty
is to this Realm, and to us all?

But she will solemnly vow and take an oath, that she will not attempt any
thing to the hurt of her Majesty's person: She has already sundry times
falsified her word, her writing and her oath, and holds it for an article of
religion, That faith is not to be holden with heretics, of which sort she
accompteth your Majesty, and all the professors of the Gospel to be: And
therefore have we little reason to trust her in that, whereof she makes so
small a conscience.

As for banishment, that were a step a malo in peius to set her at liberty: a
thing so greatly desired and thirsted for by her adherents, and by some Princes
her Allies, who sought her enlargement chiefly, to make her a head to be set up
against her Majesty, in time of inuasio^.

To the which were added some few reasons, collected out of her own letters
and the confession of Babington, her instrument and chief conspiratour: by
which appeared, how her own conscience bewrayed what might justly fall upon
her, in case any of her intended desseignements came to light: that she might
happily be shut up in some more close and strait prison, as the Tower of
London, if there befell her no worse thing: and in that she directed Babington,
in case he failed in the action of her delivery, that he should nevertheless
proceed in the residue, which was the death of her Majesty: who also
confessed, that upon assurance of her Majesty's death, or the arrival of
strangers, he intended to proclaim of Q. of Scots, and made no doubt of the
desired success: and therefore, her Majesty's death being so earnestly sought,
for advancement of this competitor, her Highness could not remain in quietness
or security, if the Scottish Queen should longer continue her life.

THE SECOND ANSWER made by the Queens Majesty, delivered by her own mouth,
to the second speech, uttered in the names of the Lords and Commons of the
Parliament.
FVL grievous is the way, whose going on and end, breed comber for the hire of
a laborious journey.

I have striued more this day then ever in my life, whether I should speak,
or use silence. If I speak and not complain, I shall dissemble: if I hold my
peace, your labor taken were full vain. For me to make my moan, were strange
and rare: for I suppose you shall find few, that for their own particular,
will comber you with such a care. Yet such I protest has been my greedy desire
and hungry will, that of your consultation might have fallen out some other
means to work my safety joined with your assurance, (then that for which
you are become such earnest suitors) as I protest, I must needs use complaint,
though not of you, but unto you, and of the cause: for that I do perceive by
your aduises, prayers, and desires, there falls out this accident, that Only
my Iniuerers bane, must be my life's suertie.

But if any there live so wicked of nature, to suppose, that I prolonged this
time only, proforma, to the intent to make a show of clemency, thereby to set
my praises to be wire drawers to lengthen them the more: they do me so great a
wrong, as they can hardly recompense. Or if any person there be, that think or
imagine, that the least vayneglorious thought has drawn me further herein,
they do me as open injury as ever was done to any living creature, as he that
is the maker of all thoughts, knows best to be true. Or if there be any,
that think, that the Lords appointed in Commission durst do no other, as
fearing thereby to displease, or else to be suspected to be of a contrary
opinion to my safety, they do but heap upon me injurious conceits. For
either those put in trust by me to supply my place, have not have signified
unto you all, that my desire was, that every one should do according to his
conscience, and in the course of his proceedings should enjoy both freedom of
voice and liberty of opinion: and what they would not only declare, they
might privately to my self have revealed. It was of a willing mind and great
desire I had, that some other means might be found out, wherein I should have
taken more comfort, then in any other thing under the Sun. And since now it
is resolved, that my surety can not be established without a Princess end,
I have just cause to complain, that I, who have in my time pardoned so many
Rebels, winked at so many treasons, and either not produced them, or altogether
slipped them over with silence, should now be forced to this proceeding,
against such a person. I have besides, during my reign, seen and heard many
opprobrious books and Pamphlets against me, my Realm and State, accusing me
to be a Tyrant: I thank them for their alms: I believe, therein their meaning
was to tell me news, and news it is to me in deed: I would it were as
strange to hear of their impiety. What will they not now say, when it shall be
spread. That for the safety of her life, a Maiden Queen could be content to
spill the blood, even of her own kinsewoman? I may therefore full well complain,
that any man should think me given to cruelty, whereof I am so guiltless
and innocent, as I should slander God, if I should say he gave me so vile a
mind: yea, I protest, I am so far from it, that for mine own life I would
not touch her: neither has my care been so much bent how to prolong mine, as
how to preserve both, which I am right sorry is made so hard, yea, so impossible.

I am not so void of judgment, as not to see mine own peril: nor yet so
ignorant, as not to know it were in nature a foolish course, to cherish a
sword to cut mine own throat: nor so careless, as not to weigh that my
life daily is in hazard: but this I do consider, that many a man would put his
life in danger for the safegarde of a King, I do not say that so will I: but
I pray you think, that I have thought upon it.

But since so many have both written and spoken against me, I pray you give me
leave to say somewhat for my self, and before you return to your countries,
let you know, for what a one you have passed so careful thoughts. Wherein, as I
think my self infinitely beholding unto you al, that seek to preserve my
life by all the means you may: so I protest unto you, that there lives no
Prince, that ever shall be more mindful to requite so good deserts. And as I
perceive you have kept your old wonts, in a general seeking of the lengthning
of my days: so am I sure that I shall never requite it, unless I had as many
lives as you all: but for ever I will acknowledge it, while there is any breath
left me. Although I may not justify, but may justly condemn my sundry faults
and sins to God: yet for my care in this government, let me acquaynt you with
my intents.

When first I took the Scepter, my title made me not forget the giver: and
therefore began, as it became me, with such religion, as both I was borne in,
bred in, and I trust shall die in. Although I was not so simple, as not to know
what danger and peril so great an alteration might procure me: how many great
Princes of the contrary opinion would attempt all they might against me: and
generally, what enimitie I should breed unto my self: which all I regarded
not, knowing that he, for whose sake I did it, might, and would defend me. For
which it is, that ever since I have been so daungerously prosecuted, as I
rather marvel that I am, then muse that I should not be: if it were not Gods
holy hand that continues me, beyond all other expectation.

Then entered I further into the school of experience, bethinking what it
fitted a King to do: and there I saw, he scant was well furnished, if either he
lacked Justice, Temperance, Magnanimity, or Judgment. As for the two latter,
I will not boaste, my sex does not permit it: But for the two first, this dare
I say, Amongst my subjects I never knew a difference of person, where right was
one: Nor never to my knowledge preferred for favor, whom I thought not fit
for worth: Nor bent my ears to credit a tale that first was told me: Nor was
so rash, to corrupt my judgment with my censure, before I heard the cause. I
will not say, but many reports might fortune be brought me by such as might
hear the case, whose partiality might mar sometime the matter: For we
Princes may not hear all our selves. But this dare I boldly affirm, My verdit
went ever with the truth of my knowledge. As full well wished Alcibiades his
friend, that he should not give any answer, till he had recited the letters
of the Alphabet: so have I not used over sudden resolutions, in matters that
have touched me full near: you will say that with me, I think.

And therefore, as touching your counsels and consultations, I conceive them to
be wise, honest, and conscionable: so provident and careful for the safety of
my life (which I wish no longer then may be for your good,) that though I never
can yield you of recompense your due: yet shall I endeavor my self to give you
cause, to think your good will not ill bestowed, and strive to make my self
worthy for such subjects.

And now for your petition, I shall pray you for this present, to content your
selves with an answer without answer: Your judgment I condemn not, neither
do I mistake your reasons, but pray you to accept my thankfulness, excuse my
doutefulnesse, and take is good part my answer answerelesse: wherein I
attribute not so much to mine own iudtgeme^t, but that I think many
particular persons may go before me, though by my degree I go before them.
Therefore if I should say, I would not do what you request, it might
peradventure be more then I thought: and to say I would do it, might perhaps
breed peril of that you labor to preserve, being more then in your own
wisdoms and discretions would seem convenient, circumstances of place and
time being duly considered.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty. 1586.


