An informacion and Peticion against the oppressors of the poor Commons of
this Realm, compiled and Imprinted for this only purpose that amongst them
that have to do in the Parliamente some godly minded men, may hereat take
occation to speak more in the matter then the Author was able to write.

Esaye. lviii. When you suffer none oppression to be amongst you, and leave of
your idel talk: then shall you call upon the Lord and he shall hear you, you
shall cry, and he shall say, Behold I am at hand. Imprinted at London by
John Day, dwelling in Sepulchers parish at the sign of the Resurrection a
little above Holbourne Conduite.

To the most honorable Lords of the Parliament with the commons of the same:
their most humble and daily Orator Robert Crowley, wishes the assiste^ce of
Gods holy spirit.
Among the manifold and most weyghtie matters, (most worthy counsaylours) to
be debated and co^muned of in this present Parliament, and by the advice,
assent and consent thereof spedili to be redressed: I think there is no one
thing more nedfull to be spoken of, then the great oppression of the pore
communes, by the possessioners as well of ye clergy as of ye laity. No doubt
it is nedfull, and there ought to be a spedy redress of many mattiers of
religion: as are these. The use of the sacraments and ceremonies, the usurping
of tenthes to private commodity, the superfluouse, unlearned, indiscreet and
vicious ministers of the church, and their Supersticious and Idolatrous
administracions, Of these things I say ought there to be a spedy reformacio^.
For they are now most lyk hastily to bring upon this noble realm, the
inevitable vengeance of God, if they be not shortly reformed: for as much as
it has pleased the almighty and lyuinge God, to open unto us those
abhominacions, which have heretofore ben keep secret and hyd from us.

These things, I say, are yet far out of joint, and had great need to be
reformed.

For notwithstanding the Kings majesty's late visitation: the ignorant people,
who have long ben fostred and brought up in the superstition and wrong believe
of these things, and are yet n^ doubt, secretly instructed by their blind
guydes and by them holde^ still in blindness: will not be persuaded that their
forfathers superstition was not the true faith of Christ, til such time as
they have continuyng among them, such preachers as shall be able and will, by
the manifest scriptur^s prove unto them that both they and their fathers were
deceived and knew not how to worship God aright, but shamfuly seduced by the
couetise of the shepherdes and guides: sought him where he was not, and when
they thought they had been most high in his favor by doing, him such
honor as they thought most acceptable in his sight: then committed they most
detestable blasphemy, and were abominable before him.

This knowledge, I say, will not be beaten into the heads of the ignoraunte:
so long as their shepeherdes be but hyrlynges and follow livings, for such
minister not to the congregation: but to their own bealyes. They are not
shepeherdes, but butchars. They come not to feed, but to be fed. And doubtless
(most christen cou^saylours) I think it not possible to amend this great
enormitie, otherwise then by reducynge the order of choseynge of the ministers,
unto the order that was in ye primitive church whereof is mentioned in the Act,
Actu. 1.
of the Apostles For solong as idle bealies may come to the byshope and be
smered for money, God shall say to the^ by his prophet. Iere. 23.
You did te^ne but I sent you not. They shall be called feedars, of feeding
them selves and not of fedyng the flock, They shall study to please men and
not to please God. In fine, they shall differ nothing from the crafts men
which apply an occupacion to get their lyuinge upon, and not to the intent
to profit the common weal.

The crafts man sueth for the fredom of a City, not because he intends to
be a maintainer of the City: but because he hops that he shall live so much
the more welthyly him self. And eue^ for like causes do our ministers and are
like still to do (so long as they may be received when they come uncalled)
apply them selves to priesting, because they like well the ydlenes of the life.

I doubt not but the Kings majesty's visitters know more of this matter then I
ca^ be able to writ. And by the^, I doubt not, you shall be moved to common of
this mattier at the full.

The sacraments they still abuse, vseinge them as matters of merchaundyce, and
chiefly the most worthy memory of our redemption, for that they selle boethe to
the quycke and to the dead, to the rych and to the poor. None shall receive
it at their hands, without he will pay the ordinary shot, and so are they
ready to serve every man. They look upon the monei only and nothing upon the
mind. Whether it be taken to comfort of conscience or judgment, they pas not.
They tell the monei, they look for no more. If they will deny this to be true
let them say why, they suffer the pore to beg money to pay for their
housel, as they call it? Perchance they will answer that the money is not
payede for the sacrament, but for the.iiii offering days. Then ask I this
questian,

Why they appoint not another time to receive it in, then that time which is
to little to be occupied in declareynge to the people the right use and
profit of the sacraments, and to instruct them so, yt they do not receive it
to their judgment, but to their confort and quietness of conscience, for which
purpose it was first instituted? Vndoubtedli (most christian counsailours) they
can not deni but that they appoint to receive it then, because they will be sure
of it.

Their doeynges will declare it, though they would deny it, for none may
receive the sacraments unless he do first pay, the money. And then, with how
little reverence it is ministered and received: every thristen heart sees and
lamenteth.

These things (I doubt not) are so evident and plain unto you: that it needs
not to troble you with many words concerneinge the abuses thereof. Many godly
minded men have boeth written and preached, and do daily writ and preach, of
and against those abuses, wherefore I am certain that you have just occasion and
can do no less but seek a further redres her of (which al christen hertes do
desire) in this present parliament.

But as for the oppression of the pore, which is no less nedful to be co^muned
of and reformed then the other: I fear me will be passed over with silence,
or if it be communed of. I can scarsely trust that any reformacion can
be had, unless God do now work in the hertes of the possessioners of this
realm, as he did in the primitive church, when the possessioners were
contented and very wyllyng, to sell their possessions and give ye price thereof
to be commune to all the faithful beleuers. Take me not here that I should go
about by these words to persuade men to make all things common: for if you
do you mistake me. For I take God to wytnes I mean no such thing. But with all
mine heart I would wysh that no man were suffered to eat, but such as would
labor in their vocation and calling, according to the rule that Paul gave
to the Thessalonians. 2 These. 3


But yet I would wysh that the possessioners would consider who gave them
their possessions, and how they ought to bestow them. And then (I doubt not)
it should not need to have all things made commune.

For what needs it the servants of the householde to desire to have their
masters goods common, so long as the stuarde ministers unto every man the
thing that is needful for him?

If the possessioners would consider the^ selves to be but stuardes, and not
Lords over their possessions: this oppression would sone be redressed. But so
long as this persuasion styketh in their minds. It is mine own.

Who shall warn me to do with mine own as me self lysteth? it shall not be
possible to have any redress at all. For if I may do with mine own as me
lysteth: then may I suffer my brother, his wife and his children, to lie in
the street, except he will give me more rent for mine house the^ ever he shall
be able to pay Then may I take his goods for that he owes me and keep his
body in prison, tournyng out his wife and children to perish, if God will not
move some man's heart to pity them: and yet keep my coffers full of goulde and
silver.

If there were no god, then would I think it leafull for men to use their
possessions as they list Or if God would not requitre an account of us for
the bestoweynge of them. I would not greatly gaynsaye though they took their
pleasure of them whylse they lived here. But forasmuch as we have a God, and he
has declared unto us by ye scripturs, yt he has made the possessioners but
Stuardes of his riches and that he will hold a straight account with them for
the occupiynge and bestoweynge of them: I think no christian ears can abide to
hear that more then Turkysh opinion.

The Philosophers who knew nothing of the bond of frendshippe which Christ
our master and redemer left among us: affirmed that among fre^des al things
are common meaneyng that frendshippe would not suffer one friend to hold
from an other, the thing that he has need of. And what shall we say? Are we
not fre^des? Suerly if we be not friends: we bear the name of Christ and be
called christians in vain. Yea if we have not a more perfect frendeshyppe
then that whereof the Philosophers speak: we are but feigned christians we
bear the name only and are no thing less in deed: For this is the token
that Christ gave whereby we should be known to be of him: John. 13.
if we love one an other as he loved us. How he loved us, is declared by the
words of the Apostle saying, Ephesians. 5.
that Christ gave him self for us. According to this exemple ought our
frendshyp to be such, that we will not spare to spend our life for the wealth
of our brothers. Not to fight in their quarrel (for Christ bade Peter put up
the sword into his place) but to teach the truth boldly with out any fear of
death, and not to suffer our brothers to be led in error though present
death should ensue for so doing.

Some perchance will think that this fre^dshyp is to be understand only of
the pastors and shepherdes toward their flock because Christ says that a
good shepherde gives his life for his sheep. John. 10.
Forsoeth if the pastors or shepeherdes only, were the flock of Christ then
might this frendeshyp right well be understood of them only. But for as much
as the Lay and private persons, are as well of the flock of Christ as the
other: this frendeshyp parteineth unto them nolesse then to the other. And this
causes me (most worthy counsaylours) not to fear the displeasure of men in
this behalf, knoweynge for certentie that the greateste number of this
assemble are not free from this oppression that I speak of, and that it is
far unlike that a private person by no means worthy to be called to such
an assemble should be favorably heard and accepted of them whom God has
called to be counsaylours of a realm, and chiefly in a cause taxyng and
blameyng the Judges before whom it is pleaded. I might well coniecte with my
self, that I should in this point be compted a busy body, and one that
renneth before he is sent. But I am redi to suffer not only al such report but
even the very death also (if it shall please the almighty and euerlyueynge
God to lay it upon me) for your sakes, most worthy counsailours, and the
residue, my natural brothers of this noble realm.

And here I proteste unto you all, that the same spirit that sent Jonas to the
Niniuits, Daniel to the Babilonians, Nathan to King David, Achior unto
Holofernes, Judith unto the Priests and Elders of the Jews, the prophet to
Jeroboam in Bethel, John the Baptist unto Herod, and Christ unto the
Iewes-wytnesseth with my conscience, Esai. 58.
that I run not unsent. For eue^ the same spirit that said unto Esaye, cry
and cease not, declare unto my people their wyckednes: cries also in my
conscience, bydyng me not spare to tell the possessioners of this realm, that
unless they repent the oppression wherewyth they vex the pore co^mo^s, and
show themselves thorough love to be brothers of one father and members of one
body with them: they shall not at the last day enherite with them the kingdom
of Christ ye eldest son of God the father, which has by his word begotten
him many brothers and coheritours is his kingdom Unless, I say, the
possessioners of this realm will repent the violence don to the poor and nedy
me^bres of the same, and become as hands, ministering unto every membre his
necessaryes: they shall at the day of their account, be bound hand and foot
and cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping, wealyng, and gnashyng of
teach, that is, dolor and yayne, the greatness whereof can not be expressed
with tongue nor thought with heart. And this much more says the spirit.
Unless ye purge your selves of this blood, and stop the mouths of the pore
that the voice of their complaynt come not unto mine ears: I will not prospere
your counsayles in the reformacio^ of those abhominacio^s which I showed unto
you, but will leave you to ye spirit of error, ye prince of this world,
whose dearlinges ye are so long as ye seek not the wealth of the nedy, but your
own private commoditye. These things has the spirit of God spoken. Heaven
and earth shall perish, but the words of the spirit shall not perish, but be
fulfilled. Now harken you possessioners, and you rich men lift up your ears,
ye stuards of the Lord mark what complayntes are layede against you in the
high court of the liueynge God.

Lord (says the Porphete) have thou forsaken us? do thou hide thy self
in the time of our trouble? Whylse the wicked wax proud the poor man is
aflicted and troubled. Would to God the wicked might feale the same things
that they invent for other. For the sinnere prayseth him self in the desyers
of his soul, and he extolleth and fetch forth the couetouse man. He provoke
the Lord and is so proud that he will not seek him. He never thinks upon
God. His ways be defiled at all times. He looks not upon thy iugementes
Lord, be will revenge him upon al his enemies.

He thinks thus with him self, I will not remove from one generation unto an
other without mischefe. His mouth is full of malediction and evil report,
fraud and deceyte: Esai. 50.
and under his tongue is afliction and iniquitye.

He lies in wait with the rychemen of the villages or graynges, in secret
corners, to the intent to slay the innocent. His eyes are fyexed upon the pore,
he lays awayete, even as a lion in his den. He lays a wait to take the
poor man by force, and when he has gotten him within his reach, then will he
take him violentlye. In his net will he overthrow the pore, and through his
strength shall the mutitude of the oppressed be over charged and fall. For in
his heart he says, God has forgotten God turns a way his face, and will
never regard the oppression of the poor, etc. to the end of the same Psalm.

What sentence (think you) will the Lord give upon this evidence? No doubt
(most worthy counselors) even the same that we read in Esaie the Prophet I
looked for judgment and rightouse dealing amongeste my people and behold
there is iniquity, Esaie. 5.
I looked also for justice, and behold there is an outcrye. Woe be unto you
therefore, that do join hour unto house, and couple one field to an other,
so long as there is any ground to be had. Think you that you shall dwell upon
the earth alone? The Lord of hosts says the prophet has spoken these
words unto me. Many large and goodlye houses, shall be deserte, and without
inhabitauntes.x. acres of vynes shall yield but one quarte of wine, and.xxx.
bushelles of seed shall yield but.iii bushelles again. Behold you engrossers
of fermes, and teynements be hold I say, the terrible threatenings of God
whose wrath you can not escape. The voice of the pore (who^ you have with money
thruste out of house and home, is well accepted in the ears of the Lord, and
has steared up his wrath against you. He threateneth you most horrible
plages. Ten acres of vynes shall yield but one quarte of wine, and.xxx.
bushelles of sede but.iii. bushelles again. The sede of Gods word sown in
your hertes, shall be barrayne and not bring forth fruit.

For couetyse, the rote of al iuelles, occupies that ground so that the
heavenly sede can by no means give increase. This is a plage of al plages
most horrible And doubt ye not you lease mongres, that take grounds by lease
to the ^ntente to let them out again for double and triple, the rent: your
part is in this plage The Lord shall take his spirit from you. He shall
forbid the clouds of his mercy, to rain upon you with the sweet dwe of his
grease. And you surueighers of lands, that of x.li. land can make.xx. you
shall not be forgotten in the effu^ion of this plage.

For when you have multiplied your re^ttes to the higheste, so that ye have
made all your tenantes your slaves to labor and toil and bring to you all
that may be plowed and dug out of your grounds: then shall death suddenly
strike you, then shall God wythdrawe his confortable grease from you, the^
shall your conscience prycke you, then shall you think with de^perat Cain,
that your sin is greater the^ that it may be forgeuen. For your own
conscience shall judge you worthy no mercy, be, cause you have showed no
merci. Yea the same enemy that hoth kendled, and does yet maintain in you
this mischeuouse, outragiouse and insatiable covetousness: shall then be as
busy to put you in mind of the words of Christ saienge, ye same measure that
you have made unto other, shall be now made unto you.

You have showed no mercy: how can you than look for mercy? Oh noble
counsailours be mercyful to your selves Destroy not your own souls to
enriche your heirs. Enlarge not your earthly possession with the loss of the
eternal enheritaunce. Learn to know the estate that God has called you unto,
and to live according to your profession, Know that you are al ministres in
the common weal and that the procion which you are borne unto, or that your
prince gives you is your estate. Know that your office is to distribute and
not to scrape to gether on heaps, God has not set you to surueye his
lands, but to play the stuardes in his householde of this world, and to se
that your pore fellow servants lack not their necessaries.

Consider that you are but ministers and servants under the Lord our God,
and that you shall render a straight account of your administracion. Stand not
to much in your own conceyte, gloriynge in the worthynesse of your blood, for
we are all one man's children, and have (by nature) like right to the richesse
and treasures of this world wh^rouf our natural father Adame was m^de Lord
and King. Which of you can lay for him self any natural cause which
should possess the treasure of this world, but yt the same cause may he
found in him also whom you make your slave? By nature (therefore) you can
claim nothing but that which you shall get with the swet of your faces.
That you are Lords and gouernoures therefore, comes not by nature but by the
ordinance and appointment of God. Know then that he has not called you to
the wealth and glory of this world: but has charged you with the great and
rude multitude.

And if any if them perish through your defaute, know the^ for certentie,
that the blood of them shall be required at your hands. If the impotent
creatures perish for lack of necessries: you are the murderres, Ezech. 33
for you have their enheritaunce and do not minister unto them.

If the sturdye fall to stealing, robbyng and reueynge: then are you the
causers thereof, for you dygge in, enclose, and witholde from them the earth out
of the which they should dig and plowe their lyueynge. Psalm. 11^
For as the Psalmiste writes. All the heaven is the Lords: but as for the
earth he has given to the childrene of men.

The whole earth therefore (by birth right) belongs to the children of men.
They are all inheritours thereof indifferently by nature

But because the sturry should not oppress^ the weak and impotent: God has
appointed you stuards to give meat unto his household in due reasone. And if
you be found faithful in this litel: then know that he will prefer you to
much greater things. But if ye be found oppressing your fellow servants:
the^ know for certentie, that the Lord your master shall at his comeynge,
reward you with many strypes. Call to your remembrance the History of King
Nabuchodonosor who for Luke. 12. Dani. 4.
his presumption became, as a brute beast, feaddinge upon grass and hey as
other beasts did.

Considre Pharao with his great army, whom the Lord overwhelmed in the red
sea for oppressing and persecuting his people. Yea considre all the nobility
that have possessed the earth, even from the beginning: and then say how you
be their successors, and by what title you cleyme that which was theyrs.

Many hundred years sense, the noble Romans held all Europa, and part of
Affrike and Asia, in quiet possession: and where are they that succeade them
in their impeir?

The brutishe Goths invaded and vanquished the impier of Rome: and where are
their successors?

What should I stand in the rehearsal of the great possessioners that have
hertofore possessed the earth, whose liniall descent ca^ not be found? It shall
suffice me to remitte you to the words of the Lord unto Nabuchodonosor,
which are written in the book of Daniell the Prophet. Dani. 4.


There shall you learn that it is God that gives the impier to who^ it
pleases him, and that all power is from above, according to the answer that
our savior Christ made unto Pilate, when he bragged him with the power than
he had to crucify him and to deliver him. Thou should, said our savior,
have no power over me at all, John. 19.
were it not given the from above.

Thus it is evident unto you (most worthy counsaylours) that your power and
estate comes from above, and that by nature, you can cleyme nothing of the
possessions of this world, more then that which you get with the swet of
your faces.

I doubt not therefore but that your consciences do condescend and agree unto that
which I have spoken concerning your office and ministry, knoweynge that God
has appointed you to minister necessaries to the impotent and to defend the
innocent.

Do not therefore neglect this principalle point of your duty, to seek in this
parliament a redress of this great oppression, wherwyth the pore members of
this noble realm, ar most unmercifully vexed on every side.

The land lords for their parts, survey and make the uttermost penny of al
their grou^des, bysydes the unreasonable fynes and incomes. And he that will not
or can not give all that they demand: shall not enter be he never so honest
or stand he never so great need.

Y^a though he have been an honest, true, faithful and quiet tenant many
years: yet at the vacatio^ of his Copy or Iudentur, he must pay welmoste as
much as would purchayse so much grownde or else void in haste, though he, his
wife and childrene, should perish for lack of harbor.

What a sea of mischifes has floued out of this more then Turkyshe tyra^nie:
what honest householders have been made folowers of other not so honest men's
tables: what honest matrones have been brought to the needy rock and cards:
what menchyldrene of good hope in the liberal sciences and other honest
qualites (whereof this realm has great lack) have been compelled to fall some
to handycrafts and some to day labor to sustain their parents decrepet age
and miserable poverty: what froward and stoubourne children have herby shaken
of the yoke of godly chastisement rennyng hedlonge into all kinds of wickedness
and finally garnyshed galowe trees: what modeste, chaste and womanly virgins,
have for lack of dourie been compelled either to pass over the days of their
youth in ungrate servitude, or else to mary to perpetual miserable poverty:
what immodeste, and wanton gyrles have hereby been made sisters of the Bank
(the stumlyng-stocke of all frail youth) and finally, most miserable creatures
lyinge and dyinge in the streets full of all plages and penury: what
universal destruction chances to this noble realm by this outrageous and
insatiable desire of the surueiers of lands: I report me to you (most
christian counseilours) which are here assembled from all parts of this noble
realm, to consult for the wealth of all the me^bres of the same.

On the other side, there be certain tenauntes, not able to be land Lords,
and yet after a sort they co^terfaite land lords, by obteininge leases in and
upon grou^des and tenementes, and so reyse fines, incomes, and rentes: and by
such pillage pike out a portion to mainteyne a proud port, and all by pilling
and polling of the poor commons that must of necessity seek habitations at
their hands.

That this is true, I report me to my lord the Maire and other the head
officers of the City of London, who (if they be not ignorant of the state of
the City) can witness with me that the most part, yea I think ix. of the.x.
parts, of the houses in London, be set and let by them that have them by
lease: and not by the owners.

How they polle the pore tena^tes, would sone be tried, if their leases were
conferred with their rentrolles. It is not to be thought contrary but that the
great leasmu^gers have great gains by their leases, for the litleons that
hold but a piece of houseing of.xx. or.xxx.s. by year: can find the means to
hold and dwell upon the chief part thereof rent fre, by letynge out the
residue for the whole yearly rent.

I think not contrary but these things do appear in the sight of many to be
but verey trifles, and not worthy to be spoken of in so noble an assemble as
this most honorable parliament. For they are no mattiers concerneyng the wealth
of the nobility, yea it is rather hyndrance to many of them, to have these
things redressed, then any increase of their wealth.

Yea even you (most christian counsaylours) which are here assembled, to
debate the weighty mattiers of this realm: are not all so free from this
kind of oppression, but that you could be well contented to wyncke at it. And
therefore, for as much as the inordinate love of men toward them selves is such,
that either they can not se their own fauts, or else if they do se them, or be
told of them, they take them not to be so great as they are in deed: I think
it no marvel, though such of you (most worthy counsaylours) as have any
profit by this oppression, do within them selves deride and laugh to scorn my
fool hardines and rash interprise herein, knowing that it is not the use of
them that be assembled to the intent to establishe such things as shall be
for the wealth of a whole realm: to condescende and agree to those things
which shall be disprofitable unto the chief members of the same.

Truth it is (most worthy counsaylours) I might well and worthily be laughed
at: if I would attempt any such thing. But the thing that hitherto I have
spoken of: is not to the disprofite of any, but to the great commodity and
profit of all the whole realm.

For what disco^moditie is it to the head, shoulders, the arms, and other the
upper me^bres of the body, being already sufficiently clothed: to put on the
legs and feet a pear of hose and shoes, to defend them also from the
injuries of the wether and other hurtes that might chance unto them in their
trauaylyng to carry the body from place to place, for his commodity and
pleasure? Verily in mine opinion that body is far vnworty to have either
legs or feet: that will let them go bare, having wherewith to cover them.

Even so you, being the chief members of this noble realm, and having in
your hands the wonderful and incomperable riches of the same: what should it
grieve you to depart with some portion thereof, that the inferioure members
thereof, may at all times be able to do their ministry and office
accordyngly.

Once remember, that as the body with out the inferioure parts is but lame
and as a block unwieldy, and must, if it will remove from place to place,
creep upon the hands: even so you, if ye had not the poor membre of this
realm to till the ground and do your other drudgery: no remedy you must
needs d^ it your selves.

Use them therefore as the necessary members of the mystical body of this
most noble realm, and be not in this point more unnatural then the heathen
Philosophers were.

They in their wrytynges declare no less then I have written.

This ought not a little to move you, being christians (whose redemer Jesus
Christ sits at the right hand of God his father) to study, not only to be
equal with, but to pass the heathen and unchristened in this matter, even as
far as the excellency of the name and religion which we profess, passes
theyrs.

Remember (most christian counsaylours) that you are not only natural members
of one body with the poor creatures of this realm: but also by religion you
are members of the same mystical body of Christ, who is the head of us all
(his members) and estemeth all that is done to the least of us his members, as
done to him self. For he says.

What so ever ye do to the least of these little ones that believe in me: ye do
it unto me. Mat. 25.


If you therefore, neither will your selves oppress our savior Christ in his
members, nor suffer other to do it: fail not to find a redres of this great
oppression, which I have declared to the same end. And the^ I doubt not, but
God shall so work with you: that every man shall wyllyngly embrace a
reformation of all mattiers of religion. For the spirit of God shall dwell in
you and in us all, and Christ himself (as he has promised) shall be in the
mids among you. Where as contrariwise, if you suffer our loueinge savior
thus to be oppressed, he will forsake you, he will leave you to the spirit of
error. Your reformacions shall take no place. All your diuises shall be
abominable in his sight, because ye have not purged your hands from the
blood of this oppression.

Let the decres which were establyshed in this place by a parliam^nt assembled
for a like purpose: be your president, not to follow, but to beware by them that
ye establish not the like.

The intent of that assemble was nolesse to refourm the abuses of our religion
then this is. But because Christ was not delivered from oppression: he would
not be among them.

They were not congregated in his name, but rather against him and his
doctrine, for he him self is dear love, and (as his Apostle John writeh) where
this dear love is not, 1. Epist. 4.
there is not he. This thing is well proved by their proceadynges in the same
Parliament. For they established articles even directly against Gods word
forbedynge to mary, and co^maundynge to put asunder those that God has joined
together

If you will call these articles into question again (as in deed you have
just occasion to do) I doubt not but you shall be fully persuaded that they
proceaded of the spirit of error and not of the spirit of God, because the
charity of God was not among them in that assemble.

Other things therbe whereby the pore me^bres of Christ in this noble realm,
are oppressed, whereof I have made no mention, partly because I am loath to
offend with the multitude of my rude words, and partly for that I know you
can not seek for a redres of these things whereof I have spoken: but the other
will offer them selves unto you. I mean the great Extortion and Usury that
reigns freely in this realm, and seem to be authorized by Parliament within
these.iii. years last paste.

The Clergy of the City of London, have for their part optayned by
Parliament, authority to over te^thes even after the exe^ple of the landlordes
and leasemongers, and may by the virtue of the act requir for double rentes,
double tenthes. If the rent of any kind of housyng or ground within the City
of London be raised (as there is in deed very much) from x.s, to xx.s: than may
the person (who had before but xvi.d. ob.) by the virtue of this act,
demand.ii.s.ix.d, the double. Bysydes this, the exactions that they take of
the pore commons, is to much beyond al reason and conscience. No couple ca^ be
married, but these me^ must have a duty, as the call it. No woman may be
purified, but they and their idle ministers must have some duties of her. None
ca^ be buried but they will have a fliese. Not three months before the
beginning of this present Parliament: I had just occasion to be at the payment
of this duty for ye buriyng of an honest pore man, whose fre^des were wylling
to have his body reuerendly laid in the ground, and according to the custom,
gave warninge to the curate that they would bring the dead body to the
church: desiryng him that he would do his duty and to be there to receive it,
and according to the custom, to lay it in the ground. But this Raven
smellyng the carrion: could not but reueile it to the other carrion birds of
the same church, and so would needs come all together in a flock to fetch
their pray, with cross and holy water as they were wont to do,
notwythstandynge the Kings Injunctions and late visitation. The friends of the
dead man refused al this and required to have no more but the common coffen
to put the body in, agreynge to pay to the keeper thereof his accustomed duty,
and in like manner to the grave maker, and the four poor men to carry the
body, so that the whole charges had been but.vii.d.

But when the corpse was buried, without other cross or holy water stycke,
Dirige, or Mass, with prayers of as small devotion, as any pore curate could
say, yet must we needs pay.vii.d. more That is to say.i.d. to the curate,
which he called an head penny, and.vi.d. to.ii. clerks that we had no need
of.

This was done in Sepulchers parish in the City of Lodon. And if it shall
please any of this noble assemble to try the truth of this: I will verify it
where so ever I shall be called, even in the presence of all the idle ministers
of the same church.

This have I written (most worthy counsailours) to give you an occasion to set
such an order in this and such other things, that either we may have
ministers found upon the te^thes that we pay yerli to the churches: other
else that it may be leaful for us to do such ministeries our selves, and not to
be thus constrained to feed a sort of carrion crows, which are never so merry
as when we lament the loss of our friends.

This much have I spoken of the extortion that reygneth freely in the Clergy.
Now, with your patience, I will with like brevity, speak of the great and
intolerable usury, which at this day, reigns so freely this realm over al,
and chiefly in the City of London: that it is taken for most leaful gains.
Yea it is welmoste heresy to reprove it, for men say it is allowed by
Parliament. Well. The most part, I am sure, of this most Godly assemble and
parliament: do know that the occasion of the act that passed here concerning
Usury: was the insatiable desire of the usurers, who could not be co^te^ted
with Usury, unless it were unreasonable much. To restrain this gredy desire
of theirs therefore, it was co^muned and agreed upon, and by the authority of
Parliament, decreed: that none should take above.x.li. by year for the lone of
an.C.li.

Alas that ever any christian assemble should be so voied of gods holy spirit,
yt they should allow for leaful: any thing that Gods word forbids, Be not
abashed (most worthy counsaylours) to call this act into question again. Scan
the words of the Psalmist concerning this matter, Lord, says he, who shall
enter into thy tabernacle, and who shall rest in thy holy mountain? H^
answers. That enters without spot and works right. That speaks truth in
his heart, and has not deceived with his tongue, that has done his neighbor ho
harm, nor accepted any reproach against his neighbor. He regards not the
wicked: but the^ that fear the Lord, he glorifieth and praises. He yt
swereth to his neighbor and deceyueth him not. He yt has not given his money
unto usury, and has not taken gifts and rewards against the innocent.

If you (most christian counsaylours) do glory in the knowledge of Gods
spirit, who has spoken these words by the prophet: how can you suffer this
act to stand which shall be a witness against you in the later day, that you
allow that, which Gods spirit forbids?

If he that gives not his money to Usury: shall dwell in the Lords
tabernacle: where shall he dwell that gives his money to Usury? shall he not be
shut out and cast into utter darkness? Their works be contrary, and why
should not their reward be also contrary? If the one be received in: the other
must be shut out. Yea and you that have made this law, unless you do revoke
it and establysh an act to the c^ntrary: the Brydegroume, the only son of
God, shall at the last day deny you and say that he never knew you, Math. 7.
Depart from me, shall he say, al ye workers if iniquity. Scanne the words of
the Prophet therefore, and scanne the words of our savior Christ also, in
the.vi. of Luke, where he says thus. Do you lend lokynge for no gaynes
thereof, and your reward shall be plentuous, and you shall be sons of the
highest, because he is gentle and liberal, toward the unthankful and wicked.

I am not ignoraunte what Glosses have been made upon this place, and how men
have wrested and made it no precept, but a counsel of our savior, and
therefore not to infer necessity to christians but to leave them at liberty
either to do it or leave it undone.

Oh merciful Lord, what manner of religion is it that these men profess?

They boast them selves to be the disciples of Christ and setters forth of
his glory.

They will bear the name of him and be called christians, and yet wylbe at
liberty to chose whether they lust, to follow his counsel or leave it
undone.

Our shepherd Christ, of whose flock they boaste them selves to be, says
that his sheep hear his voice and follow him.

And immediately before, he shows, John. 10
the cause why the Jews did not credyt his words, to be none other: but that
they were not his sheep.

And doubt ye not (most worthy counsaylours) what so ever he is that will
defend or teach, that any one little jot of the counsayles of Christ should
be so vaynly spoken that any of his flock might refuse to practice the same in
his living to the vttermoste of his power: is nolesse then a membre of the
Deuell, and a verey Antichriste.

For he that desires not in his heart to practice in his lyueynge, all the
counsayles of Christ our master and teachar: shall be numbered among the
obstinate Jews, for none of the flock of Christ, because he hears not his
voice nor follows him. Thus I make an end

Wyshyng unto you (most worthy counsaylours) ye same spirit that in ye
primitive church gave unto the multitude of beleuers, Actu. 4.
one heart one mind, and to esteem nothing of this world as their own,
ministrynge unto every one according to his necessities. That you led by the
same spirit, may at the lestwaye, ordeine such a law that the oppression of
the pore reign not freely among them that bear the name of christians, But if
they will be still oppressyng the pore members of Christ after once or twyse
admonicio^: let them no more be named christians after Christ whom they serve
not, but Ma^monistes after Ma^mon whose badge they bear. And this reformacion
had, no doubt the majesty of God shall so appear in all your decres, yt none so
wicked a creature shall be found so bold as once to open his mouth against the
order that you shall take in all matters of religion. Yea the very enemies of
David shall do Omage unto Solomon for his wisdom. All the Kings christined shall
learn at you to reform their churches. You shall be eu^n the light of all the
world.

But if ye let these things pass and regard the^ not: be ye sure the Lord
shall co^fou^d your, wisdom. Invent, Decre, Establish and authorize what you
ca^: al shall come to naught. The ways that you shall invent to establyshe
unity and concord: shall be the occacions of discord. The things whereby you
shall think to win praise through all the world: shall turn to your utter
shame, and the ways yt you shall invent to establysh a kingdom: shall be the
utter subuercio^ of the same. The merciful father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
indue you with his spirit, that you be not parttakers of these plages.

AMEN

