A TREATISE OF FAITH: Wherein is declared how a man may live by Faith, and
find relief in all his necessities.

Applied especially unto the use of the weakest Christians.

By EZEKEL CVLVERVVELL.

The Just shall Live by Faith.

EPHESIANS. 6. 16. Above all taking the shield of Faith.

ROMANS 15. 4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the entering in of Popes head Allie out of Lumbard-streete. 1623.

TO ALL GODS PEOPLE, WHO HAVE ENJOYED any benefit by my Ministry, especially
of my Pastoral charge.
DEARLY Beloved in the Lord, although I cannot but be privy to my self, of
many defects in discharge of my duty which God required at my hands toward
you, (which I humbly beseech the Lord and you to pardon,) yet this has been,
is, and I hope shall be, to the end of my days, my comfort, that I have not
labored in vain amongst you. What were my labors and success thereof, I
must appeal to the consciences of you who are yet living; for you know that
not a few are now at rest with the Lord, whose holy lives and happy ends gave
good testimony hereof. But to leave these to the wise consideration, of such
whom they may concern, and to give unto all, to whom these presents shall
come, a just account of my proceedings herein: I do profess that for many
years past, I have had my thoughts much exercised about this prime grace of
Faith; (by which alone we receive all saving grace, and without which none:)
and after that, by long experience, I found through conference with many of
diverse sorts, that very few attained to the true knowledge, much less to the
right use of Faith, either in the assurance of their salvation, or well
ordering of their conversation. For to pass over all carnal Protestants, who
only have a form of godliness, making an outward show thereof, and deny the
power of it, in walking after their own lusts: I have observed very many, who
have in truth labored after salvation, yet through want of good direction have
made forsaking of their sin, the ground of their believing, and so building
such a weighty matter, upon so weak a foundation, could never come to such
certainty of their salvation, or constancy in a holy conversation, as true
Faith would have brought them unto. Some others I have seen, who being deeply
affected with the sense of their misery, and knowing that there is no means of
recovery, but by Christ, have desired nothing more, then to be delivered, and
restored by him; yet these not knowing the right way how to attain to Faith,
by which alone do receive Christ and all his benefits) have spent many years
unprofitably and vnfruitfu^ly. Others there be who persuading themselves, that
they have Faith, and thereby be quieted from fear of condemnation, yet much
wanting the life and power of Faith, neither so honor God and their
profession, nor in time of trial, find that sound peace and comfort, which a
lively Faith would certainly procure. By all which it appears, how few they
be that have attained to the true knowledge of Faith what it is, how it is
go^ten and increased, and how to live by it. The consideration whereof grieuing
my soul to see so many mistaken in so weighty a matter, and so much labor to
be lost, has been the chief moouer of me, to employ all my thoughts, how this
great evil may be redressed. Whereupon entering into deeper consideration, how
this might be attained, I well perceived, that (seeing Gods truth revealed unto
us in his Word, is the sole ground of Faith,) the only way to get and keep
Faith, is to be well acquainted with Gods Word, in which I cannot sufficiently
admire the wisdom and love of God; in providing such store of heavenly
comforts, to relieve us in all our necessities: so that had we the knowledge,
and the right use of them, we should then see, what were the Life of Faith, and
the blessed estate of a believer in this world, above all other estates though
never so excellent. These thus being, I gave my self to the search of the
Scriptures, to find out what these heavenly comforts were, which God has so
abundantly provided for our relief, in all time of need. And to this purpose,
(with no small labor) have gathered out all the promises as well as I could
out of both the Testaments, which being laid together, made a great heap of
heavenly treasure, such as any of understanding, would greatly admire and
rejoice in and I may in truth profess, I was much affected with the bare
reading of them. But well considering, that the naked laying down of these
promises, would not be sufficient to direct every one, to the right use and fit
application of them, for the begetting and increasing of Faith:

I have labored to draw these unto several heads, such as in my opinion may
contain all our necessities, that at leastwise the weakest sort may more fitly
apply them to their several uses, and so by Faith be comforted, when all other
helps fail them. If in this my labor I have not so sufficiently satisfied
the desires of the most judicious: I must content my self, that according to
the measure of grace received, I have labored to be helpful to such as stand
in need hereof; and have carefully avoided, whatsoever I have thought might
hinder their profiting, and specially all controversies about Faith, and have
plainly showed out of the Scriptures, what I have conceived to be the truth;
wherein I may have this defense of my failing, that I have not had any guide in
this labor, neither have I seen any who have in this way gone before me; and
therefore I entreat, my Reverend brethren in the Ministry, whose abilities
do far exceed mine, that they would perfect this, which is but weakly
begun. And for my part, I will not cease to pray, that this may be as
profitable to others, as painful to my self, which the Lord grant, for his
Christ's sake.

Ezekel Culuerwell.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THE leading of a happy Life (the attainement whereof this Treatise directs
unto) is that which all desire; but Gods truth only discovers, and Faith only
enjoys. In the first Adam our happiness was in our own keeping, but he by
turning from God to the creature, made proof what, and whence he was, a
creature raised out of nothing, and without the supporting power of Him in whom
all things consist, subject to fall into a state worse then nothing again
Hence God out of his infinite power, depth of goodness, intending the glory of
his mercy in restoring man, would not trust man with his own happiness; but
would have it procured and established in the person of a second Adam, in whom
we recover a suter estate then we lost in the first: for though Adams soul was
joined to God, yet that knitting was within the contingent and changeahle
liberty of his own will, but now we are brought to God, in an everlasting
covenant of mercy by Faith in Christ, who by taking the nature of man into
unity of His person, and not the person of any, became a public person, to be
Author of eternal salvation to all that receive him; and so gathering us that
were scattered from God into one head, brings us back again to God by a
contrary way to that whereby we fell, that is, by cleaving to God by faith from
whom we fell by distrust. A fit grace for the state of grace, giving the whole
glory to God, and emptying the soul of all selfe-sufficiency, and enlarging it
to receive what is freely wrought and offered by an other: thus we come to
have the comfort, and God the glory of mercy, which sweet attribute, moved
him to set all other attributes on work to make us happy. Out of the bowels of
his mercy, as he chose us to eternal salvation in Christ, so vouchsafes he all
things necessary to life and godliness. And as the same love in God gives us
heaven, and furnishes us withal things needful in the way, until we come
thither: So the same Faith which lays hold on the promises of necessary
assistance, comfort, provision and protection: and this office it performs in
all the several stations of this life, until it has brought us unto the
enjoying of Him in whose presenceis fulness of joy and pleasure for evermore.
We see that same love in parents which moves them to gave an inheritance to
their sons, moves them likewise to provide for them, and to train them up
in experience of their fatherly care. So it pleases our first and best Father,
besides the maine promise of salvation, to give us many other rich and precious
promises, that in taste of his goidnesse and truth in these, we may at length
yield up our souls to him, as to our faith full Creator with the more assured
comfort; and the longer we live here be more rooted in Faith. I know whom I
have trusted, 2 Timothy 1. 12.
says aged S. Paul. But alas how little is that we know of his ways! because
we observe him no^, making good his word unto us. All his ways are mercy and
truth, Psalm. 25. 10. 12. 6.
and every word is a tried word. For the better help of Gods people to know
there portion in those good things, Psalm. 31. 19.
which their Father not only lays up for them for times to come, but lays out
for them here as his Wisdom sees fit: this reverend and holy man of God
has compiled this Treatise, wherein he lays open the veins of promises,
hidden in the Scriptures, to the view of every Christian, and digesteth them in
their order, and withal shows their several value and use for the
beautifying of a holy life, which vvits-lesse exercised of themselves, would
not so well have discerned.

For the benefiting by which Treatise, it will not be inconvenient to know
these four things. First, that it supposes a reader grounded in the knowledge
of the nature and properties of God, of Christ and his offices, of the covenant
of grace and such like; because as in an arch one stone settles an other, so
there is such a linking together of points in divinity, that one strengthens
another. For from whence, has Faith that efficacy, but because it is that
which is required in the covenant, to lay hold on the free promise? And whence
have the promises their strength but from the constant nature of Iehoua, who
gives a being to his Word, and is at peace with us by the all-fufficient
sacrifice of the Mediator of the new covenant? Words have their validity from
the authority of the speaker: were not faith founded on the word of an
infinite God so thoroughly appeased, the soul would sink in great temptations,
whereas now even mountains vanish before a believing soul. For what is all to
Christ, and who is able to subdue all to himself? Hence it is that now we are
by Faith safer then Adam in Paradise, Phil. 3. 21.
because we have a promise which he wanted. Safer it is to be as low as hell
with a promise, then as high in Paradise without it, because Faith wrought by
the power of God, has what strength God has on whom it rests, and therefore
works such wonders.

But howsoever the knowledge of these things serves the argument in hand, yet
it must not be expected, that he should be long in these things which are but
coincident, and should be foreknowne: which I speak, because some of weaker
judgment not considering the just bounds of Treatises may expect larger
handling of some things. Whereas he has labored especially to furnish the
argument in hand and not to load the discourse. In the second place, it must be
known that the fruit of these things belong to such as are in Christ, in whom
all promises are yea and Amen, made and performed. He that by the immortal
seed of the Word and Spirit is borne again, may claim a title to that he is
borne unto. For clearing of this there be three degrees of promises, one of
salvation to absolute and personal obedience, but this by reason of weakness
of the flesh drives us to a despair in our selves, and so to the second
promise of life by Christ: This requires nothing but receiving by Faith, which
is wrought in those that are given to Christ, whilst grace is offered, the
Spirit clothing the words with a hidden and strong power, and making them
operative; when they are commanded to believe, their hearts are opened to
believe. To persons in this state are made a third kind of promises of all
that is needful in this world, until all promises, end in performance; of
both these promises and the last especially this book speaks of. Thirdly, it
must be pressed upon those that mean to profit, that they resolve to come
under Christ's government, and be willing to be led by the Spirit into all
revealed truth. Wisdom is easy to such as are willing, and the victory is
as good as gotten, when the will is brought from thraldom to base affections,
to resolve to be guided; for such a heart lies open to Gods gracious working,
and the Spirit readily closes with such a spirit as puts not bars of
obstinacy.

Notwithstanding, We must know in the fourth place, that when we are at the
best, we shall yet be in such a conflicting state, as that we shall long after
that glorious liberty of the sons of God, after we have done the work God
has given us to do. For, God will have a difference betwixt heaven and earth,
and sharpen our desire of the coming of his kingdom, which nothing does so
much, especially in times of outward prosperity, as those tedious combats of
the inner man; and yet let this raise up our spirits, that it is so far, that
this remainder should prejudice our interest in happiness, that thereby we are
driven every day to renew our claim to the promise of pardon, and so to live
by Faith, until this unclean issue be dried up. These sour herbs help us
to relish Christ the better. Moreover, though in this life our endeauours come
short of our desires, and we always allow a greater measure then we can
attain unto: yet we may by stirring up the graces begun in us, and by suing
God upon those promises of his Spirit and Grace, whereby he has made himself
a debtor unto us, come to that measure whereby we shall make the profession of
religion glorious, and lovely in the eyes of others, and comfortable to our
selves: and so shine far brighter then others do. Why then do we not in the
use of all sanctified means beg of God, to make good the promises wherein he
has caused us to trust? Do we not beside life of our bodies, desire health
and strength, to discharge all the offices of civil life! and why should we
not much more (if the life of God be in us) labor after health and vigor of
spirit, and for that anointing of the holy Ghost, whereby we may do and
suffer all things, so as we may draw others to a liking of our ways? The truth
is, Satan labors to keep us under unbelief of particular promises, and
from renewing our covenant, in confidence that God will perfect the work that
he has begun, and not repent him of his earnest. So far as thus we cherish
distrust, we lie open to Satan. Strengthen Faith, and strengthen all. Let us
therefore at once set upon all duties required, and be in love with an holy
life, above all other lives, and put our selves upon Gods mercy and truth; and
we shall be able from experience so far to justify all Gods ways, as that
we would not be in another state for all the world. What greater
encouragement can we wish, then that our corruptions shall fall more and more
before the Spirit: and we shall be able to do all things through Christ that
strengthens us.

To make these ways of God more plain unto us, this pains is taken by this
man of God. Not to disparage the labors of other holy men, (as far as I can
judge) there is nothing in this kind more fully, indiciously, and sauorily
written, with greater evidence of a Spirit, persuaded of the goodness and
truth of what it sets down: And (though distinct from respect to the Author)
the Treatise deserves much respect, yet it should gain the move acceptance,
especially of those that are babes and young men in Christ, that it is written
by a Father of long and Reverend esteem in the Church: who has begun in all
these rules to others. As for our bodies, so for our souls, we may more
securely rely on an old experienced Physician. He commends it unto thee,
having felt the kindly working of it, upon himself. The Lord by his Spirit
convey these truths into thy heart, and upon good felt hereby in thy soul,
remember to desire God that he may still bring forth more fruit in his age
until he has finished his course with credit to the Gospel, and an assured
hope of a blessed charge.

Grayes Inn, RICHARD SIBBS.

To the Christian Reader.
IF any Grace (and if not Grace what else?) does deserve so to be commended
unto the people of God, as they may be set on fire, with desire of it, till
their desire be satisfied; surely among, and above all other Graces, the Mother
and Nurse-grace, the Queen and Sovereign Grace, which brings forth, and
breeds up, that nourishes and cherishes, that commands and orders all
other Graces, even FAITH deserves as much. FAITH I say, which is to the soul,
as the soul is to the body. The life of it: and to the little world, as the
Sun is to the great world, The light of it: that which warmeth, quickneth,
comfort, encourages, the person in whom it is. Does it not then deserve the
best pains of the most judicious, and industrious Divines to set it out? Great
pains has been taken hereabouts by men of good note and name. So much, and
so well has been uttered and published on this subject since the latter
spring of the Gospel, as to utter and publish any more, may be thought to do
no more then what has been done before: yet without prejudice to any other,
to the praise of Gods Grace in the Author of this Treatise, be it spoken, Never
any took such pains to so good purpose in and about the foundation of FAITH,
as he has done. The only, true, proper Groundwork of FAITH is Gods promise.
Whatsoever is prnmised may safely be believed, whatsoever is believed without
a promise, is presumed. As FAITH is the life of the soul, so Gods promise is
the life of FAITH. Desire thou FAITH? take notice of Gods promises. Would
thou have thy FAITH, like the light in the Lords Sanctuary, never to go out?
Acquaint thy soul with Gods promises, know them, meditate on them, confer
about them: let them be continually in thy mind, memory, heart and tongue. If
thou find it too hard a task for thee to find them out, to rank them in
order, and to make fit application of them (which is indeed an hard task.)
Behold here God has sent Ezekel Culuerwell, as of old he sent Ezekel Buzi,
to set out the promises of God more plentifully and pertinently then ever
before: and that to breed FAITH, where it is not: to strengthen it, where it
is weak: to settle it, where it wauereth: to repair it, where it decays: to
apply it aright to every need: to extend it to sanctification as well as to
justification: and to point out the singular use of it in matters temporal,
spiritual, and aeternall. The subject matter of this Treatise is fit to be
under taken by a man well exercised in the holy Scriptures, and well acquainted
with the disposition of man's heart toward these promises. Such an one is he
who has penned and published this treatise. His exercise in the Scripture has
enabled him to gather together heaps of promises. His experience of the
disposition of man's heart, (having piercingly diued thereinto through much
friendly and familiar conference with sundry sorts) has enabled him to set
those heaps in a fit and due order. What I say of him, I know of him; for
from mine infancy have I known him, and under his ministry was I trained up in
my younger years: he being at the least two and twenty years elder then my
self. Now because of all the Ministers that ever I knew, he has been one of
the most painful, faithful, and powerful, give me leave (good Reader) to set
down somewhat of his practice for a pattern to others. What manner of entering
upon his pastoral charge, he had, is not unknown to them that were under his
charge. Very few, if any at all, did he find fit to receive the holy
Communion: which moved him by the space of many months from morning to night,
every day in the week to instruct in the first oracles of the word of God,
every one under his charge, sometimes one by one severally, and other times
many jointly together: which he did with such success, as there were but few
that were not able to give a reason of their hope to be saved, and so were
admitted to the Lords Table. From which time, ever after, so long as he
continued there, he had weekly meetings in his Church for all sorts, distinctly
on several days to catechize them in the Principles of Religion: whereby (I
am persuaded) he did more good then by preaching, which yet was very powerful,
and not in vain. For as his own, and his hearers labors, in teaching and
learning abounded, so God gave answerable fruits in obedience to the word. For
as the Lords day was very religiously observed: so the foul sins, whereunto
people untaught are usually given, were there abandoned, and all contentions
among neighbors so laid aside, as most lovingly they came to one another
house. And though there were many poor, and none greatly rich, yet did none of
the poor beg abroad for food, but were relieved at home. Among other
evidences of the power of Gods word among them, I will record one, a very
remarkable one, and worthy to be had in more frequent use. It was this: In
time of great dearth of corn and other food, there was order taken by public
authority, that every family should forbear one meal in the week, and upon
the Lords day bring the value of it to the collectours for the poor. This
being faithfully performed by them all, therewith they did provide good corn,
which cost 8. or 9. shillings the bushel, and sold it to the poor at 12.
pence the pecke, and yet reserueda good stock to set the poor on work. These
and many other good works were done under his ministry, who was ready on all
occasions to press the doctrine of faith: so as the preaching of faith
hinders not the performance of good works. This Treatise will give evident
proof thereof. Well use his pains, and thou shait not lose thy pains.

WILLIAM GOVGE.

A TREATISE of Faith.
WHEREIN IS declared how a man may live by faith, and find relief in all his
necessities.
IT is a matter much to be lamented, Few attain the end of the Gospel.
that in this clear light of the Gospel, so few attain to the right end of
the Gospel, which is to live by faith, as we shall see by and by further
laid open to such as will consider.

For to say nothing of all unregenerate men, who never felt any work of Faith
for their true conversion, and therefore could never find any sound comfort of
their salvation.

The matter that I complain of is this, that many of Gods children, who have
some true faith and hope to be saved by Christ, (as they profess, and others
in charity are so to conceive of them) do not enjoy that sweet life and
blessed estate in this world which God their Father has provided for them, and
they full well might attain, were not the fault in themselves.

The truth hereof may appear in these two things especially.

First, that so few do hold fast that joy in the holy Ghost, which might
comfort them over all the discouragements of this life, either in forgoing the
sweet delights of this world, or in patient bearing the manifold troubles of
this life, which usually are their portion.

Secondly, that so few do cast out such a sweet savor of holy conversation,
Hose 14 8.
as might make those that dwell under their shadow (as the Prophet speaks)
to give a sent like the wine of Lebanon.

Or to speak more plainly they be not many even of those who take upon them
the Christians profession, who have gotten that certainty of their salvation,
and constancy in holy conversation which might abundantly comfort themselves,
and move others to desire and labor to be lik them.

To prove these to be so, is not hard, the life and practice of the most of our
professors daily witnessing the truth hereof.

The consideration of these, has often and long moved me to seek how this
great evil might be redressed, and to make known by Gods word, how all Gods
children may enjoy this large allowance of their Father, to live comfortably
and to die happily so far as in this vale of misery may be attained
whatsoever shall be said or done to the contrary by any adversary
notwithstanding.

This seems unto me, Remedy.
to be notably set out unto us in that one sentence, Hab. 2. 3.
The just shall live by Faith; Romans 1. 17.
which for the excellency thereof is often repeated, Gal. 3. 11.
both in the old and new Testament, Heb. 10. 38
and confirmed by the examples of Gods worthy servants in all ages, as is
plentifully to be seen, Hebrews 11. The true meaning whereof is this, that the
man who is now accounted just and righteous before God, being justified and
sanctified by Christ; as he first was made alive by the holy Ghost through
Faith, receiving Christ: so likewise by the same faith he is to receive in and
from Christ, the continuance of this life, both in all comfort that he shall
receive all needful blessings, and in all good conscience, to yield unto God
all required obedience: Wherein are laid down two maine pillars of our holy
profession.

One, Two main pillars of our profession.
that all grace which we want is alone in Christ, and from him to be received
by us, that it may be ours.

The other, that all this grace which is in Christ for us, is made ours only
by faith, whereupon follows this our principal conclusion, in this Treatise
intended, that the only way to attain to all comfort in Gods favor, and
conscience to live a godly life, by which alone our life and death be happy;
is to get, keep, and increase this precious gift of Faith, whereby alone we
receive Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 3.
and in him all things pertaining to life and godliness.

Now to come to a more full opening, and so to a more plentiful use of these
so heavenly matters, specially for such as most need help herein: this must
be laid as the foundation of all this building.

That man being created of God perfectly holy and happy, and having by his
disobedience utterly lost both, and cast himself and all his posterity into
the contrary misery of sin and damnation, so that neither he himself, nor
any other creature was able to deliver him out of this misery, and restore him
to his former happiness.

It pleased the divine Majesty to ordain, that the second person in Trinity,
the only begotten Son of the Father, should assume and take to his divine
nature, the nature of Man, that so he might become a meet Mediator between
God and Man, to which end the divine Nature sanctified the humane nature which
he took, and filled it with all grace for us; whereby he was made Jesus
Christ our Lord, John 1. 16.
That of his fullness we might receive grace for grace, that is, in stead of
that grace which God gave man by creation, and he lost by disobedience, and God
long before promised and shaddowed in the Ceremonial law, and required in the
Moral law, in stead hereof (I say) we have in Christ fully and truly all
grace needful for our salvation, and to bring us to a far more excellent
estate then we lost by our transgression.

All which are most sufficiently by the Apostle drawn to four heads.

But, 1 Cor. 1. 30
ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made to us wisdom and
righteousness, and sanctification and redemption. In which Scripture I desire
more to be observed, specially these two things as most pertaining to our
purpose.

1. First, 2 Observations.
that the Wisdom, Justification, Sanctification, and Redemption, whereby any
sinner naturally foolish, guilty, defiled, and in bondage, is made wise,
justified, sanctified, and redeemed, is all and alone in Christ, who is made of
God unto us all of these; that is, he himself wrought all these things for
us, and gives them freely to us, and no other way can any man have any of
these, but from and in Christ, We have all grace in Christ.
as is expressly said in the first words of this verse, where it is said, that
ye are of him, that is of God in Christ Jesus: that is made by God one with
Christ, set into him (by faith,) as shall in the second general point be
showed.

the other special point, 2 Observation.
which I think meet in this forenamed Scripture to be observed is this. Many
seek to be justified by Christ not to be sanctified by him.


That whereas all who look to be saved by Christ in all the accusations of
their conscience for any sin, do run to Christ alone for pardon of their
sin: yet many of them being overcome by their corrupt nature, and so falling
into sin, do pray to God for more grace to mortify the same, and do
purpose and strive to master it (both which must be done) but these men not so
clearly seeing, that all power to mortify all sin, and to practice all good
duties, lies only in Christ, and must from him be received by us; that so we
may prevail, herein they fail, that not receiving this power from Christ, nor
well knowing how, do lose much labor, and in long time get small victory;
yea, rather many times their corruptions get strength over them.

The chief remedy of this evil I take to be this, that as we obtain pardon
of sin, and be justified by applying Christ unto our selves: so we in like
manner must apply Christ unto our selves for our sanctification, being no more
able to purge our selves then to justify our selves.

This is lively represented unto us by the parable of the Vine and the
branches, Ioh. 18. 5.
that as the branch receives all sap whereby it is fruitful, from the Vine, so
do we from Christ; therefore he himself says, Gal. 2: 20.
(without me ye can do nothing) and to like effect the Apostle speaks
plainly, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.

The reason hereof is as manifest, that man's nature being so wholly corrupted,
that he has no inclination, much less ability to do Gods will, Christ
taking man's nature has so sanctified it in his own person, that it is able
perfectly to please God, which purity of his nature being in some measure
communicated to us sinners, 2 Cor. 3. 18
we are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit
of the Lord; which the Apostle Peter calls to be partakers of the Divine
nature. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
By all which and the like many, it is evident that as all our comfort for our
full and free Justification must be had from and in Christ alone, so all the
power whereby we may mortify our corruptions, and perform all holy duties
lies in Christ alone, and must be had in and from him. And thus much for the
former general point, that all grace we want is in Christ.

Now for the second that Christ, 2. Of faith.
and all grace in him, is received by faith, We are well to weigh the nature
of this faith, what it is, and how it is gotten and kept: that so we may live
by it, wherein this is to be remembered, that in this business, we have
nothing to do, but with a true saving faith, which is usually termed a
Justifying faith, How justified.
not for that it does properly for any worthiness in it self, or by any
efficacy in it, make righteous, but only for that as a weak hand it receives
Christ our righteousness, who has fully wrought all righteousness for us, and
freely bestowed it on all those who receive him by this hand of Faith. Now then
to say what this Justifying Faith is, howsoever many learned Divines have
diversely defined or described it; I conceive the whole nature of it, may thus
be sufficiently set forth unto us.

Justifying Faith is a belief of the Gospel, What Justifying faith is.
whereby I receive Christ offered to me in the same.

This is plainly to be seen in this Scripture, among many others, John 1.
12. But as many as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of
God, even to them that believed on his name. Which I desire may be well
considered, for that so many be deceived in this matter of Faith and that
diversely: who all by the light of truth may be drawn into the right way, and
so find that sweet and precious fruit of Faith, which so few attain unto. For
the better understanding whereof, we are to observe two special points
pertaining to the nature of this Justifying Faith.

1. First, what it has in common with all other kinds of faith.

2. Secondly what in special, whereby it differs from them all.

For the former, Faith is a belief.
I call it a belief, which is a giving credit to that which is spoken, whereby
a man is assured that it is true which is spoken; which assurance may be more
or less, according to the persuasion we have of the truth of the speaker.

Now, What is to be believed.
the matter the be believed is here said to be the Gospel.

That is, Gospel.
the glad tidings of of reconciliation made by Christ Jesus between God and
man, which though it be diversely, and in sundry speeches set out unto us in
holy Scriptures, yet all is most sufficiently contained in this one sentence
delivered by Christ himself, Ioh. 3. 16. For God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life; wherein this is evident that the matter to
be believed unto salvation is this.

That God the father moved by nothing but his free love to mankind lost, has
made a deed of gift and grant of his Son Christ Jesus unto mankind, that
whosoever of all mankind shall receive this gift by a true and lively faith,
he shall not perish, but have everlasting life, which the same Apostle
expressly says, 1. Ioh. 5. 11. This is the record, that God has given to us
eternal life, and this life is in his Son, meaning, that this it is, which
God has witnessed for us to believe, which he that does not, makes God a
liar; and shall most justly be condemned; therefore this then is the first
thing in true faith to be considered, that every soul to whom God sends this
message of the Gospel do truly believe and give credit unto it to be true,
that God has made grant of Christ to sinners, so that if he accept this grant,
he shall be saved. This is that faith which in schools is called historical,
because it goes no further then to give assent and credit to the story of that
which God speaks to be true, which one may believe for another; and therefore
this cannot be true justifying faith, and this may be in those that know they
are bidden to the wedding, yet refuse to come. So that though this be
necessary to true justifying faith, yet it is not sufficient: therefore in
justifying faith there is required another and more special work; namely, to
receive Christ, and life in him offered in the Gospel, which was the second
general point to be considered in the nature of this justifying faith.
Namely, that beside the assent of the mind and judgment to the truth of the
Gospel, The second special work of faith, is to receive Christ offered us in
the Gospel.
we give consent with our heart and will, and so willingly and gladly accept
Gods gift of Christ, whereby indeed he is become ours, and we his: and so we
in him be made partakers of all things pertaining to life and godliness, 2.
Pet. 1. 3.
as the Apostle Peter speaks, where I would have this specially to be marked,
that he says, this is by the knowledge or acknowledging of him, which I
understand to be by true faith, whereby we know and acknowledge Christ to be
ours.

This I the rather observe, for that I see some honestly minded, herein
beguiled, to imagine that a man may be a true member of Christ, and so be
justified, before he thus actually believe, and thereby apprehend Christ. I
deny not but that some weak in faith may fear that they do not believe, and
that they have not apprehended Christ when in deed they have apprehended him,
though they feel it not; who may be discerned partly by their heaviness for
want of sense of faith, but especially by their love they bear to God showed
manifold ways, whereof we shall here more in the trial of faith.

But that he who never apprehended Christ by believing, should ordinarily be a
member of Christ, I cannot see; sure I am, the Scripture constantly speaks
otherwise, as John 12. As many as received him, Gal. 3 26.
to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in
his name. Gal. 2. 20.
And to like effect often, that we are all the children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus, That we live by faith of the Son of God, That Christ dwells
in our hearts by faith. Ephesians. 3. 17.


In which and the like many, it is evident that faith is the Instrument whereby
we receive Christ our righteousness and life. And this is the constant opinion
of all found Divines so far as I know.

Thus then we see that the very nature of faith consists in the true
acceptance of Christ proclaimed in the Gospel. How faith is gotten.


Now follows to be considered how this faith is to be obtained and increased,
that so we may live by it, wherein we have these two points to be observed.

1. First, 2. point.
what is the ground of faith? 1.


2. Secondly, 2.
how faithis hereon builded.

But before, this block (at which so many stumble) is to be removed, That we
yet speak not how a man that has faith may know it to be so (whereof more in
his place) but how one that indeed has not apprehended Christ by faith may
attain unto it. So that here only we seek the causes which beget this faith,
not the effects of faith, which only prove we have it.

Many not discerning this difference do much mistake, Causes and effects of
faith differing.
and being asked what caused them to believe, they say, because they have
truly repented, and changed their course of life, which if it proceed not
from faith, is not so much as a sound proof of faith, much less can it be
any cause to draw them to believe,

By which mistaking it comes to pass, that such persons building their faith
upon their life, (which is subject to many changes) can never have sound and
steadfast faith) but a staggering and unconstant opinion at the best. We have
need therefore to look for a more sure ground whereon to build our faith,
which must stand against so many and mighty storms wherewith it is so usually
assaulted.

The only firm ground of this saving faith is Gods truth revealed in his
word, The only ground of faith is Gods truth, Reason why.
as is plainly taught, Romans 10. 17. So then faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God. And so likewise it is said of the Ephesians, 1.
13. That they by hearing the word of truth, the Gospel of salvation believed,
which is as manifest to reason, in that there is not any thing in heaven or in
earth, which can testify to us such good will in God to save us; but we must
have Gods own word to witness this unto us, and all little enough. It is a
matter so incredible that the holy and just God who cannot abide any iniquity,
Heb. 2. 2.
but will certainly give to every sin his due punishment, yet of his own
free mercy has given and granted to poor sinners eternal life.

Therefore has the Lord so often, and so evidently spoken no less, that he
might thereby move us to believe, as 1. Ioh. 5. 11. expressly affirming. This
is that which is testified, That God has given us eternal life; and this life
is in his son. For our further confirmation wherein, it is said, verse. 7.
that this is witnessed both by three witnesses in heaven. The first, the
father; the second, the word: that is, the son of God, the second person in
Trinity; the third, the holy Ghost which three be one divine nature, and
testify the same things; as also by three witnesses on earth, all which be in
every true believer, and none else. The first, the spirit; the second, the
water; the third, the blood which agree in one, witnessing the same things,
whereby are meant. By the first, our spirit; by the second, our sanctification;
and by the third, our justification, that in the mouth of so many witnesses,
this truth which of al others is the greatest (yet most hardly received) may
stand sure for the consolation of all believers, and conviction of all
unbelievers, etc.

To which is further added, verse. 10. He that believes in the Son of God,
has the witness in himself, he that believes not, God has made him a liar,
because he believed not the record which God witnesses of his son.

The self same word of life is in sundry other Scriptures published unto us;
because the Lord knows we have need to hear of it continually; we are so
full of doubting in time of temptation: therefore our Savior himself
proclaims this glad tidings. Ioh. 3. 16. For God so loved the world; that he
has given his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life; and verse 17. For God sent not his Son
into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be
saved.

So likewise Ioh. 12 47. I came not to condemn the world, but to save the
world.

Again, Ioh. 2. 2. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father Jesus
Christ the Just, verse. 3. And he is the reconciliation for our sins, and not
for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world.

And Ioh. 1. 29. Behold the lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world.

So the Apostle says. 2. Cor. 5. 19. For God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their sins unto them, and has committed to
us the word of reconciliation.

In all which and many other Scriptures, this is manifest, that God in his word
has made a general offer of salvation in Christ, and inuiteth all (to whom
he sends his servants, the preachers of his Gospel) to come to Christ that
they might be saved, as is plain in the parable of the wedding, Mat. 22. 1.
which is therefore called the Gospel, that is good news: because it brings
forth this glad tidings of great joy that shall be to all people, as the
Angels of the Lord told that the sheepheards of the birth of Christ, Luke 2.
10.

And this is the same which our Lord Jesus himself after he had finished his
whole work of man's redemption here on earth, and was to ascend up to his father
to prepare a place for all his members, commanded his Apostles, and so
consequently gave in commission to al their successors, the preachers of the
Gospel, to proclaim and publish this Gospel to every creature: that is, to
every man and woman, that so every soul, to whom the sound of the Gospel
should come, might have sufficient ground whereon to build their faith and be
saved, or be made without excuse for neglecting so great salvation, which at
the first began to be preached by the Lord, and afterward was confirmed by us
that heard him, Heb. 2* 3. This then is the only ground whereon saving faith is
builded.

Namely, this general pardon proclaimed in the Gospel to poor sinners, which
I have very plentifully proved, for that it is not well considered by many,
who feign would believe, yet being ignorant hereof, do long time pine away
with grief, for that they see nothing which might make them (being so vile in
their own eyes) so bold as to believe that there is any such love in God
toward them, as to give Christ unto them.

Others more dangerously presume of Gods favor without any such ground whereon
they build their persuasion, but only on the outward change of their life,
which often is found deceitful as was before showed.

Now follows how a poor sinner (yet void of saving grace, How to build
faith on the word.
and finding nothing in himself* which may make him bold to believe) may
build upon this ground, that so he may attain to true faith, whereunto these
three considerations be necessary. Three considera^ions.


First, what is said.

Secondly, to whom?

Thirdly, by whom, that so he may have good warrant to believe that he shall
enjoy this mercy offered.

For the former, What is said.
the poor distressed sinner is to weigh with himself, that in this Gospel
and glad tidings of salvation is proclaimed and freely offered forgiveness of
sins through Christ, as is plain by the Apostle Paul his preaching to them at
Antioch. Act. 13. 38. Be it known unto you therefore men and brethren, that
through this man is preached unto you forgiveness of sins, where as in all
the former Scriptures, and in many others, Christ and all his benefits for our
justification, sanctification, and full glorification is the matter offered,
which being that which every humbled sinner most desires* how can it be but
welcome news to hear, that there are such things prepared and offered as he
most desires, which must needs move him often to sigh for the same, and say,
Oh that I might once have my part in this inestimable treasure: but presently
comes into his mind his own unworthiness, which drives him as far back
from all hope, that ever any such as he should have part therein* wherein many
a poor soul does remain a long season, because he cannot see any thing which
might make him bold to believe, that there is any such benefit prepared for
him.

For remedy whereof he is in the second place deeply to weigh this wonderful
mercy of God, 2. To whom.
who so freely offers this great benefit of Christ and all his merits, not to
the righteous, but to sinners; yea to all without exception, to whom the
Gospel comes, as we have seen in the former Scriptures, where the ground
of faith was laid, and because such as have most feeling of their sins, are
most fearful, and hardliest brought to believe, that this is tendered to
them: therefore are they more especially called, as appears. Matthew, 11. 28.

Where Christ himself having proclaimed that all things are delivered to him
of his Father; Mat. 28. 18.
meaning as else where, Heb. 7. 27.
that all power is given to him, whereby he is perfectly able to save all them
that come unto God by him, inuiteth all that labor and are heavy laden to come
unto him, promising that he will ease them; whereby every poor sinner, who
feels his woeful estate, by reason of his sin, and Gods curse hanging over
his head for the same, may certainly know that he is the party whom Christ
calls to come to him, and to whom this benefit of Christ and salvation in
him is freely offered, that so he may be somewhat more raised up, to conceive
hope, that he shall in due time enjoy the same; to which end every one who
feign would believe, is to consider, that as there is no grace in any, why he
should hope for such favor at Gods hand, (for Gods mercy in preparing and
offering his Son a redemption for sinners is altogether free and undeserved;)
so on the other side, there is no sin which ought to hinder any one from
receiving pardon so freely offered unto him: but rather as the greatness of
the disease should more hasten the sick to seek to such a physitio^ as can cure
al diseases, and not keep back such as be called to be cured (...) so no
heinousness of sin should drive any from coming to Christ, which is able
and willing to cure all that come unto him, but rather hasten the poor sinner
more speedily to come to Christ, and so much the more, for that Christ shall
have greater glory in pardoning great offenders, and more love from them being
pardoned, As a Physician shall have more credit in curing great then small
diseases. So then the maine thing that must move and draw a poor sinner to
come to Christ to be eased, is the free mercy of God offering Christ without
exception to all that being laden would be eased, which every one must apply
to himself, that seeing it has so pleased God to send these glad tidings to
him, to call him, command, and beseech him to receive this grace offered:
therefore he need not fear, but may boldly believe and receive Christ offered
to him, as we shall further hear by and by.

For our further help, Who promises.
wherein, in the third place it shall be highly needful, well to weigh who it
is that makes this great offer unto us miserable sinners, even God himself,
who is both 1. able, and 2. willing, and 3. as faithful to perform what he
promises; all which are so manifest that they need no proof for the truth of
them.

But we have need often to set them before us for our use to strengthen our
faith in making us more boldly to rely on Christ.

To this end are specially these testimonies of Gods power mercy and truth so
often repeated in 1. Gods power.
the scriptures, that we might have them ever before us to uphold us against
our doubtings, and fears, whereof our nature is full; for though in general
none will deny but God is Almighty, yet it may appear in all ages, not only
the wicked, but even Gods children have doubted of Gods power, as though he
were not able to help them, as it is evident in Gods people in the wilderness
in their often murmurings through their distrust of Gods power, Psalm. 78. 19.
Can God furnish a table in the wilderness. For this cause was the Lord so
often constrained to oppose his Almighty power against their distrust. As for
Sarahs laughing, thinking it impossible she should have a child, the Lord said
to Abraham, Is any thing hard or impossible to God. Genesis 18. 14
And again to Moses obiecting Whether all the fish in the sea should be
gathered for food for Israel in the wilderness, Number. 11. 23
The Lord answered, Is the Lords hand waxed short, thou shall see whether my
words shall come to pass or not. The like many, whereby it appears to be a
great cause of unbelief, that looking too much upon the impossibilities, which
are apparent to us, and not opposing to them Gods power, we so despair of
help, as is most sensible to be seen in poor afflicted consciences, whose
chiefest fear and doubts are, that their sins are greater then can be
forgiven, and they think it an impossibility for such as they are to be
saved.

Who now knowing by Gods own word, that salvation in Christ is freely offered
and proclaimed even to them, though never so vilde and unworthy, and that by
God himself, Psalm. 115. 3. 135. 6.
who is of all power in heaven and earth to do whatsoever he will, and to whom
nothing is impossible: this may bring the afflicted and despairing ner at least
thus far as to say then it may be, God will be merciful unto me, wherein I
doubt not may be found some true faith in apprehending the mercy offered though
so weak as cannot be discerned or felt by the believer himself, and this I
should take to be the lowest degree of faith.

For the further strengthening whereof, it shall be much available for all
such as yet feel not not their faith, Weakest faith.
and for every weak believer, Goodness and mercy of God.
to cast their eyes upon the wonderful mercy and goodness of God, which alone
makes him so loath to cast away any poor sinner, and so willing to save even
his enemies and rank traitors against his high Majesty. Here if ever, is a
fit place for all such scriptures, as set out Gods mercy to poor sinners the
more to persuade them to believe, as that of Ezechiel, 33 11. where the Lord
swears by himself: saying, As I live says the Lord, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live, turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye dye oh house of Israel.
2. Pet. 3. 9.
And to like effect is that of Saint Peter, That God is not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance, which scriptures and
many the like, are not to be understood of Gods determining will and decree,
but of his revealed and approouing will, which he would have us to know and
believe, thar thereby we might be drawn to rest our selves upon him for
salvation; which whosoever (though never so great sinner) shall do, he shall
not perish, but have everlasting life.

This then is that sure foundation of faith, whereon all that truly believe
do build: namely, the rich and free mercy of God revealed in the Gospel,
whereby all that shall be saved be drawn thankfully to accept this mercy so
freely offered to them, being yet stark dead in their sins, and void of
all saving grace; and therefore all they who looking into themselves, and
finding nothing to draw them, but all to drive them from hope of life, are
often and much to set before them this unspeakable and invaluable mercy of
Almighty God, as in preparing such a remedy for all our misery; so in making so
free a grant thereof in the Gospel to all sinners excepting none. And now more
specially in ^endring it to them: so that they may boldly accept this mercy in
Christ offered to them, and shall not sin but please God therein, that thereby
they may be drawn on in a further degree to believe to find mercy at Gods
hands: whereunto if one thing be added, I see not what can be wanting, to make
the sinner bold to lay hold upon Christ with all his merits so freely offered to
him by God who is so able and willing to bestow Christ even upon his enemies.

This one thing I mean, Gods truth*
is David and Solomon often professed, which howsoever (as before I spoke of Gods
power) it is confessed of all, that God is both faithful and just in all his
promises, yet nothing is more common then in time of trial to distrust and
fear God will not be as good as his word, at least whatsoever is said we
fear we shall perish; We need not seek for proof hereof, which is so
recorded in the lives of the most worthy servants of God, who are otherwise
highly commended for their faith, he that has any insight into himself may
see too much of this in himself, how ready we are to call into question Gods
truth, when God deferreth the help we looked for.

To pass by all others, and to see this in the matter we have in hand: from
whence is it, that so few of those that be truly humbled in the sight of their
misery, who know and desire Christ; yea more, who have heard and in general
believed the Gospel, that it is the glad tidings of salvation, that Christ
bids all that be heavy laden to come unto him, and he will ease them? what is
the cause I say, that so few of these do so lay hold on Gods word, as to
believe and to rest assured of their salvation by Christ?

I know no better answer then this, that when it comes to our selves, we
cannot believe God will perform his word to us; some thing or other will be
objected by our unbelieving hearts, why we may not believe. Against all which
we have no other buckler to hold out but Gods truth, Psalm. 31. 5.
as Psalm. 91. 4. His truth shall be thy shield and buckler; which is such, that
he cannot lie nor deceive. To this end it is that God is called the God of
truth; Reu. 3. 14.
Christ the faithful and true witness, Ioh. 14. 17.
the holy Ghost the Spirit of truth, Ephe. 1. 13.
the Gospel the word of truth, that when our faithless hearts shall stagger
and doubt, whether that shall be which God has spoken, we may stay our selves
upon this immovable rock (God is faithful.) 1 Cor. 19.


As often it is repeated to strengthen our weak faith. This then remains for
the settling of the heart of the weak in faith.

That so often as doubts arise concerning his salvation by Christ, whether God so
love him, that he has given him his only begotten Son, that he believing
might not perish but have everlasting life, he has no other thing in the
world to persuade him but this, that God (who cannot lie) has said it, and
therefore he may and ought to believe, that Christ and all his benefits are
his; wherein the more to move him, he is to lay before him both what a great
sin it is not to believe, no less then to make God a liar, 1 John 5. 10.
as the Apostle John expressly speaks, Ioh. 3. 18.
and also what fearful punishment it procures, even a certain and
remediless condemnation as our Savior himself denounces.

By these and the like considerations is true faith, both first begotten, and
afterward increased in all those that shall be saved, which I have more fully
laid open, not only for that it is the most principal matter to be regarded,
concerning true saving faith, namely how he that has it not may attain to it.

But also, for that it is, if not the least known and labored for, Many seek
for marks of faith in vain.
yet least attained unto. For I have observed many very inquisitiue for some
marks of faith, who never so much as knew any thing which might draw them
effectually to believe.

And therefore now to end this point, concerning the right and orderly way,
whereby an unbeliever is brought to true and saving faith, my advise is to all
that find their faith weak, and consequently their lives much out of frame,
that first they take good heed whereupon they build their faith, Build faith
only on Gods truth*
and that only upon Gods mercy and truth revealed in the Gospel, which never
changing are a sure foundation; and not upon their own change which often is
deceitful, and at best variable, and indeed is only an effect and fruit of
Faith accordingly showing the strength and weakness of our faith, and can by
no means be made any cause thereof.

Thus have we seen both what this faith is whereby the just do live, and by
what means it is attained.

Now lest any should gather out of the former, that any man may by his own
endeavor, using these means attain to faith; I think meet to add this, that
although it be Gods will and commandment to all, to whom he sends his
Gospel, Faith is not in man's power, but wrought by Gods Spirit.
that they should believe and receive Christ offered unto them, and therefore
it is the duty of every one so to do, and it is their sin, and shall be
their condemnation who do not thus, as has been said in all respects; yet
such is the corruption of all mankind by Adams fall, that not one soul has
either will or power to receive this grace in Christ offered unto him, Romans 11.
32.
For God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon al, Act.
13. 48.
and so many believed as were ordained to eternal life, Ephesians. 2. 8.
and Faith is the gift of God, Ioh. 6. 44.
and none can come to Christ except the Father draw him. Which is wisely
disposed by God that no man might have cause to glory in himself, but that the
glory of man's salvation may be given to God. From whence it comes, that
besides this common favor of salvation in Christ tendered to all in the
Gospel; yea, and besides the common gifts of the Spirit which many receive,
who never received Christ by faith. As knowledge both of man's misery and the
remedy thereof; sorrow for the one, and desire of the other, with such others
(besides these I say) God does give his holy Spirit to all that shall be saved,
who does inwardly draw and incline their hearts to believe Gods free and
gracious promises, and so thankfully to accept Christ offered unto them,
whereby indeed they be truly made partakers of Christ and all his benefits,
and thereby be justified and sanctified, and shall be fully and everlastingly
glorified.

And thus is a poor sinner by Faith made the child of God, and heir of
glory. Now before we proceed to our principal intention, to show how this
Justified man may live by his faith. It shall not be lost labor to show how
this may be known of any, How it is known a man has this faith.
that he has this true faith, and how every true believer may be able to prove
that he does so, this certain and infallible knowledge in any man that he
has true faith, Rises jointly from the causes and effects thereof, and not
from either apart, as shall be showed.

Under the causes I comprehend all that work of God, Causes of faith.
whereby he works faith in any, which stands especially in these three
things.

1. That God by his word and Spirit first inlighteneth the understanding,
truly to conceive the doctrine of man's misery, and of his full recovery by
Christ.

2. Secondly, by the same means he works in his heart, both such sound
sorrow for his misery, and fervent desire after Christ the remedy, that he
can never be at quiet till he enjoy Christ.

3. Thirdly, God so manifests his love in freely offering Christ with all
his benefits to him a poor sinner, that thereby he draws him so to give
credit to God therein, that he gladly accepts Christ offered unto him; These
three works of God, whosoever finds to have been wrought in himself, he
may thereby know certainly he has faith, But without these what change of
life soever may be conceived, there can be no certainty of faith, and
therefore I again advise, that this be first and especially looked unto for
our comfort, wherein that none be deceived with shows of these in stead of
substance, I take these to be true notes of soundness.

For the second of sorrow, seeing Trial of sorrow.
nametie corruption and affliction, therefore this sorrow must continue to our
lives end, though in a different manner, now mingled with comfort, whereas the
former before faith could have none.

Whereas on the other side the sorrow that quite dries up, was never sound, as
it is to be seen in many, who being once deeply afflicted, and in great
heaviness for their miserable estate, afterward coming to some comfort, are
grown so secure and senseless, that having no true grief or remorse for
their daily corruptions, content themselves, that they were once cast down.

Whose lives as they be ^^ule and full of blottes, so their ends be often
fearful, either senseless or uncomfortable: so dangerous it is, to quench
the spirit in any part.

Again, Trial of our desire.
for the trial of our Peter exhorts all that be newborn; ^ Pet. 2. 1, 2
If so be they have tasted how* sweet the Lord is, Mat. 5, 6.
and this is that holy hunger after righteousness, to which our Lord Jesus
promises blessedness, which many mistake, for such a desire as going before all
faith, has no promise of blessedness.

And great reason there is hereof why all true believers should more and more
thus hunger after Christ, for that whiles we live here we receive but the
first fruits only, and we have but an earnest penny of that fullness we shall
have, and therefore we cannot be fully satisfied with that we have received,
but still desire more.

Trial of faith.
whereby he works Faith, that any may know God has wrought this in him in
deed and in truth, and not in conceit and opinion (wherein many be deceived,) I
take this to be most infallible in the weakest of those who may know they
believe, that though in temptations they be driven from their hold, yet
afterward they return unto their rest, and find Gods holy Spirit drawing them
yet to believe in God because of his word, which though it be weak, yet it is
true faith, and not that wavering which has no faith in it.

As may be laid open by a plain comparison for the weaker sort. In a pair of
gold weights when they be empty, either balance will hang wavering and not
rest on either side: but if a grain be put into one above the other, it will
weigh it down, yet so as the wind or a little iogge may lift it up; but if it
be let alone, the grain will weigh it down and so hold it: so is it between
weak faith and wavering. When there is any credit given, and so any resting on
Gods word after temptation, there is true faith; but where there is nothing but
a hanging in suspense, and uncertainty, that is wavering, James 1. 7.
which cannot look to obtain any thing, as the Apostle James speaks. Thus
by the causes is every one to try himself, whether true faith have bin
wrought in him, which indeed are the more certain proofs though not so
easily seen.

Now follow the proofs taken from the effects and fruits of faith, Proofs
from effect.
which be more manifest, but not so certain, unless it be also as manifest
that they come from faith.

To make this plain to those for whose sakes I write these (that is, weak
believers:) The principal effects of Faith be Joy and Love, Joy in the
benefit, and love to god the author of it. These be such as a man may easily
see whether he has them in him or no. But if any man can say he has joy of
his salvation, and loves God for it; to say nothing yet of the truth of these,
unless he can prove that these grow out of the tree of Faith; they can no more
prove that he has faith, then fruit growing on one tree, can prove another
tree to be good. For we shall see that both these and many other supposed
fruits of Faith, are nothing less, but are bastard fruits, and mere natural
affections: I mean such as may be in a natural man not regenerated, but
only enlightened and wrought by such a working of the Spirit as may be in a
reprobate; and therefore neither these nor any other change of life can be
proofs of faith further then it is manifest they come from faith.

The ignorance of this deceives many who build their faith on these, whereas
true fruits grow from Faith.

But to come to the trial of our faith by the effects thereof, Trial by the
Spirit.
which though they be many, yet may be all contained under this one, of
receiving the Spirit; not as a stranger to do some work and so to depart, 1
Cor. 6. 19.
but as an Inhabitant to dwell with us for ever. 1 Ioh. 2. 27
And therefore this is set down as the inseperable mark of true receiving
Christ, which is only by Faith. This is manifest in the Epistle of John, 1
Io^. 4. 1.
Hereby we know that we dwell in him and he in us, because he has given us of
his Spirit; and to like effect in the Galathians: And because ye are sons,
Gal. 4. 6.
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, Gal. 3. 2.
crying Abba Father. Again in Galathians 3. 2. which is as manifest by all
experience: when God vouchsafed effectually to call any to embrace Christ, he
sent immediately upon them his holy Spirit, which at first was in extraordinary
manner, as in the Acts, Acts 10. 44
but afterward in ordinary manner, Ephesians. 1. 13.
as in the Ephesians, where it is said, That they after they believed were
s^aled with that holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise
of his glory. So then every one that will prove that he has truly believed,
must be able to see and show that he is thus sealed with the holy Spirit
promised to all believers.

The Spirit is known by his working, How the Spirit is known.
which though manifold, yet in this case may well be contained under these two,
Joy, and Love, (as was before said:) in regard whereof this grace of the Spirit
is not unfitly compared to fire, which has two properties, light and heat;
which though they be inseperable, so that where fire is both these must needs
be, yet they are not both alike sensible; for often the hear of fire may be
felt when no light can be seen: so is it with these of Joy and Love,
especially in weak believers; who though their faith be so covered under their
corruptions, that they cannot often times have such sight thereof as might breed
joy and comfort in their salvation, yet their love to God can never be so
quenched, that they shall feel no heat in it. But if they shall be well tried
what hearts they bear to God, it cannot be hid, but they bear a loving
affection to him, approving of all that he does to be well done; yea, though
he should condemn them; being grieved for offending him, and very desirous to
please him. All which and many the like be evident proofs of their true love
to God, whereby they may prove that there is in them some persuasion of Gods
love toward them, which cannot be without true faith; though faith in it
self, much less the joy therein cannot be seen. And this I judge to be the
cleerest proof which a weak believer may have, that he has any faith; which
I de^i^e the more may be regarded, for that in my best experience I have ever
found nothing more auailable to comfort a truly afflicted conscience (that is,
one whose heart is oppressed with sorrow, for that seeing his misery, and
desiring Christ his only remedy; yet cannot believe, at least cannot see he
does believe.)

To return then to these effects of Gods Spirit, whereby it is manifest who
has the Spirit of God dwelling in him; Every one must examine his own heart
what sound joy and comfort he has of his salvation by Christ, and what true
love he bears to God for the same; which two be as the two maine Arms of the
tree of Life, from whence do issue and spring all other branches of a godly
life.

From the former, that is, the Joy of Faith, does grow all comfort in God, that
we shall receive from him in due time and measure all needful blessings. From
love proceeds a careful conscience to yield God all cheerful obedience,
both in duty toward* God and toward our neighbor; in all which whosoever
has no part, he may thereby know that as yet he has not received Gods Spirit;
but on the other side, if any man do find these in him, and his heart do not
beguile him, he may have boldness, that he is a true living member of Christ.
But for so much as this is to too common, that many be deeply deceived, on
both sides: some, and these the fewer and better sort mistrusting themselves,
that these are not in truth in them, and so fearing they have not truly
received the Spirit, and therefore are none of Christ's; when as in deed and in
truth they have both, whose case is good though they see it not, and so remain
uncomfortable.

Others the greater and worser sort do flatter themselves, they have these and
such other fruits of the Spirit, and so have true faith in Christ, and
salvation, when indeed they have none of these in truth, but vain shadows of
them.

It is a matter exceeding needful to set down some plain and infallible
marks of soundness, whereby every one may be able to discern of his estate,
whether he have rightly received the grace of God or no, that hereby the sound
hearted (though weak and full of doubts) may be quieted, if not comforted; and
the proud hypocrites and presumptuous professor may be discovered and
discomforted; wherein great care is to be had, that the gate be not made too
wide to let in the Libertine and loose liver, or too straight to shut out the
poorest and weakest believer.

1. One especial mark of a sound heart I have observed (chiefly in young
Christians and weak believers) is a godly i^alousie of being deceived with
false faith, Marks of soundness.
joy and love, which makes them careful to examine themselves, and willing to
be tried by others; yea, they be earnest with God to try them, to discover to
them the falsehood or weakness of their hearts, that both may be reformed;
Whereas on the other side the unsound heart will not be tried, but as he
flatters himself all is well, so he takes it very ill to be suspected by
others.

2. Another note that the grace we have received is true and not counterset, is
this; that upon search, finding that we have some sorrow for our frailties, and
some desires of being cleansed by Christ, and some faith and hope therein, with
some joy and love of God for the same; yet we have withal, such a sight of our
poverty in all of these, as makes us often mourn for our wants, and to think
so meanly of our selves, that we highly esteem the graces of God in others,
and for our own parts desire and labor for nothing more, then to have all
these increased in us. These and the like be the humble thoughts and desires
of those that have truly tasted of Gods grace.

But they who think every little prick to be deep wounding, or carnal and
worldly sorrow to be the true godly sorrow, and their vain wishes to be
fervent desires, their fantasies to be faith, and so for all the rest of Gods
gifts bestowed upon them; do dote upon them, and their happiness in them, and
so live merrily, casting away all mourning for their manifold corruptions, and
be very busy in censuring of others, and advancing themselves: and now being
full do take their ease, and grow sloathfull in holy exercises (especially in
private,) these I say and such like, are far from true regeneration, and
might, if they were not blinded, see their estate more dangerous then such as
never saw the light.

3. A third mark of a true Israelite, such as Nathaniel was, in whom was no
guile, may be this, that he is the same inwardly, and in deed, which he is
outwardly, and in show: as the Apostle speaks of the Jew, and of
circumcision, so may we of a Christian, and of Baptism, Romans 2. 28.
That it must not be outward only, and in the flesh, but inward of the heart,
in the spirit, not in the letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God.
Whereby appears that all such who only make a fair show of faith and love,
when in truth these be not in them, these be plain Hypocrites, so far from
happiness as they be from sincerity.

4. Lastly, to end this point, great evidence may be had, that our profession
is sincere and not fained, Obedience in matter and manner.
from our obedience to Gods Commandments, and that two ways, partly from the
matter, partly from the manner. In either of which we shall see apparent
difference between the child of God and him that is only in show.

For the former, the true child of God from his heart hates all sin, which
he knows to be sin; yea those sins most, which most annoye him, and
such as his corrupt nature is most inclinable unto: and contrarily in his heart
desires to please God in all things, and so in truth labors chiefly to
yield obedience to God in those duties, to which naturally he is most
unwilling; and so indeed does mortify the flesh, when it would most reign
over him.

The carnal Protestant on the other side, will ever have some sin so sweet,
that he hides it like sugar candy ^^der his tongue, and cannot forgo it, and
he must be borne with in such sins as are most pleasing to his nature, as
the proud person in his pride, the voluptuous in his pleasures, the covetous in
his sinful gain, which shows that their heart is false, and do leave some
sin for by-respects; for did they in truth hate sin, because it is sin, and
offends God, they would hate one as well as another.

So again, he that pretends conscience in some duties commanded, and
wilfully neglects others which he knows God requires of him, and will by
no means be brought to do them, his heart is unsound, respecting more his
own ease, gain, and credit, then Gods honor or favor toward him. As for
example, he that will not forgive an offense or debt, and will not show mercy,
and relieve by giving and lending, when he knows he ought. And so for the
first table, he that wilfully neglects holy exercises of religion by himself,
and with his family, which he confesses he should use, and will not sanctify
the Sabbath whch* God commands; these men and the like, can have no sound
proof or comfort, that they be truly regenerated.

In all which I would not be understood of frailty in neglecting the good
commanded, or doing the evil forbidden, both which do fall into Gods true
children, Romans 7. 18.
whose will is present to do the will of God, though through the strength of
corruption, and weakness of grace, they much fail in either of these. But I
speak of such as set their hearts to sin, Psalm. 66. 18
as in the Psalm. and their hearts rise against such duties, so that they will
not (as they say) be held under such slavery; these be hollow-hearted
hypocrites, what show soever they make to the contrary in any case
notwithstanding.

5. Now for the other property of true obedience concerning the right manner
thereof, Manner.
this is the care of those who make conscience to please God, that they content
not themselves with the deed done, (as to hear Gods word, to pray, to give
(...) and the like) but they endeavor to do all these in such a holy manner,
(especially for the inward affection) as God requires; and therefore be as
much humbled for their defects this way, as if they had not done these duties
at all; whereas the hollow hearted Hypocrite, so contenteth himself, yea
boasts of the outward deed done, that he thinks himself wronged, if he
be not approved of God, and commended of men* Witness these, and such other
voices of theirs to God: Esa 58. 3.
Why have we fasted, and thou see not? wherefore have we afflicted our
souls, Luke 18. 12
and thou take no knowledge? And again, I fast twice in the week, I give
tithes of all that I possess. Take Saul for example saying, 1 Samuel 15. 13.
I have performed the Commandments of the Lord.

In which it is manifest, they look only to the outward work, and so wash
only the outside of the cup, but never look to the heart, and in what
manner they perform these and all other holy duties.

Thus have we seen some special marks, whereby every man who takes upon him
the name and profession of a Christian, may try himself, and know whether his
heart be upright, and his conversion sound, without which there can be no true
comfort. But he that finds these marks of Christ's sheep upon him (though
not so clearly as some others may) he may have boldness before God, and assure
himself that he has rightly received the grace of Gods Spirit.

So then to conclude this point, how any man may certainly know by the causes
and effects soundly wrought in him, that he has true faith, and thereby is a
true member of Christ, and sothe child of God, and heir of life everlasting.

I desire every one wisely to lay all together, and to raise up their
judgment of their estate, not upon a piece or part thereof, but on the whole
work joined together, which is only available to prove any to be a house or
Temple for the Holy Ghost to dwell in.

This I add for their sakes who dangerously hazard their hope of happiness
upon some one of these works of Gods Spirit, or more, which may be in those
that perish, who have many of these. (I say not in a sanctified manner, but in
a common sort, as has been showed already,) whereas this among all, is one
infallible mark of Gods regenerating and sanctifying Spirit, that where he
begins, he perfecteth his work; whom he unites to Christ by faith, he
quickneth and purges: so that faith without fruits is a dead stock, and all
fruits not growing out of faith, are but as wild and bitter grapes
unacceptable to God, and unprofitable to man.

Having hitherto showed what true faith is, How to live by faith.
how it is wrought, and how any man may know, that this is truly wrought in
him by God Spirit:

Now it follows to consider how he that indeed harh this precious faith may
live thereby; which is the principal matter by me in this Treatise intended.
For the better understanding and practice whereof we are wisely to weigh these
two things.

First thing, What it is to live by faith.

Secondly, How this is attained.

For the former, to live by faith, is this* that God having made promise of all
good things, more then we could ask or think, that no good thing shall be
wanting, and whatsoever comes, shall be for our good. We are so to believe,
that we thereby be as well satisfied when we have no means of help, as if we
had all that our hearts could desire: which is to be seen both in earthly and
spiritual matters. As for example, if a man should fall into any grievous
calamity, as into a dangerous disease, and should see no way of help, yet if
he believe that God will surely help him, this will make him so to rest
contented and comforted, as if he had all present help that could be devised.
So for spiritual, if any should fall into sin, so as he had no hope of
pardon, and* amendment, yet then to believe, so as to rest upon Gods promise
for both, and so to be comforted, this is to live by faith. The practice of
both is plain in scripture and in the lives of Gods faithful servants.
Notable is that of Abraham, whereof Genesis, which the Apostle citing, Romans 4.
18. affirms that he above hope believed in hope, that he might become the
father of many nations* according to that which was spoken* so shall thy seed be
Wherein it is evident, that Abraham seeing no possibility in naturalreaso^, that
he being so old, and his wife not only barren from her youth, but now past
childebearing, should have a son: yet he, as it is said, Not weak in faith,
considered not his own body now dead* when he was about an hundred years old,
neither yet the deadness of Sarahs womb, staggered not at the promise of God
through unbelief, but was strong in faith, and gave glory to God, and being
fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was also able to perform. The
self same is to be seen in that honorable company of th^se worthy servants
of God in all ages, from the beginning of the world to that day, mentioned,
Heb. 11. Who all are brought in as a cloud of witnesses testifiing this truth,
that The just shall live by faith. In all which may appear, that in whatsoever
estate or straight they were brought into, yet they so lived by faith, that
nothing could dismaye them, much less overthrow them. By those example we
might learn, if that we would make the right use hereof, that what condition
soever should befall us, that we might so rest on Gods word and promise for all
help needful, that in greatest conflicts we should be more then
conquerours, Romans 8. 37.
as the Apostle speaks. What a blessed estate this were, it is not hard to
show, whereof we may see more, when we have better learned how to attain
hereunto, thus to live by faith, which was the second thing in this point
propounded, How to attain to live by faith.


For the attaining whereof these two things are carefully to be performed.

First, to call to mind Gods promises.

Secondly, to apply them.

For the former, in all time of need, (that is, whenever God shall bring us
into any straight, that we see not any way of escaping, or means for our
relief, in such sort that we begin to sink into many fears and vexations of
mind) then to inquire, if there be any good word of the Lord spoken for our
comfort; that so calling it to mind, we might raise thereout such hope of
help in due time, as may quiet and content us till we do enjoy in effect
that which before we did expect. This do I take to be the ground of all our
faith whereby we live, be maintained, and vpheld in all our trials. As was
before more fully laid out when I showed the way how any do at the first
attain to saving faith; which is no other here intended, for the daily
increase of faith, that we may live thereby, but the continuance of the same
means, namely, to call to mind and to lay before us, Gods gracious promises
made to comfort his people in all their necessities, that thereby we might be
comforted and quieted in all the tempests of our unruly thoughts and
distempered affections, patiently to wait on God for his help, which shall
not be wanting in that time, sort and measure, which he sees most meet.

This being then the ground of our faith, whereby we live: namely, Gods
promises, which are as so many Legacies bequeathed us by our heavenly Father,
and by his Son Jesus Christ in his last will and Testamen^, what can be more
behoouefull for us then to search this will and Testament for all such legacies
as may concern us? and seeing they be many, some way or other to get into our
minds and memories, at the least, the most principal of these, that we may
have them in a readiness for our use in all occasions to minister so good
comfort, as if we had the best help present we* could devise and desire.
What will be the gain of this practice, I had rather we found by proof, then
hear by report, and so I hope we shall do when we shall be more
particularly directed, to put this instruction in practice. But yet before hand
for encouragement, thus much will I say, and no more then shall be found true:
That he who shall but endeavor in any truth to practice this which here is
taught, shall find his whole profession (wh^t ever his condition shall be of
prosperity or adversity) more easy, and more comfortable. And therefore to
utter my thoughts more plainly, (if may be) I advise all that be weak of
memory, and not so exercised in the scriptures (as some are) that they can
readily upon every occasion call to mind such promises of of God, How to
gather promises.
as be then most fit for their use; that such, I say, if they can write, would
collect and gather out of the holy Scriptures, such special promises as they
shall conceive may most concern them, and be fittest to strengthen their faith
as need shall require.

For such as be not able fitly thus to relieve themselves, my next labor
shall be to gather some special promises, such as I conceive be of most use
in our ordinary affairs and course of life, and refer them to their places,
that they may more readily be run unto, upon all occasions; and likewise I
will show how these may be applied to our several necessities for the
strengthening of our faith, that so we may live thereby, and find sufficient
contentment in God, when all other helps fail. All which we shall hereafter
more see in their place.

But now to proceed with that I have in hand, to show how this invaluable
benefit of living by faith may be attained:

1. The first thing required hereunto, I have showed, Psalm. 85. 8
is to use the Prophets words, I will hear what God the Lord will speak; for
he will speak peace unto his people, and (...) his Saints, etc. That is, to
call to mind, what comfortable promises God has made to his children, in such
case or condition as we be in, that thereon we may build our faith, and live
thereby. To which end, this in the next place is to be performed, that we may
attain to this grace to live by our faith: namely, How to apply these promises
to our selves.
That we wisely apply these promises both to our persons, that we be the true
(...) of them: and (...)

Secondly, to our present condition, That it is such as God has specially made
his promise unto, if the promise be special.

For we shall see there be general promises, which all may and ought to apply
to themselves.

Now for the better practice of this duty, Means of application by meditation
and prayer.
that we may so apply Gods promises to ourselves, that we may thereby have our
faith increased, and we live thereby, we are to use meditation and prayer, and
that not slightly in common manner, or seldom, but often and earnestly, with
wisdom and conscience; and all little enough, so to keep our faith alive,
that it alone may uphold us, Meditation
when nothing else can. Under this meditation I contain such a consideration of
Gods promises, as may lead us to see, what his good will and pleasure is, what
a fatherly care of our welfare he has, and not only how able, but how
willing also he is to help us. And lest we should be dismayed first by our
unworthiness, we are to consider, that all Gods favor is free, procured by
none, but that he shows mercy for his own names sake, which is often so said,
and always understood.

Or secondly, for that some of those his promises are made to certain special
men, as Abraham, David, Raul, and the like and not belonging to us, we are to
remember, that whatsoever God promises to any one of his children, not in any
special or proper respect, only concerning such a person, and for such a
time, as the promise to Abraham, that in Isacke should his seed be called,
Genesis 21. 12.
and many other like promises which properly belonged to them only, to whom
they were made.

But whatsoever God promises, though particularly to one, yet in no special
respect, but as a common favor belonging to all Gods children*

That promise every child of God may and ought to apply to himself, as if it
had been spoken by God to him in particular.

An evident proof hereof we have in that promise made to Joshua, Joshua 1. 5.
That God would never leave him, nor forsake him, which the Author to the
Hebre (...), 13 5. is bold to apply to those to whom he writ, exhorting them
that their conversation be without covetousness, and to be content with such
things as they had, and that upon this reason. Seeing God had promised, that
he would not leave them nor forsake them: where we see he applies to all
the faithful that promise, which was particularly made to Joshua. So are we to
do with all the promises made to any of the faithful, wherein we see no
special limitation that it cannot belong to any other. For further warrant
hereof, this may serve, that the Apostle (...), Romans 15. 4
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And more
specially seeing all the promises are yea and Amen in Christ: 2. Cor. ^. 20.
that is, they be all set out in Christ, to be offered and bestowed in a
constant and unchangeable manner, Bez^.
(as a learned man well expounds this place.) So that he that has Christ,
has an interest and right unto all the promises of this life, and that to
come. 1. Tim. 4. 8
As the Apostle speaks of godliness, which is the daughter of faith, and
cannot be without faith, more then a child without a mother. Therefore every
faithful soul (who cannot but be godly) may assure himself to be true heir
to all the promises which God has made to his children in Christ; and so far
may boldly apply them all to himself, as if they were personally made to him.
And so much for the former part of the application of the promises to every one
his own person.

Now for the second, how to apply them yet more nearly to our present state
and condition whatsouer, 2. How to apply the promises.
seeing the Lord has yielded so much to our weakness, as not only in
general to make out his promises to all his children, but to descend
particularly to our several estates and necessities, bodily and spiritual;
that in what condition soever we be, and whatsoever work of his we shall
undertake, he has made promises to his children, To be with them, to succor
and support them, Psalm. 91. 15 10 84. 11.
that no evil shall hurt them, no good thing shall be wanting, Romans 8. 28.
and whatsoever does come, shall be for their good. Seeing God, I say, does often
more specially intaile his promises: that is, bequeath them to such and such
persons, as to the humble, to the meek, to the hungry, to the afflicted, to
the fatherless, widdowe and the like many; and so likewise to our prayers,
hearing of his word, and all other holy exercises, yea to all obedience to any
of his commandments:

This shall be our wisdom, and is our duty more specially to weigh how these
belong unto us; and finding our selves so qualified, and in such condition, as
the Lord made his promise unto: we may then much more confidently apply his
promise to us in such estate, that so we may more comfortably believe and look
for his help all-sufficient, and in due season. Which what quiet it will bring
to any in distress, cannot be hid or doubted of. And this is that which I have
conceived to be the right way of application of Gods promises by this
meditating and wise considering of them, that so we may have our use of them.

But yet all this is not sufficient, in regard of our great frailty, who be
not only blind, not able to search and see these promises, and forgetful as
the Hebre was Chap. 12. 5. of whom he says, They had forgotten the
consolations. But we are as the two Disciples, whereof Luke 24. 25. Slow of
heart to believe what God promises to us. Neither indeed can we believe first
or last, more then God by his Spirit shall work in us, as both by Scripture and
daily experience is to be seen, how exceeding full of doubts we are, when
we can see no means to put us its hope of help, 2. means of applying the
promises, is prayer.
but do pitifully sink down in despair. In regard whereof our only
refuge is to fly to God, and to ply him with fervent prayer, that he would by
his Spirit both reveal unto us what be those precious promises which he has
made unto his people in his holy word, and likewise give unto us wisdom
rightly to judge of them, and fitly to apply them unto our selves in every
estate we shall be in: yea and about al, to move our hearts so to believe them,
that we may thereupon assure our selves of all needful help in due time;
seeeing God all-sufficient and faithful, has promised it; and so with comfort
and patience wait for the accomplishment thereof. Which seeing it is so weakly
attained even by those that have received some true and saving grace, as every
one that will well weigh his own practice, may easily see: It shows full
well, that this duty is not sufficiently performed. I make no doubt but these
of whom I speak, do constantly call upon God, and therein do usually pray
for faith, which as I must needs approve, and hope that it is not without his
fruit: so I desire in this case a further matter, that they who would live by
faith, (...)
do so consider of the great benefit attained hereby, and damage by the want
hereof, that they may make it that one thing which they do beg of God; and
therefore especially in case of necessity be so importunate with God for this
grace, as to give him no rest till he fulfill their desire.

Thus if any shall join these two, fervent prayers, and diligent meditation on
Gods promises, I nothing doubt, but dare from the Lords own mouth assure him
that he is the man who shall stand, when others fall, and shall sing for joy of
heart, when others shall cry for sorrow of heart.

For to these (if to any) may that promise, Esaias 65. 13. be applied, and to
whom else may that agree: Math. 7. 7.
Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you? So that he who thus trusts in the Lord shall be as mount
Sion which shall never be moved. Psalm. 125. 1.
Yea more, before I conclude this point which I have undertaken, concerning
living by Faith, this will I add, Gain of living by faith.
what I conceive will be the exceeding gain hereof; which I have once or twice
before generally mentioned, but reserved more particularly to this place to lay
open, to this end, that they who desire to enjoy these sweet comforts, may be
willing to use the means prescribed, for the attaining thereunto. Wherein upon
some trial, I will forewarne of this danger, which will hardly be avoided
without great care: That though the labor to live by Faith be neither tedious
nor unpleasant, much less so grievous as cannot be endured: yet our corrupt
nature will not easily be brought to undertake it, and more hardly be held
with any constancy to continue it; Few labor for this or attain to it.
Whereby it will come to pass, that few, will find the fruit hereof promised;
which I observe comes to pass by a special policy of Satan, who (knowing
that all our strength to resist him lies in Christ: and all the help we have
from Christ is principally by faith) does therefore in special, labor by all
means to hinder our growth in faith, that so he may more easily overcome us.
Wherefore we are exhorted 1 Pet. 5. 9. To resist the devil steadfast in faith.
And our care must be to strive for the maintenance of the faith which was once
given to the Saints; Jude ver. 3.
As the Apostle Jude exhorts. And above all to take to us the shield of
faith, Ephesians. 6. 16
that we may quench all the fiery darts of the Devil; That is, those dreadful
terrors of an afflicted conscience arising from sense of Gods wrath hanging
over us, which as venomed Darts lie burning in the flesh, so these do torment
men's consciences.

The more to move us to be specially careful herein, let us well weigh what be
the vnualurable commodities hereon ensuing, that we may to our comfort enjoy
the same. In thinking of these, me thinks I might make a like answer to this
question, What is the benefit of living by faith, to that which the Apostle
made; Romans 3. 1, 2
What is the profitte of Circumcision: Much every way.

For to say the truth, there is no good thing which God has prepared for the
sons of men, or promised to any of his children, or they may ever look for
and enjoy: which can any other way be obtained then by Faith. As the Scripture
plentifully shows, especially in that worthy Chapter, Heb. 11. where it is
further said, v. 2. That by faith the Elders obtained a good report; Which I
understand thus: That never was nor can be done any act, which is worthy true
praise, but by Faith. For as it must needs be sinful that is not done of
faith, and cannot please God; so where true faith is (according to the measure
of it) it carries above all strength of nature to such admirable effects, as
do evidently show the power of God to be present, and chief agent therein. As
may well be concluded out of that which the Apostle prays for the Ephesians;
Ephesians. 1. 19.
That they might know what is the exceeding greatness of Gods power in us that
believe; which we see, admirably extolleth the excellency of Faith. Now
therefore not to rest in general, but to lay open some part of these great
treasures, which are enjoyed by Faith: I might content my self to refer such
as desire to behold; and attain the same, to that excllent Treatise of the
Privileges which belong to every true Christian, set out by Master Rogers
(which I could wish were better regarded,) wherein is fully laid out, what
special favors, and benefits God has provided for his children, both in
this life, in all the several estates thereof: and in the life to come; all
which being the free gift of God, and Legacies bequeathed to us in Christ, are
received of us only by Faith: and are so many strong motives to stir up all
to stand fast in the faith, and by all good means to maintain the same. But
seeing that many have not the book, and others want leisure or delight to
read such large Treatises: I will draw out some of the principal, which shall
be sufficient to persuade us, to spare no pains, whereby we may be made
partakers of so great benefits. Wherein let this be first: That whereas they
be exceeding few who attain to that blessed estate, set down, Romans 5. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. yet they that be justified by Faith do enjoy them all.

As first, 1. Benefit of faith is peace.
To have peace toward God: That is, whereas every soul by nature is the
child of wrath, and so at mortal war with God, being a servant of sin and
Satan, Gods sworn enemy: and therefore utterly out of Gods favor, and
subject to his fearful indignation: Now for such an one to be released from
his trespass and punishment; and to be so reconciled to God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, that there is an everlasting peace concluded between God and
him, that there shall never be any more variance, or displeasure; this cannot
be thought a small benefit. And if it were between a rebel and his Prince,
it would be redeemed with a great price. This is much, yet behold more; for as
it is a far higher favor, for a Traitor not only to be pardoned, and freed
from the Kings displeasure, and so fully reconciled: but to be taken into to
special grace, 2. To be admitted into high favor to be sons.
and made one, whom the King singularly loves, and makes of his privy
Council, and takes great delight in, so that he may have free access into
the Kings presence, and to whom the King can deny nothing: In a word, to be
advanced as Joseph in Pharaoes court, or Mordecay in Ahashuerus Court, so to
be taken into like favor with God: Yea more, of an enemy to be made a son,
and heir, yea coheire with Christ; this is so high a favor, as more cannot
be conceived. Yet this is that, which is here added to the former; That we who
be justified by Faith, Romans 5. 2.
by Christ have access through faith unto this grace wherein we stand. Which
I thus understand (as I said) that we be not only fully and freely
discharged, from all Gods displeasure justly conceived for our sin, and so a
full peace made between God and us: But hereby also we be advanced to that
high dignity to be the sons of God, as it is called John 1. 12. Which is that
grace wherein we now stand. Rom 5. 2.
By means whereof we may boldly cry Abba Father, and have free access to
come into his presence to ask what we will, with assurance it shall be done
unto us, as Christ himself promises, Ioh. 16. 23, 24.
John 15. 7. And from hence do flow all other blessings, as fruits and
effects of this grace and favor, into which we be admitted.

Among which, one principal follows in this Scripture, That we rejoice in the
hope of the glory of God. Romans 5. 2.
That is, how contemptible soever our state be in this world, (which usually
is bad enough) yet we have hope of such a glorious estate to come, 3 Joy of
salvation.
with God in his kingdom, as does make us not only inwardly to rejoice; but
openly to express it in word and deed. In word, when in a heavenly manner we
do boast as it were of our honors which we shall have with God, when we
shall be received into his kingdom: as we read Paul did often, Romans 8. 18, 38.
2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. In deed, when we openly show, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10.
that on the one side we are content to forgo these transitory preferments,
2 Cor. 4. 17.
which the worldlings so magnify, that they fell heaven for them. A worthy
pattern whereof was Moses, Heb. 11. 24. That he when he was come to years,
25.
refused to be called the son of Pharaoes daughter; 26.
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasure of sin for a season: esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches
then the treasures of Egypt; For he had respect to the recompense of reward.
And on the other side when we are willing to do as our Lord and Master Christ
did, Who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised
the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. Heb. 12. 2.
So when we shall be willing to suffer with Christ, that we may reign with
him, and shall count that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to
be compared with the glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8. 18,
then do we truly glory in the hope of the glory of God; and (to say the
truth) as none can do these, but such as have hope of this glory, so he that
has this hope, cannot but count all doung for Christ, and to be glorified
with him: for howsoever it be most true of this glory, that it is such as eye
has not seen, ear has not heard, neither can it enter into the heart of man
to conceive of the excellency of this glory, yet God has given to his
beloved, such a glimpse of it, as Peter, Math. 17. 1
James, and John, had in the mount of Christ's glory. 2 Pet. 1. 17
That they do conceive their vilde bodies shall be changed and made like to
the glorious body of Christ. Phil. 3. 21.
Their souls shall be cleansed from all spots, Ephesians. 5. 27.
and clothed with the perfect righteousness of Christ, and both in soul and
body to be like unto Christ, 1 Ioh. 3. 3.
and so glorified with him; 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
that he shall be glorified in them, and they with him sit in his throne: Reu.
3. 21.
yea more and above all, that can be uttered, that they shall have such union
with Christ as shall bring them to be one with God the Father, Ioh. 17. 21.
as Christ and his Father are one; Which is that for which our Savior himself
prayed unto his Father. All which so far exceeding the short reach of our
weak capacity, we may see cause sufficient, why they who are assured by
faith, they shall certainly and fully enjoy this glory, when they lay down
this earthly tabernacle. As the Apostle 2 Cor. 5. 1. expressly affirms, why
they, I say, do thus rejoice and glory in this glory of God.

How great a benefit this is, though it cannot be valued, yet every one who
has his senses exercised, to discern both good and evil, may easily see,
that it is such and so great, as nothing to be desired may be compared with
it. And therefore there is cause enough to draw all that know it, to spare no
cost or pains for the attayning to it.

In the next words, Romans 5. 3
the Apostle yet not satisfied in setting out the singular benefits which are
enjoyed by this life of faith, adds this, as a great enlargement of the
former, That the believer does not only so, that is, in a holy manner, Glory
in the hope of Gods glory; but we glory also in tribulation, knowing that
tribulation works patience, v. 4. and patience experience, and experience
hope, v. 5. and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given to us, wherein he intends
that such is the power of faith where it is living, that it so quieteth and
comfort Gods children in their meanest condition, that they not only
rejoice in the hope of that glory to come, (which is the best part of their
estate:) but (which is much more admirable) that they find matter of outward
rejoicing in the worst part, Rejoicing in afflictions.
that is, in tribulations and afflictions of what kind soever; which is no
more then God requires by his Apostle James 1. 2. My brethren count it all joy,
when you fall into diverse temtations, knowing that the trial of your faith
works patience, etc. Whereof we have the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 10. a
worthy example, who says of himself, Therefore I take pleasure in
infirmities, 2 Cor. 12. 10.
in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ his
sake. Which if it shall be well considered, how unwelcome these be to the
natural man, and nippe the heart of all his comforts and reioycings; it will
be counted a singular benefit in all of these to be more then conquerers, as
the Apostle says, Romans 8. 37. That is, not only to overcome these with faith
and patience, but to glory in them and rejoice, that we are counted worthy to
suffer shame for his name. Acts 5. 41.
And whereas the natural man does for these especially shun true religion,
and the sincere profession thereof, which usually brings the cross and manifold
troubles; What a singular comfort is this, that Gods child may assure
himself, these afflictions (how many and great soever) yet they shall be so
far ftom hurting him, that they shall all turn to his good many ways? and
therefore that he has just matter of joy and thanks, though not for the pain
and grief which be bitter, but for the gain which is sweet, as Heb. 12. 11.

Because this is not readily received, the Apostle in this Scripture Romans 5.
3, etc. does undertake, to give sufficient reason hereof; namely this, that
the firm believer does know that tribulation works patience, and patience
experience, Tribulation brings patience.
and experience hope, etc. In all which he sets forth certain special
fruits, which Gods children reap by afflictions: Namely these; That whereas
we all are by nature like untamed Heiffers never accustomed to the yoke, who by
bearing the yoke be made gentle and willing to put their necks under the
yoke, and quietly to bear it; so Gods children being not acquainted with
afflictions, be much disquieted therewith at first: But afterward being more
exercised with sundry tribulations, grow more acquainted, and become more
willing to bear them, and quietly to endure them, which alone is true
patience: Not to be furious or senseless, but meekely to abide under Gods
hand, and so To hold their peace, Psalm. 39. 9.
because God who cannot err has done it. The worth of this may herein be
seen, in that so few have well learned this Christian patience.

From hence arises another special fruit, Patience brings experience.
namely experience. That as Mariners at the first going to sea, seeing the
great waves, and tossing of the ship, look still to be swallowed up and to
perish; but afterward by enduring many of these storms, grow to such
experience of Gods power in preserving them, that they do not so fear
perishing as before, but cheerfully endure them: Even so the faithful, how so
ever at the first they begin to be dismayed with the manifold troubles they
meet withal, corruptions within, and afflictions without, (reproaches and
injuries by men of the world not the least,) yet afterward by patient enduring
of these, they find by proof, that God has made them able to bear them, and
graciously delivered them. Whereby they grow to be as trained soldiers,
better exercised both to bear and profit by them; and so to wait for a good
end and issue out of them, which is the next benefit here mentioned: namely
hope, whereof it is said, Experience brings hope.
Experience works hope; whereby is meant, that as in all kind of
difficulties, men having often found help and release, do gather thereout
hope of like assistance for time to come; Even so likewise the often proof and
experience which the faithful have of Gods mighty power, and ready help in
all their trials and troubles, both preserving them under their heavy
burdens, and in due time and measure easing them, and in the end fully
releasing them: The experience hereof (I say) makes them hope and look for
like help hereafter in time of need. What sweet ease and refreshing this
brings to a weary heart, may be seen by that common and true proverb: If it
were not for hope heart would break.

And to go no further, the next words makes it manifest: Where it is said,
Hope makes not ashamed. Verse. 5. Hope makes not ashamed.
That is, when we be sore distressed, and see no apparent means of escaping
or deliverance, naturally we begin to faint; and to be confounded in our
selves, and so driven to hide our heads for shame, as not able to abide the
reproachful speeches, which usually pass upon men so cast down. A clear
proof whereof we have in Jobs case. Then if there be any true hope grounded
on Gods faithful promise of help in due time, which is embraced by faith;
then, I say, shall we be able to hold up our heads, and say with faithful Job,
Job 13. 15.
Though he kill me yet will I trust in him. Ephesians. 6. 17.
For which cause this grace of hope is fitly compared to an helmet, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
8.
wherewith a man armed dares boldly hold up his head and look his enemy in the
face.

This is the benefit which the believer has in all extremities, which no
other can enjoy. For they if they be not senseless, either struggle like a
wild beast in the net; or sink down in despair without any comfort.

If this be so, let it be then acknowledged to be no common blessing to live
by faith; which besides many others, brings such patience, experience, hope,
and confidence in all our troubles. The true cause of all which the Apostle
here lays down to be this, Romans 5. 5.
Because the love of God is shed abroad in their hearts by the Holy Ghost which
is given to us; meaning, that as the love of a friend, is best tried and seen
in greatest need: so Gods love unto his children is most manifest in their
greatest tribulations.

For whereas at other times God gives to his, some sweet tastes of his fatherly
love, Esa. 63. 9.
In all their troubles he is so troubled, and his bowels so moved, that like a
tender mother be as it were dandles them in his lap, and speaks so kindly to
them; yea not only bemones them, but helps them every way as need requires;
that now they see plainly, how tenderly he loves them; which grace is wrought
in them by the holy Ghost, which is given to all believers; All which
commends Gods high favor to these, and so the most happy condition of them
all, and of them alone, that live by faith. All which is contained in this one
scripture, Romans 5. 7. which I have but opened, and not powered out all that
herein is contained. Now if this one box of Spikenard contain such store of
sweet consolations, what may we think is to be drawn out of al other
scriptures? I dare say a large volume; for to say what I have observed, (and
all may see who will consider it) that although the Lord in great wisdom and
love regarding our frailty, who are not more loath to read much, then prone to
forget what we read, has set down his will in inimitable breuity; yet he is
very plentiful in laying forth his exceeding great and precious promises, 2
Pet. 1. 4.
as S. Peter calls them: All which do contain those blessings earthly and
spiritual, for this life and that to come, which God has prepared for all
true believers; who only being the just possessors of these, I think it
sufficiently proves that which I intend, What benefit it is to live by faith.
Which may more manifestly be seen by the Apostles own words in the scripture,
Romans 5. 1.
where he of purpose undertakes to set out what is the blessed estate of those
that be justified by faith, and so brings in all these singular benefits we
have mentioned. Yea, and adds that it is by faith, that we have access into
this grace wherein we stand. And to say the truth, (as has been said
already,) neither these, nor any other saving grace, or true blessing is
obtained, but by faith* And therefore I may conclude, that he that looks to
find any comfort in this life, and to nourish the hope of a better, let him
make it his chief endeavor thus to live by faith, by which alone, these and
ail that may be desired, are enjoyed.

And thus would I leave this point to be proved rather by experience then by
argument, and so come to that I chiefly aim at, to bring this doctrine into
practice; and as I promised to collect some special promises, and to show how
they are to be applied particularly to every person, and condition to whom
they belong. But that I remember there is one other singular use of Faith,
whereof though we stand in great need, yet it is very weakly attained, because
it is so little sought after, Another benefit of living by faith, is our
Sanctification.
And this it is, how by faith we might more master our greatest corruptions,
and better discharge those duties wherein we most fail. Wherein the more to
move all that read this, better to regard it, I do with hearts grief
bewail, to see so many, of whom I conceive good hope, that they have truly
received the grace of God, that yet neither themselves can feel, nor others
discern any apparent growth in true sanctification, either in the subduing of
their chiefest infirmities: or such a walking in their places as beseems
their condition. But in general such a conformity to the corruptions of the
times, such deadness of spirit in all holy exercises, with a gross and
continual neglect, or common abuse of them; as private reading, meditation and
prayer, Many blemishes in regenerate persons.
instruction and wise government of their Families, holy conference in their
brotherly meetings, with such care of edifying one another. And on the other
side, such vain and sinful merrie-making, that there is but small difference
between them and mere natural men. As for their worldly dealings, as eagerly
following the world, and contending thereabouts; as busily following their
pleasure, with curiosity in houses, apparel, decking their children and the
like, and generally such setting their minds and affections upon these things
here below, as men that are not risen with Christ. I might say no less of
their unmercifulness many ways, and great impatiencie in every thing that
crosses them; with sundry the like great and long continued blemishes of
their holy profession, and just abaters of their spiritual comforts, in such
sort, that I have seen and heard the deaths of many to have had little to be
rejoiced in: and no marvel, seeing they took so little care either to
glorify God in their life, or to win others, or to make their calling and
election sure. It was most just with God, that their death should want of that
glory with others, and comfort to themselves, which others of Gods children do
enjoy; who living by faith, have learned better to bridle their unruly
affections, and more wisely to walk to the honor of God, edification of
others, and peace to their own consciences. All which is attained by ^aith,
and notwithout it, as has before bin touched, and now shall further be made
manifest. The Apostle, Romans 7. 14, says, speaking of himself, being now
regenerate, says That the Law is spiritual* but I am carnal, sold under
sin, which in many words following, he proves and exclaimes: saying, verse.
18. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing; for
to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find
not: and more to like effect. Whereout this may evidently be gathered, that
even in those that have true faith, Strength of sin in true believers.
and be effectually regenerated, there remains such a corrupt nature, as
keeps them from many good duties, and carries them to sundry evil actions:
yea, and that with such strong hand oftentimes that they have no power to
withstand; as follows, where he compares himself to a poor soldier taken
prisoner by the enemy, and held in captivity till he be rescued by his
captain; meaning, that Gods children are often so held captives to their
corruptions, that they have no power to resist, much less to overcome, till by
the power of Christ they be delivered out of this thraldom, as may be seen
in all the particulars before mentioned. As for example, when a poor Christian
shall be so possessed with the love of this worldly wealth, that though he
desire and purpose to be more merciful to Gods needy Saints, yet when he comes
to it, he cannot overcome himself to relieve according to his ability, and
their necessity; but even against the light of his conscience, either gives
not, or not so much as he should. So much more for lending, for conscionable
buying and selling: and as in all matters of profit, so of pleasure, he that
is in captivity to them, no purposes, prayers, no vows can keep him back,
but he will obey his lust, in vain apparel, in going to plays, in cards,
dice, and other gamings. The impotency of many in withstanding their lusts,
shows in what captivity they be held: likewise in revenge, and uncharitable
thoughts, of such as have done them wrong. They which be able to discern their
own corrupt nature, may easily see with what difficulty they do bridle their
lusts; nay often, how impossible it is, to give to such as offend them, a good
word, or a good countenance.

By all which and many the like, it evidently appears, that many of Gods
children be thus held in captivity, that they cannot by all the strength they
have get out: so that without they be delivered by Christ, they shall bequite
overcome: which the Apostle himself in this very place expresses, where
complaining hereof with grief and admiration at the difficulty of the work
(not in any despair) cries out, Romans 7. 24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Whereunto he makes answer himself, saying, I thank God through Jesus Christ
our Lord: meaning, that though he saw, neither in himself, nor in any
creature beside, any power to deliver him from the corruption of nature, which
brings death, where it is not subdued: yet he saw such help in Christ, as
made him joy to give thanks to God for the same. Wherein I observe a worthy
practice of this which I chiefly endeavor to draw believers unto, namely, How
by faith to master their strongest corruptions: For here the Apostle finding no
where out of Christ, any sufficient power to deliver him out of this captivity
to sin and death, by the hand of faith he lays hold upon Christ, assuring
himself upon Christ's promise, 2. Cor. 12 9
That his grace should be sufficient for him, and that his power should be
magnified in his weakness. Therefore he should not be left in his enemies
hands, but in due time to be set at liberty more freely to serve the Lord.
This is that I commend to the practice of every true believer, that whenever
he feels his corruptions too hard for him, that he cannot by all his
endeavors get the masterie over them, then to fly to Christ, and by true faith
to apply his promises for the mortifying of sin, that thereby he may
receive power from Christ more to crucify the old man with his members.

For our better performance whereof, I will a little digress, (though not
far from my purpose) briefly to set out, the readiest and the surest way
which I know, to mortify any sin; which stands in the diligent exercise of
these 4 rules following.

First, 4. rules of mortification.
that whereas we be all blind by nature, that we see not our sins, and so
full of pride, and self-love, that we think better of our selves, then there
is cause; every one who will mortify his sin, must labor by all good means
to find out what be his chiefest sins most displeasing ^o God.

These means be:

1. A true examination of our selves in every commandment.

2. Secondly, a careful observation of all our ways; and as men do trace the
creatures in the time of snow, so to mark our steps in time of temptation:
as our impatience when we be provoked, and so for all other sins, as pride,
and covetousness, etc.

3. Thirdly, a seeking, and receiving admonition from such as spy our
infirmities.

4. And fourthly, earnest prayer to God to discover our chiefest imperfections.
By all which and the like faithfully used, we shall find out, wherein we have
most need to be reformed; that so upon sight thereof, we may better apply all
our endeauours for our recovery.

The second rule is, 2. rule to be weary of our sins.
when we have found out our sin, then to get our hearts to be weary of the
same, and willing to be cured of it; which shall be if we consider the great
hurt it brings us, partly in keeping good things from us, and partly in pulling
down upon us so many evils upon soul and body, our selves and others
belonging to us. To set out these in particulars would not be hard, but it
would carry me too far from my matter intended. It shall suffice to remember
in this case, that all our woe comes from our sins, as both Scripture,
reason, and continual experience do show: which if it were well weighed,
would make us more weary of our sin, then of our sickness or other
affliction, and breed in us much more fervent desires to be cured. And
therefore this must be another daily consideration, both what bitter fruits
our sins bring forth, and that from thence all the woes we meet withal
does spring.

The third and most principal rule is, 3. rule is to get power from Christ.
That for so much as such is our frailty, that when we have got some true
sight of our principal corruptions, and therewithal some loathing of them,
with an earnest desire to be rid of them; yet we have no ability in our
selves to mortify them, but All our sufficiency is of God, and without Christ,
we can do nothing, as is often said, but never sufficiently regarded:
Therefore hereupon especially depends all our power to mortify sin, that
we by faith do draw from Christ that power and virtue, which is in him, to
change our crabbed and sour nature, that we may be sweet and pleasant
grapes for the Lord our God. This is that especially which I aim at, to
persuade all that feign would get more mastery over their strong corruptions
and unruly affections: namely, to do as the woman in the Gospel, Who having an
issue of blood twelve years, and had suffered many things of the Physicians,
Mar. 5. 25.
and had spent all that she had, and was nothing better, but rather grew worse;
when she heard of Jesus, came in the preasse behind him, and touched his
garment; for she said, if I may but touch him, I shall be whole: and straight
way the fountain of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her body that she
was healed of that plague. Even so must we all, who have had many foul issues
of sin, of pride, hypocrisy, security, presumption, wrathfulnesse,
uncleanness, worldliness, and the like many, and have taken great pains,
and been nothing the better, but rather grown worser: (for so must it needs
be till we come to Christ) do we what possibly we can; such I say must come
to Christ, and touch him by a true faith, and then shall they feel virtue to
come from him, to dry up this fountain of their corruptions.

Oh that this might be brought more into trial, what would be the difference
between this and all other practices for the mortifying of the flesh, which
without this shall be found insufficient, if not deceivable: for where shall
be found any virtue to kill sin in our nature, but in Christ in our nature?
Can man's reason, will, or resolution suffice to draw him to forsake his so
pleasing, and profitable sins, as he supposes? If this might be in some
outward actions, in respect of men, yet this cannot be in the heart to please
God, which is only the work of Gods Spirit in true believers. How this is to
be done, has been before declared; here only I commend the use of this
living by faith, without which, as there is no true mortification of any sin
whatsoever: so by this, we shall surely obtain power against the oldest and
strongest corruptions in our nature.

Whereunto if one thing be added, I well see not what should be wanting, to the
mortification of them all; at least in such measure as God will accept of, and
we may have comfort in; which is the fourth rule by me intended: 4. rule of
mortifying sin.
namely, That having received 1. a true sight of sin. 2. a willing mind to
be cured of it. 3. power from Christ for the subduing of it: then in the last
place, that with this furniture we enter the battle, and with good courage
set against all the assaults of Satan, all the allurements of this world, and
all the evil lusts of our own hearts: Ephesians. 4. 27.
That we give not place to the devil, Iam. 4. 7.
but resist him rather, 1. Pet. 5. 9.
steadfast in faith, as we often be exhorted; and that upon promise that he
shall fly from us; which is the same whereto the Apostle exhorts and persuades
by many arguments, To put on the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 11.
that we may be able to stand against the (...) of the devil; 1 Timothy 6. 12
and elsewhere, ^ Cor. 16. 13.
to fight the good fight of faith, to (...) and stand fast in the faith, to
quite, us like men, and to be strong. In all which, and many the like, this is
required, that all they who have by faith received Christ, and so from and in
him all needful grace, whereby (...) enabled to withstand all their spiritual
enemies: That they, I say, should manfully (...) the Lords battles, and (...)
through sloathfulnesse, not cowardlinesse, shrink back, and give way to their
enemies; which would be their overthrow, as daily experience shows. Herein
many fail. On the other side, many rashly rushing into the battle unarmed,
and so are soar foiled; which is the common error of those, who wanting faith
both resolve to leave such sins as bring them to terror before God, and
shame before men: and do also many ways bind themselves thereto, as to leave
badde company, dicing, carding, drinking, and worse: yet often they prevail not;
and if they do, it is far from true mortification, and so indeed are never
the nearer to true comfort. So needful therefore it is for all that may hope
for victory in this spiritual battle, first to get this Armor, and then to
fight. And thus have I showed the best way I know for the ouercomming of our
several corruptions, and all other spiritual enemies, which seeing it cannot
be attained to but by faith* For this is the victory that overcomes the
world, 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
even our faith: it well proves the point I intend, and so commends this
precious gift of faith, that any who ever felt or fears the wounds of sin,
and has tasted and desires the rejoicing of a good conscience, (whereof 2. of
Corinth. 1. 12.) shall see cause enough to persuade him above all to take up
often and again (as the word signifies:)

The shield of faith, Ephesians. 6. 16.
The same may be said for the other part of sanctification: namely, that all
to our ability to lead a godly life, and comfortably to perform all good
duties to God and man, is no other way attained then by faith, as it has been
already, and might more plentifully be proved by Scriptures and experience if
need so required. But I will only add this for help of the weaker, to show
them how by the help of the former rules fitly used, they may be able in some
good measure to practice all holy duties, and specially such in which they most
fail.

First, 4. rules for practice of all duties.
every one is to inquire, and by all means he may, to learn, 1. to know our
duties.
what be the special duties which God requires at his hands, either in his
general calling of Christianity, or special place wherein God has set him,
and what be the gifts and graces wherein he is most weak; that so he may more
earnestly labor for the attaining of them: which knowledge shall be as a
light to guide him in the right way to heaven. Whereas otherwise men are in
darkness, and can never possibly lead a godly life; and though they may have
some desires to take a better course, yet this ignorance will so blind them*
they shall not find the way; which is one chief cause, why the lives of many
professing religion are so barren, that little more can be seen then bare
leaves of profession.

Most think it enough to avoid gross offenses, and to practice common duties
of religion and righteousness: but to know how to please God in all things,
this is too precise, and more then needs; whereas the best of Gods children,
seeing and bewailing their blindness, do often and earnestly seek to God to give
them knowledge and understanding, Romans 12. 1.
what the good will of God is, (...) and perfect. Psalm. 119.
The example of David is sufficient in this case, how vnce^^antlie he prayed
to God To teach him his (...), to give hi^ understanding, who yet had as much
knowledge of his duty as any other.

The great need and use of this knowledge, what God would have us to do in
our places, and in our several estates of prosperity and adversity, may
easily be seen by all that have any care to please God, who shall find
themselves to seek in many things, both what to do, and how to carry
themselves. And therefore I advise all who may look for any comfort of an holy
life, carefully to examine themselves in what duties they be most failing,
either in not doing them, or doing them amiss. And for their help to do as
before was taught in the first rule of mortification, ^ow to find out our
chiefest sins: so here to know what is the chiefest work God would have us
to do, and in what manner it ought to be done, that this may be ever as a
light to show us the good way wherein God would have us to walk.

This is the first rule to be observed for the well ordering of our whole
life; which though it be so necessary, that there can be no good life without
it, yet it is not sufacient.

And therefore in the next place, 2. rule to get a willing mind.
we are to labor to get our hearts ready and willing to do such good things,
as we know God requires; for we are not more ignorant what God would have us
to do, and in what manner, then unwilling to do either, as our daily practice
proves, especially to do more then usually is done, which the Lord knowth is
very poorly performed: for to let pass the carnal Protestant and hypocrite,
who do al to halfes, and for show, this will be found in those that have some
truth, that though they make conscience of some duties, yet are very hardly
brought to others, which be more laborious, or more crossing their corrupt
nature in their credit, profit or pleasure. Hence it is that many are so
negligent and slight in reading, private prayer, meditating, instructing of
their families, sanctification of the Sabbath: so hardly brought to sobriety
and and true liberality. But of all, how seldom can the most of us be brought
to humble our selves in fasting and prayer, though we have never so many and
just causes to pull us often hereunto, both for our selves and others, in
public and private. These and the like prove this rule to be most needful,
to get our hearts more willing to every known duty.

The way whereby this is obtained, is an often and advised consideration of the
great gain which comes by a conscionable discharge of these duties that belong
unto us, in bringing glory to God, profit to others, and peace to their own
souls; all which is more commonly confessed, then soundly enjoyed of many
true believers.

Of this gain well spoke the Apostle, 1. Tim. 6. 6. saying, Godliness with
contentment is great gain: and chap. 4. 8. Godliness is profitable for all
things, having promise of the life that now i^, and of that which is to come.
And to the same purpose is that of the Prophet, Psalm. 19. 11
In keeping of the^, that is, Gods commandments, there is great reward. None
of any grace will deny these; but not remembering or not believing them, and
so not regarding them, and being drawn away by other more desired gain,
despise this the greatest gain, and neglect the means which bring the same.
The true practice then of this rule is, that when we feel a backwardnes to
any duty which we know God requires, then to stir up our hearts by laying
before us, how we shall honor God and our profession, draw on, and win others
to the like obedience, and stop the mouths of gainsayers, procure to our
selves much peace, comfort, and credit amongst Gods servants; yea draw down
all needful blessings, and keep away many sore che^ke of a guilty conscience,
and many reproaches in the world, and heavy chastiseme^ts which God lays upon
his own children for their bold neglect of duties which he requires. If
these were as they should be, well remembered and regarded, it would at least
make us willing to do our utmost, to please God; which yet is not enough to
make us able to do what we would, for that which Paul speaks of himself,
Romans 7. 19.
we find much more in our selves, That the good we would do, we do not; such
is our decay by Adams fall, that as we have no knowledge of Gods will, for the
well guiding of our lives, till he reveal it, and have no will thereto till
God make us unwilling; so more, when we have both these, yet we find no
ability to perform that which is good.

There is need therefore of a third rule to direct us, 3. rule to get ability.
how to get this ability to do that good which we know and desire; and seeing
all our sufficiency to do any good, 2. Cor. 3. 5.
thought, word, or work, is of God: and (as before upon an other occasion was
showed) Without Christ we can do nothing; Ioh. 15. 5.
and I am able to do all things through Christ which strengthens me, as the
Apostle says, Phil. 4. 13. By these and the like, is evident, that all our
strength to perform any duty in such sort as may be pleasing to God, lies in
Christ, and must be from him communicated to us, that we by it may be able to
do the will of God. Now we have already heard that the only way to apply
Christ to us, and so to draw grace and virtue from him* to do any good work,
is faith; whereby as we are united to him, so we receive from him all needful
grace to enable us to such measure of obedience, as God will accept at our
hands. And therefore whenever we feel a true desire to do the will of God in
any thing, but find no ability thereto, as to forgive our enemies, to be
more patient under the cross, to humble our selves before God in fasting, to
pray more fervently, and with fruit, and more consci^nablie to hear Gods
word, etc. Our practice must be (as before, for mortication, so now for new
obedience) to fly to Christ, and to lay hold on him by a true faith, that
through him we shall be able to do all things, and from him receive all
grace necessary for the leading of a godly life; which is a special part of
this great benefit we have by faith, that being of our selves so weak unto
every good work, by faith in Christ, we may be strengthened in grace, Heb.
12. 28
Whereby we may so serve God, that we may please him with reverence and g^dly
fear. In which respect also, I commend it to our daily practice, that thus
living by faith, our lives may bring more glory to God, good example and
profit to our brethren, with sweet comfort to our own souls both in life and
death.

For the better practice whereof, 4. Rule to set upon duties.
the fourth rule is also to be observed, namely With this knowledge, desire,
and faith, to set upon the duties we most fail in, and to put to all our
strength to do the will of God in all things, and that in such manner as may
be most acceptable through Christ. To this end be all those exhortations unto
holy life in the Scriptures, both in the writings of the Apostles and Prophets;
Mat. 5. 44.
as to love our enemies, to bless those that curse us, and the like many. All
which, though justly by God required of all men, yet indeed cannot be performed
without faith, which is the cause why they be so seldom, and that very
slightly obeyed: For as some will set upon holy duties by their own strength,
and not drawing by faith virtue from Christ, do labor in vain; so on the other
side, many idle professors dangerously deceive themselves, in saying they hope
in Christ for power and strength to lead a better life, and yet very idly
neglect those labors which God commands, whereby they might attain to more
grace and better obedience; so that all those rules will be found so
necessary, that not one of them can be spared, but he that looks for the
comfort of a good conscience, either in the ouercomming of his special sins,
or conscionable practice of his special duties, must constantly observe these
rules, by which I dare affirm (to say no more) his gain shall answer all his
pains.

And thus have I as briefly as I can, and plainly (upon the former occasion)
showed, how a true believer may attain unto this great grace to lead a godly
life in both the parts of it, in dying to all sin, and living to all
righteousness; Which as no other can possibly attain unto, so neither they
all who believe to be saved by Christ, do enjoy this benefit: for though they
be renewed in part, and in some measure do mortify the flesh, and make
conscience of some duties, both of holiness, and righteousness, without which
they could not prove themselves to have any saving faith; yet either not
knowing how to live by faith, so as thereby they might shine as lights in the
dark world; or not practicing this knowledge, they be not only dim lights,
but give out bad example, living many ways offensiuely, to the reproach of
their profession, grief of the godly, and small peace or comfort to their own
consciences. All which might be well avoided and the contrary blessings
enjoyed, if this living by faith were brought into daily use; By all which, and
the former benefits of living by faith laid together, I hope may be
sufficiently seen, that there is no life comparable to this life of Faith; yea
rather none to be desired besides this, which only has all the promises of
this life present, and that which is to come. And therefore to conclude this
former part of the Treatise, Conclusion of first part.
wherein I have as plainly as I can, set out first what true faith is, how it
is gotten, how any may know that they have true Faith. And secondly what it is
to live by Faith, how this is attained by a wise application of Gods promises;
and herewith the manifold and singular benefits arising from hence: I do in
the Lord, with all instance beseech all such who having any true faith in
Christ, and desire to adorn it with an holy life, and yet upon beter
examination of their ways, do find their profession to have been of little
good use to others, and of as small comfort to themselves, (to speak nothing
of their offensive life before mentioned:) I entreat all such, I say, but to
make trial of this advice I give, to learn to live by Faith, and to this end
to follow this direction here set down, till they shall be able better to
guide themselves. And so my hope and prayer shall be, that God will let them
see such fruit of their labor, as shall bring them more true comfort daily,
then in many days, and to some more then in any day of their life past; which
I humbly beseech the Lord to grant both to my self, and them, even for his
Christ's sake.

THE SECOND part of this Treatise, containing A direction how to apply Gods
promises to our particular occasions.
FOr the better understanding and practice of this duty, of particular
application of Gods promises to our several necessities, that so we may
thereby live by faith, (which is the chief thing by me intended in this
Treatise) we are advisedly to consider the nature and kinds of these promises
(which be the foundation of our faith,) that so we may more soundly apply
them to our several occasions and uses.

^y Gods promises I understand generally all those declarations of Gods will*
wherein he offers to us in his word any good thing to enjoy: Gods promises what.
As on the other side, by threats are meant those declarations of his will*
wherein he denounces any evil against us for sin. Both which be plentifully
set down in the holy Scriptures, to these ends, that by his promises he might
allure and draw us to believe and obey his will; and by his threatenings, he
might fear us from sin. Gods will revealed two ways, first absolutely.
In all which God does declare his will after a double manner, either
absolutely, or conditionally. Absosolutely what he will most certainly do,
any thing to the contrary notwithstanding. As for example, That there shall be
no more waters of a ^^ood to destroy all flesh* And in this same time I will
come, Genesis 9. 15.
and Sarah shall have a son, Romans 9. 9.
which the Apostle says is a word of promise: of this sort be a^^ Gods
promises concerning salvation made unto the elect, which cannot be made void
by any means whatsoever.

The other manner whereby God does reveal his will, is not absolute, but (as it
is commonly said to be) conditional, Conditionally.
which is, when God declares his will what he will do if we do our part, else
not: this conditional promise well understood may be borne; otherwise
misunderstood, it destroies the nature of the free and gracious promise of the
Gospel, and in this respect confounds the Law: and the Gospel, taking away a
chief difference between the Covenant of works (wherein God promised life
upon condition, of doing all that was written in the law, without which
condition performed on our parts, God did not covenant to give life:) and the
covenant of grace, wherein God freely promised, not only life, but to give
grace to receive this life, as Jer. 31. from verse. 31. to 35. read the place.
The like Ezekiel. 36. 24, etc. A new heart also will I give you, etc. In which and
the like many, is no condition required on our parts, but God himself makes
capable of this grace whom he pleases. How these are by us to be applied
afterward I will show. But now seeing very many, yea the most of the free
gracious promises of the Gospel, be propounded with some condition* either
expressed or necessarily understood, (...) wisely to consider of them; as first
in this, and the like many* the condition or duty required, is expressed, John
3. 15. Whosoever believes in Christ, shall not perish, but have everlasting
life:

Secondly, in others the duty required for the attaining the thing promised,
is necessarily understood, Mat. 18. 11.
The Son of Man is come to save that which is lost. John 1. 29.
Behold the L^^be of God which takes away the sins of the world. And the
like many. In all which Faith is necessarily understood, for the obtaining of
the benefit promised. But yet in all these, Faith is no condition, properly so
called, moving God to promise life, although in some sort it may be called a
condition, because the promise of life is made to persons qualified with Faith*
for first, faith it self is part of the thing promised, and no man can believe
except it be given him* and therefore an impossible condition to be performed
of our selves. And to say as it is, Faith does apply the fruit and benefit of
the promise to the believer, (who alone shall enjoy the thing promised,) and
does not restrain the offer of grace, which is general to all to whom the
Gospel comes; who as they have no faith before they hear the promise made to
them, so after hearing this promise made to them, if they believe not, they
shall be condemned for not believing, as John 3. 1^. Thus then I conceive all
conditional promises of the Gospel are to be taken, that God does freely
offer mercy in what kind soever, and for the enjoying thereof requires some
duty of obedience at our hands. Now we must first believe and so obey, and
then enjoy the thing promised, so that there (...) believing, but all (...)
promise; and our obedience only is an effect of our faith, and so a proof of
Faith, no cause to move us to believe. As for example, If you forgive you shall
be forgiven: Mat. 6. 14.
God freely offers pardon to us, and requires that we believing show mercy to
others, As we read in the parable, Math, 18. 32. I forgave thee all the debt,
because thou desiredst me, should not thou also have compassion on thy
fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? So then he that believes to find
mercy, is thereby moved to show mercy, and certainly he that shows no mercy
in deed received none.

Besides this, An other consideration.
there is an other consideration of Gods promises, which stands in the diverse
quality of the things promised, whereof some be wholly necessary for our
salvation, and offered without any restraint, Simply necessary.
and are so to be believed, as Faith and Repentance. Other things though good
in themselves; yet are not always good for us, but we may be saved without
them, and in some case, better want them then have them: as health, wealth,
peace, and all earthly blessings: yea, many common gifts of the Spirit, at
least the measure of them; as excellent wit, memory, knowledge of heavenly
things, courage, liberality, gentleness, etc. all of these be promised with
limitation, With limitation.
so far as they be good for us, and no further; and so far only are to be
desired and believed.

Another needful consideration of Gods promises, that we may better make our
use of them, is this, that God does proclaim in the Gospel his Son Christ
and all his benefits generally to all, General promises offered to all.
and every soul, to whom the Gospel comes: so that every one who hears the
Gospel, ought to believe; which if he do not, (which none can without
special grace) yet this is his sin, and shall be his condemnation for wilful
refusing mercy offered. And therefore every one that will not perish must
believe, that there is such mercy in God as he offers, and that God is able,
willing, and faithful to perform his promise: that so believing he may enjoy
the benefit, of which otherwise he depriueth himself. This therefore I do
before hand make known, that (seeing many worthy promises be thus generally
propounded and set out, that we might by believing be made partakers of
Christ) therefore none do shut out themselves, and so bring upon themselves
more just damnation: as John 3. 18. is plainly expressed, He that believes
not is condemned already. ver. 19. This is the condemnation that light is come
into the world, etc.

There be also many special promises made to special persons performing such
duties, as to Faith and trust in God, to confession of sin, to prayer, and so
to all obedience: for God requires no duty, but there is a Reward belonging
thereto, (though not always expressed) which reward though it may move the
heart to desire it, yet it cannot beget Faith; but the truth of the promiser
must draw us to believe, and our belief of having the reward which we desire,
will move to obedience: And therefore every one who hears such rewards
promised, must be thereby moved to believe. Secondly, to obey as was before
said. These well considered, will better guide the weaker sort, to apply and
make the right use of all the promises in the Scripture, which may any way
concern them.

Now then because these promises be exceeding many, we must needs bring them
to some order, and that as plain and short as may be, lest the weaker memories
be ouer-loaden, and so their understanding confounded, by many divisions, as is
too often seen. I cannot think of any more easy way, to teach the full use of
our faith in every part of our lives, then to lay open the most principal
matters, in which we are most subject to doubt and fear; that seeing our
diseases, we may more fitly apply the remedy.

Ouerlooking the whole course of life, Order.
I observe these six special occasions of doubting, wherein we have most need
to be relieved by Faith.

1. First and above all, 6. Choice heads.
we are most subject to doubt, whether we be in the state of grace, and so of
the number of those that shall be saved by Christ.

2. Secondly, how we shall be able to overcome our strong corruptions and
temptations.

3. Thirdly, how to get grace to pray, hear the word, and to perform all
duties to God and man in faith, so as God will accept them.

4. Fourthly, how to endure and profit by all afflictions and persecutions.

5. Fifthly, how to be provided for, of all things needful for this natural
life.

6. Sixthly, how we shall hold out to the end.

All which may be drawn to two heads, first for our spiritual life, secondly
for this bodily life: In both which, were we so strengthened in Faith, as to
rest upon God for all sufficient relief, I well see not what might be much
wanting to make us rejoice always in the Lord; and sure I am, no other state
in this life, herewith were to be compared* Let us therefore come to
particulars, and see how in all of these we may gather out of Gods word
strength of Faith, and so comfort to our souls, for the better finishing of
our warfare in this life, and more full assurance of our final victory and
glory hereafter, in and through our Lord Jesus.

And now to begin with that, First point wherein we live by Faith, is for
assurance of our salvation.
which as it is first in order, so is it in degree above all to be most sought
for (seeing upon it all the rest do depend,) and yet we are usually in nothing
more wanting, namely to be sure of our salvation by Christ; under which I do
contain especially our Justification, by which we be made Gods children. All
which, as we have already heard, is to be had alone in Christ, and to be made
ours, only by Faith, Titus 3. 5*
not by any works of righteousness which we have done. Whereof, although
there has been in the former part of this Treatise, so much said as might
suffice for this point, to show how this Faith is attained: yet seeing the Lord
has left us so many promises in the holy Scriptures, (specially in the new
Testament, wherein Christ who was before shadowed in Types, is more cleerelie
revealed, for which cause I do chiefly cite these.) And seeing this is my
maine scope, to teach the weak believer, how he may by these promises daily
nourish his faith, (specially in time of tentation) I hope it will be found no
lost labor to gather some store of these promises, and to show the right use
of them.

To come then to the practice of this first point, how we may daily come to
more certainty, that we be reconciled to God, and so his adopted children
and heirs of salvation: we are to remember, Double ^ertentie.
that there is a twofold certainty, or assurance of Gods favor, 1. Of faith.
one the certainty which comes by Faith alone, 2. Sense.
the only stay whereof is Gods word: The other is the certainty of sense, when
as we have some spiritual feeling of Gods favor, manifested to us by his
manifold graces bestowed on us, which be so many tokens and testimonies, of his
Fatherly love. A clear resemblance whereof, may be that which Ioab said to
David: 2 Samuel 14. 22.
To day thy servant knows that I have found grace in thy sight, my Lord O
King, in that the King has fulfilled the request of his servant. Wherein we
see Ioab was more assured of the Kings favor, by granting his request. Both
these assurances be expressly coupled in that one sentence of the Apostle John,
1 John 2. 3.
And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments.
Meaning that the conscionable endeavor to keep Gods Commandments, makes us to
know certainly, that we truly believe, and have the true certainty of Faith
for our salvation by Christ. For our strengthening in both of these assurances,
the Lord makes diverse promises.

In all of which we shall find usually these two things. Matter what.


First, what be the excellent benefits, and unsearchable riches which be
brought to us in Christ: which be set forth unto us sometimes generally, all
in a lump, that he will save us; and sometimes more particularly, that he
will forgive and cleanse us: all to this end, to draw up our earthly minds and
affections, so to hunger and thirst after them, as never to be at rest till we
do in some measure enjoy them.

Secondly, Persons to whom.
the persons to whom these be in the Gospel proclaimed, that so every one may
apply them to himself by Faith, and be assured they be his. Both which shall
now better app^are in the particular promises.

And first concerning Christ and the benefits brought by him, Christ promised.
we may well begin with that, which was the first promise made to man, and the
foundation of all others, where the Lord denouncing his vengeance against the
Serpent (the devils instrument in seducing mankind) said, Genesis 3. 15.
And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and
her seed: It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. In which,
besides sundry other things there intended, this is chief for our purpose;
that Christ the promised seed of the woman should fully conquer Satan, and
his whole kingdom, howsoever Satan would continually molest the seed of the
woman, till he were quite vanquished.

The selfsame matter is more plainly taught, Heb. 2. 14. that Christ took
our nature, That through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is, the Devil. And deliver them, who for fear of death, were all
their life subject to bondage. Which (if God had made no other promise) might
be a sufficient word, to persuade every soul that hears it, not only to
desire, and seek this deliverance by Christ, but to believe that he shall
enjoy it, seeing God has so faithfully said it. For the further confirmation
of the faith of gods people in this point, in all ages the Lord renewed this
promise of sending Christ the promised seed. As immediately after the flood,
Noah by Prophecy blessing his two sons said, God shall enlarge Iaphet and
he shall dwell in the tents of She^^. Genesis 9. 27.
Which intends that we Gentiles, Gal. 3. 16.
should be called to be one body with the Jews in Christ. The same was
afterward often renewed to Abraham, 22. 18.
In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, 26. 4. 28. 14
Act. 3. 25. The like to Isaacke, and to Jacob also; In all which Christ was
promised, the true seed, in whom alone all families be blessed. And so forward
in all succeeding ages, Moses and all the Prophets in their times, foretold of
Christ, as we read, Act. 3. 24. 10. 43. So that it is needelesse to write all
the scriptures tending to this point.

All this serves thus to strengthen the faith of all that will give credit to
God, Use.
that seeing the Lord nourished the faith of his Church from Adam to Christ,
with those promises of salvation by Christ, the promised seed; we therefore may
boldly rest hereupon, and much the rather, seeing we under the Gospel, have all
things fulfilled, which they under the former Testament saw a far off, Heb.
11. 13
and were persuaded of them, and embraced them. To pass over then all the
promises of the old Testament concerning Christ and his benefits, and to come
to the new, Multitude of promises concerning Christ
wherein all things which were foretold, are fully accomplished, and we may
with open face behold as in a glass, 2. Cor. 3. 17
the glory of the Lord. Here be so many promises, wherein Christ and his
benefits be set forth unto us, that the bare rehearsing of them, without any
further opening of them, would make a sufficient book, and longer I fear, then
any of our idle professors would once read over. I intend therefore to range
these into some order, and to make choice of some principal of every sort, and
by them to show how we may make use of the rest, that are of the same kind.

Now all these promises concerning this first point, for the strengthening of
our faith in the assurance of our salvation by Christ, be propounded either
generally or more specially, as was before said. General, Matter.


Generally, Persons.
in respect of the matter promised, as that Christ shall save us and the like;
as also of the persons, to whom these promises be performed: that is, generally
to all mankind. Both which be for the most part joined together, what is
promised, and to whom; therefore we will handle them together for breuity sake,
least otherwise we should be feign to allege the same scriptures again, to
sundry purposes; which would be tedious, which I desire to avoid. To begin
then with the very names, which throughout the new Testament be given to our
redeemer Jesus Christ: they are both of great force to confirm our faith. When
the angel Gabriel was sent from God to the Virgin Mary, with that heavenly
salutation, he told her, That she should conceive in her womb, and bring
forth a Son, and she shall call his name Jesus: Jesus.
Whereof the Evangelist Mat. gives this reason, Luke 1. 26. 31
for he shall save his people from their sin; Mat. 1. 21.
and to like effect often, All flesh shall see the salvation of God. Luke 3. 6. 1
When Christ came to Zacheus, he said, This day is salvation come to this
house, 19. 9, 10.
for as much as he also is the son of Abraham; for the Son of man is come
to seek, and to save that which is lost. Christ himself said, Ioh. 3. 17.
God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world through him should be saved. And again, I came not to judge the world,
12. 47.
but to save the world, And to heap up no more of this sort, to this end is
Christ to often called our Savior.

In all which we ought to reason thus, Use.
Seeing the eternal Son of God did take man's nature, and so was Immanuel God
with us, Mat. 1. 23.
as the Evangelist Matthew, Esa. 7. 14.
shows out of the Prophet, and that to this end, to save us being lost, and
not to condemn the world, but to save the world: therefore unless we will
think all this is but a fable, we are undoubtedly to believe, that there is in
this Jesus, and in him alone salvation for us sinners: Act. 4. 12.
For there is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved. And further, if we will not despise this wonderful mercy of God in
sending his Son, and of Christ himself, in coming into the world, not to
condemn us, but to save us being lost: then must we with a true faith accept
this mercy. The same may be said of the name Christ, Christ.
(unto both which all his other names may be referred) which signifies
Anointed, whereto answers the word Messiah in Hebrew. By both which (being
referred to Christ) is meant, that the Son of God taking our nature, was in the
same filled with the Holy Ghost, (as is often said of him) and that far above
all other holy men, as was prophesied of him, Psalm. 45. 7. Thou love
righteousness, and hate wickedness; therefore God thy God has anointed thee
with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Of which the Evangelist John
more plainly says, Ioh. 3. 34.
For God gives not the spirit by measure unto him; which was manifestly showed
at Christ's baptizing, where the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a
dove upon him, Luke 3. 22.
and a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I
am well pleased. Which was to this end, that as under the Law, the Prophets,
Priests, and Kings were consecrated to their offices by the anointing with the
holy oil: so Christ was consecrated to the offices of his mediation, 1. to be
our Prophet, to reveal the whole will of God for our salvation. 2. to be our
high Priest, both to offer up himself to God his Father, a full and sufficient
sacrifice for the redemption of us sinners, and to make intercession for us. 3.
to be our King to rule and govern his people, and to subdue all his enemies.
All which be notably set out in that worthy epistle to the Hebrews, which
being too long to recite, I desire the Christian reader to read with
observation that epistle to this end.

From whence another effectual motive to believe, Use.
may be thus taken: Seeing God the Father has thus anointed his Son in our
nature, and therefore called him Christ, and filled him with the Holy Ghost
without measure, that he might perform all things needful for our salvation;
all which he has fully accomplished: we may therefore boldly come to him, and
so steadfastly rest upon him for our salvation. And on the other side, they who
hearing these, be not drawn hereby to believe in Christ for their salvation,
do either deny the truth of these, (which is to make God a liar) or despise
their own salvation, so prepared and offered to them; which shall bring upon
them most just condemnation. And these briefly for those two names Jesus
Christ, properly belonging to our Savior, which do summarily contain all,
and so to a wise regarder hereof might suffice to persuade him, to rest upon
Christ for salvation.

But seeing the Lord (who knows how hardly we be brought to this assurance
by faith of our salvation by Christ) has in that small volume of the new
Testament, spoken so much of Christ and the benefits which he has brought
unto us, to this end that we might be more stirred up to seek to him, and to
embrace him for our Savior: I hope it shall be worth our labor further to
consider what the Lord says. And before I come to particulars, let us hear,
and wonder at these heaps of heavenly treasures, General benefits by Christ.
which be brought to sinners in Christ.

Wherein this is the first, Saves us.
that Christ is sent to save sinners, Luke 2. 32.
whereof enough was spoken before in the name Jesus, therefore now no more
thereof.

The next is, that Christ is said to be a light to the Gentiles, Light to Gent.
which was long before prophesied often times by the Prophet Esaias, Esa. 9. 2.
42. 6. 49. 6. 60. 3.
saying: The people that walk in darkness, Mat. 4. 16.
have seen a great light, they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death,
upon them is the light shined: which the Evangelist Matthew applies to Christ,
bringing the light of the Gospel, to a blind and ignorant people: And the
Apostle Paul alleges for his warrant in preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles.

To like effect, Christ is often said to be the light of the world, Act. 13. 48.
as he professes of himself, Ioh. 8. 12. 9. 5.
I am the light of the world. And of this I understand that which is spoken by
the Evangelist John, 1. 9. That Christ was that true light which lights every
man that comes into the world, (that is:) who casts out the light of the
Gospel to all nations, as the sun in the firmament shines to all the world,
though many blind never see the light thereof. Under this comparison of light,
all the benefits which Christ brings us be contained, light of knowledge,
light of grace, and holy life, and light of eternal life and glory. All which
be contained either generally or specially in the former alleged scriptures,
and in sundry others. To this head also belongs such scriptures as show Christ
to be our life, Ioh. 6. 33. 51. 10. 10. 14. 6. 2. Tim. 1. 10.

Of all which this is the use we Use.
are to make, that seeing God has set up his Son Jesus Christ in the
ministry of the Gospel, to all nations, where ever it comes, to lighten, and
to give life to every man who hears it, if he refuse it not, and shut not his
eyes against it, as the Pharisees did: Therefore every one who hears this,
Ioh. 9. 41.
not only may, but is bound to embrace this light, Ioh. 12. 36.
by a true faith, that so they may be the children of the light, and that upon
pain of condemnation, even as our Savior himself denounces against all
unbelievers, saying: This is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, Ioh. 3. 19.
and men love darkness rather then light.

Another worthy ground for our faith is this, that God the Father, when at the
baptizing of Christ, he sent down his Holy Spirit in the likeness of a dove,
3. God is well pleased in Christ.
lighting upon him, sent a voice from heaven, saying: This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased; Wherein is meant not only that God did love and
like well his Son, (with whom for himself he could never be displeased,
there being no cause why) but this rather, that whereas God was extremely
offended with all mankind, now he was fully appeased by Christ, and for his
sake ready to receive into favor, all that by Faith should receive him; and so
to accept him for us, and us in him: which is the same with that, where it is
said, God has made us accepted in his beloved. Ephesians. 1. 6. 5. 2.
And again, That Christ has given himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor: meaning that whereas whole
mankind since the fall, is become odious to God for sin, so that neither their
persons, nor their works could be acceptable to God; now by this all
sufficient sacrifice of Christ, all that lay hold on Christ by faith, and so
apply his sacrifice to themselves, they shall be accepted of God, and their
obedience pleasing to God, in his perfect obedience.

Which alone is a sufficient means by the operation of the Holy Ghost, to
draw any that hear and conceive this, to cast themselves wholly upon Christ,
and to seek for Gods favor, and all the fruits thereof only in this
sacrifice of Christ.

Besides these, there be many other Scriptures, which in general set out
Christ, and his benefits to us; but if they be well marked, it will appear,
they be contained under these. As for example, where Christ compares himself
to a Vine* Ioh. 15. 1.
to teach, that as the branch has his whole life from the stock, so we have
all our life from him: so does he call himself the bread of life, and is said
to be the head of the body, Ioh. 6. 35.
That he is full of grace and truth. Ioh. 1. 14.
Again, He that spared not his own Son, Romans 8. 32.
but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also, Esa. 55. 3.
freely give us all things? Again, I will give you the sure mercies of David:
Act. 13. 34.
that is, all those good things which were promised in Christ, who was the
seed of David.

In all these and many more, Use.
we see the intent of the Holy Ghost was, to give us in one view, a sight of
all that good, which Christ has brought us, that hereby every one, who hears
hereof, may both wonder at Gods unspeakable mercy, in providing so many, and
so great blessings in Christ for us his enemies: and hereby also be drawn to
labor by all means to be made partakers of them.

And this shall suffice to have set out some of the general promises, and the
use of them, how we are to strengthen our faith by them.

Only this I will add concerning these, When special want, make use of
general.
that if at any time in our doubts and fears for any particular distress, we
cannot readily remember some particular promise, whereby we might be
comforted; then we may safely run to one of these general promises, (which
do contain all particulars) and so apply it to our present need. As for
example, if any poor soul should fall into great doubtings of Gods favor, by
reason of some great affliction that lay heavy upon him, or some corruption
which he could not master; and in this perplexity could not think of any
special promise, whereout he might gather some comfort: then may he boldly
lay hold upon any one of these general promises, and rest thereupon for
comfort, in this manner: O Lord thou have said in thy holy word (which is the
word of truth) that the Son of man is come to save that which is lost; Luke
19. 10.
Lord I am lost, and see nothing in my self to help me: therefore I do
wholly rest upon Christ and look for help only by him. The same may be said
of all the general promises, the least of which contain matter enough to
support us in all our fears, if we could fitly apply them.

Wherein I do again forewarne every one who desires to believe in God, Look
for nothing in thy self, to cause thee to believe.
and so to live by his faith, above all to deny himself, and not to look for
any thing in himself, why he should believe (which I have observed to be a
maine hinderance from true believing:) but to cast all our thoughts upon God:
First, how merciful he is to provide such help, for poor sinners in Christ,
and freely to offer it unto them in his word: and secondly, how faithful he
is to perform all that he has said, that by this means the poor sinner may
be moved to believe in God, that he will surely succor, and comfort him in
due season and measure.

Thus would I now pass from these general promises, For the persons, to whom,
first to all.
and come to the special, but that I fear I have not sufficiently cleared one
point concerning these generals: namely, for the persons, to whom God preaches
and proclaims these mercies, that they may believe (I speak not here, who
shall enjoy these, who be only believers and their seed, but to whom these be
offered.) From whence be raised the greatest doubts in many for their
salvation, that they know not themselves to be of that number, to whom God
does truly offer these mercies: and no marvel. For as it is not possible, for
a rebel against his Sovereign, to believe he shall be pardoned, unless he be
sure that he is contained under the Princes pardon: so no sinner can believe
to have pardon, till he know that he is in the number of those, to whom the
pardon is proclaimed by God in the Gospel, for the knowledge whereof either
there must be some special mark of difference whereby it may be known, to whom
the pardon is proclaimed, and to whom not, or else it must be general to all.
But there is no such special certain difference between sinners before faith,
whereby one may know the pardon is granted to him, and such as he is, and not to
any other: for then might some know themselves to be under Gods special
favor, that is, elected before he believe, which is impossible by any ordinary
means: therefore of necessity the only way whereby any may know himself to
be contained under the pardon, is this, that he hears that God in his Gospel
does proclaim forgiveness of sin in Christ, without exception, to all
sinners, that whosoever hears and believes shall be saved; the rest shall
be condemned for not believing, and not accepting this mercy offered to them.
Having in the former part of this Treatise sufficiently proved by many
Scriptures, this point, that Christ and all his benefits be freely offered
without exception to all mankind, as that one place, Mark 16. 15. expressly
shows: I only now advise every one, who is kept from believing by this, that
he knows not whether he be contained under the pardon or no, not to look to
Gods secret will, but to attend to Gods revealed will in his word, wherein it
is expressly said, That God would have no man to perish, 2. Pet. 3 9.
but would have all men to come to repentance, Ezekiel. 18. 23. 32.
and so often, That he desires not tht death of a sinner, that hereby he may be
moved to seek, and hope for that mercy, which God is so willing to bestow
upon upon him, if the fault be not in his own self, as it was in the
vnbeleeulng Jews in Jerusalem, Mat. 23. 37
of whom our Savior complained, saying: How often would I have gathered thy
children, as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings? and ye would
not. A further manifestation of this willingness in God to save sinners, Mat.
22. 9, 10*
may be seen in his gracious inuitation of the unworthiest to come to the
wedding of his Son; yea more by his beseeching sinners to be reconciled to him:
2 Cor. 5. 20
and by the many and weighty arguments he uses to persuade men to believe, by
the great rewards, earthly, and spiritual, temporal, and eternal, which all
believers shall enjoy; and by the fearful woes which shall fall on all
unbelievers, both in this life, and that to come, Ioh. 7. 38. 3. 18.
as plentifully is to be seen throughout the Scriptures.

Out of all this, me thinks, a poor distressed sinner, might thus stir up
himself to believe. If this be certain, Note.
that God would not have me perish, but is very willing to save me, and
therefore has not only provided all sufficient means to bring me thereto,
and made such a general pardon, as may assure me I am contained under it: yea
seeing I now know, that I am invited and called to come to Christ, and
entreated to be friends with God, then may I be bold to come and assure my
self, I shall be welcome. Yea further, if I will not forgo all these rich
rewards tendered unto me, and pull upon my self most justly all those woes
which God has threatened against all despisers of his mercies, then must I
gladly accept Gods mercy offered to me; and if I find my unbelieving heart to
draw back, then must I ply the Lord with fervent and constant prayers, that he
would draw me by his Spirit to come to Christ, and so to rest upon him for my
salvation. And thus much for the general promises, both in regard of the
matters promised, and of the persons to whom they be proclaimed, that every
one who hears them, may claim his part in them. Special benefits.


Now to come to those special benefits which we receive in Christ, which
belong to this first point, how our faith is to be strengthened in the
assurance of our salvation by Christ: I intend to refer all that I have to
say herein, to these two, 1. our Justification, and 2. the fruits immediately
growing from thence, which I gather out of the Apostle Romans 5. 1. to be these
three, 1. Reconciliation, 2. Adoption, 3. Hope of Glory.

Concerning Justification, Justification.
it is evident by the Scripture, that all our salvation depends upon it, that
whosoever shall be saved, must be justified: and therefore of necessity, he
that is not justified, must needs be condemned; it behooves then every one
who looks for salvation, well to conceive, what it is to be justified in Gods
sight; and then to make sure work, that he may attain it: yea and know it
also, that he is justified: without which, is no comfort or hope of
happiness. To be justified before God, is to be made righteous: that is, not
only without all sin, but having all that righteousness which God in his holy
law requires, as Romans 2. 13. So was Adam and Eve by creation: Eccl. 7. 31.
God made man righteous. Heb. 7. 26.
So was Christ, Such an high Priest it became us to have, who is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens.

Besides these, not one of the whole stock of mankind, was thus righteous,
but every soul, young and old, was, is, and ever shall be in this world, void
of this righteousness, and full of all unrighteousness: As Romans 3. 20.
Therefore by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in his sight. It
follows then, that all that shall be saved, must be justified another way,
and that is this, by having that perfect righteousness which was in Christ
alone, to be accounted theirs, as if it had been in themselves.

Not intending to enter into any further discourse hereof, which may be seen
in sundry Treatises, written of this argument; all our care must be, to get
this grace in Christ, whereby we shall assuredly be saved. The Scripture is
clear that this is obtained by faith, and no way else, as besides sundry other
scriptures, the Apostle both soundly and plentifully proves, Romans 3. and Gal.
3. read the places, in which we shall see not only the truth of the
doctrine, but many motives to believe, and embrace this grace wrought by Christ
for us, and by him freely offered unto us, that we might receive it to our
comfort.

To this purpose is that which is said, Romans 3. verse. 21. 22. But now is the
righteousness of God, made manifest without the Law, having witness of the
Law and the Prophets, to wit, the righteousness of God, by the faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe. And so forward to the end of the
chapter; wherein for our purpose, this is chiefly to be considered, That as
none are partakers of this benefit of Justification in Christ, but believers:
so seeing none can believe to enjoy this, but such as know that God freely and
faithfully offers it to them, therefore it is here, and elsewhere often revealed,
that as all have sinned and are deprived of the glory of God, so are they
justified feeely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
Which (as I said) cannot be understood, that all do receive this mercy of
Justification, purchased by Christ; but that as Christ has wrought it, so God
does indifferently offer it in the Gospel to all: which is more manifested by
the words following, verse 25. Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation,
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness
of sins that are passed, etc.

The use to be made of these, Use.
and the like, for the strengthening of our Faith, in the assurance of our
salvation by Christ, is this; that every one who would believe, do set before
him, on the one side his own sinfulness and cursednesse, to be such, that he
is no way able to make any satisfaction whereby he might be delivered: on the
other side, that Christ has made a full satisfaction unto his Father for him a
miserable sinner, and freely offers it to him; which if he believe, it shall
be accepted for him, and he thereby saved: that this may draw him, to renounce
all hope in himself, and so to rely upon Christ for his Justification and
salvation.

This shall be more manifest in the parts of Justification, Parts of
justification.
which are forgiveness of sins, Forgiveness of sin.
and imputation of righteousness: and more especially in the former,
forgiveness of sin, which so unseparably bringing in the latter imputation
of righteousness, the Scripture does most labor to assure us of. And for this
cause all blessedness is worthily placed herein, both by the Prophet David and
the Apostle Paul, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, Psalm.
32. 1, 2.
and whose sins are covered. Romans 4. 7, 8*
Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputes not sin. That it may drive
every man out of himself for happiness, seeing God justifies the ungodly,
verse 5: and to draw all that shall be saved, to look for salvation, only in
Gods free mercy, forgiueing their iniquity, and covering their sin, and not
imputing to them their sin. Under which speeches is contained the way and
means, how the righteous God (who will not let one sin and breach of his Law
to escape unpunished, without deserved condemnation) does yet set free poor
sinners, from their sin and punishment: which is only by the satisfaction,
which Christ has made for them, in bearing their punishment; wherewith God
being satisfied, does fully and freely forgive all those who by Faith accept
this mercy offered unto them.

To this end throughout the Scripture, is this great benefit of forgiveness of
sin by Christ, so plentifully proclaimed unto us miserable sinners; I will cite
a few for many. When John the Baptist was sent to prepare way for Christ, first
seeing Christ coming unto him, Ioh. 1. 29.
he cried out, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the
world. Our Savior himself after his resurrection, appearing to two of his
Disciples going to Emaus, Luk 24. 45.
having opened their understanding that they might understand the Scriptures,
46.
said unto them, Thus it is written, 47.
and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead the
third day; and that Repentance and Remission of sins, should be preached in
his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. Likewise the Apostle Paul
preaching at Antioch to the Jews in their Synagogues said unto them, Be it
known unto you therefore men and brethren, that through this man (meaning
Christ) is preached vuto you forgiveness of sins: Act. 3. 38, 39.
And from all things from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses,
Romans 4. 25.
by him every one that believes is Justified. Gal. 1. 4.
And so all the rest of the Scriptures, Tit. 2. 14.
in which it is said, Heb. 1. 3.
that Christ was Delivered to death for our sins: 1. Pet. 2. 24.
And gave himself to redeem us from all iniquity. And has by himself
purged our sin. Reu. 1. 5.
That he bare our sins on the tree. That he loved us, and washed us from our
sins. And to shut up all with that worthy saying of Saint John, If any man
sin, 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2.
we have an Advocate with the Father, Christ the righteous, And he is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only; but for the sins of the
whole world. In all of which, what can any man think to be Gods meaning, Use.
but to provide a means to save us sinners? And therefore whosoever feels his
sin, and fears Gods wrath, may boldly come to Christ, and steadfastly believe
that God for Christ's sake will forgive him, and remember his sins no more.
And so much the more, may and ought every one, to whom this good news of
pardon is brought by the preaching of the Gospel, lay claim to this pardon,
and so shall he please God and save his own soul; otherwise as his sin shall
be exceeding great, so shall his damnation be more grievous.

I do therefore again exhort every poor soul who feign would believe, not
to make his sin greater then Gods mercy: but seeing Christ has borne the
punishment of his sin, and fully appeased Gods wrath for him, and does
expressly call him, and proclaim this pardon unto him; therefore that he
commit himself to Christ, and so give glory to God in believing, that through
Christ his debt is discharged, and he freed from condemnation; so that neither
God will, nor the devil, nor his own conscience, shall be able to lay any
thing to his charge: then which what can be more comfortable to a distressed
sinner, I know not.

This might content us, if we were not so full of unbelief: but the Lord both
knowing, and pitying our distrustful hearts, has said much more to persuade
us of our salvation in and by our Lord Christ Jesus. And whereas we have
learned that to the justifying of a sinner, there is required not only that
his sin and punishment be quite taken away, but that he have perfect
righteousness, 2. part of Justification.
without which there can be no life: for although these two be never parted
(no more then soul and body in a living man) yet they be not both one,
Imputation of righteousness.
but necessarily distinguished, and both required in him that is justified in
Gods sight. The Lord therefore has graciously provided a means, whereby we
(who since the fall of our first parents, have utterly lost our original
righteousness, and be no way able, to attain such righteousness as God in
justice requires at our hands) may recover our loss and be made perfectly
righteous, such as God will allow, and for which he will in his justice grant
eternal life. As Paul in his glorious triumph before his departure, did boldly
profess: 2 Timothy 4. 6.
For I am now ready to be offered, 7.
and the time of my departure is at hand; 8.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith;
Henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousn^sse, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but to all that
love his appearing. Which one Scripture might suffice to persuade us, to look
for this righteousness and eternal life, which by due debt (through Gods
mercy and the merit of Christ) is made ours. But because this is not so easily
seen, much less believed, that such as we shall ever attain to this high
dignity, the Lord has revealed his good will toward us sinners in this
behalf, that he has prepared such a perfect righteousness for us, and made a
faithful and free grant thereof unto us, that so we may make it our own by
Faith. This is most manifest, in that heavenly comparison, between the first
Adam, and the second Adam Christ Jesus, set forth at large and in many degrees,
Romans 5. 12, to the end. The sum of all is this, that the benefit we have in
Christ, does every way exceed all the hurt we had in Adam, as the Apostle
himself says, verse 20. Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound, v.
21. That as sin had reigned unto death, so might grace also reign by
righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Where we see
that as sin through Gods justice brought death: so by Gods mercy, the
righteousness of Christ brought to us eternal life. As is expressly said verse
19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedience
of one shall many be made righteous. Wherein it is clear, that as Christ by his
obedience was perfectly righteous, so by it many (that is, all) that by Faith
receive Christ, are made righteous in Gods sight. To the same purpose it is
said that we are made the righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5. 21
And that of the Prophet Esa. Esa. 53. 11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear
their iniquities. And for this cause is Christ called The Lord our
righteousness: Ier. 23. 6. 33. 16.
and that he is the end of the Law, Romans 10. 4.
for righteousness to every one that believes. And for this cause are the
Sacraments said to be seals of the righteousness of Faith, 4. 11.
and to the same intent much: wherein we see how plainly and plentifully the
Lord sets out this perfect righteousness, and life thereby in Christ, to be
made ours. Which if any shall but neglect, and pass by, and not accept, how
shall he escape most just condemnation? As we read Heb. 2. 3. speaking of
the same matter.

How then can this but persuade every one, Use.
who desires salvation, with both hands (as we say) to receive this great gift
of Christ's righteousness to be his: whereupon depends so certainly his
eternal happiness. And how justly shall thou perish, who hear of this
great goodness of God, prepared in Christ, and offered in the Gospel to thee,
and yet wilt not receive it? but either securely neglect it, or at least by thy
unbelief, deprive thy self of so incomparable a benefit. I can say no more
to persuade thee: but I beseech the Lord to persuade thee, and do thou give
the Lord no rest, till by his Spirit he draw thee, to embrace this benefit, to
thy everlasting comfort.

Now to come to the fruits of Justification, Fruits of Justification.
which be so many effects of Gods grace accompanying and following our
Justification, 1. Reconciliation, 2. Adoption, and 3. Hope of Glory: I am not
ignorant that these be set in another order diversely, by diverse Divines, which
is not much material; for all consent, that they be special benefits, which
Christ has purchased for us by his death and obedience, and serve much for the
assurance of our salvation. Whereas on the contrary the ignorance or doubting
of them, must needs breed much discomfort, especially in time of temptation,
and at the hour of death. Yet seeing these do so depend upon the former of
our Justification, that he who is justified cannot want these; and without a
man be justified, he can never enjoy any of them, either to be at peace with
God, much less to come into so high favor, as to be adopted and made Gods
child and heir of all his blessings; and lest of all, attain such hope of
everlasting glory with God in his kingdom, as might make him here in this
vale of misery, not only to cheer up his heart in the expectation thereof,
but outwardly to rejoice, and holilie to boast thereof: seeing, I say, the
justified man, and none else has these most certainly, the best way to get
assurance of these, is to make sure our Justification, in such sort as has
been already showed.

But seeing the Scriptures do often make mention of these, that God has
prepared and offered these to us in Christ: it shall be to our comfort to take
knowledge of them, and so labor for the right use of them. Remembering that I
have in the former part of this Treatise, spoken of these effects of our faith,
out of Romans 5. 1, etc. to set out the great and precious fruits which are
gotten by Faith, thereby to provoke all, more to labor for Faith: I may now be
the more brief, especially seeing the Scripture including them in the former,
is not so plentiful as in the former. For the first of these, Reconciliation.
Reconciliation, I understand, that whereas before we were in Christ; we were
enemies to God by reason of sin. Now by Christ we are reconciled and made
friends, as Romans 5. 10. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled by the
death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life. So
likewise notably is this set forth, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. All things are of
God, who has reconciled the world unto himself by Jesus Christ, and has
given us the ministry of Reconciliation. For God was in Christ, and
reconciled the world unto himself, not imputing their sins unto them; and
has committed to us the word of Reconciliation. Now then are we ambassadors
of Christ: As though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ
stead, that ye be reconciled to God. In both which Scriptures these two
things I observe for our purpose, first, that we being rank enemies to God,
Christ by his full satisfaction (whereof his death was a principal part) has
reconciled God his Father unto mankind; yet not so, that any have the benefit
thereof, but they who gladly do accept it. The second is, that seeing none
could so much as know this, much less have warrant to believe, to have any
part in it: Therefore the Apostle as a faithful disposer of the secrets of
God, plainly affirms, and for more certainty repeats, that this
reconciliation was wrought for the world, that is, all mankind, (though again
I say, none but believers enjoy it.) And the more to draw us to believe, that
God has granted out a commission to the Ministers of the Gospel, to preach
and publish this good news of reconciliation wrought by Christ between God
and man: and that they should by all means labor to persuade men; yea (which
is wonderful) he says that God by his Ambassadors, does entreat them to be
reconciled to God, that is, to accept this unheard of mercy offered to them.

These things when I consider, I cannot but admire Gods unspeakable mercy, in
so seeking to save us his enemies, and our brutish ingratitude in so light
esteeming thereof: yea our sensles neglect of our chiefest good, and our deadly
unbelief; by which we deprive out selves of so invaluable treasure, freely
offered unto us. What may be said more to move our stony hearts either to
desire, or to accept so great grace I well see not: but this I see, and am sure
of, that it shall be more tolerable for Turks and Pagans in the day of
judgment, then for thee whosoever thou art, who living in the Church, do
either despise or so distrust this bounty of the Lord, that thou do not
receive it.

As for such who prefer any worldly thing before this unmatchable mercy, and
so if not grossly reject it, yet securely neglect it, and as swine trample
such precious pearls under their feet: Reu. 22. 11
I say no more, but he that is filthy let him be filthy still. But for such
poor souls, as do highly prise this exceeding favor, to be reconciled unto
God, and only be kept from it by distrustful fears, that it is not for them
(they being so unworthy.) I beseech them in the Lord, deeply to weigh what
has been said to draw them to believe, and for an example, to set before them
Gods dealing with the Ephesians, of whom the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2. 3.
That when they were dead in trespasses and sins, (which is as bad as may
be, yet he heaps more of their woeful condition, verse 2. 11. 12.) yet these
were quickened in Christ: so likewise the Colossians, Col. 1. 21.
being before their conversion strangers, and enemies, because their minds
were set on evil works, were reconciled to God, etc. And to say the truth, so
is it with all that be converted, as Paul testifies of himself, and all
other believers before their effectual calling, that they had their
conversation in times past in the lusts of their flesh, in fulfilling the will
of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath as
well as others. All which if a poor sinner shall consider, that others in as
bad a state as he, and many far worse, were received to mercy: and that God
does in mercy as freely offer it to him as them, and is as faithful as ever to
perform what he says: this doubtless will in time move him to expect like
mercy at Gods hands, if he shall with patience wait the Lords leisure, and
never give over earnest supplication to God, to draw him, and daily meditation
on Gods mercy. Thus will I leave this point (having said more then I purposed:)
Peace.
only I desire to be considered, that under this reconciliation, I contain
that peace which Christ makes between God and us, whereof Romans 5. 1. Ephesians. 2.
17. and elsewhere often; that it may be referred to this head.

Now we come to the second fruit of our Justification, which is Adoption,
Adoption.
whereby I understand that high favor of God, whereby he makes those who be
justified by Christ, and so reconciled, his own children and heirs of all his
blessings. If David thought it no small preferment to be son in Law to King
Saul: 1 Samuel 18. 23.
what may be thought of this? And therefore the Apostle John calls all to an
admiration of that unspeakable love of God in calling us to be the sons of
God. 1 Ioh. 3. 1.


Wherein we have to consider, not only the excellency of this estate, but the
certainetie of it, without which we could have no comfort by it. This
certainty appears as in this, that God has called all true believers to be
his sons: so further in the next verse where he says, Dearly beloved, now
are we the sons of God, though (as he says) is appears not what we shall
be. To this purpose well serves that gracious promise which the Apostle
cites out of the Prophet Hosea, And it shall be in the place where it was said
unto them: Romans 9. 26.
ye are not my people, that there they shall be called the children of the
living God: So likewise when the Lord promises to such as shall separate
themselves from the wicked: And I will be a Father unto you, 2 Cor. 6. 18.
and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Reu. 21. 7.
Again, He that overcomes shall inherit all things, And I will be his God,
and he shall be my son: these promises must be the cause of our faith, and
our faith the cause of our obedience, as has been said. And therefore it is
said, Ye are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3. 26.
And yet much more to our present purpose, is that excellent Scripture, Gal. 4.
4, 5, 6, 7. which contains much for the strengthening of our faith in this
whole point of the assurance of our salvation, therefore I rehearse it all: But
when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman,
and made under the Law, that he might redeem them which were under the Law:
that we might receive the adoption of sons, And because ye are sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, which cries Abba
Father. Wherein (to pass over all the rest) this is evident, that a maine end
why God sent his Son to redeem us miserable sinners, (who are by nature
under the curse of the Law) was this, that we might by this redemption by
Christ be made Gods children, and, as the Apostle says, Romans 8. 17.
If children, then also heirs, even the heirs of God and coheires with
Christ, as it follows in the former Scripture, Gal. 4. 7. Wherefore thou art
no more a servant, but a son; now if thou be a son, thou art also an heir
of God through Christ.

If this be so (as the devil himself cannot deny) who can sufficiently
admire and magnify the bountifulness and love of God to man, Use.
by so great a price to purchase so high a dignity, Tit. 3. 4.
(as the Apostle John calls it) that we should be the sons of God, Ioh. 1.
12.
and partakers with Christ of all his glory in his Fathers kingdom?

But me thinks I hear some one say, It is true, this is a most blessed
estate, if a man might be assured it were his own: but seeing the Scripture
often witnesses, that they be but few who attain this favor, Objection.
how may I who am so unworthy, so full of sin, and void of grace, ever hope
to be a partaker hereof?

This being so great an objection, and so common, whereby many be kept from
believing, it is meet to be well answered. It has two parts: first, that so
few come to be Gods children, to which I answer, first the fault hereof is
not in God, who (as often has been said) has so largly proclaimed life in the
Gospel to every sinner. Again, if there were an alms of great value cast among
many, which a few only could enjoy, what scrambling is there who could get it?
A memorable story of late years, I will relate to be a witness against all such
wicked servants, Mat. 25. 26
and slothful, (as our Savior calls them) who hearing that a few shall be
saved, will let others strive for it, and be content to go without it
themselves; which is indeed, and so the Lord will count it, a flat despising
of his mercy offered unto them. A rich woman gave at her death a dole of six
pence to the poor that came to Leaden Hall in London, for which there was such
striving that many were trodden to death; how shall these rise in judgment,
against our dainty, idle, ambitious, covetous, and voluptuous worldlings, who
every one in their kind, strive extremely for their desires, but take no
pains to be saved? But to leave these, and to come to the second part of the
objection, which concerns a better sort, and far nearer salvation, who be
kepr back by their unworthiness; whom as I much pity for their
vncomfortablenesse so can I no less blame for their ignorance, that after so
long preaching of the Gospel, wherein all the mercies of God be proclaimed
unto, yea bestowed upon sinners, yea great, and all unworthy (as in the last
point before this was showed:) yet these poor souls do stick so fast in
the mudde of their natural pride of Popery, as to seek for some worthiness
in themselves, for which God should make them his sons. To conclude then this
point, seeing God is a free giver of this high favor of Adoption; and no
seller of it; and seeing he so freely offers it to thee in Christ; beware,
that neither by idleness, nor proud ignorance, thou deprive thy self of it,
but thankfully accept it; so shall thou be saved.

The last special benefit which we receive from Christ, Hope of glory.
as a fruit of our justification, serving for strengthening of our faith in the
assurance of our salvation, is the Hope of Glory: whereby I understand that God
has prepared for us sinners, this singular comfort, that we may enjoy in this
life, such a hope and expectation of everlasting glory, as may both inwardly
cheer our hearts, and cause us outwardly to profess the same, to the glory
of God, encouragement of other faithful people of God, amazing of the wicked,
and strengthening of our selves, to hold out to the end, against al
discouragements whatsouer. That God has provided such a stay, to support us in
all the changes of this life, may sufficiently appear by that which we read,
Hebr. 6. 17. 18, 19. a Scripture containing great force for the strengthening
of our faith, in the certainty of our salvation, as we shall see.

Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the
immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath. That by two immutable
things, in which it was not possible that God should lie, we might have a
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set
before us; which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast,
and which enters into that which is within the veil, whither the forerunner
is for us entered, even Jesus made an high Priest after the order of
Melchisedech. Wherein be these heavenly matters contained, which I will only
lay open, and so gather out that which makes most for our presentintention, to
make us more sure of this grace, the hope of glory.

1. Gods decree and everlasting counsel concerning our salvation, is
unchangeable.

2. It was Gods good pleasure to make this exceedingly manifest.

3. The persons, to whom God would thus manifest his counsel, were the heirs
of promise.

4. The means whereby God would thus manifest his counsel, was this, That
what he promised, he bound with an oath.

5. These two evidences of Gods counsel, be sure and unchangeable.

6. It is impossible that God should lie in these

7. By these we may have strong consolation.

8. They who shall have strong consolation must make hope their refuge: that
is, hold fast on ir.

9. That hope is set before them to hold fast by.

10. This hope is to our souls in tentations, as an Anchor to a ship in storms.

11. This Anchor which will hold, it is sure and steadfast.

12. It is entered upward into heaven, as our earthly ank^^ ^e cast downwards.

13. Christ our forerunner is gone to heaven for us.

14. Christ is our everlasting high Priest.

Behold what store of heavenly matters be here contained; which when I did
consider so closely folded up, and so well furthering the point in hand, I was
drawn thus to unfold them. Among all, this is special for our purpose, that
Almighty God as a loving Father having provided for his children a good estate,
was very careful to make it sure unto them, and therefore has given two such
evidences as cannot deceive, his promise and oath; that we being persuaded
hereby, might in all our fears, for out refuge, cast our hope upon his
fidelity: so shall we be safe, and have strong consolation. Wherein we see
the singular use of this hope of eternal life, that it is hope which makes us
not ashamed, Romans 5. 5.
as the Apostle speaks, and the Prophet David exceeding often the same: Psalm.
25. 3.
Yea, that we are saved by hope: that is, Romans 8. 23.
we are so assured of our salvation, as if we possessed it already; and
therefore do with patience wait for it. There is much in this Scripture to
this end, that as the whole Creation as it were groaneth and trauelleth in
pain, with earnest expectation, waiting for the manifestation of the sons of
God, what time they shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the children of God: So all true believers (who have the
first fruits of the spirit) groan in themselves, waiting for the Adoption: to
wit, the redemption of their bodies: that is, for a full glorification of soul
and body. This is to be seen in the lives and deaths of Gods faithful
servants, Heb. 12. 2.
who for this hope, endured the cross, and despised shame, as is testified of
our Savior himself; and of Moses that he did choose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, Heb. 11. 26.
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: esteeming the reproach of
Christ greater riches then the treasures in Egypt, for he had respect to the
recompense of reward. The same is to be seen in all that honorable company
mentioned, Hebr. 11. And so in all the holy Martyrs in all ages, what was it,
but this hope of glory, after a short suffering, which made them willingly to
endure so great and sore persecutions? I might be long in this, for the
Scripture speaks much hereof, exhorting us to rejoice in hope, making it
the end of our vocation, and regeneration: God has called us to his kingdom
and glory, 1 These. 2. 12.
God according to his mercy has begotten us again to a lively hope, 1 Petr.
1. 3.
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in the heavens for us,
etc. And more to like effect as does follow, well worth our reading, and
careful consideration, serving much for the comfort of Gods children.

Out of all which this is that I gather, Use.
seeing this hope of glory is so sure an Anchor in all storms, so strong a
helmet in all our battles, that we therefore carefully provide our selves of
this grace: yea rather seeing God has so plentifully provided it for us, and
given us so many promises hereof, and has called us hereunto, and so often
exhorts us to rejoice in this hope of glory; all this should move us to hold
fast the profession of our hope without wavering, For he is faithful that
promised, Heb. 10. 23
as the Apostle exhorts: otherwise we shall call Gods truth and faithfulness
into question, which is a high degree of tempting God, and no less provocation
of his high displeasure: whereas on the other side by casting this anchor in any
storm, we shall be sure to escape shipwreck, and so in the end arrive at
our desired port of everlasting salvation.

Thus have I now showed as briefly and plainly as I could, how every one who
is troubled with unbelief, about the cercainety of his salvation, namely,
whether such as he (so void of all grace, and so full of all sin) may be bold
to believe, and thereby be assured to be saved by Christ; and to this end, that
his sin is quite forgiven, and he accepted as righteous in Gods sight, so
reconciled to God, and adopted to be Gods child, that he may rejoice in hope
of the glory of God; how such an one (I say) may get and daily increase this
assurance of faith, that there is no condemnation to him belonging, but that he
has everlasting life, and is passed from death to life; then which what can be
more welcome and comfortable to a troubled conscience, I well see not. And
therefore (as often before) I exhort all that feel this weakness of faith
concerning their salvation, above all to observe these and such other
Scriptures (whereof there be many) wherein Christ and salvation be offered to
poor sinners, Observe Scriptures concerning Christ.
that they (who have as good right to them as any,) may not for any thing they
see in themselves, put these promises from them, as not made to them. But
rather in admiration of Gods wonderful goodness, mercy, and compassion upon
such unworthy wretches, to give glory to God, in believing and accepting this
mercy so freely offered: which they must do, before they shall see such a true
change of heart and life in them, as they earnestly desire, and for want
whereof, they think they ought not to believe; which is to such (if not the
only yet) the chiefest let and hinderance from faith: whereas on the other
side, when it shall please Gods spirit, by these his free promises to draw them
to believe, and though weakly, yet truly to stay themselves upon Gods great
mercy so revealed to them; then assuredly shall they see and feel this change
in their hearts, that they know not what to say or think of Gods mercy, in
pardoning such as they feel themselves to be. This cannot but breed an
unfeigned love in them to God, with an earnest desire and true purpose to
glorify him; which be the chief parts of a holy life, and surest proofs of
saving faith: which can no more want these, then a true fire can be without
heat (though too many carnal Gospellers think otherwise, and so miserably
perish.

Having thus seen how we are by Gods promises to get and increase our
assurance by faith, that we be Gods children: Now it follows, that we
consider what be the marks of God children, Assurance by the fruits of faith.
whereby we may be further assured thereof. Among which marks, seeing faith it
self is the first and surest proof that we be Gods children, and to this end,
many precious promises be made to such as do already believe; as the former
promises were made to beget and increase faith. It is meet that we take some
view of these, not for the strengthening of our faith, but that by our faith
(be it small or great) we may have a sensible assurance of our salvation. To
which purpose may this serve, that we who believe in Christ, are so often said to
be blessed, as our Savior said to Thomas, Blessed are they who have not
seen, Ioh. 20. 29.
and yet have believed: Mat. 13. 16. 16, 17.
and again to his Disciples, Blessed are your eyes, for they see, etc: and
likewise to Peter, Blessed art thou Simon Bar Iona, for flesh and blood has
not revealed it unto thee, but my father which is in heaven; and the like many:
to the same end also it is said, That he who believes shall be saved: Mr. k.
16. 16
That the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that
believes. Romans 1. 16. 10. 9.
Again, If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thy heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shall besaued: and again,
Whosoever believes in Christ, Ioh. 3. 15. 16
shall not perish, but have everlasting life, yea has everlasting life, 5. 24.
Ioh. ^. 47. and is passed from death to life. Again, 12. 46. 11. 26.
I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes in me, shall not
abide in darkness: and though he were dead, yet shall he live, and shall never
dye. The same also is intended in these Scriptures, in which forgiveness of
sins, righteousness, and justification are promised to believers, Act. 10.
45. Romans 10. 4. Act. 13. 30. Romans 4. 5. 5. 1. Gal. 3. 26.
So likewise it is said, Ioh. 1. 12.
We are made the children of God by faith; and as many as received him, to
them he gave power to be the sons of God* even to them that believe in his
name. Lastly, (to heap up no more of this kind) to this end is that; Christ
shall come to be glorified in his Saints, 1. These. (...) 10.
and be made marvelous in all them that believe, etc. In all these and many
the like promiises, made to such as do truly believe in Christ, may evidently
appear, that if any do know, and can prove themselves to be in the faith, 2
Cor. 13. 5.
as the Apostle speaks, by this he may be infallibly assured of his
salvation. Wherein seeing the greatest part of professors of Christian
Religion be deceived, saying they have faith, when in truth they have none, it
highly behooues such as look for better comfort, above all to beware their
hearts do not beguile them herein, 2. Pet. 1. 10.
and to bestow all study to make their calling and election sure, that they
may know that Christ dwells in them: otherwise they cannot be approved neither
by themselves, nor any others, to be in the state of grace.

Thus much for faith it self, whereby we may certainly know that we be Gods
children, heirs of salvation, and cannot perish. We are now further to see
some special fruits of our faith, which be the effects of Gods Spirit in all
true believers, and be so many marks whereby they do know themselves, and be
known to others, that they be Gods sheep, and so be further evidences and
assurances, that they be Gods children, and shall be saved.

In which respect, Assurance by the fruits of faith.
this gift of Gods Spirit to believers is called a seal, Ephesians, 1. 13.
Where the Apostle setting out the conversation of the Ephesians, 1. by the gift
of the spirit.
lays down both these evidences: first of their faith, secondly, of this gift
of the spirit: saying, In who^ ye also (have obtained inheritance) after that
ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation; wherein also after
ye believed, ye were sealed with the Spirit of promise, which is the earnest
of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the
praise of his glory. In which we see the Lord deals with us according unto
the manner of men; who in their conueyances of land do not only give writings
to make known their grants, but to make them sure, do set seals to their
writings, and besides do give a turfe of the land to assure the possession: so
the Lord having given us his word and writing for salvation in Christ, thereby
to make us believe, does also give his Spirit so manifestly to work in them,
that they be thereby more assured, that Christ is theirs, and that by him they
shall inherit eternal glory. For which cause, it is said, they were sealed
with the Spirit of promise (that is, which was promised to all believers.) And
this gift of the Spirit, is said to be as an earnest penny, to assure us we
shall enjoy the full bargain, or rather the whole gift of perfect happiness in
Gods Kingdom. Of this I understand that of the Apostle, where he says, that
though some who had made a fair profession, were now fallen away from the
faith, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord
knows them that are his; and let every one that names the name of Christ,
depart from iniquity. Where he makes the foundation of our salvation to be
Gods election; and a seal or stamp whereby we be known to be Gods children,
to be an holy life, a part whereof is departing from iniquity. Thus then we
may see in general, that the gift of the sanctifying Spirit, which is the
first and chiefest fruit of faith, and root of other graces necessary to
salvation, is a most sure evidence, that we be the children of God, and heirs
of salvation by Christ; which might suffice to assure any man of his state to
be very good, if he be not deceived, but be sure he has received this
sanctifying Spirit: for so the Apostle, 1. Ioh. 4. 13. reasons, Hereby we
know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his
spirit: as was further spoken in the former part of this Treatise, and is now
for our better assurance that we be in Gods favor, more largely to be laid
open, if not in all, yet in the most principal effects of this Spirit dwelling
it us.

Among which, Assurance of salvation by keeping Gods commandments.
good order requires to begin with that which is most general, and contains
the rest: namely, the keeping of Gods commandments, which in sundry places is
made a sure mark of saving grace. This is manifest in that divine Epistle of
John, which was written principally to this end, to set down sundry marks
whereby it may be known, who be the true children of God, and who not. Among
which this is one, the keeping of Gods commandemencs, as 1. epist. chap. 2.
verse. 3. And hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments:
the meaning whereof, is, that the conscionable endeavor to frame our lives,
according to Gods will revealed in his word, is a most certain mark, that we be
true believers, and so the true children of God and heirs of glory. To this
end is that chapter 3. 22. where he makes this keeping of Gods commandments an
evident note that we are in Gods favor: so that, Whatsoever we ask, we
receive of him. And again, verse. 24 He that keeps his commandments dwells
in him, and he in him. It would be too long, and I think needelesse to heap
up more of this argument: for the Scriptures are full of these promises made to
the righteous, to obedience, to such as walk in Gods way, hearken to his
voice, bear much fruits, be new creatures, and many of like sort. All
meaning the same thing, to lead a godly life, which whosoever does in truth,
though with much weakness, he may certainly thereby assure himself of his
salvation.

Which if many a poor soul (who have a good care to please God, and that of
very love unto him for his mercy) would consider, it might comfort them against
all their fears and doubtings rising from the sense of their infirmities,
which for just causes God does leave in his dear children. And therefore
(these being the persons for whose sake specially I write these,) I earnestly
beseech them to deal righteously with God, and their own souls, and not to
rob God of his honor, and themselves of their comfort in doubting of his
favor, but rather acknowledge the gracious work of God, in so renewing them
by his Spirit, that whereas by nature they had no care to please God, nor
conscience of obedience: Now God and their own consciences do witness, and
Gods people do see, it is their chiefest endeavor to please God in all
things, and their greatest grief to offend him: whereupon they may certainly
conclude, That they are in the state of grace, notwithstanding the burden of
their infirmities, under which they groan and often desire to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ.

Me thinks, this might abundantly suffice, to confirm any truly converted
souls, that their case is good, and their end shall be safe, notwithstanding
the many sore battles and blows they meet with all by their corruptions,
yet dwelling nor reigning in them.

But seeing the Lord (who of old saw how hard it would be for us, Particular
duties.
to hold fast this assurance of our safety, especially when our enemies seem
to have the upper hand,) has made so many promises of salvation, not only to
general obedience, but almost to all particulars, that though we many times,
cannot fetch comfort from some duties and fruits of our faith, yet we may from
others, and never want some true evidences of our faith and happiness. It shall
be expedient to set down some chief, referring the diligent reader of the
Scriptures, to take a pattern by these to observe and make use of the rest as
he can.

Among all, 1. Love a mark of happiness.
the first and chief fruit of Faith is love to God, and all them which belong
to him, to Christ and to all his members; all which be unseparably joined, and
do all proceed from the love of God to us, as 1 Ioh. 4. 19. We love him,
because he loved us first. From whence we may soundly gather, that as Gods love
is the cause of our love of him; so our love of God is a certain proof that
we are loved of God, and shall be everlastingly blessed and saved by him;
which the Apostle James expresses, Iam. 1. 12. 25.
That God has promised the crown of Life, (and in another place) The kingdom
to them that love him. The same also is intended in that heavenly saying of the
Apostle, Romans 8. 28.
And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to
them that are the called according to his purpose. And the same may be gathered
out of that excellent sentence, 1 Cor. 2. 9. and 8. 3.
Eye has not seen nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him; And to like effect,
But if any man love God, the same is known of him. In all which and the like
many, our love of God is made a certain proof that we be in Gods favor, and
heirs of his kingdom: Our love to Christ.
so likewise is our love to Christ, Ioh. 14. 21. 23.
as he himself professes, And he that loves me shall be loved of my Father
(where our love of Christ is not the cause, but the effect of Gods love to us,
as follows a little after: If any man love me he will keep my words, and my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

In like sort our love we bear one to another as brethren and members of the
body of Christ, Love of our brethren.
is made an infallible mark, that we belong to Christ, as he said to his
Disciples, John 13. 35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples if you love one another.
And for further proof hereof we need go no further, then to the first Epistle
of John, in which this brotherly love is often set down, as a sure evidence,
that we are in a blessed estate; 1. John 2. 10.
He that loves his brother abides in the light, chap. 3. 14.
and there is no occasion of stumbling in him. Again, we know that we are
passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren. And in another place,
4. Verse. 12.
If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us.
And a little before in the same chapter, Verse. 7.
Beloved let us love one another; for love is of God, and every one that loves
is borne of God. And again verse 17. Herein is our love made perfect, that we
have boldness in the day of Judgment. Yea more, our Savior teaches, Love of
our enemies.
that the love of our enemies is a good proof that we are the children of God,
as both the Evangelist Matthew and Luke report. Matthew. 5. 44, 45.
The places be known. Luke 6. 35.


From all which we see how any (who calls in question, Use.
whether he has true faith, and be in the state of grace) may by this grace
of love assure himself that he has true faith, and so shall be saved. Only
we must take heed we deceive not our selves with a vain carnal love, Take
heed of deceit.
(as many do) which shall appear by these two especially, whether our love
come from Faith, and secondly breed true obedience; which if it do, it is
sound, and a sure warrant of saving grace: otherwise if either of these be
wanting, then our love at best is but natural, which can be no proof of true
happiness. For further manifestation hereof that our love is sound, and so our
faith, and safety, we need no other arguments then to see what be the fruits
that grow from hence. For the Scriptures in sundry places make love the root
of all fruits of a godly life, Rome. 13. 10
calling it the fulfilling of the Law, Col. 3. 14.
and the bond of perfectness, So that if our love be fruitful in holiness to
God, and in righteousness to men, it will manifestly declare that we be the
true children of God.

Herein may well come in the first place, 2. Fear of God.
the fear of God, which if it come not from love, and be not tempered
therewith, is but a servile fear, and not that holy fear which is made such a
mark of Gods children, that it is usually made a surname to them all, to be
such as fear God: As, Psalm. 112. 1. 115. 13.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, and greatly delights in his
Commandments; He will bless them that fear the Lord both small and great.
And the like many. That which we are here chiefly to regard, is, what high
commendations are given to this fruit of Faith, the fear of God, whereby he
that feels this grace, may know he is truly converted, and shall be saved.
This is to be seen in all those Scriptures, where they that fear the Lord be
pronounced blessed, as in the last forenamed places, and so Psalm. 128. 1. 4.
meaning, he that fears the Lord, is and shall be every way blessed. To the
same purpose be those Scriptures, which set out the greatness, and perpetuity
of Gods mercy to those that fear him, Psalm. 103. 11. 17. and Luke 1. 50. the
places be known. Such is that, Psalm. 31. 19
O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee!
The like, Eccl. 8. 12 It would be long to cite all of this kind. These be
some, that such as fear God are accepted of him, Act. 13. 26
That God will teach the man that fears him in the way that he shall choose,
Psalm. 25. 12 and 347, 10
and more in the same Psalm to the like effect. The Angel of the Lord
encampeth about them, they shall not want any good thing. Psalm. 145. 19. 147.
12.
The Lord will fulfill their desire; be takes pleasure in them. Mal. 4. 2.
And to end this, The Sun of righteousness shall rise up to these, and the
reward of eternal life shall be given them, Reu. 11. 18. If this be not
sufficient, I know not what may be, to persuade any man who finds this true
fear of God in his heart, that he is and shall be blessed for ever.

It behooves therefore all that would have this comfort, to make sure to
themselves, that God has put this holy fear into their hearts, and so may
they rest assured of Gods love.

Thus would I leave this point, but I fear some tender consciences will ask,
how may I know that I have this holy fear in me; whom I might send to that
brief note of difference that I gave a little before, which in my opinion, is
the best difference between the good fear and the bad; namely the holy and
childe-like fear, comes from the love of God, the other at the best from
self-love; which may go far, yet can it never come near the holy fear, as
not in the root of Faith and Love, so neither in the fruit of sincere
obedience, which the Holy Ghost makes the fruit of the fear of God, Eccles.
12. 13.
Fear God and keep his Commandments. He then that feels Gods rich mercy
unto him, in calling him out of his miserable estate, to some hope of salvation
by Christ) to breed in him a love to God for the same, and that love to make
him afraid to displease and offend so gracious a Father; and shall find this
fear moving him to shun what God dislikes, though never so pleasing to his
corrupt nature, and to make him willing to do Gods will, though against his
corrupt will: this man need not doubt, but that he has the true fear of God,
which is so certain a mark of Gods favor, and of everlasting happiness.

And this is the use Gods children are to make hereof. Use.
Thus we see how the faithful may by these two particular fruits of their
faith, love and fear, be confirmed in the assurance of their salvation by
Christ.

The same may be showed in all the rest, which the Scripture makes to be so
many testimonies of saving grace and happiness to those that have them: As
Blessed are the poor in spirit; Mat. 5. 3. 10.
they that mourn, the humble, meek, such as hunger after righteousness,
merciful, pure in heart, peacemakers, persecuted for righteousness sake. All
which are in this place gathered together by our Savior Christ, to cross the
corrupt opinion of the world, and to show that they whom the world account
above all men most miserable, are indeed truly and only happy.

The like he does in other places, Mat. 16 28 19. 29.
where he makes the denying of our selves, Mar. 10. 30.
taking up the Cross and following him, forsaking all for him, and for the
Gospel, to be sure tokens to be his, who shall have an hundredfold in this
world, Luke 9.
and in the world to come life everlasting. To end this whole matter of
assurance of salvation, and to pass over many other fruits of Faith which do
prove the same, as the confession of sin, mortification thereof, ouercomming,
and Perseverance: All which be often made certain proofs of happiness. This
is the maine use which is to be made of all these, Use.
(as has often been said) that when (as it often falls out with Gods children,
especially such as have weak faith and tender consciences) that they beholding
their pronenesse to sin, and deadness of spirit to all holy duties, do fall
into great fears and doubts of their salvation, this may be some stay unto
them, that they may see some of these fruits of their faith in them, even when
they be at the lowest ebb of grace, by which they may comfort themselves; that
though they be very sick and weak, yet they be not stark dead. For whose
sakes I will add this observation by mine own experience, wherewith I have
quieted the minds of many much perplexed in this case, Marks of faith which
is not seen
for that they could not see they had any faith, that there is a true living
faith in many, who have no feeling thereof.

I have observed these four infallible proofs. 1. Unquiet for want of faith.
First where Faith is, and not felt, the party in whom it is, and cannot see
that he has any Faith, is grieved for want of Faith, and cannot be quiet for
want of it, but mourns, as if he had none; which for the most part is the
state of those that be truly afflicted in conscience, who feign would
believe, but yet in their own sense do not: And yet in my experience I never
knew any such (who had any knowledge of the doctrine of Faith) but indeed they
had some Faith, though they saw it not. 2. Spare no means to get foitfi.


This will more appear by the next effect of this insensible faith, which is
this; that they who have Faith and yet feel it not, be very painful in use
of all good means, both public and private, by themselves and with oothers,
whereby they might hope to get this precious gift of Faith; which hardly would
any do if he had not some taste of the sweetness of Faith though he feel
it not, which so stirs up his heart to seek after it: and therefore I hold
this constant seeking of Faith, to be a token of some to be in him already.

A third and more principal effect of Faith in these, 3. Carry a good heart
to God.
is this, that though they see not Gods Fatherly love to them, yet they cannot
think hardly of God, but lay all the fault on themselves, why they have no
more grace; yea, they will commend Gods mercy to others, and cannot endure any
dishonor to God: which great love of theirs to God, does show they are loved
of him, yea that they have by Faith apprehended it, though they see it not, and
fear they have it not.

The fourth proof of Faith, 4. A good conscience.
where it is not seen, may be this that such have a tender conscience,
shunning small sins, which others dare boldly do; and be careful to please
God in every thing, which many who be not so disquieted be more careless of.
So then if there be any poor souls who cannot see their faith, yet if they
can see any of these effects of Faith in themselves: let them know for a truth,
and to their comfort, that they have true Faith and shall be saved.

And thus have I said what I think meet for this first point, how we may daily
get more assurance, that we be now in Gods favor, and shall want no good thing
in this life, and shall certainly in the end come to life everlasting. Which I
again do exhort every one (who looks for any blessing from God either in
this life, or that to come) above all to labor for, seeing without this
assurance that we be in Gods favor, how can we look for any blessing from
God earthly or spiritual, temporal or eternal? whereas being assured hereof,
we may boldly look for all other blessings needful for our present comfort
and eternal happiness.

Concerning all which, seeing the Lord (who did well know the frailty of his
own children, All other blessings depend on this.
how ready they are upon every occasion to doubt of his help) has so
plentifully recorded in the Scriptures both generally, what a fatherly care he
has of their welfare, and also more specially what help they may look for
from him, in their particular necessities: I do not doubt but it will be
worth our labor, to consider of them both; and all little enough to comfort us
in our greatest need. And first of the general, which contain under them all
good things* which God has prepared and promised to all his children. Of this
sort may that come first, which is the ground of all the rest, namely that God
will be our God and of our seed after us, as he said to Abraham the Father of
the faithful, Genesis 17. 7.
and so belongs to all believers, as the Apostle shows, Romans 4. 11. 16.
which self same promise, was after repeated to Abraham's posterity in all ages,
to be a staff of comfort to them at all times; therefore is it often said, That
God is the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob. Likewise God
said to the people of Israel, And I will take you to me to be a people, and I
will be to you a God. And most notable is that when the Lord gave his Law to
his people of Israel, that he bound his people to obedience by these two bonds
of his great Majesty, and his special favor saying, Exodus 3. 6. and 6. 7.
and 20. 2.
I am the Lord thy God. It would be tedious and needless to heap more of this
sort; for this was promised to the faithful, by the Prophets and Apostles in
all ages, that God would be their God, and they should be his people: Whereby
was meant that they should certainly receive from him whatsoever might be good
for them; and should yield to him all that obedience which he required. In
which one promise if we could steadfastly believe, and rest upon, we should
find more true comfort, then in all the world beside. And therefore I desire
all that want comfort, to think much upon this. Of this kind likewise be all
those gracious promises, that God is our portion, that is, all we have to
maintain us in this world; and we his portion, that is, the chiefest thing
he makes reckoning of, Psalm. 16. 5. 19. 5. 1. 7. 142. 5.
his treasure, his peculiar people, the lot of his inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32. 9.
his chosen, his delight, and many the like are plentiful in the Scriptures,
Psalm. 33. 26.
all showing how dear unto God his people are, Psalm. 135. 4.
that they may assure themselves they shall not want, Exodus 19. 5.
as the Prophet David concluded upon that meditation that the Lord was his
shepherd. Psalm. 23. 1. and 146. 9.
To this end is God said to be Father to the fatherless, a helper to the
widow, to succor them, and to supply the^ with all needful blessings,
spiritual and bodily. To this purpose very comfortable is that, Psalm. 84, 11.
For the Lord God is a Sun and Shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, and
no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly: Meaning that
the Sun is not more beneficial to the earth then God to his.

Oh that we had hearts to consider and believe these! Then might we say and
sing for joy of heart with David, Psalm. 27. 1.
The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? And to like effect, Psalm. 28.
7. 8. Seeing the Lord has thought it needful so often to testify his goodness
unto us, there is no reason we should think much to remember the same for our
good. The Prophet David was never weary of thinking hereof, which was (as I
conceive) that which made him so large-hearted toward God, and so excelling
others in all holy conversation, as himself professes unto God saying, Psalm.
26. 3, Examine me O Lord and prove me, try my reins and my heart; for thy
loving kindness is before mine eyes, therefore I have walked in thy truth.
And again, How excellent is thy loving kindness O God! Psalm. 36. 7.
therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.
And the like, Psalm 31. 19. and elsewhere often he professes, Psalm. 62. 2. 6,
7. 71. 5.
God is his hope, his help, his health, his rock, his refuge, Ier. 17. 7.
and many the like: I^el 3. 16.
All which should make us boldly to rest on God for all things necessary. And
yet behold more, for exceeding often does the Lord promise that he will dwell
among them, Exodus 29. 46.
and not forsake them, but be with them, both to provide for them, Psalm. 37.
4. 145. 19.
and protect them; that he will bless them, Pro. 10. 24.
that all shall go well with them, God will give them their hearts desire,
that he will be their reward. All which with sundry the like effects of Gods
favor, and provident care over his, to minister unto them abundant relief in
all their needs, are throughout the Scriptures so often repeated, that in what
condition soever we be, we might have store of help at hand, to strengthen
our faith, that God will never fail us, but in that season and measure which
he sees fittest, we shall assuredly find all needful help for soul and
body, Use.
for this life and that to come. I do therefore commend unto all those who
have so profited by the former promises pertaining to the assurance of
salvation, that they have some comfort therein, this care, to observe well
these large legacies which the Lord both in the old and new Testament has
bequeathed to all his children, as so many privileges belonging to them,
whereof no other person in the world (though never so high in man's account)
shall ever be partaker: That they be not dismayed with any discouragements,
they shall meet with, but rather rejoice and glory in their happy condition,
and so be careful to walk worthy of the same, that they may thereby honor
God their Father, and that high dignity whereto he has advanced them; yea,
also move many to seek to be partakers with them, of so blessed a condition.
I could here willingly take up a bitter complaint against many of good hope,
that spend most of their days either securely, or uncomfortably, Neh. 8. 10.
not finding this joy of the Lord to be their strength, and not walking in the
light of Gods favor, so cheerfully as they might, if they would better weigh
these gracious promises made unto them: and so lay hold upon them as their
own, whereby they might be refreshed in their greatest discouragements. But
this being besides my intention, I will thus end this point

The second general Head.
Now we come to the second general matter wherein we are to live by faith,
namely, how we may be able to mortify our corrupt nature, and overcome our
special sins, which most prevail over us. That this cannot be without
faith, has been sufficiently proved, in the former part of this Treatise;
and how this power is obtained by faith from Christ.

Here only we are to consider, what promises God has made unto us in the
Scriptures, to strengthen our faith in this, that whereas we are full of
doubting, how we (who are so full of sin, yea naturally sold under sin, and
often held captive under some strong corruptions) should possibly overcome these:
yet we may hear such comfortable promises from God, as may assure us, no
sin shall have dominion over us: but we shall daily master it, and in the end
obtain a full victory over it. For which purpose I cannot begin with any
Scripture more effectual then this self same, Romans 6. 1. etc.
where the Apostle does not only show the absolute necessity of forsaking
sin, by all those who be members of Christ: but thereupon he exhorts them
all, saying: Let not sin reign in your mortal body, Verse 12.
that ye should obey it in the lust thereof; and shows the way how this may
be attained, by not yielding unto sin their minds and hearts (which be
principal members of the old man, and weapons of unrighteousness) but rather
yielding themselves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and their
members as instruments of righteousness unto God. And whereas this might justly
be objected, Alas: how shall we (who by nature are so unable to resist so
mighty a Tyrant as sin is, who has overcome all mankind, Christ only
excepted) ever be able so to withstand sin? For answer whereto, the Apostle
brings a most comfortable promise unto all that be not under the Law, Verse 14.
but under grace (that is, who be not still under the condemnation and tyranny
of the Law, whereby it reigns over all unregenerate: but by true receiving of
Christ by faith are now delivered from that bondage, and so brought into the
liberty of Gods children: which he says, is to be under grace (whereof the
Apostle speaks more fully, Romans 6. 1.) Of these he says, That sin shall not
have dominion over them, meaning that although these do still carry sin,
(that is, corruption of nature) which continually fights against the grace of
God in the^, yet the corruption and sinful nature, shall never any more
reign as in times past it did, and so have the full victory over them. But
they by the grace of Gods Spirit reigning in them, shall daily more and more
overcome this their sinful nature, and in the end get a glorious conquest
over it, and all other their spiritual enemies.

This one Scripture, if there were no more, is sufficient, if it be truly
weighed and believed, to comfort every child of God over all his sins; that
though they be never so many, or never so great, and of long continuance, yet
being here assured the root of sin shall be killed, ver. 18. 22.
he may then quietly rest his soul in peace, that all the fruits and branches
shall in time quite wither; for certainety whereof this is twice repeated.

But the Lord knowing how hardly we be brought to be persuaded hereof,
(especially when we be under captivity of any sin, as of unbelief, pride,
anger worldliness, and the like) has much labored in his word to comfort us
herein: that though the battle be sore, and our strength small, yet his grace
shall be sufficient for us, and his power shall be made perfect in
weakness, 2. Cor. 12. 7 8, 9.
as was said to Paul in his wrestling against some privy corruption, which he
felt a prick in his flesh, to be sent as a messenger of Satan to buffet him,
least he should be exalted above measure, by the abundance of revelations;
which though spoken to him, yet indeed belongs to all in his case, and
therefore every poor soul, who feels his sin too hard for him, that when
he would do well, evil is present with him; he is to lay hold on this
promise, that Gods grace shall be sufficient for him, and Gods strength shall
be made perfect in his weakness: That so complaining with the Apostle, O
wretched man that I am, Romans 7. 24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? he may comfortably cheer
up his heart with him, saying: verse 25.
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, that through the power of the
Spirit of Christ, he shall subdue that body of sin, which otherwise would carry
him headlong to death and destruction, both of body and soul for ever.

This the Prophet Micah notably expresses, Mich. 7. 18
having highly magnified the mercy of God in pardoning iniquity, and passing by
the transgression of his people, he adds this, He will turn again, he will
have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, etc. The Apostle also
lays out this matter at large, how the Christian soldier being armed with
the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.
may be able to stand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand: that
is, being furnished with those excellent graces of the Spirit, which he
afterward names, he may manfully fight the Lords battle against sin and
Satan, and so hold out to the end of the battle, that he shall stand up as
conqueror, when sin and Satan shall fall as vanquished.

Behold what encouragements the Lord gives against all our fearfulness in
our spiritual battle: which if we could remember, would put more spirit into
us to fight against our sins like men, and not to faint or fly like cowards.
And yet these be not the tenth of these gracious promises, which the Lord has
made to this end, that we faint not when we see the force of the enemy.

Of this sort be all those Scriptures, which setting out the rich benefits we
receive in Christ, among the rest mention our sanctification by him; whereby is
meant that Christ having taken our humane nature, and sanctified it by his holy
Spirit: we being made one with him, do receive the self same spirit (though
in measure) to sanctify us, Ioh. 17. 29.
that is, to make us holy: Whereunto these two be necessary; first, the killing
of all sin in us, and secondly, the quickening of us to newness of life. 1.
Cor. 1. 30
Of the latter, more in the next point, of the former here: concerning which
this is often repeated, that Christ shall save his people from their sin, Mat. 1.
21.
which as it is true in the matter of our justification for the forgiveness of
our sin: so it is also true in this point of our sanctification, for
delivering us from the power of sin. And so are all those general speeches
to be understood, that Christ is the lamb of God, Ioh. 1. 29. 39.
which takes away the sin of the world: That he has loved us, Reu. 1. 5.
and washed us from our sins in his own blood: 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
That the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our sin: Act. 3. 26.
That God has sent his Son Jesus to bless us, in turning every one of us
from our iniquities. And the like many, in all which this must needs be
contained, that one great benefit we enjoy by Christ is, that we who be
members of him are cleansed, as from the guiltiness of sin, that it shall
not be imputed: so from the filthiness of sin, that it shall not prevail
over us. For more manifest proof whereof, this grace of mortification is
expressly promised in sundry places; Gal. 5. 16.
as Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh.
Likewise the Apostle John joining together both our justification and
sanctification, 1 Ioh. 1. 9
says: If we confess our sins he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness: so does the Apostle Paul
to Titus, Tit. 2. 11.
having showed, that the grace of God which brings salvation, does also teach
men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts: he adds this, that Christ gave
himself for us, 14.
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a
peculiar people zealous of good works.

This is the same whereof the Prophets foretold in their time, that God would
purge and cleanse his Church. Esa. 1. 25.
Esai often, that God will purely purge their dross, and take away all their
tin, that is, their sins: as in another place more plainly he says, And
it shall come to pass, Esa. 4 3.
that he that is left in Sion, and he that remains in Jerusalem, shall be
called holy, every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem, ver. 4.
when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Sion, and
shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by the
Spirit of judgment, and by the Spirit of burning. 27. 9
Again, By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is
all the fruit to take away his sin. Notable is that place of Ezekel, Then
will I sprinckle clean water upon you, Eze. 36. 25
and you shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all your idols
will cleanse you. Of this sort I might gather many more out of these, and the
other Prophets, who spoke of this grace which should be given by Christ to all
the members of his Church, the cleansing of them from all their filthiness,
which David expresses, Ps. 103. 3.
By healing all our diseases. The matter being so clear, and the testimonies
so many, I judge it will be too tedious to heap up more.

It shall be more to our profit, well to weigh these and the like promises,
when we read them: that when we feel our hearts discouraged, by the little
strength we find to master our special corruptions, then we may apply to
our selves any one of these promises, wherein the Lord himself does undertake
this work which is too hard for us; That he will subdue our iniquities, he
will cleanse us from all unrighteousness, his grace shall be sufficient for
us, and his power shall be mad: perfect in our weakness: which if we do
believe, how can we fear or be faint-hearted to enter into this spiritual
battle against our sins? Yea this will make us bold to resist, and able to
overcome our strongest sins, which formerly have most prevailed over us.

For our further encouragement herein, we have the examples of all the
faithful, who before were servants, yea bondslaues to their vilde lusts,
Examples
as Zacheus, to oppression; Mary Magdalen to whooredome, Paul to persecution:
and generally the famous Churches, to whom the Apostles writ, who before their
calling, were idolaters, and lived in all abominable sins (as other
Gentiles:) being converted, they turned from their idols, and so from all
their former vain and vilde conversation, to serve the living God, as is to be
seen in all the holy Epistles written to them, and in the history of the Acts:
which was long before prophesied by the Prophets, Esa. 11. 6.
that the wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, etc. meaning by all these cruel
and devouring beasts, all kind of beastly and wicked men, who by the Gospel
should be so changed, that al their cruel and beastly qualities should be so
abated, that they should become like to Gods children, and so have a holy
Communion with them.

Let not any therefore who feels any measure of mortification in himself, Use.
though he cannot yet overcome all his sins, and keep under his unruly
affections, say in his heart, I shall never overcome such and such sins, but
shall one day perish by these: for this were not only to mistrust his own
strength, (which well he may) but to call Gods power, goodness, and truth into
question: which were a great injury to God and to his own soul: but rather
let us all do as Jehosaphat, when he saw a great army gathered together
against him, 2. Chro. 20 12.
so as he saw no power in himself to withstand them, he did wholly cast
himself upon the Lord, saying, O our God, will thou not judge them? for we
have no might against this great company that comes against us, neither know
we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. So let us be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might, and so taking to us, and using the holy armor
of his spirit, fighting valiantly, we may be sure of the victory.

These thus being, that Gods children may be so certain, that no sin shall
have dominion over them, but that they shall in the end overcome them all, and
so have that glorious conquest over them, and over all their spiritual enemies
(who can no way hurt them but by sin:) how can it sufficiently be bewailed,
that so few do enjoy this benefit, and the sweet comfort thereof?

This may well be seeee in the many and foul spots in the faces of sundry
professors; I mean their open pride, their impatiency, their worldliness,
and deadness of spirit in all spiritual duties: all which, though they might
(in some of longer standing in Christ) have been long before well mortified,
yet they still remain, live, and grow in them, to their reproach before others,
and small peace and comfort to their own hearts. A principal cause hereof
must needs be this, that these pleasing themselves in their estate, for that
they be forward in public exercises of Religion (though many be slack enough
in private, especially secret by themselves alone,) and for that they be free
from the gross sins of the wicked, do either not see or not bewail these
their sins, and therefore do not so much as seek after, much less enjoy
these precious promises: and the fruit of them. An other sort (who are more to
be pitied for their want of this comfort which God has prepared for them, and
so plentifully promised to them in especial) be they who groan under the
burden of their infirmities, and take much pains to be eased; yet in long time
finding small amendment, be much discouraged with fear, that they shall never
be able to overcome these corruptions which do most annoy them. I cannot
think of any thing to be a greater cause of this discouragement in these,
then either the ignorance, forgetfulness, or not believing these promises,
Phil. 1. 6.
that He who has begun the good work in them, will perfect it until the day
of Christ: and as God promised often, to his people going to conquer the land of
Canaan, Deuteronomy. 7. 2^ 11. 25
that no enemy should be able to stand against them: Iosu^. 1. 5. 10. 8.
so has he as certainly promised to these, that no sin shall have dominion
over them.

It remains therefore, that these and all other, who desire to conquer their
corrupt nature, and unruly lusts thereof, th^^ they do often set before
themselves these promises, and so considering that he is faithful who has
promised, confidently look for the victory, and so constantly fight till they
obtain the same.

This I hope may suffice in this point, to quiet the minds of all that be
troubled with the doubt, how they shall be able to get the mastery over their
greatest corruptions.

If any should further require, to have particular promises for particular
sins, he is to know that howsoever the Lord does sometimes descend to
particulars, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26.
as that the will cleanse them from their Idols, and that he will take away the
stony heart out of them, and such like:

Yet this is not done in every sin, neither is it needful; for when God
speaks so generally, that he will cleanse us from all unrighteousness, and that
he will heal al our diseases, and the like many (as we have seen in the
forenamed places) who would require more? Let us then learn to apply these
general promises to our particular occasions, and I nothing doubt but it will
as sufficiently comfort us, as if the Lord had said in particular, he will
kill our pride, our unbelief, our hypocrisy, and the rest.

Only let us be familiarly acquainted with these (as need shall require) and be
often in meditation upon these (whereof we shall have daily use:) and hereunto
join fervent prayer, that the Lord would persuade us by his Spirit thus to
rest upon his promise for his help in our greatest need; and then shall we more
courageously set our selves against our greatest sins, and daily more and
more get the victory over them all, to the honor of God, and of our holy
profession; to the good ensample and encouragement of our brethren, and to the
present comfort and salvation of our own souls, etc.

THE THIRD general head of living by faith, is concerning holy duties.
THus having seen how we are to gather out of Gods promises, daily more
certainety of our salvation, both by faith, and by the principal fruits
thereof: and in the second place, how we may be daily more assured of a full
victory over all our corruptions, that they shall never overcome us, but we
them: (which must needs bring much comfort to all poor distressed souls, who
groan under the burden of them, till they may be eased.)

We are to proceed to the third general point propounded, wherein we are to
have use of our faith against those many doubts, which arise in our hearts; how
we who be so full of frailty, and so weak in grace, may yet be able to
perform all those duties which God requires at our hands, both toward his
majesty in the first table of the ten commandments; and toward man, our
selves, and others in the second table; and that in such manner, as may be
pleasing to him.

For howsoever many carnal professors (in truth little better then
hypocrites) imagine it is no such hard matter to lead a godly life, and so
content themselves with such common duties, as may uphold a name in profession
of true Religion; as frequenting the public assemblies, saying prayers in
their houses, and living honestly among their neighbors; all which must be
done, and many come not so far: yet they who have truly tasted of Gods mercy
in their redemption by Christ, do know that God has deserved better service
at their hands, What holiness God requires.
and requires more duty of them: 1. Pet. 1. 15
namely, That as he, who has called them is holy; so they must be holy in all
manner of conversation: and that it must be their chief Study, to add to
their faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance; 2.
Pet. 1. 4. 6.
and to temperance, patience, and to patience, godliness, and to godliness, 7.
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness, charity.

And for the manner of their service, it must be 1. without fear, (that is,
not servile and constrained, but willing and cheerful, 2. universal in
holiness (toward God) in righteousness (toward me^) 3. before him (as in his
sight) sincerely, Luke 1 78. 75.
4. all the days of their life, constantly in all estates unto the end, and so
to please God in all things. Col. 1. 10.


The faithful people of God know, Gods children unable thus to live by
themselves.
that this is the life which God in his word so much requires at their hands,
and which they so earnestly desire, and endeavor to perform.

But so are they beset round with sin, Heb. 12. 1.
and often so taken captive by the power of their corrupt nature, That when they
would do good, evil is present with them: Romans 7. 21
whereby it comes to pass, that all, even the strongest Christians, find it a
matter above their ability, thus to lead their lives; and many of the weaker
sort be often discouraged, to see how weakly they perform all Christian duties.

And no marvel, for seeing the regenerate themselves, have not received any
such measure of grace, whereby they may thus willingly, and thoroughly,
sincerely, and constantly, so serve God, as to fear him with reverence and
godly fear, Heb. 12. 28
(witness the slips and falls of the most worthy servants of God) but all our
sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. 12. 9.
and his grace must be sufficient for us, Ioh. 15. 5.
and his power must be magnified in our weakness, and without Christ we can
do nothing: Out of all this may be gathered, what need we have of faith, to
enable us to lead this life, whereby we may please God, and find comfort to
our souls.

Which shall further appear, What is necessary to please God.
if we well consider, what is necessarily required of us sinners, that we may
please God in any duty we perform; which I conceive be these three.

1. First, a conscionable endeavor to do the will of God, Mat. 7. 21.
in such sort as he in his word commands.

2. Secondly, Psalm. 51. 17
a true grief for our many failings herein, Esa. 66. 2.
both in the deed, Heb. 11. 6.
and right manner of doing.

3. Thirdly, a belief, that God for Christ's sake will assist us, and accept of
our weak obedience.

All which as we see be evident in the scripture, and often required, so are they
as manifest by reason; that seeing Gods will, is the rule of all equity,
therefore whatsoever swarueth from it (though never so little) must needs be
unequal, and so displeasing to God.

And on the other side, seeing all our righteousness, is as a stained or
defiled cloth, such as Gods pure eyes cannot endure; of necessity it follows,
that they who will be acceptable to God, must come unto God in Christ, All our
sufficiency is in Christ received by faith.
both for strength to do that which God requires, and for favor, that God
will be pleased to accept of the satisfaction made by Christ for the pardon of
their defects in their best duties, and for the allowing of their obedience to
be well liking in his sight.

Whereupon it necessarily follows, that whosoever intends so to lead a godly
life, that he may be pleasing to God, m^st attain this by faith, without which
as all we do is sin: Heb. 11. 6.
so the Scripture speaks plainly* Without faith it is impossible to please
God.

And yet how few be they, who have attained this grace, so to live by faith; as
thereby to draw from Christ continual increase of spiritual strength, better
to perform all holy obedience, and daily to get more comfort, that this their
obedience shall be acceptable to God! Two branches of this 1. how to get
grace. 2. how to be accepted


Wherein we have these two special branches to be considered, How we may get
this grace, to lead a godly life, or how we may have comfort that this shall
be accepted.

For the former, Some chief failings in every commandment.
that we may better see how unable we be of our selves to perform all holy
obedience, and so be more willing to embrace the remedy: I desire every one
carefully to examine himself by the Law of God, how exceedingly he fails in
every one of them.

1. As for example, in the first commandment: In not walking with God, not
resting upon him for relief in all his necessities, nor so delighting in him,
as to count nothing too dear for him, and that he is not more afraid to
displease God, then any in the world besides.

2. In the second commandment: how slack and slight he is in all the
worship of God, both private and public: as namely, in private prayer (which
yet for the most part is in greatest use.) As for reading the scriptures, and
other godly books, how seldom? meditation alone, and conference with others,
how little thought upon? So likewise for the public, what careless and
unfruitful hearing, praying, singing and receiving of the Sacraments.

3. In the third commandment. How backward he is lifting up the name of God,
so as he might by all his behavior, bring God into better esteem with those
with whom he conuerseth.

4. In the fourth commandment. What ado he has to keep his whole man
employed about the true sanctification of the Lords Sabbath.

In all which whosoever shall conscionably consider his ways, I nothing doubt
but he shall see just cause to complain of his want of faith, whereby alone
he should receive power from Christ and his Spirit, much more effectually to
perform all these holy duties to God.

The like defect shall be found upon due examination in all duties of
righteousness in the second table, which God requires both in regard of our
selves and our neighbor.

As in the fifth commandment. I wish every one duly to weigh how badly he
discharges the duty of his special place, either in the Family, Church, or
Commonwealth, both such as are set above others, and such as be below,
governors and governed: and then he shall well see what need he has of
faith* to enable him to a better performance of those duties, which his place
requires.

6. In the sixth commandment. How careless he is both in avoiding those things
which hurt the life and health of body and soul, both of himself and others:
and in using all good means for the preservation of both; And much more
wanting in bearing and forgiving wrongs, in loving his enemies, and ouercomming
evil with goodness.

7. In the seventh commandment likewise. What little watch and means are
used to keep both soul and body chaste: and so to avoid all allurements to
uncleanness, soberly using all our senses, and their delights.

8. In the eight commandment. How he fails in getting his goods justly, and
so using them holily to Gods honor, mercifully to the relief of his
neighbor, and wisely to his own good, of soul and body.

9. In the ninth commandment. How careless he is as to avoid all blemishing
of his own good name, or his neighbors any manner of way, and so to preserve
either, and to recover them being wounded, by such means as God has appointed.

10. In the tenth commandment. How hardly he can bring his heart to love his
neighbor as himself, and to be as loath to hurt him as his own self, and to
seek his neighbors good as his own.

Thus have I briefly drawn out of the Commandments, some of the chiefest
duties; which we cannot deny, but that as we are bound to perform them, and
desire so to do, so we fail much in the practice of them: neither possibly
can we do better, till we receive grace from Christ to enable us thereunto.

These being so manifest, I hope I shall not need to say any thing more, to
persuade any true Christian to labor for the increase of this precious gift of
faith, whereby he may get power from Christ, better to obey God in all that he
shall require at his hands.

And therefore I would now set upon this work (which is my chief intent) to
gather some special promises, and to show the right use of Faith, for our
help in this behalf.

But that I remember there is an other branch of this matter, 2. Branch of this
third point, how our obedience may be accepted.
namely, how we may do all our works in faith, that God will accept thereof.
Wherein it will be no hard matter to show that we are for the most part as much
(if not more) failing, then in the former; as both reason and experience will
prove. For a mere natural man void of all saving grace, may be drawn by
self-love for his own good, or by fear of danger that might befall him, to
do many good things, Mark. 6. 20.
as we read of Herod, 2 King. 10. 30.
Iehu, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2.
Amaziah, who did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a
perfect heart.

But to be persuaded upon good ground, that God will accept our weak and
sinful obedience for perfect, as if it were without fault, this requires true
grace, yea a greater measure then many a weak believer can attain.

From hence it specially arises that sundry true hearted Christians, Many
discouraged by their infirmities.
very conscionable in their conversation, be yet much discouraged, and by
reason of the infirmities of their best duties have little comfort in any thing
they do, and so loose if not all, yet much fruit of great labor: so that it
cannot be but welcome instruction to them, to hear and learn how they may be
assured that their weak obedience shall be pleasing to God, as if it were
without fault.

In both which I will do my best, to draw out of the wells of salvation, the
holy Scriptures, such sweet promises as shall abundantly satisfy the thirsty
soul, whose chief desire is nothing more then to have grace whereby they may
serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. Heb. 12. 28.


And first to begin with the former, How we may be sure we shall want no
grace.
that we may assure our selves we shall not want any needful grace for the
leading of a godly life, the Lord has expressly said so much, Psalm. 84. 11.
For the Lord God is a Sun and shield: The Lord will give grace and glory, no
good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. Which being so
general, I nothing doubt but it includes this grace of holiness among the
rest. To this end also does the Lord so often promise to sanctify and make
holy his people, as Exodus 19. 6. 31. 13. Leu. 20. 8. 21. 8. 22. 32. Deuteronomy. 22.
8. 9. Esa. 4. 3. 35. 8. Joel 3. 17. I spare to set down the words which they
that list may easily read. Again, to the same end God promises to make his
people fruitful, and so compares himself to a good husbandman, as in the
15. of John, I am the Vine, and my Father is the husbandman; Every branch that
bears not fruit he takes away, and every branch that bears fruit he
purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. So, Esa. 27. 2, 3. In that day
sing ye unto her, a vineyard of red wine; I the Lord do keep it. I will
water it every moment: least any hurt it. I will keep it night and day: and
Psalm. 92. 14. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat
and flourishing.

This also is meant where the Lord as a good shepherd says, he will feed his
people that they may be fat, that is, abounding in grace, as Psalm. 23. Ezekiel.
34. 13, 14, 15. and Psalm. 36. 8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy
pleasures, etc.

This grace of God to lead a godly life, is likewise intended in many other
promises, God gives strength.
as where it is said, That God will give strength to his people; which as it is
in some places meant against enemies bodily or spiritual: so in other, to
walk in the ways of the Lord, etc. Esa. 45. 24. Surely shall one say, In the
Lord have I righteousness and strength. Zach. 10. 12. And I will strengthen
them in the Lord, and they shall walk up and down in his Name, says the
Lord, and the like. That God has wrought all our works in us. Esa. 26. 12.
and so the Apostle, Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ who
strengthens me.

But to this purpose, be most plain those promises where God says; He will
circumcise thine heart and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. Deuteronomy. 30.
6. God makes able to obey.
And to the like effect, verse. 8. And thou shall return and obey the voice of
the Lord, and do all his commandments which I command thee this day, which is
here made a promise of God to them what he would make them able to perform,
as may appear by Hosea 3. 5. and 14. 7. and Ierem. 24. 7. where the like
promise is made. And so, Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. And I will give them one heart, and
I will put a new spirit within you, and I will take the stony heart out of
their flesh, and will give them a heart of flesh: That they may walk in my
statutes, and keep my ordinances and do them, and they shall be my people,
and I will be their God. The like is repeated 36. 27. and 37. 24.

Thus we may see in these Scriptures and many (...) of like sort, Use of these
general promises for sanctification.
how the Lord seeing the frailty of his children, both in obeying his will,
and in believing that ever they shall be able to attain thereunto, has for
their comfort herein given many precious promises, in general containing all
grace needful to the leading of a godly life, which every child of God may
boldly apply to himself in this manner, seeing God who is faithful has said
to all his people, that he will give grace, that he will sanctify them, and
make them fruitful, satisfy them with the fatness of his house, make them
strong to walk in his ways, and give them a new heart to fear him for ever,
and to walk in his statutes, and to keep his ordinances, and to do them,
etc. therefore I may boldly assure my self, though I be never so weak, yet
through Christ I shall be able to do all things, For he has wrought and will
work all our works, 2 Cor. 12. 9.
and his grace shall be sufficient for us.

Yea, we may say as Esa. 45. 24. In the Lord have I righteousness and strength.

If thus we would call to mind what God has spoken for our comfort in this
kind, it would well hearten us, to set upon any duty which the Lord shall
require at our hands, with confidence that we shall be able so to perform it,
as he will approve and say, Matthew. 25. 21.
It is well done, good and faithful servant. Whereas otherwise if we look
upon the difficulty of the work, and our own insufficiency to every good
duty, we shall have no heart to set upon it, but either quite give it over, or
very unfruitfully and uncomfortably go about it, as the manner of most is:
whereby God has small honor, and themselves as little comfort in all their
profession.

This might suffice, Particular graces.
to encourage us cheerfully to set upon a godly life in all the parts of it,
if we were not so untoward to it in our selves, and had not so many
discouragements from others, and so full of unbelief toward God.

But because of all these, the Lord in love is constrained to take more pains
with us, and not only thus in general, to promise us his help, but he
descends to particulars, and where he sees us most mistrustful, there he does
more specially promise his help, that so we might more willingly serve him.

And first, whereas we be all ignorant (even after regeneration) in many
things, what is Gods will, and how to perform such things as God requires (as
may be seen in those special duties before named in every commandment:) and
this has been of old, and is at this day, the complaint of the godly, and so
their often and earnest prayer to God to teach them; as that one book of the
Psalms, and therein that one Psalm. 119. does show, wherein this prayer is often
repeated.

For these causes it is so often said, God will teach us.
that the Lord will teach his people; As in that famous prophecy of the days
of the Gospel where the zeal and faith of Gods people is foreshewed, that
they called upon one another to frequent the public assemblies, upon this
ground: That God would teach them his ways, and they would walk in his
paths. Esa. 2. 3. Mich. 4. 2. So Psalm. 25. 8, 9. He will teach sinners in the
way, and the meek he will teach his way. So Esa. 54. 13. And all thy children
shall be taught of the Lord. And to this purpose that is special, 1. Ioh. 2.
27. where speaking of the spirit given to all the faithful, he says, But the
anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you: and ye need not that
any man teach you: but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and
is truth, and is no lie; and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in
him: Many more promises to this effect might be alleged.

Out of them all, Use.
thus we may conclude; Seeing Christ does bid us come to him, and so to anoint
our eyes with eye-salue that we may see, Reu. 3. 18.
and God has made so many promises to teach us, and that his Spirit shall
lead us into all truth; Ioh. 16. 13.
therefore be our ignorance never so great, and our capacity never so small,
yet we shall not want so much spiritual knowledge as God sees meet. And
therefore we may with confidence come to God for it, and using the means as he
has appointed, we shall not miss. This may suffice for knowledge.

Now for ability, God will set our hearts in frame.
to walk according to our knowledge, enough has been said in the general.
Where also we heard, that God will give unto his, a new heart, which is the
fountain of all obedience; and may be a singular comfort to all those, who
being acquainted with the untowardness of their hearts to any holy duty,
specially to some, do mistrust nothing more, then this, how to get a good
heart; and so to keep it, who for their comfort, are to set before them, all
those promises wherein God has said, that he will change their hearts;
whereof I spoke a little before upon occasion: that God would make his people
able to obey his statutes and do his commandments, which cannot be without a
new heart, and none can have that, but from God; for it is not in man to set
his heart aright, but this is Gods gift. As besides the former Scriptures, that
is manifest, Ierem. 31. 33. Where the Prophet speaking of the new Testament,
which God would make to his people under the Gospel, says, I will put my Law
in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, etc. which is twice
repeated in the Epist. to the Hebrews 8. 10. 10. 16. which is also intended,
Acts 15. 9. where it is said of the Gentiles to whom Peter preached, that God
purified their hearts by faith, and in the next chapter, that the Lord opened
the heart of Lydia. Act. 16. 14.
Again, 2 Cor. 1. 22.
that God has given the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 17.
and 4. 6.
that God has shined into our hearts: that God comfort our hearts, Phil. 4.
7.
keeps our hearts, stablisheth them, directs them, 2 These. 3. 4.
and the like many.

From whence we may safely gather this, Use.
That though our hearts be never so corrupt, so hardened and shut up, so
darkened, distressed, declining, fainting, and wandering out of the right way;
yet that God (as he has promised) will certainly succor us in all; and both
set and keep our hearts in frame, that they may be fit for all such services
as it shall please the Lord to set us about.

This I doubt not, will be welcome news to all sound hearted professors, who
so much see and bewail their naughty and unbelieving hearts, that they may
comfortably rest upon God, that he will by his holy Spirit so guide their
hearts, that they may be serviceable to him.

Thus much for the heart in general. Now seeing the Lord contents not himself
herewith, but comes more particularly to the well ordering of our affections,
of joy, love, fear, trust, and the like; we shall find it useful for us, to
apply to our selves these promises, to hearten us against all our doubts,
concerning these affections, which are as the hands and feet of our souls, by
which we work and be carried to every duty: that being well furnished with
these, we shall be more apt and ready to every good work.

And whereas among these, God gives faith, trust, and hope.
there are none more profitable then Faith, trust and hope (which three though
they have some special difference one from the other, 1 Timothy 2. 8.
yet they be never parted, Eccle. 5. 1.
and be usually contained one within another, and so we will take them
together:) Of these the Scripture exceeding often witnesses, that God gives
these to all those whom he means to save. As Jude verse 3. says of Faith,
that it was once given to the Saints: the like Ephesians. 2. 8. And Heb. 12. 2.
Christ is said to be the Author and finisher of our faith; and so his Apostles
prayed to him, Lord increase our faith: and Romans 12. 13. that God has dealt to
every man the measure of faith.

So likewise for trust and confidence in God, it is said of Gods people, Esa.
10. 20.
that they shall stay upon the Lord, the holy one of Israel: and 14. 32. That
the Lord has founded Sion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it. and
17. 7. At that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have
respect to the holy One of Israel: and Jer. 3. 19. Thou shall call me, my
Father, and shall not turn away from me. Zep. 3. 12.

And for Hope, David often professes, Psalm. 71. 5. 22. 10.
that God was his hope and his trust, even from his youth; and, God made him
hope even from his mothers womb. 65. 5.
Yea more, that God is the hope of all the ends of the earth, etc.

Did we well consider on the one side, Use of these.
what need we have of those three graces, throughout our whole life, (as may
easily be seen by that which has been said in this whole Treatise) and on
the other side, how exceedingly we fail in them all, in times of trial; we
would then with both hands lay hold on these promises, wherein God gives, and
by his Word and Spirit, does work these in the hearts of all his children: and
therefore so often as we feel our hearts to fail; let us with David comfort
our hearts in the Lord, Psalm. 73. 26.
and say, My flesh and my heart fail me, but God is the strength of my heart
and my portion for ever. And seeing the Lord Jesus is both Author and finisher
of our Faith, let us rest in hope, that he who has begun the good work of
faith in our hearts, will finish it; and so pray with the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
11.
that God would fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the Work
of Faith with power.

Come we now to the next grace in the heart, God promises Joy.
the first fruit of our faith, which is Joy, I mean spiritual joy, which is
called joy in the Lord, and joy in the holy Ghost. In thinking whereof I cannot
but wonder, in comparing together what God has promised, and how little we
enjoy: for howsoever it cannot be denied, but in these days of peace many have
joy enough, and too much too, yet this (upon search) shall be found to be
carnal and fleeting, not that spiritual and lasting joy, which God bestows
on those whom he loves.

It may evidently appear by Gods word, that as a father would have his
children to live cheerfully, so would God; and therefore does he so much call
upon them to rejoice, as plentifully is to be seen in the books of the
Psalms, Prophets, and Apostles: That one for many may serve, Rejoice in the
Lord always, Phil. 4. 4.
and again I say rejoice. Which if there were no more, might let us see Gods
mind, that he would have us not now and then, sometimes to rejoice, that is,
when all goes well with us (for so the hypocrites do,) but always, even in
afflictions; as the Apostle James exhorts, My brethren, Iam. 1. 2.
count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations. Which is not simply
for the afflictions, but for the good we are assured, they shall bring to us,
as is said, Romans 8. 28. That all things work together for our good. Few
attain joy.


But yet they be but few, who attain unto this blessed estate, to rejoice
always in the Lord, as any one may well perceive, if he shall consider either
how seldom his heart is ravished with admiration of Gods goodness toward him
so unworthy; and so to stir up his soul with the Prophet David to praise the
Lord (which must needs be where the heart is well affected with this joy, as
there can be no true thanks where this joy is not:) o^ how often his heart is
disquieted, when any thing crosses his will, and desire, which would not be,
if the heart were filled with this spiritual joy, which would make bitter
things sweet.

It shall be therefore our wisdom to hearken to Gods word, wherein we shall
see how plentifully the Lord has prepared this pleasant fruit of the Spirit,
and promised it to all the true members of Christ, that so they may claim
their part therein.

This is notably set out unto us in the book of the Psalms. As first, Psalm.
19. 8. The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart. Psalm. 23. 4.
Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me: 36. 8. 9. Thou shall make them drink
of the river of thy pleasure; for with thee is the fountain of Life, and in
thy light shall we see light. 89. 15, 16. Blessed are the people that know the
joyful sound: they shall walk O Lord, in the light of thy countenance. In thy
name shall they rejoice all the day, and in thy righteousness shall they be
exalted. So Psalm. 45. 15. Speaking of the members of the Church, says, With
gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought, they shall enter into the Kings
palace. Psalm. 64. 10. The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust
in the Lord, and all the upright in heart shall glory. Psalm. 68. 3. But let the
righteous be glad, let them rejoice before God, yea let them exceedingly
rejoice. 97. 11. 12. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the
upright in heart: Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, and give thanks at the
remembrance of his holiness, 118. 15. The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in
the tabernacle of the righteous, The right hand of the Lord does valiantly,
126. 5, 6. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. He that goes forth
and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheanes with him, 132. 16; I will cloathe her priests
with salvation, and her Saints shall shout aloud for joy. It were not hard to
gather many more out of the Psalms.

Likewise the books of the Prophets, be full of these. Notable is that sweet
song of Esai. 12. 2. 3. Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust and not be
afraid; for the Lord Je^ouah is my strength, and my song, he is become my
salvation. Therefore with joy shall ye draw waters out of the wells of
salvation. Esa. 24, 14. They shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the
Majesty of the Lord. Esa. 29. 19. The meek also shall increase their joy in
the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel. Esa.
35. The whole chapter is full of heavenly comforts to us Gentiles, verse. 1. The
wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them, and the desert shall
rejoice, and blossom as the rose. Esa. 56; verse. 7. I will make them joyful in
my house of prayer. Esa. 62. 13. 14. Behold my servants shall rejoice, but ye
shall be ashamed* Behold my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall
cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit. Likewise in the last
of Esa. be many sweet consolations, He shall appear to your joy, etc. ver.
10. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her all ye that love her,
rejoice with joy for her all that mourn for her: That ye may suck, and be
satisfied with the breasts of her consolations, that ye may milk out, and be
delighted with the abundance of her glory, etc. to verse. 14. And when you see
this, your heart shall rejoice, and the hand of the Lord shall be known toward
his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies. In like sort spoke our
Savior to his Disciples, that their hearts should rejoice, Ioh. 16. 22.
and their joy should no man take away from them. Jeremy also has the like,
chap. 31. 12, 13. Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Sion, and
shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, etc. Then shall the Virgin
rejoice in the dance, both young men, and old together: for I will turn their
mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their
sorrow. Zach. c. 18. 19. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the fast of the fourth
month, etc. shall be to the house of Judah, joy and gladness, and cheerful
feasts. I will end with that, Romans 14. 17. The kingdom of God is righteousness,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

Thus have I gathered store of these promises, Use.
in which the Lord promises to give joy and gladness to his people: yet I
suppose not half so many, as might be collected out of the scriptures: for I
do not meddle with the many exhortations unto this duty, nor the many examples
of it, nor prayers for it: all which show the necessity of it.

But the mark I aim at, is to persuade all who feel the want of this holy
rejoicing in the Lord (whereby their whole life is the more uncomfortable,)
that God has provided this for them, and that there is nothing but their
unbelieving hearts which keeps it from them. For if true faith be the breeder
of this joy, as both scripture and experience prove, then no marvel, that so
few attain to this excellent grace of rejoicing, when faith it self is so
weak, if not wanting.

I do wish therefore all such, to think with themselves what the Lord should
intend, in making so many promises of this one thing, but to make us see these
two things: first, that there can be no holding out in a Christian course
without this joy: secondly, that by reason of the many evils that befall us in
this life, it is very hard, and so very rare to get, much more to keep this
joy, that by both these, they may be stirred up to labor to enjoy this joy of
the Holy Ghost, whereby they may find what is the excellency of this estate
above all the estates in the whole world besides; and be so far from envying
the wicked in their greatest prosperity, as rather to pity them, for that like
fools and children, they forgo such treasure for very toys and bables.

Now the way to attain this joy is, (besides earnest prayer unto God for it)
to be much in meditation, as upon the many and most just causes God has
given to all believers to rejoice: so also upon these excellent promises,
wherein God has bound himself to work this grace in them, by his holy
Spirit: for if we well weigh them all, we shall see, that the Lords meaning is
not only to give them matter of reioicing, (but whereas it too often falls
out, that they who should rejoice, and have good good cause so to do, be so
held down with the burden of corruption or affliction, that they cannot lift
up their hands with joy, but waste their days in sorrow:) This is also Gods
work to open their eyes to see, and to move their hearts, and draw them by
his Spirit to be affected with his favors, that they with the Prophet David
may find more joy in the light of Gods countenance, then the wicked have in
all their prosperity. And thus much for this point, how a true believer may
attain this blessed estate of living joyfully, what ever does befall him:
which how much it is to be desired, all may see though they be few, who take
the right way to get it.

The next grace of the heart, which God requires of all those, Of the love of
God.
whom he has adopted in Christ to be his children, Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
is, that they should love him with all their heart, with all their soul, with
all their might: which that we ought to do is not denied of any, except
Atheists, people without God; but of those that yield it ought to be, there be
in general two sorts, one that deceive themselves in thinking they do well
love God, when as indeed they do not truly and heartily love him, but only
say they love him; or if they do, it is but very slightlie and carnally,
because all goes well with them: Some say they love God, and do not.
who are to be convinced by their loose lives, and little conscience to keep
Gods commandments, that they do not as they say, truly love God. And these
especially are to be urged by the many commandments of God to love him
sincerely and fervently, and to be moved hereto by these weighty arguments,
which are so plentifully used in the holy scripture, to persuade us unfeignedly
to love God.

There is another sort, who looking into their lives, and there finding so many
infirmities and failings in all duties to God and man, Others fear they do
not love, yet do.
do thence conclude, they have not the love of God in them; and thereby be
much kept down, both from that comfort and confidence they might have in their
holy profession.

These be the persons with whom I chiefly deal: who have need to be
hartened, first by this, that the sight of their want of love to God, Comforts
to such as grieve for want of love.
breeding in them hearty grief for the same, is an evident token there is
some true love in them: else would they not be so disquieted for want of this
love of God.

And secondly, this must comfort them, that he who has given them to will and
desire this grace, Phil. 2. 13. 1. 6.
will also give them ability to do, and he that has begun the good work,
will also perfect it, for so is his promise: yea he has said, at least to all,
and every such, And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, Deuteronomy. 306.
and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, that thou may live: which one promise, if there be no
more, is all-sufficient to persuade those that will believe God on his word,
that God (who knows how polluted our hearts be, and unable to love him, so
thoroughly as we ought,) will cleanse our hearts, and so sanctify them, that
we shall be able by his grace so to love him, as he will approve.

It is only unbelief, which keeps from that holy boldness, which made Paul
to say, I can do al things through Christ who strengthens me. Phil. 4. 13.


Although I do not read any other so express promise, that God will make us
to love him, yet seeing the manifestation of Gods love to us, does as
certainly breed love in us to him again, as the kindling of a fire will bring
forth heat: therefore all the many testimonies which God gives of his love to
us, must be so many persuasions, that we shall love him. Therefore it is said,
We love him, Use.
because he first loved us. Let us therefore get as many arguments of Gods love
to us, and doubt we not but it will kindle in us some like love to him again.

Likewise all the rich rewards, which throughout the Scripture be promised to
those that love God, are so many encouragements to this duty; and so much for
this.

The next is the fear of God, God promises to make us fear him.
whereby specially I understand that holy affection whereby we be made so to
stand in awe of God, as to be very unwilling to displease him; and on the
other side to be as ready to please him, both in eschewing evil, and doing
good. How excellent a grace this is, of what singular use in our whole life,
how often and earnestly it is commanded, how practiced by Gods worthy servants,
and how wanting in many professors, and weak in others it is: all these,
though worthy good consideration, yet seeing they would carry me too far from
my purpose, I pass them by, and will bend my speech to such as knowing all
these, ^eele and complain of the want of this grace, and desire it, and labor
for it, by often prayer, and other holy means: yet through weakness of faith,
cannot attain to such a measure of this fear, as might keep them in such
awe, that they durst not either do that which God forbids, or leave undone
that which he commands.

These I do beseech to attend to such promises as God has made to his people
in particular, concerning this grace; that whereas he sees, that naturally,
there is no fear of God before men's eyes, he faith he will put his fear into
their hearts: as Jeremy, 32. 39. 40. And I will give them one heart, and one
way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their
children after them. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I
will not turn away from them, to do them good, but I will put my fear in
their hearts that they shall not depart from me. Which if we could believe,
would sufficiently assure us, we should not want this saving grace, but that
God will certainly bestow it upon us in that time and measure he sees meet.

But for our confirmation, the Lord does often repeat this promise, as Deu. 4.
10. where one special means, whereby this fear is wrought, is set down:
Gather me the people together, and I will make them hear my words, that they
may learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and
that they may teach their children. So Prou. ^. 5. They who seek for wisdom,
shall understand the fear of God. To like effect. Deu. 6* 1. 2. and 17* 19, it
is specially spoken of the king: and more generally of all, chap. 32. 12. And
to this purpose special is that of the Prophet David, Psalm. 40. 3. where he
shows another means whereby God does stir up this grace in his people:
namely, the beholding of Gods mercy on others, saying, And he has put a new
song in my mouth, even praise unto our God, many shall see it, and fear, and
shall trust in the Lord: so likewise David being taught of God, inuiteth
others, saying: Come ye children, hearken to me^* I will teach you the fear
of the Lord. Psalm. 72. 5. They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon
endures, through all generations. The like Psalm. 102. 16. so Esa. 29. 23. They
shall sanctify my name, etc. and shall fear the God of Israel. Jeremie also
speaking of Gods singular mercies, which he promises to his people, chap. 33.
9. And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and an honor before all the
nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good I do unto them; and they
shall fear and tremble for all the goodness, and for all the prosperity that I
procure unto it: so Hosea 3. 5. Afterward shall the people of Israel return
and seek the Lord their God, and David their king, and shall fear the Lord
and his goodness in the latter days.

These shall suffice, it would be long to cite all.

The right use we are to make of these and the like, Use.
is, so often as we find our hearts condemning us for want of this fear, and
doubting how ever we shall attain to it in any good measure, so often that we
must call to mind some of these promises, which though delivered in particular
to some of Gods children, yet in truth belonging to all of them: Therefore
every child of God may and ought to apply them to himself, and steadfastly
believe that God will perform his word to him, and so waiting with patience
the Lords appointed season, he shall not be disappointed of his hope: but
shall certainly enjoy the fruit of his desire, And thus much for this.

I see this third point, how we may be sure of grace to lead a godly life,
so as shall be accepted, grows large; and no marvel, for it reaches to all
the duties required in both tables. I may not therefore run into all
particulars, but will make choice of some, and namely such as I conceive
Christians most fail in, and have least comfort in performing them.

Of this sort be special, Concerning holy exercises, prayer. etc.
all our spiritual services of God, as our prayers, and exercises in his word
and sacraments. In all which I have heard many of good hope, complaining that
they found small comfort in these, because they performed them in so weak and
sinful manner. A principal cause whereof I have observed in many to be
this, that they placed all their comfort in the good discharge of their duty,
wherein when they failed (which they found often) then they were discomfited.
Which evidently shows, that they had little use of faith in those duties: for
faith does comfort in our greatest failings, as well as in the least. To make
this more plain (which I fear is little seen of many a poor soul, who
takes great pains to serve God, and yet seldom finds comfort, that his
service being so full of infirmity is pleasing to God:) It must be confessed,
that while we live here, there is flesh and spirit mingled in all the actions
of Gods children; so that as their best prayers be stained with some
corruption of the flesh, so I conceive that there is some operation of the
Spirit in their weakest, which being offered up in faith, is assuredly
acceptable to God; and therein may Gods child find sound comfort, not in
himself, nor in his work, but in Gods pardoning of all his defects, and
accepting his obedience in the perfect satisfaction made by Christ: whereas
otherwise, if any having prayed with great feruency of Spirit, shall be
conceited therewith, and not humbled for his failings in that his best prayer,
and rather expecting for favor for the goodness of his prayer, then looking
for mercy, only for the merit of Christ, (which though it be too little
seen, yet too often it falls out) I durst boldly say, that the sleepy prayer
offered up in faith, is accepted, when the weeping prayer without faith is
rejected.

In so saying, Want of faith in Gods worship.
be it far from my thought, to approve of drowsinesse, or any other gross
corruption in prayer: or to disgrace any zeal or gift of Gods Spirit in
prayer; but that I aim at, is to discover a common, and yet close and
dangerous corruption in our prayers, and other holy exercises, that when we
perform these in any sort to our liking, then we be glad and rest quiet,
that God will accept them. I deny not but such may then rejoice in the
assistance of Gods Spirit: but the fault I find, is, that these have in such
times little use of their faith; for not beholding the blemishes of these their
best services of God, they are not humbled for them, and so not driven out of
themselves to seek for favor in Christ, in whom alone God is well pleased:
and thus they stain their best duties for want of faith.

This will more clearly be seen in the contrary, when these do pray, or
hear, read or meditate, or receive the Sacraments with much accusation to
their conscience, they have no comfort that such duties shall be accepted,
which must needs arise from want of faith; for did they in their poorest
prayers (for which they be most humbled) come to God in Christ for pardon,
believing that their imperfections should be covered by the full and perfect
satisfaction of Christ, they might find comfort in their weakest obedience,
and so be more encouraged to serve God.

This then is that I would persuade all that would find sound and lasting
comfort in their prayers and other holy exercises, Remedy.
in their best duties to beware of pride, which accompanies them; and to that
end ever to think of their failings, to humble them, and drive to Christ, that
so they may offer up their sacrifice in faith, and be accepted. On the other
side, when they be most dejected, then to beware of despair, doubting, and
discouragement, which be usual companions of us in the sense of our wants;
and to comfort our selves by faith in Christ, in that we know, he is as able
and willing to cure great diseases, as small, to pardon our fowler falls, as
our lesser slippes.

In all which we now see that which I intended, how needful it is to be
stored and strengthened with faith, that we may find comfort in our prayers,
and other holy exercises; which I know is much wanting in many true hearted
Christians, for whose sake in special I write these: and will now for their
further comfort lay out some store of precious promises, which God our Father
has treasured up in his word to this purpose, that we his children might be
imboldened to come with confidence to him in all our necessities.

Perusing these, I find that the far greater number of them, do specially
promise that God will accept our prayers, and grant our desires, and do not so
expressly assure us that God will assist us, and make us able to pray (which yet
sundry promises do.) God promises to make us able to pray.
I will therefore here gather such as expressly promise Gods help to teach us
to pray; for that we are no less subject to doubt of our ability to pray
aright, then of Gods readiness to hear our poor and weak prayers.

Among all, that comes first to mind, which might serve in stead of all, if we
could hold it fast: where the Apostle laboring to comfort the hearts of Gods
children over all their corruptions and afflictions, Romans 8. 26.
does answer a great objection, which many a heavy heart makes, namely this:
Many troubled that they cannot pray.
I am often so distressed, that I am not able to pray, and how then may I look
for any help at Gods hand? Thus it fares often with Gods children, and those
not of the weakest sort, that their hearts be so ^ore oppressed, that they can
do nothing but sigh and groan, not able to set aright their hearts to pray to
God. As we read of Hezekiah, Esa. 38. 14.
that he like a Crane or Swallow did chatter, and did mourn as a Dove, not
able to utter his griefs to God. The like we read of David often, Psalm. 32.
how he roared for grief, but could not come to make his moan to God; and
the like many: Yea what more ordinary complaint do we hear made by many
worthy Christians in their extremities, then this to their friends, O help me,
I cannot pray?

To this sore tentation, the Apostle answers, Romans 8. 26.
saying, Likewise the Spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what we
should pray for, 27.
as we ought: But the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings
that cannot be uttered: And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the
mind of the spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints according to
the will of God. Wherein he freely confesses, that he and all the rest of Gods
children do know this by woeful experience, that they in such cases know not
what they should pray as they ought. But yet for all this God has not left us
comfortless, for he has given us his own Spirit to succor and help us (as
it were to bear that part of the burthe, which is too heavy for us to bear:)
and whereas we cannot pray as we ought, that self same Spirit shall by his
power make us able to pray with such feeling, faith, and feruencie, as no words
can express; in such sort that God, who both knows and regards the secret
desires of the heart, beholding the work of his Spirit, does graciously accept
and approve of those prayers of his children.

I make no doubt, but this is the intent of the Apostle in this Scripture. In
which if there were no more, is enough to comfort any poor afflicted soul
against this temptation, that they cannot pray: In that God has given us his
Spirit so to help us, that our poor prayers are said to be the prayers of
Gods Spirit in us, which God cannot deny.

This I take to be the cause, why elsewhere we be called upon to pray in the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18.
and in the holy Ghost; Jude v. 20.
that is, as he does teach us, not as any natural gift can.

Where I note a special difference of true prayer from counterfeit, Difference
of prayers, true* and counterfeit
which may be excellent in speech, but wanting this breath of Gods Spirit, it
is but a dead sacrifice, unpleasing to God, and unprofitable to him that
offers it.

And therefore I advise all, who look for comfort by their prayers, more to
labor for Spirit, then speech in prayers. And so much for this Scripture,
whereupon I have stood the longer, for that it may suffice in stead of all. But
seeing the Lord knowing our weakness, has in all ages of his Church,
comforted his people with the like, it shall more confirm us to hear more of
these sweet promises.

To this may well be referred that which one of Jobs friends said to comfort
him (which doubtless was good comfort, howsouer misapplyed) when after some
good exhortations, he makes many more gracious promises, among all he adds
these: For thou shall have thy delight in the Almighty, Job 22.
and shall lift up thy face to God. 21. and 6.
Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, 26.
and he shall hear thee, and thou shall pay thy vows, etc. 27.
And in like manner does another of Jobs friends say, He shall pray unto the
Lord, Job 33. 26.
and he will be favorable to him. So David in his time said. For this shall
every one that is godly pray unto thee, Psalm. 32. 6.
in the time when thou may be found. Esa. 58. 9.
And the Prophet Esaias makes such promises to the people in his time: Then shall
thou call and the Lord will answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I
am: So Jeremy, Ier. 29. 12.
Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will
hearken to you. 13.
And ye shall seek me and find me, when you shall search for me with all
your heart. Again, They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I
lead them, 31. 9.
I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters, in a strait way wherein
they shall not stumble, for I am a Father to Israel and Ephraim is my first
borne. 50. 4.
And again, In those days, and in that time, says the Lord, the children of
Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going and weeping,
they shall go and seek the Lord their God. Hosea. 3. 5. etc. So Zachary in
his time prophesied, that God would power out upon the house of David, Zach.
12. 10.
and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and supplications.
They shall call upon my name, 13. 9.
and I will hear them. I will say, it is my people: and they shall say, the
Lord is my God. Our Lord Jesus Christ in his time comforted his Disciples, that
they should not so hang upon him, as to have no confidence in God the Father:
Ioh. 16. 23.
but they shall boldly pray to the Father in his name, 24.
and shall receive whatsoever they ask. 26.
No doubt but more places to this purpose might be cited.

The maine intent of them all, Use.
is not so much, to show it is our duty thus to seek the Lord and to call upon
him, or to persuade thereunto, which is in many Scriptures required; but
rather, whereas many are very willing to call upon God according to his will,
and so as might please him, but finding so small ability to pray as they
would, they be discouraged* all this is to draw them to believe, that God by
his Spirit will teach them to pray, so as he will hear them: the certainty
whereof depends not upon any worthiness of our persons or prayers, but only
upon the mercy of God in promising, and upon his truth in performing his
promise; both which we deny, and so rob God of his chiefest honor, if we
believe not, that God will make us able by his Spirit, so to call upon him, as
he will accept in his Son. And therefore in all our doubts and fears about
this matter, our only refuge must be to these promises, and so to give
credit unto them, that we comfortably seek and look for help from God, when
we can find none in our selves.

And thus much for our comfort, that God will assist us by his Spirit in our
prayers, which also might suffice to assure us, that he will also accept us:
for so much is expressed in the most of them, and necessarily employed in them
all.

But seeing the Lord (who better sees what we most need, That God will accept
our prayers.
then we do our selves) has made so many promises, that he will accept our
poor services, though never so weak, if they be in truth (which will be
welcome news to many an humble heart) I may not defraud them of these
comforts, but will lay them open for their use, and beseech the Lord to make
them profitable to all that unfeignedly desire it.

When Moses from God had sharply denounced fearful judgments against Israel
for their sin, and namely a scattering among the heathen, he adds this
comfort: But if from thence, thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou shall
find him, Deuteronomy. 30.
if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul: and to like
effect he adds much more.

This promise may be specially comfortable, Use.
to any poor soul cast down in sense of some grievous fall, whereby he may
see Gods readiness to receive any poor sinner coming unto him. The like
promise did the Lord make to Solomon after his prayer, saying, Mine eyes shall
be open, 2. Chron. 7. 15.
and mine ears attend to the prayer in this place. And full often we read, that
the Lord promised to his people, that if they should seek him, he would be
found of them, as 2. Chron. 15. 2 the Prophet told Asa the King. Ierem. 29. 13.
And 1. Chron. 28. 9. David said the same to Solomon his son. Psalm. 34. 10.
They that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing. The self same thing
is truly to be gathered out of all these places where the faithful profess,
either that God has heard their prayers, or their faith and confidence in God,
that he will hear their prayers; both which be grounded on Gods promises that
he will hear them. Of this sort there be many, as in the Psalms, so in
sundry other Scriptures: The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, Psalm. 6.
8, 9.
the Lord has heard my supplication, the Lord will receive my prayer. And
Psalm. 9. 10. Thou Lord have not forsaken them that seek thee. Psalm. 10. 17.
Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their heart,
thou will cause thine ear to hear. Psalm. 18. 3. I will call upon the Lord,
who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies. Psalm. 20.
6 Now I know the Lord saves his anointed, he will hear him from his holy
heaven, with the saving strength of his right hand. These are sufficient to
manifest this truth.

But seeing my scope is rather to stir up to believe, I hope it will not be
more tedious to any, to read these and consider them, then it is to me to
gather them; and I may truly say, I have often read them with comfort. For
sometimes one, sometimes another does more affect. I will therefore not spare
to add many more.

To this purpose, notable is that in the Psalm 34. 15. The eyes of the Lord
are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their cry. verse 17. The
righteous cry, and the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their
troubles. Which is often repeated, Psalm. 107. 6. 13. 19. 28. Psalm. 50. 15. the
Lord says, Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me. And, For thou Lord art good and ready to forgive, Psalm. 86.
5.
and plenteous in mercy to all them that call upon thee, etc. verse 6. 7. Psalm.
102, 17. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their
prayer, to verse 20: to hear the groaning of the prisoner, to loose those that
are appointed to death. Psalm. 145. 18.
The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him, to all that call upon him in
truth. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, 19.
he also will hear their cry, and will save them. Prou. 15. 8. But the prayer
of the upright is his delight, and verse 29. But he hears the prayer of the
righteous. He will be very gracious unto thee, at the voice of thy cry, when he
shall hear it, he will answer thee. Joel 2. 32. And it shall come to pass,
that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered. Act. 2.
21. the same is repeated, and Romans 10. 13.

Thus we see how plentifully has been renewed this promise of hearing the
prayers of his people, in all ages of his Church until Christ, who (knowing
that we under the Gospel have as great need, both to pray and to be
comforted, that God will hear our prayers) has given us many encouragements
to pray in faith, Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find:
Mat. 7. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
knock and it shall be opened unto you, For every one that asks, receives,
and he that seeks, finds, and to him that knocks, shall it be opened.
The same is set down, Luke 11. from verse 9. to 13. where it is said, If ye
then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to the^ that ask him? So our
Savior said to the woman of Samaria, If thou knew the gift of God, Ioh. 4.
and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked
of him, and he would have given thee the living water.

Likewise in those heavenly and last speeches, which he uttered to his
Disciples, he often repeated those promises, saying: Whatsoever ye shall ask in
my name, that will I do, Ioh. 15. 13.
that the Father may be glorifie^ in the Son: If ye shall ask any thing in my
name, I will do it. The like often, Ioh. 15. 7. 16. 16. 23. and 24. Ask and ye
shall receive, that your joy may be full: so the Apostle, Romans 10. 12.
For the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him, Iam. 5. 15.
The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and
if he have committed sin, it shall be forgiven him: and ver. 16. the
effectual prayer of the righteous avails much. The Apostle Ioh. has the
like saying, 1 Ioh. 3. 22
And whatsoever we ask of him, we receive. And again, 5. 14.
And this is the confidence we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will, he hears us, And if we know that he hears us, 15.
whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired of
him. And in the next place, If any see his brother sin a sin which is not
unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life, etc. Use.


Thus have we store of these promises, wherein the Lord binds himself, to
hear our prayers, and grant our requests; the end of all which is to cure this
sore disease of our nature, Use.
that we be so full of distrust, and so hardly believe that God will accept our
prayers, they being so weak, and our selves so unworthy. For remedy whereof we
are to be familiarly acquainted with these promises, and to make choice of some
of them, such as to our feeling are most comfortable; that when we go to
prayer, we may meditate on them, that so we may be persuaded by them, that God
will graciously pardon all our failings, and accept our poor endeavors in the
perfect satisfaction made by Christ for us. The fruit of this practice would
be exceeding great, both to breed in us a greater delight in this holy duty,
(which usually is so much wanting:) And to make all our prayers more
effectual, for the obtaining of all good things, at the hand of God. Whereas
on the other side, by neglecting this duty of meditating on these promises, we
shall disable our selves from all comfortable practice of prayer, and become
more guilty not only of contempt of Gods bounty in making such promises unto
us: but withal of greater impiety, in making the holy and true God a liar, in
that we do not believe him in that which he speaks. Therefore as we desire
to avoid these sore evils* and attain these great benefits, let us make high
account of these promises, and so make them our own, that we may have the
right use of them, especially in all time of need.

This which has been said of Gods gracious accepting of our prayers, All
sacrifices accepted.
may as truly be applied to all other holy exercises of religion and services
of God. In all of which the Lord is as ready both to enable us to the work,
and to be pleased with our sincere endeavors, we offering them up to God with
faith in the mediation of Christ Jesus.

Yet seeing besides these, we have many promises, that God will be pleased
with our sacrifices (which may be truly understood of all) it will add to our
comfort, if we shall advisedly consider of them: of which sort is that in the
Psalm. 51. 19. Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness,
Deuteronomy. 33. 19.
etc. As Moses blessed the tribe of Z^bulon in the same words: 1 Pet. 2. 5.
so the Apostle Peter speaking of all the faithful says, Ye also as living
stones are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And Paul writing to the
Philippians, speaking of the relief which they sent to him, calls it an
odor of a sweet smell, Phil. 4. 18
a sacrifice, acceptable, well pleasing to God. And writing to the Romans 12. 1.
says, I beseech you therefore brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your
reasonable service. The Lord by Moses did oftentimes tell his people, that they
offering up their sacrifices, such as he commanded, they should be accepted, as
Leuit. 1. 4. 22. 21. 23. 11. 26. 11. So Malachy 3. 4. Then shall the offerings
of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant to the Lord, as in the days of old, and as
in former years. This also may be gathered out of that which Moses told the
people of Israel from the Lord, that they bringing their sacrifices to the
door of the Tabernacle of the congregation, There he would meet the people
of Israel, Exodus 29. 43.
and the Tabernacle should be sanctified by his glory. Which may be gathered
out of that which follows, that the Lord would dwell among them, and be their
God, to hear and help them, which is elsewhere often repeated. Esa. 60. 7.
foreshewed this saying, They shall come with acceptance, etc. And hitherto may
be well referred the many favors which God promises to our obedience, which
is an acceptable sacrifice to God, offered up in Christ. As the Lord said unto
Cain, Genesis 4. 7.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? the like the Lord said to his
people of Israel in preparing them to hear his Law: Now therefore if ye will
obey my voice indeed, Exodus 19. 5.
and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all
people; for all the earth is mine. 6.
And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of Priests, and an holy nation. Leuit. 26.
3. to 14. and Deuteronomy. 28. 1. to 14. be many special blessings promised to the
Lords people if they would hearken to his voice, and observe and do all his
commandments: and to conclude with that sweet promise, Psalm. 84. 11. For the
Lord God is a Sun and shield, the Lord will give grace and glory: no good
thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

Out of these promises and the like many, Use.
we may boldly assure our selves, that although by reason of our corruption
still dwelling in us, we can never offer up any sacrifice to God, without
blemish and spot, (for which God might justly reject all, which we offer unto
him) yet we offering them up in the name of Christ, they shall be accepted and
rewarded.

Were we well persuaded hereof, it would put life into us, and make us
perform all holy duties much more cheerfully and constantly, which through
want of this faith, are at least more uncomfortably performed by us.

I leave the deeper consideration of both these, to the conscience of every one
who will take trial of himself, namely, what small comfort he finds in any
of his spiritual services; and on the other side, what a comfort it would be,
if he might be assured that God would both assist him, and accept them at his
hand. Whereof seeing he has God so firmly bound by promise, that he cannot
without great sin, wrong to God and to his own own soul, call this into
question:

I therefore exhort all who see their weakness in this kind, to take
special notice of these and such like promises, and so every one apply them to
himself, in all time of need, that he may more cheerfully set upon all holy
duties, and more conscionably perform them to the glory of God, and his own
comfort, and the good encouragement of others.

This which has been said in special for prayer, and so in general for all
our sacrifices, may well be applied to the Word and Sacraments, yea to all
private exercises of religion, yea to all works of mercy; which be all of them
sacrifices, which God has commanded, and promised to accept at our hands.

Yet seeing woeful experience bewrays that too too many (and those not of
the worst sort) do find small comfort in the ordinary ministry of the Word
and receiving the holy Sacraments: Word.
I will do my best endeavor to redress this sore evil, and show how any who
will be guided by Gods word, may more cheerfully set upon these holy duties,
and so reap more fruit and comfort by them.

I cannot be ignorant of this, that there be many causes of this
unfruitfulness, and vncomfortablenesse in these holy services of God, both in
the Minister and people, especially in the preaching of the word, when he does
not apply himself to the capacity and best edification of the hearers:
wherein there is much failing many ways, and this not the least, that where
many good doctrines and uses are delivered, yet there is not such a conuincing
of the conscience, as might constrain the hearer to confess his guiltiness,
and to make conscience to yield better obedience to that which is taught him.

In the people also there is great carelessness in preparing themselves before
they come; dullness and wandering of mind, when they be at the word, with like
neglect of meditating on what they heard: By any of which, much more by all,
the Word is made unfruitful.

But to treat of these, is beyond my scope and matter intended, which is
chiefly to help such as uing a true desire and care to profit by Gods holy
ordinances, yet be so discouraged by their many infirmities in the use of them,
that they have small comfort in them, and would if they durst, forbear the use
of them.

The principal cause hereof which I observe is this, that they too much
looking into themselves (where they find no ability to do what they would)
and not looking sufficiently to God in whom is all their help, they enjoy not
that fruit and comfort in Gods service which they desire.

For remedy whereof I know no better way, then to be acquainted with Gods
promises made to such as shall hearken to his Word, and receive the holy
Sacraments the seals of the Word, that by these they may be comforted, that
God will bless his own ordinances to their edification and salvation. First
for the hearing of the word, that which the Prophet Esaias speaks might suffice
to persuade any (who will give credit to his report) that it shall not be lost
labor to hearken to Gods word. The place is worthy special observation: Esa.
55. 1.
Hoe every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no
money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money, and
without price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread, 2.
and your labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and
eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness.
Incline your care and come unto me, 3.
hear and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with
you, even the sure mercies of David.

In this Scripture (to pass by many other profitable matters which may be
collected;) these for our purpose must be observed: First, how freely the Lord
offers saving grace to such as have none, nor any thing whereby they might
purchase it: Secondly, he sets out the way whereby they may enjoy it, namely*
a diligent hearing and believing Gods word. To which end he thirdly makes most
sweet promises, that their soul shall live, that is, they shall be quickened
in Christ, and in him the seed of David, be made partakers of those mercies
which shall never decay. From hence what encouragement may any poor soul take
to hearken to Gods word, when he may upon so good ground assure himself, that
hereby he shall attain unto salvation, and all needful graces for this life?

This is notably confirmed by all these Scriptures, which testify That the
word is able to save our souls, as Iam. 1. 21. Wherefore lay apart all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the
ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. So Paul exhorting Timothy to
many excellent duties, among the rest gives this, 1 Timothy 4. 16
Take heed to thy self, and unto the doctrine: continue therein; for in doing
this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee. Again,
speaking to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20. 33.
says; And now brethren I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace,
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them
which are sanctified. So likewise to the Corinthians he says, 1 Cor, 1. 21
It pleased God by the foolishnes of preaching to save them that believe.

All which Scriptures, and many other to like effect, Use.
do evidently confirm unto us, that as there is no salvation without the
preaching of the word, so whosoever shall conscionably attend to it, shall
certainly be saved: which if it were believed, it could not but make men run
to it with great alacrity, and so should they find much comfort thereby.

To this purpose be there so many commendations of the word throughout the
scriptures, specially in the books of the Psalms, and of the Proverbs. It
would be too long to cite all: yet all are to be referred to this end, to
breed in us a greater delight in this word, which brings such incomparable
benefits. Of this sort, are these, Psalm. 19. 7, etc. The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the soul: The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise
the simple: The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart. And so
follows to like effect in the same place. The whole Psalm 119, was written
to this purpose, to set out the excellency of this word in all respects, and
specially for the worthy effects, and fruits which it brings forth in every
one, who truly embraces it: so that it is observed by many learned Divines,
that omong 176. verses, there be scarce four or five at the most, wherein
there is not some commendation of the word, to stir up all Gods people better
to esteem it, and more diligently to attend to it, that they may enjoy the
fruits of it, at all times, and in all estates. To which end I require every
true Christian to be much exercised in this Psalm, that they may be
familiarlie acquainted with it, and so have it in readiness for their use in all
their necessities.

I might say as much for the book of the Proverbs, wherein besides the many,
and most wise directions for the well ordering of our whole life, are contained
especially in the first nine chapters, admirable commendations of those
heavenly instructions, which God as a Father by his servants does give unto his
children. Prou. 4. 13.
A few for many: Take fast hold of instruction, let her not go: Keep her, for
she is thy life. Wherein what can be more contained then this, that instruction
is our life? meaning that thereby we attain all things pertaining to the
comfort of this life, and of that to come.

This might be set out at large in particulars, both in the escaping of
manifold evils, sins, and punishments, which they fall into, who want, or
will not receive these instructions: as also in the enjoying of many blessings
bodily and spiritual, which others want: but I leave the further consideration
of these to every ones particular meditation, who desires to see the truth
hereof. No doubt, David meant no less, when he said, Psalm. 119. 165.
Great peace (is, and shall be) to them that love thy Law: and nothing shall
offend them. Who would not highly prise that word, which brings all manner of
wisdom, to all sorts, learned, unlearned, wise and silly, old and young? Yet
all this, does that one book of the Proverbs, as is expressly said in the six
first verses of the first chapter, as you may there read; and therefore how
much more is this to be found in the whole Scripture?

Which, Use.
me thinks, should put life into any good heart, to be much conversant in the
hearing, reading, and meditating of the word of God. For further quickening
herein, I will only quote the places, and refer every one that lists to
hear more of this matter, to peruse them; and so shall he find enough to
hearten him to this duty, Prou. 1. 9. 23. 2. from 1. to 13. 3. 1. to 4. 13. to
24 4, 5. to 13. 20. to 22. 6. 20. to 24, 7. 1. to 5. 8. the whole chapter.

In these and many other places of the old and new Testament, Application
the Lord knowing our exceeding backwardness in true receiving, and keeping
his word, (which yet is so necessary, as that there is no salvation without it)
does make so many precious promises, as I know not whether to any thing more;
That at least by some of them, we, who be so full of doubting how we may
attain to the right use of the word, may be more heartened to a conscionable
and constant attendance unto it, that so we may in due season reap the sweet
fruit thereof.

This then must be the care and labor of every one, who feels the want of
this comfortable use of Gods word, and earnestly desires it, to be well
acquainted with these promises, and out of all to gather some of the chief,
such as seem to him most special, and so commit them to memory, that
whenever he goes to the word, he may meditate upon these, and so be more
encouraged to attend unto Gods word with expectation of Gods blessing upon his
labor.

The want of this meditation upon Gods promises when we go to the word, is
one chief cause of that great sin of unfruitful hearing, and consequently
of that little growth in grace, which is every where to be seen among ordinary
resorters to the public ministry; as the Apostle reports of the Hebrews,
that the Word preached did not profit them, Heb. 4. 2.
being not mingled with faith in them that heard it.

Out of this which has been said of the word in general, Sacraments.
(which well may be referred to all the several exercises therein, public or
private, to every of which many of these promises do pertain) we may safely
gather comfort in the use of the Sacraments, which be truly called a visible
Word, because that which is spoken in the word to the ear, is in visible
signs represented to our eyes, and sealed to our hearts, that we may be the
more assured of them to be ours; so that if we had no special promises made
expressly to them, yet we might out of the former receive sufficient
encouragement to look for the benefit of them: that is, to be made partakers
of Christ and life in him; which is the sum and substance of all that which
is promised in the word.

But seeing the Lord, (who in all ages of his Church ordained these holy signs
and seals of his Testament, in which he bequeathed Christ and all his benefits
to true believers, and their seed,) knowing our great weakness of faith in
receiving these seals, has so labored to give us assurance, that (if we
think there is any truth in him) we may be as sure that Christ and al his
merits are ours, as the outward signs which we see with oureies, and our hands
do handle: let us for our comfort carefully consider hereof.

Not to meddle with the Sacraments of the old Testament, Circumcision and the
Passover, both which were to the people of God sure seals of the righteousness
of faith, Romans 4. 11.
as the Apostle speaks of Circumcision; and does as truly belong to all the
Sacraments of the old and new Testament: this one Scripture might sufficiently
assure any, that he truly receiving the outward seals according to Gods
appointment, should as certainly be partaker of Christ and all his benefits,
(which are the things sealed) as he is partaker of the outward seals: the
certainty whereof depends on Gods truth and faithfulness, as in his word, so
in the seals thereof; who does as truly give that which he promises and
seals, as he does freely give any promise or seal.

We do justly account him no honest man, who will not be as good as his word;
much more him who will seal a covenant, and yet not perform it.

Be it far off then, from any Christian to impute this to God, that he gives
vain words and seals, and does not as truly give that which he promises
and seals.

But the sole cause why many who come to the word and Sacraments, Why many
profit not by the word and sacraments.
are not partakers in them of Christ, who is truly on Gods part offered in
them, is this; That they do not inwardly by faith receive that which is
promised and sealed, as they do outwardly receive the word and seal.

It shall be our wisdom then whenever we go to the word and Sacraments,
specially to labor for faith, that thereby we may as truly receive Christ in
them offered, as we do receive outwardly the word and seals thereof.

For the receiving of the word we have said enough.

Now for our Sacraments, Few profit by Sacraments.
I cannot sufficiently bewail the universal abuse of them, which is so
grievous, that they being by God in love left to his Church, as a special
means to further their salvation; so many are by their unworthy receiving of
them, made more guilty of condemnation: which comes to pass, not only by that
gross profaneness, which is in all carnal Protestants, who only for
custom, Law, or credit, come to the Sacraments, without any knowledge or
conscience:

2. But in many of some better sort, who have some care for their souls, there
is either such ignorance, or negligence, that they never did worthily receive
the holy seals: and therefore never found the sweet fruits of them.

3. Yea (that which is more to be lamented) this may be found in not a few of
those who have received true grace, and be indeed Gods children, to whom only
these seals of right do belong: yet these seldom or never attain that
comfort by the holy Sacraments, which indeed they ought and might, were not
the fault in themselves.

For proof hereof, I require every one, who would see the truth of this
complaint, to examine himself in this question, what sensible good he has
received by his Baptism.

For my part I have demanded this question of many (who were of good esteem in
the Church) who had little to say in this point; and I make no doubt, but the
like may be found in many others, who are to seek in this matter; so far
off be they from enjoying that great gain, which is to be got hereby: which
in special consists in these two, first, that by our baptism we be more
assured of our salvation by Christ; and secondly, that thereby we be more (...)
lead a godly conversation; both which be evidently the fruits of true
baptism.

The same may be said of the Lords suppo^, which in a further do (...) to
assure us of our growth in grace, and small perseverance (...) how few come
from the communion so sure of Christ and all his benefits to be theirs, as the
woman married at the Church does come home assured of the man whom she has
married, and all his to be hers, for her use and comfort? Yet I (...) thus,
and it cannot (...) but our (...) when it is (...) so.

If I were demanded what I conceive to be the chief cause, why it is not
thus, Want of farth.
I would say, want of Faith, which arises in many from want of clear light to
see Gods mind in ordaining these Sacraments.

In some (...) slight account they make of these.

And in the best sort of these, from the sight of their unworthiness, which
makes them fear that they cannot be made partakers of so great a benefit.

For whose sake I specially write these, to help their weak faith that
thereby they may, find this benefit.

To which purpose, I would have well considered, that which before was touched
concerning Gods intention in ordaining these holy signs and seals, Right end
of seals.
(which we call Sacraments) which was to help our weak ^aith; that whereas
the Lord having in his word, made unto us sinners many promises of alg^ace in
Christ, which (if the fault were not in our selves,) might be sufficient to
uphold our faith in the assurance thereof, yet he seeing how slow of heart we
are to believe his word, did for the confirmation of our faith give us, these
outward and visible pledges of his love, that we knowing him to be faithful,
may be more assured: yea put out of doubt, that we shall as certainly be made
partakers of Christ himself, and all his merits, as we are of the outward
signs of his covenant; as Genesis 17. 10. This is my covenant, which ye shall
keep between me and you and thy seed after thee* Every (...) child among you
shall be circumcised.

And very often that which properly belongs to the things sealed, is given to the
outward seal, to show that on Gods part they be never parted. For this cause
were the Lords people commanded to circumcise the foreskinne of their (...);
Deuteronomy. 10. 16
and the Lord promised that He would circumc^se them hearts, Ier. 4. 4.
and the heart of their seed, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.

The like is said of Baptism, Romans 6. 3.
That we are buried with Christ by Baptism, Col. 2. 1.
and for this cause it is called Baptism of (...) for remission of sins.
Mar. 1. 4.
And our sins are said to be washed away, Act. 22. 16
and that Baptism saves. Heb. 10. 22
All which belongs to the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
as 1. Ioh. 1. 7. (that is, All his sufferings) which does wash and (...) us
from all our sins. Reu. 1. 5.


And in this sense our Savior Christ says, We must be (...) of water, Ioh.
3. 5. that is, be made Gods children by receiving Christ, as Ioh. 1. 12.

The like is said of the Lords Supper, when our Lord Jesus did ordain it, he
speaking of the bread, Mat. 26. 26 28.
said: This is my body, and of the wine: This is my blood of the new Testament;
meaning that these outward signs and seals were most sure and certain pledges
of his body and blood, which he did as truly give to be spiritual food, as
he gave the bread and wine to be bodily food to every believer.

And for the same cause, the Apostle says. The cup of blessing which we
bless, 1 Cor. 10. 16.
is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is
it not the Communion of the body of Christ? for that we do as certainly
communicate* with the body and blood of Christ, that is, whole Christ and all
his merits in the Sacrament, as ^ee with the rest of Gods people do
communicate in the bread and wine. And to conclude with this testimony of the
Apostle in the 12* chap. verse. 13. He speaking of both Sacraments says, 1.
Cor. 12. 13.
For by one Spirit, we, all are baptized into one body, whether we be I^wes or
Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink into
one spirit. In which, as in all the former, we see that true grace is given to
the outward seals, not for that by the bare work wrought, the outward
receiving of the signs does give grace, which is proper to Christ, and his
merits sealed by the outward signs; but to teach and persuade that God for his
part does unseparably ioyn these graces with the signs, and as truly give the
one as the other.

The use whereof is this, Application.
that What God has joined, we do not separate, but that we be persuaded by
all these witnesses, that we receiving these holy Sacraments according to Gods
appointment, shall as surely have Christ and all his benefits to be ours, as we
have the outward seals thereof: were we thus persuaded, we would more
cheerfully come to the Sacraments, more carefully prepare our selves to be
meet partakers of them, and should find more fruit by them, then usually most
do.

This then must be the labor of all that would enjoy the benefit and comfort
of Gods holy Sacraments, so often as they approach unto them, to set before them,
both the mercy of God in ordaining these for the strengthening of our faith,
and withal his faithfulness in freely bestowing on us, that which he offers
and seals unto us in these outward seals: namely, Christ and all his
benefits to be ours for our present comfort, quickening and strengthening, and
for our everlasting salvation. And this shall suffice for this third general
point, how we may cheerfully serve the Lord in all good duties which he
requires of us, being assured by faith, that he will both assist us by his
Spirit, to perform them (at least in some measure) according to his will, and
also accept at our hands our poor and weak obedience, which we shall offer up
unto him in the name of his Son Christ Jesus.

THE FOVRTH GENERAL HEAD, OF LIVING BY FAITH IS CONCERNING AFFLICTIONS.
WE are now in the fourth place come to afflictions, which as they be the lot
of Gods children, so we find them heavy to bear, and such as much hinder
the comfort of many poor souls: in such sort, that if we be not heartned to
bear them with patience and quietness, we shall never be able to hold out our
Christian course unto the end, with any comfort to our selves, or good example
to others. Many hindered by afflictions.
Lamentable proof hereof all ages have affoorded. In that many who in the
fair sunshine of the Gospel, made a good profession; When troubles and
persecutions came, then they went back and with Demas embraced this present
world, 2. Tim. 4. 10. 16.
as many others did forsake Paul at his first answer before the Emperor at
Rome. Yea, it is often heard to be the complaint of many a good Christian, who
served God constantly, and cheerfully, in their health and quiet estate, yet
when sickness came and other crosses, they were disquieted, unsettled, and
could not go on, as in times of peace and quietness. And some good reason
hereof there may be alleged, that howsoever the principal end of afflictions
(specially to the children of God) is to make them better every way; yet by
reason of natural infirmity, which is so loath to suffer and can so hardly
bear any affliction; they cannot get their minds and hearts to be fit to any
Christian duty, no not to prayer, as at some other time of peace they have
been: But rather be provoked to fretting, impatience, murmuring; yea in
greatest extremities to despair, and seeking many unlawful shifts to get out
of their troubles; these with sundry the like, be the hurts which come by
afflictions, when we be not well armed to bear them, and instructed how to
make the right use of them. By all which we may see, what need we have to be
strengthened against all the discouragements, and other hindrances: we meet
withal in afflictions; No help but by faith.
which we shall plainly see, can by no other means be attained, then by
faith; whereby we may boldly rest upon God for his direction and assistance,
how to bear and profit by all our afflictions of what sort soever. This is
that which now I undertake to show; how we may live by faith in all
afflictions, so as they shall in no sort hinder us in our course of
Christianity, but rather further us, till we attain unto the end our course
in Gods kingdom. Wherein I intend to say less then otherwise I would, for
that since I took this work in hand, I have light upon a Treatise of Mr.
Bifield, Mr. Bifield of promises.
called The Promises: wherein he shows both plainly and soundly, how a godly
Christian may support his heart with comfort, against all the distress, which
by reason of any afflictions, or temptations can befall him in this life. To
which Treatise, I refer all who desire to be further satisfied in this
matter. But seeing I had (before I saw his book) gathered out of the
Scriptures, both those promises, and many more concerning afflictions; I will
proceed as I have begun, to show the use of faith in all manner of outward
afflictions, belonging to this natural life; how we may be armed to bear them
patiently, and made able to profit by them. Of inward troubles in the three
former points.
For inward and spiritual troubles of mind, which arise from doubts of Gods
favor, and of our salvation by Christ, as also of such griefs as rise from
our infirmities, either unableness to mortify our sins: or very weak
performance of all holy duties; I have sufficiently spoken in the three former
general heads of this Treatise, how we are to live by faith in all of these.
Therefore here only I intend to gather out of the Scriptures, such sweet
comforts, as God has plentifully set down for our comfort in all the outward
crosses, Now of outward.
whereto we be subject, while we live here in this vale of tears, that so we
may better hold out unto the end.

In setting down whereof, Order in handling afflictions.
to keep some order, for our better help in making use of them. Our first
ground of comfort, 1.
arises from hence, that all our afflictions come directly from God, by what
means soever. The second is, 2.
to observe in what manner the Lord does afflict us his children, that is, most
wisely in all respects, and most lovingly. 3.
The third, to what ends, namely his own glory: example to others, and our own
good. 4.
The last is, that he will both help us in them, and give us a good end of
them. For the first, that all our afflictions come from God, as the supreme
judge and disposer of them, needs not so much proof of the truth of it, as due
consideration to make the right use of it. It is said by the Prophet, Amos 3. 6.
Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it; meaning of the
evil of affliction not of sin; further, then it is a punishment of sin. So
likewise the Prophet Hosea 6. 1. Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has
torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up. And this
is manifest in that common speech. The chastening of the Lord; so often used,
especially Heb. 12. 5. etc In which one Scripture be contained many special
consolations, against all manner of afflictions, as we shall see every one in
his place: here only I would join this with the former; that as all the
afflictions which Gods children do suffer, come from the hand of God,
Afflictions be common to all Gods children.
so he spares none of them, but as it is said, verse 6. He scourges every
son whom he receives, and verse 7. What son is he, whom the father
corrects not; and more to like effect both there and elsewhere. Application.
Both which, that all our afflictions come from God, and that he deals so
with all his children, may minister much comfort unto us in all our
afflictions; first, seeing what God does, must needs be good, how evil and
bitter soever it seems to us: Yea, Psalm. 39. 9.
we must hold our peace, because he has done it. Although we cannot see any
reason thereof, yet we may be sure the Lord does never correct his children,
but he sees just cause so to do. As the Prophet David plainly professes:
Psalm 119. 75.
I know oh Lord that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness
have afflicted me. But more, seeing God who corrects us is our Father, we
may much more comfort our hearts in all that he sends, that he will never send
any cross, but such as shall be for our good, as we shall more see. And
seeing this is no other then such, as befalls the rest of Gods children. As the
Apostle Peter affirms, saying. 1. Pet 5. 9.
Knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are
in the world. Yea more, seeing God did not spare his own Son, but he was a
man of sorrows and acquainted with grief. Yea smitten of God and afflicted,
as Esa. 53. 3, 4. These should much more make us willing to bear the cross,
yea and much the rather, seeing it is the way to glory, as more hereafter.

But this will yet be more effectual for our consolation in all troubles, In
what manner God corrects his, in Wisdom, Love.
if we shall advisedly weigh in what manner God deals with his children, when
he corrects them, which as it is every way and in all repects very well, so
this may epecially be seen in these two: In wisdom, and love, both which
well regarded, will make us much more willing to bear any thing at Gods hand,
and to look for some good issue out of all the afflictions which he shall lay
upon us. Although those two divine properties in God be unseparably joined
together in all his dealings with his own children. Both joined.
Yet, it shall much more increase our comfort in any affliction which befalles
us, to consider them apart: and first that we may behold how wisely God
orders the matter in all his chasti sements upon his own children. Most
wisely.


This may sufficiently be seen in these two. With meet corrections in just
measure.
First that God does chastise his with most meet corrections: and secondly, in
just measure. The fitness of Gods correction stands in this, that God knows
all circumstances, both when and how to chastise his children, and so
accordingly dispenses this spiritual Physic, as he sees most fit for the
good of the patient, and quality of the disease. This me thinks may be well
gathered out of that comparison, which the holy Ghost makes between our
natural parents, and our spiritual Father in correcting their children,
saying: Furthermore, Heb. 12. 9, 10.
we have had the fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of our
spirits and live. For they verily, for a few days chastised us after their
own pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness. Wherein besides other differences, this is manifest, that earthly
parents, often correct their children after their own pleasure, to satisfy
their will, not so respecting wisely, what might be every way best for them:
but God our heavenly Father, in great wisdom considers with what correction,
and when to chastise his, so as may be most for their profit; yea the best
profit, to repair his Image of holiness in them, which is a chief end and
use of all afflictions, as we shall hereafter see. This wisdom of God in
chastising his children, may clearly be seen in the histories of all ages of
the Church. Memorable is that of the children of Jacob, Gen 37. 28.
who moved with envy, sold Joseph their brother into Egypt and deceived their
old father, verse 33. 42
who thought that an evil beast had devoured him. Whereat the Lord holding his
peace for many years, they were quiet, all was well. But afterward the Lord
took a fit season and means to make them see their sin, namely, by their
brother Joseph, who (though they knew him not) roughly handled them, accused
them for spies, cast them into prison, and many other ways sorely grieved
the^: then their guilty consciences could make them confess their sin, and
say. We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish
of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear: therefore is this
distress come upon us. And another time Judah confessed to Joseph, what shall
we say unto my Lord? what, shall we speak? God has found out the iniquity of
thy servants. The like course did the Lord take with David, 2. Sam. 12. 15.
in correcting his grievous sins in the matter of Vriah: both by the death of
the child so borne in adultery, and by the fact of Absolon, not only rising
up in rebellion, 16. 22.
to drive him out of his kingdom, but openly before all Israel defiling his
wives and concubines, as was denounced by Nathan unto him. So likewise the Lord
corrected his pride in numbering the people, by that fearful plague whereof
dyed threescore and ten thousand. 2. Sam. 24. 15.
In like manner the Lord denounced his judgment against his own people. Deuteronomy.
2^. 47. Because thou seruedst not the Lord thy God with ioyfulnesse and with
gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things. Therefore shall thou serve
thine enemies, which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger and in thirst*
etc. The Prophets also in their times, did often foreshew like chastisements to
the peoples trespasses. As Haggai and Malachy: Because they were sumptuous in
their own houses, and neglected the Lords house, therefore the Lord sent a
great dearth and scarcity among them. So for the contempt of the word, God
threatened to send a famine of the word. Amos 8. 11. The same might we see in
Gods dealings with our selves, if we would observe them. When we set our
affections on any thing too much, whereby our hearts be stolen from God,
whether they be persons or things, pleasures or profits; It is usual with the
Lord, either to take them from us, or to make them bitter unto us, that we may
less esteem them, and have our hearts free for better things.

The comfort which we are to take by this wise dealing of God with us,
Application.
is this, that as we know all afflictions to Gods children, to be Physic, to
cure their corruptions; so knowing also they all come from so wise and skillful
a Physician who cannot err, but always sends such Physic, and in such
season, as shall surely do us good. This must make us not only quietly to
bear them, but to be thankful to God for them, and to labor to be the better
by them.

But this will more appear, if we shall well consider Gods wisdom, in
moderating all his chastisements, both for the measure and continuance of them,
2. In measure.
so as may be most fit, both for the strength of the patient, and quality of
the disease: both which may be showed in all the afflictions which God lays
upon all his children, though he chastise some much more seuercly and holds
the rod longer upon them, then upon others, who either have not so much
provoked the Lord, or be not so able to bear the hand of the Lord. This is
plainly taught by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 13
saying, There has no tentation taken you, but such as is common to man. But
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able
but will with the tentation make way to escape, that ye may be able to bear
it. In which one sentence, we have these special encouragements, to bear such
afflictions, as God our heavenly Father shall lay upon us; first, that God
deals no otherwise with us then with others, even of his own children
(whereof before;) secondly, that God never ouer-loadeth his, but wisely
moderateth the burden according to his strength that bears it. And this he
does according to promise most faithfully: nothing shall move him to deal
otherwise: yea more, God will so assist us by his Spirit, to endure and bear,
that in due season we shall have a good end and deliverance out of all: which
if there were no more might be sufficient to uphold us from sinking in any
trial, though never so great. But because the Lord well saw how hardly we be
persuaded hereof, and be ever thinking our burden too heavy for us to bear;
therefore the Lord is feign often to beat this into our minds and memories, as
El^hu told Job, Job 34. 23.
That God will not lay more on man then is meet, that he should enter into
judgment with God: and so much the Apostle Peter intends when he says, that
the faithful did greatly rejoice in their salvation purchased by Christ,
Though for a season they were in heaviness through manifold temptations, 1.
Pet. 1. 6.
yet he adds (if need be) meaning that this is never, but when God sees
needful in all respects, for this cause also does the Prophet Esaias notably set
out this wise dealing of God with his people, Esa. 27.
and with the wicked, comparing these to thorns and briars, but his people to
a vineyard, which the Lord did keep and water every moment, least any hurt it.
Verse 3.
As for the briars and thorns, he would burn them together: And thereupon
says, Verse. 7.
Has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him, or is he slain
according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him. Verse 8.
In measure, when it shoots forth, thou will debate with it, etc. Which I
understand, that whereas God will stub up as thorns by the roots, and cast
into the fire the wicked adversaries of his Church, he will but shred and
prune as a vine his Church, that they may bring more fruit, as our Savior
plainly speaks: John 15. 2. And more plainly does Jeremy 46. 28. and 30. 11.
say. Fear thou not O Jacob my servant, says the Lord, for I am with thee for
I will make a full end of all the nations, whither I have driven thee: But I
will not make a full end of thee, but correct thee in measure, yet I will not
leave thee wholly unpunished. Wherein we see great odds, betwixt Gods dealing
with his children, and with the wicked whom he utterly consumes, when he most
wisely moderateth the corrections of his children, that they may better bear
and profit by them, which must needs allay the sharpness of them if well
considered. And this no doubt was that which the Prophet David and Jeremy so
earnestly begged of God, Psalm. 6. 1
that he would not correct them in his anger, Iere. 10. 24
neither chasten them in his hot displeasure. But with judgment, that is, most
wisely considering what they were able to bear, least otherwise they should
be consumed and brought to nothing.

This wisdom of God in chastening his children, as it manifests it self in
the measure of the burden laid upon them: Gods wisdom in moderating the
continuance.
so also in moderating the time of the continuance of it, least it should be
over tedious, and make them faint and give over. Hereof the Prophet David had
great experience, as he oftentimes professes. Psalm. 30. 5. For his anger
indureth but a moment, in his favor is life, weeping may endure for a night,
but joy comes in the morning. Psalm. 103. 9. He will not always chide,
neither will he keep his anger for ever. Psalm. 129. 3. For the rod of the
wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous put
forth their hands to iniquity. The Prophet Esaias in the name of the Lord
professes the like. Esaias 10. 25
For yet a very little while and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in
their destruction, and Chap. 26. 20. Come my people enter into thy chambers,
and shut the doors about thee, hide thy self as it were for a little moment,
until the indignation be ouer-past. and 54. 7, 8. For a small moment have I
forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I
hid my face from thee, for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redee^^er, and 57. 16. For I will not
contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, for the spirit should fail
before me, and the souls which I have made. Likewise the Prophet Jeremy in
his time, witnesses the same in the name of the Lord, Iere. 3. 12.
saying. For I am merciful says the Lord, and I will not keep anger for
ever, and to the same effect. Ezekiel. 16. 42. So will I make my fury toward thee
to rest, and my jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will
be no more angry. Notable to this purpose is that of the Prophet, Micah 7. 18.
Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgressien of the remnant of his heritage! he retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy: and to conclude with that of the
Apostle. 2. Cor. 4. 17. For our light affliction which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Thus may we
behold Gods wise dealing with his children in all his chastisements, Application
observing the fittest seasons, and just measure both for the quantity of the
correction and for the continuance thereof, all as is most agreeable to the
strength of the patient, and quality of the disease, which if it be believed,
must needs in further degree make us contented to bear the hand of the Lord,
and neither to fret at, nor faint under any affliction, which the Lord so
wisely does order for our good every way. And therefore so often as we shall
find any affliction to lie heavy upon us, either for the greatness of it, or
long continuance in our feeling: so often let us run to some of these promises,
wherein the Lord assures us, that he will lay no more upon us, then we shall
be able to bear; and will suffer no affliction to lie longer upon us then
shall be needful and for our good, that thus resting upon Gods word, we may
weight Gods leisure for our ease and full deliverance.

For our better furtherance herein, Gods loving dealing with his in affliction.
we are to consider Gods loving and tender dealing with his children in all
their afflictions, which is plentifully set set forth unto us in the holy
Scriptures, both by many comparisons, express testimonies, and examples, all
little enough to hold us up from sinking, if the affliction seem great or
long, in which we are ready to fear God forgets us, or at least does not
pity us. For this cause the Lord is said to be a Father of the fatherless,
Psalm. 68. 5.
and a Iudg^ of the widows. And Psalm. 103. 13. Like as a father pittieth his
children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. For he knows our (...),
he remembers that we but dust. Yea more; The Prophet Esaias 49. 13. etc. notably
sets out this comparison in God toward his afflicted people, saying, Sing O
heaven, and be joyful O earth* and break^ forth into singing O mountains:
for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy on his afflicted: But
Zion said the Lord had forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Can a woman
forsake her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the some of
her womb. Yea they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. So David, Psalm. 9.
18. For the needy shall not always be forgotten, the expectation of the poor
shall not perish for ever. To the same purpose he said to God. Psalm. 31. 7. I
will be glad and rei^yce in thy mercy* for thou have considered my trouble,
thou have known my soul in adversity. And Psalm. 38. 9. Lord my desire is
before thee, and my gr^^^ing is not hid from thee* And to the same end it is
said, Ps. 56. 8. Thou tellest my wanderings, put thou my tears into thy bottle,
are they not in thy book: which shows such tender compassion, that he was so
affected with the calamities of his servant, that he most narrowly observed
every one: yea, he made so precious a reckoning of their griefs and sorrows,
that not a tear fell to the ground, but he kept them in memory (as men
preserve precious liccours in bottles) that in due time he might comfort and
succor them: For which cause it is said, Psalm. 116. 15. Precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of his Saints. And to like effect. Esa. 63. 9. In all
their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them,
in his love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried
them all the days of old. Wherein (as in many other places of Scripture, for
it would be to long to recite all) we may see most admirable Application.
compassion in Almighty God toward us in all our afflictions, that even as
the bowels of a tender hearted mother are moved within her, when she sees
her child in any peril; so is the Lord troubled, to see his children in any
extreamitie, that he does as much pity them, and is as ready to succor them,
as if his bowels were moved within him, Mat. 14. 14*
which was in very deed so in our Savior Christ in his humanity, Mark 1* 41
and 6. 34.
as is * often testified of him in the holy story. This should yet more comfort
us in all our afflictions, that he who is God over all; of such infinite power
to help, both whom he will, and how, and when it pleases him, is so tenderly
affected toward us, that he does not only take special notice of all our
grieuances, but does after a sort, even as a tender mother suffer with us, and
by his Spirit does bear the burden of our infirmities with us, as it is said,
Romans 8. 20. This compassion of the Lord (if well waighed) must needs allay the
heat of such fiery trials as Gods children do often fall into, and make us more
patiently endure whatsoever so tender hearted a Father shall lay upon us. And
therefore these promises in which Gods loving and compassionate dealing with
his, is set forth unto us, must be often in our mind and thoroughly thought on,
that in time of need we may rest upon them, to find like favor at the hands
of our most loving Father. And th^s shall suffice for this second ground of
comfort in all afflictions taken from the manner of Gods dealing with his, as
in great wisdom so in like love. 3. Ground of comfort in afflictions from the
ends of them.


We are now in the third place to consider what be the worthy ends, why God so
exercises his children to bear the cross, even from their youth to their old
age, these we heard be generally three. First, glory to God, secondly example
to others, third profit to our selves: all which should strongly move us to be
so far from repining to suffer them that we should rather rejoice and be
glad, as our Savior exhorts his Disciples, Math 5. ^1 ^2.
and the Apostle James 1. 2. which was often practiced by the holy servants of
God. Acts 5. 41. And Paul and Silas in the prison Sang praises unto God. Act.
16. 25.
We read also of Paul how he took pleasure in infirmities, that is bodily,
not spiritual; as himself expresses, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, 2. Cor. 12.
in distresses for Christ's sake. In all which it cannot be doubted, but that
the chief cause of this rejoicing in afflictions was this, that their
sufferings made so much for Gods glory, and the good of Gods Church, who were
greatly confirmed in the truth, Phil. 1. 14
made bold to profess it, and ready to suffer for it) besides the manifold
benefits themselves did reap thereby. Here I might take just occasion more
largely to show how God is glorified by the afflictions of his children,
whether they be sent for correction or for trial. And likewise how these
afflictions serve many ways for the good of others: both which should and often
do make Gods children more contentedly to bear them.

But seeing nothing can more prevail with our frail nature, to make us take
such an unpleasing potion or biting corasiue, then the certainty of the good
it will do us; therefore we will now consider what be the chief benefits
which God promises, Chief Benefits by afflictions.
and his spirit works in the hearts of his children by afflictions. Among all
which this is most general, Blessed*
that they be blessed whom the Lord corrects, as Job 5. 17. Behold, happy is
the man whom God corrects, therefore despise not the chastening of the
Almighty. The like Iam. 1. 12. 5. 11. Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom
thou chastenest O Lord, and teach him out of thy Law, that thou may give
him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit be dug for the wicked.
In the same sense it is so often said, Pro. 3. 12
whom the Lord loves he corrects, even as father the son, 11.
in whom he delights. Where this use is made of it, not to despise the
chastening of the Lord, neither to be weary of his correction. Which is to
like purpose repeated, Reve. 3. 19*
Heb. 12. 5, 6. etc. David also professes the like. It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, Psalm. 119. 71.
that I might learn thy statutes.

In all which and the like is Use.
plainly declared, that how bitter soever afflictions be to our feeling, yet to
Gods children they be very profitable means, and so marks of happiness and
special tokens of Gods fatherly love, and therefore so to be accounted of, and
with thankfulness to be received. The same is said of all the sufferings which
Gods children endure for righteousness sake, which though they greatly differ
from chastisements for sin: yet seeing they be bitter to our taste, and often
sore afflict us, we have need to be heartned to bear, and directed to make
the right use of them. For this cause the Lord does pronounce them Blessed that
thus suffer, Mat. 5 10. 11
which in all former ages of the Church, Luke 6. 22.
has made the faithful to suffer patiently and cheerfully for righteousness
sake, 1. Pet. 3. 14 4. 14.
and so must it move us, that so we may glorify God in our generation, as
they have done in theirs.

But for our better encouragement herein, let us more particularly consider
some of those benefits, which Gods children do obtain by afflictions. These
are fitly drawn to three heads by the Prophet Daniel, Chap. 11. 3. Benefits by
affliction.
Who soreshewing the afflictions which should happen to Gods faithful people,
verse. 33. That they should fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and
by spoil many days verse. 35. he adds. And some of them of understanding
shall fall, to try them, and to purge them, and to make them white. Meaning
hereby that these were the three chief ends why God sent such afflictions on
his own children.

First, to take trial of them, what dross of corruption, and what sound
metal of grace was in them.

Secondly, to purge out that corruption which was found yet remaining in them.

The third, to make them more beautiful and shining in grace, all which should
turn to the glory of God, to the good ensample of others, and to their own
comfort.

For the first, Afflictions be trials.
they be trials of our strength and weakness, what faith and patience we have
in bearing them, what love we bear to God who sends them, and what we be the
better by them. This is often in Scripture set out by this compar^son of gold and
silver tried by the fire, So, Zach. 13. 9. Speaking of the remnant of Gods
people, who should be reserved out of that general destruction says. And I
will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is
refined, and will try them as goldis tried: the effect whereof follows. They
shall call upon my name, and I will hear them. I will say it is* my people,
and they shall say the Lord is my God. So, Ierem. 17. 10. Complaining of the
deceitfulness and wickedness of the heart to be exceeding, says. I the Lord
search the heart, I try the reins, to give every man according to his ways,
and according to the fruit of his doings, hereof Solomon speaking more
generally. Prou. 17. 3. says, The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace
for gold, but the Lord tries the hearts. But more specially to the present
purpose is that of 1. Pet. 1. 6, 7. where he shows that the end of those
manifold temptations, which for a season made sad the hearts of Gods children,
when need required was this. That the trial of your faith being much more
precious then of gold that perishes* though it be tried by fire, might be
found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. And
therefore chap. 4. verse. 12. he exhorts them; Beloved, think it not strange
concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you, as though some strange thing
happened unto you. But rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's
sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed; ye may be glad also with
exceeding joy. To like effect the Apostle James 1. 2. exhorts; My brethren
count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse temp^tations; knowing this, that
the trying of your faith works patience. Many more Scriptures might to this
purpose be alleged.

In all which may be seen, Application.
that this is one special benefit of the afflictions of Gods children, that by
th^se may be made manifest as to others so to themselves, what dross of sin
and pure metal of grace is in them. Its not to be doubted, but God knows
perfectly what is in them yet he is said often to prove them, that he might make
known what was in them, both good and evil: whereby as he would raise up
glory to himself: so likewise he would draw out much good to themselves, and
to others by their example, as may well be gathered out of that one place,
Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 3.
Deuteronomy. 8. 16. where Moses speaking of Gods marvailous providence over his
people in the Wilderness, says; who fed thee in the wilderness with Manna*
which thy fathers knew not, that he might humble thee, and that he might prove
thee, to do thee good at thy latter end.

We have da^ly experience, Many judge amiss of themselves.
how foolishly many deceive themselves: some, and they the wor^er sort, promise
to themselves more strength of faith, patience, love, and other like graces,
then indeed they have, which when they come to trial, find it far otherwise,
to their just shame, and yet amendment, if they belong to God.

Others, indeed better (though they see it not for want of experience) much
mistrust themselves, who being brought to the trial, well approve themselves
to have sound faith, and so other good graces accompanying the same. Memorable
examples hereof all the stories of the Church set forth unto us in all ages,
among which that is famous in the Book of Martyrs, of Mr Lawrence Saunders,
who in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Mary, seeing the alteration of
Religion, manifested his great fear to suffer Martyrdom unto Doctor
Penington, who being a big fat man, said, he would see every drop of his grease
molten, before he would forsake the truth. Yet after he shamefully yielded, and
master Saunders constantly professed the truth, and suffered Martyrdom very
chearefully.

Again, Godly misiudged by the world.
as by these trialls, the faithful grow to know themselves better, which is of
good use: so on the other side, whereas it is the common lot of Gods people, to
be hardly thought on, and by many worldlings thought to be no better then
themselves. But as Satan accused Job, Job. 1. 9. 11.
that he did not serve God for naught, and that if he should afflict him he
would curse God to his face, so say they, if these professors (as they in
reproach call them) were in such case as others, in great distress be, you
should soon see what they would do I warrant you, they would be as impatient
and take as bad courses to shift for themselves as others do. But when God
calls forth his children to sore trialls, as specially to Martyrdom, to suffer
patiently and with rejoicing great torments, then the world is constrained to
confess as the Centurion did of Christ; Luc. 23. 47.
Certain^y this was a righteous man. So then we see this one just cause of
comfort in our afflictions, that by these trialls as God has the glory of his
graces in us, we have the better proof and comfort of them, and others be
constrained to conceive and speak better of us. In which respect we are bound
better to bear them, and to bless God for them.

Another special benefit which we reap by all kind of afflictions is this,
Second benefit by afflictions, is to purge sin
that they be made by Gods blessing effectual means to purge out that sinful
corruption which grows in our nature, unless by these and other like means
it be daily purged out; In which respect afflictions most aptly be compared to
Medicines, for so indeed they are to all Gods children, most sovereign means
to kill their spiritual diseases, in that they do drive them more to search
out their sin* make them more weary of them, and as to seek pardon for them,
so more to endeavor to overcome them, all which be worthy fruits of affliction,
plentifully set out unto us in Scripture, both by precept and practice of the
faithful. Nothing more common then to call Gods people to repentance, which
contains all these by Gods judgments either threatened or executed.

That this ought to be, cannot be denied, but that we shall be thus purged by
our afflictions is most doubted, and therefore we find not such comfort in
afflictions as otherwise we should, if we might be sure to reap this fruit by
them for our comfort, wherein I know not what can be greater then that which
the Apostle says, Romans 8. 28. Also we know that all things work together for
good to them that love God, to them that are called according to his purpose;
where, in one word he says as much as may be desired or conceived, that all
afflictions (for of them specially he speaks) how many or great soever they
be, shall by Gods blessing as means by him appointed, procure and further our
chiefest good, that is, the welfare and happiness of our souls, a principal
part whereof is the purging of our souls from sin (which is the sole cause
of all our misery) which benefit by afflictions, though it be most excellent,
yet it is no less sure and certain, as appears by the Apostles own words,
saying (we know) that is, not only I and you, but all the faithful people of
God, have good proof of it by daily experience, and therefore cannot doubt of
it, that all our afflictions shall turn to our good, which because it is (in
time of sore afflictions) so hardly believed.

I will make it manifest by one undeniable reason, that it cannot otherwise be
but that whatsoever befalls Gods children, shall most certainly make for
their good. Which is this, seeing God did from all eternity of his own good
will choose them to be heirs of glory, and ordained that all things which
should befall them, should serve to that end, then whatsoever comes to them
shall turn to this their chief good, otherwise God should either change his
will, or be not able to do that which he determined to do, neither of which
can in any sort be said of God, and therefore it cannot possibly be, that any
affliction upon Gods children should turn to their hurt, but all of them must
needs turn to their good. This one Scripture (if there were no more) may
sufficiently assure us hereof, and so persuade us, more contentedly to bear
them.

But as this does more generally set out the fruit of afflictions: so in other
places this fruit of purging us from our sinfulness is more specially
declared, as Dan. 12. 10. like to that before of Dan. 11. 35. Many shall be
purified, made white, and tried. So Esa. 1. 25. the Prophet denouncing Gods
fearful judgments against the wicked rebellious Jews, verse. 24. adds this
as a blessing to the Church; And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely
purge away thy dross, and take away all thy sin* meaning their dross of
sin, which corrupted the purer metal of grace. And to like effect, Chap. 27.
setting forth Gods different dealing with his beloved, above their wicked
enemies in their afflictions, adds this in verse. 9. By this therefore shall the
iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin.
This also is part of that which is said of our Savior Christ, John. 15. 2.
that every branch which bears fruit, he purges it that it may bring more
fruit. And how should Gods chastising us, keep us that we be not condemned, 1
Cor 11. 32.
if it did not weaken our sins, the sole cause of condemnation. But I will
spare many more places to this purpose, as Prou. 20. 30. Psalm. 119. 67 71. Esa.
4. 4. etc. I will only show thet ruth hereof in a few examples for many; most
famous is that of Manasseh, who exceedeed in sin all that ever I heard of to
be saved: yet it is said of him when he was in affliction, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12.
he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of
his fathers 13.
And prayed vn^to him, and he was entreated of him and heard his supplication
etc. After which follows how many things he reformed. Which is a special
example of this fruit of afflictions, the more to stir us up to look for the
like. The same may beseene in the Prophet David, Psalm. 32. and else where often.

But to leave all particular persons in whom this is to be seen that by their
afflictions they were brought to repentance. It is observed to be the ordinary
practice of Gods people in their afflictions, to seek to God in prayer, and to
turn from their sin, 1 Kin. 8. 35.
as Solomon shows in his prayer to God. And Esa. 26. 16. professes the like,
saying; Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they powered out a prayer when
thy chastening was upon them. Yea, God himself, Hos. 5. 15. says no less; I
will go and return to my place till they acknowledge their offense, and seek
my face, in their affliction they will seek me early.

Thus we see this point sufficiently proved, that afflictions be special means
to purge us from sin, in which regard they should be more welcome unto us, and
not so unkindly entertained as usually they be.

But before we make further use hereof, Third benefit by affliction. Stir up
grace.
seeing the third benefit by afflictions, namely, to make us white (as the
Prophet speaks, Dan. 11. 35 12. 10
that is, beautiful and shining in grace) is never parted from the former (if
either of them be in truth) I will though more briefly manifest the truth
thereof, and let us see what helps afflictions be by Gods blessing upon them,
to quicken and stir up Gods graces in his children. This is evidently said Heb.
12. 10. that whereas our earthly parents chastened us after their own
pleasure, God our heavenly Father chasteneth us for our profit, that we might
be partakers of his holiness. David, Psalm. 119. 67. professes the like of
himself, saying; Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy
Word. And verse. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might
learn thy statutes. Esa. 26. 9. When thy judgments are upon the earth, the
inhabitants of the world shall learn righteousness.

As this is true in the general that the faithful be made better and more
fruitful by afflictions, Afflictions stir up faith and patience.
so this is most apparent in faith and patience, both which be most exercised
by afflictions, and the worth of them more manifested, and magnified. For
faith, the Apostle Peter 1. Epistle, 1. Chap. verse. 6. 7. excellently sets it
forth, where in the former verse in a high degree he extolleth the exceeding
mercies of God toward all the faithful (which although I digress, I cannot
pass over, in the desire I have they may be better admired, and sought after)
the words I will leave to be perused by such as desire better to waygh them.
Prerogatives of the elect.
The special prerogatives belonging to all Gods chosen (of whom he speaks) be
these; That they were begotten of God as to be his children, so to have a
living and never dying hope, purchased unto them by the whole mediation of
Christ, whereof his rising from the dead was a chief part. The chief matter
hoped for, is an inheritance, and that no earthly, one, which is full of
imperfections and changes, but a heavenly, which is every way perfect and pure,
and so lasts without alteration for ever; whereof, that by no power they be
deprived, its locked up and kept safe for them in heaven: And least themselves
should perish before they should fully enjoy it, and take possession of it;
They are kept safely by Gods power, applied unto them by faith, till they
attain that salvation which is prepared for them, and shall shortly be fully
bestowed upon them.

What heart can sufficiently be affected, either to desire these or joy in them
as were meet, and so be thankful for them? yet this is it whereof the Apostle
speaks of these believers; Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a
season (if need be) ye are in heaviness, 1 Pet. 1. 6.
through manifold temptations: 7.
That the trial of your faith, being much more precious then of gold that
perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto prasye, and honor
and glory, at the appearing of Christ. In which Scripture, this one thing is
clear, that the great worth of faith is made manifest by the fiery trial of
afflictions, so that faith is as much advanced by afflictions as gold by fire.

This shall suffice in a case so common, in the practice of the faithful in
all ages, whose faith has been made famous by afflictions. Take only the
whole 11. Chapter to the Hebrews for a pattern, wherein is at large laid out,
how the faith of Gods people in all ages was made glorious by afflictions. The
life of Job, and David. Especially I may not forget that worthy servant of God
the Apostle Paul, whose whole life, after his conversion, was full of sore
affliction, yet where did we ever hear of greater faith? So that as great
Battles set out the valor of a worthy Captain or Soldier, and great storms
the goodness of the Ship and Anchor, and skill of the Master; so do afflictions
commend the faith of true Christians.

Now to show how afflictions be special means to invre to patience, Patience.
I need not say much, seeing patience is the daughter, and an inseparable
companion of faith, as is worthily set down Romans 5. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. I only
cite verse. 3. where he says; That we do not only so (rejoice in hope of the
glory of God) But we glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation
works patience, etc. To like effect is that James 1. 2. 3. My brethren count
it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptati^ons. Knowing this that the trying
of your faith works patience.

I will content my self with these two witnesses as good as twenty, which in
this case may soon be brought, and so will come to make our use of all these
three benefits by afflictions. 1. That they be sent from God, to be trialls to
discover to our selves and others, godly and wicked, what strength of grace and
sin does remain in us, which is many ways profitable. 2. To be effectual
purgations to wast and weaken those special corruptions which most hinder our
souls health. 3. And lastly to quicken all saving graces in us, and so every
way to make us better, both to glorify God in this life, and to be glorified
of him in the life to come.

The least of all which fruits of afflictions, Use of all these benefits by
afflictions.
though it went alone (if the profit and comfort it brings might be well
prised) would move any good heart, (if lawfully they might) to desire
afflictions, at least to be glad of them, when the Lord our loving Father, and
wise Physician does send them to us, how much more then when as all these shall
be joined together, should we rejoice and bless God for them. There is no good
Christian, but he greatly desires to be more humbled in the sight of his
manifold sins, and to be comforted with the sweet feeling of Gods graces in
him. Yea, much more desires he to be purged from these spiritual corruptions,
which take away his stomach and strength, that he can neither feed nor work
as his place requires. And above all does he covet spiritual graces, that he
might shine out in a godly life to the honor of his profession, the winning of
oothers, and making sure his calling and election. All which seeing they be
procured by afflictious, and hardly or never without them (as that place 1 Pet.
4. 18. proves; And if the righteous be scarcely saved. And this is the chief
cause why none of Gods children are without them, as Heb. 12. 6. 7. 8.) me
thinks there is great reason why we should be thankful to God for them; and
so labor to reap this fruit by them, that we may say and sing with the
Psalmist, (as it is sweetly expressed in the Meeter) O h^ppie time may I well
say, when thou did me correct: For as a guide to learn thy laws, thy rod^^d
me direct. So little cause have Gods children to think their condition
miserable, because of afflictions, that if we will believe and practice what
the Apostle Paul professed and performed, we must in a holy manner boast of our
afflictions, Romans 5. 3.
as a Soldier of his scarres got in battle. And as a little before we heard,
2 Cor. 12. 10.
Paul did take pleasure in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions* in
distresses f^^ Christ's sake. Thus we see what comfort we may get out of Gods
Word, fitly applied unto us by faith, for the better bearing of all afflictions
of what sort soever. I might gather many other fruits of afflictions, as some
have done, but if all be well wayghed they may be referred to one of these
three, and so having said sufficient of the three former grounds of comfort in
afflictions.

I will come to the fourth and last, The fourth ground of comfort in
afflictions.
which is to set out what help God has promised us in all our troubles, that
we may be able to bear them; and in due season to give us a good issue out of
them. Concerning which it will be profitable to observe, that the Lord knowing
our great weakness to bear the cross, and how full of distrust we be, that God
will not be ready to help us, at least as we would, (both which are so often
to be found in the lives of Gods faithful servants in all ages, as needs no
further proof) the Lord, I say, well acquainted with this frailty of his
children, has most plentifully provided all sufficient help to support them,
and therefore made so many promises to be with them in all their troubles, and
succor them in all extremities, that they shall never perish, but in the end
find a good end and issue out of them, to his glory, and their endless comfort.

Having perused these promises, and gathered them out of the Scripture, I may
boldly say they do far exceed in number all the former, so that it would be
too tedious to set them down all, I will therefore make choice of some of the
chief, that we may have them ready for our use against time of need.

Among all that is exceeding full of comfort which is written, Romans 8. 26. In
which chapter, the Apostle intending to teach, that nothing should hinder the
happiness of those that be in Christ, whereas there be but these two, corruption
and affliction, he first confutes the one, from verse ^. to ^7. and secondly
the other concerning afflictions, from verse 17. to 31. And whereas it might be
objected, that though afflictions were profitable to those that could endure
them, yet often they be so heavy that we cannot so much as cry to God for help
as we ought: he answers, that even then the spirit helps our infirmities,
etc. meaning that when we begin to sincke as not able to stand under the
burden, then Gods Spirit puts under his hand to support us. Which is in so
many words said Psalm. 37. 24. Though he f^ll, he shall not utterly be cast
down, for the Lord vpholdeth him with his hand. Which is when he does by his
Spirit strengthen us with faith and patience, to wait for Gods help one way
or other, either to rid us out of our afflictions, or make us, quietly to bea^e
them, so long as shall seem good to his heavenly wisdom to continue them. For
which cause our Savior Christ fortelling his Disciples of many afflictions,
John 14. 15. 16.
which should befall them in the world, among other encouragements, he often
tells them that he will send them his holy Spirit to be their comfo^^r, who
shall be stronger in them, then all their adversaries. And to the same purpose,
16. 33.
telling them, that in the world they should have tribulation, he bids them be
of good cheer for he has overcome the World. Likewise the Apostle, 2. Cor.
1. 3 4. to hearten the Corinthians to endure all troubles, calls God the God
of all comfort, who comforted him and all others in all their tribulations,
that they might be able to comfort others which are in any trouble. The like is
to be seen almost in all the holy Epistles, in which the Saints be encouraged
to suffer afflictions patiently.

But to proceed, exceeding many be the places in which God promises to his
people that he will be a sure and speedy help in all troubles, in due season
ready to be found, David had great experience thereof. The book of the Psalms
is full of those speeches, God ^s my (...), my tower, my refuge, my shield and
buckler, my health and strength, and many more, all tending to this, that look
what help any man in danger may find in any earthly means what soever, God is
the same and much more to al his people in all their necessities, bodily or
spiritual. Because the fai^hfull in all ages have stood in need of this
comfort, therefore is this so often repeated, that we in our generation may look
for the like help in our need. To the same intent be many other like
speeches, That God will lighten our darkness he will keep the feet of his
Saints, he will not forsake them, nor forget their complaint* That they shall
not be confounded, In time of trouble he will hide them. His Angels shall pitch
about them, He will heal them and take all sickness from them They shall not
fear their enemies, but God will make their enemies afraid of them, Be avenged
of their enemies, That God will repent him of the evil pronounced against them,
with many other of like sort and often, more specially of removing war,
pestilence, etc.

The sum of all which is, Application.
that into whatsoever calamity or distress Gods children shall fall, though
the Lord do leave them for a season, as though he did not regard it, yet he
will be with them by his Spirit to help them, that they shall not utterly
perish: yea rather that they shall be able with patience to hold out, till God
send them a happy end and issue out of all. That this has been Gods dealing
with his beloved in all ages, needs no proof, it is so manifest. Ioh, David,
and Paul may be sufficient to witness this, how wonderfully God was with them
in all their trials*

The other branch of this last ground of comfort is this, God will deliver.
that the Lord will not only assist his under the burden of their
afflictions, with all needful helps, that they may be able to bear them:
but will in due season fully deliver them out of them all, which being so
hardly believed, especially in great and sore afflictions, therefore the Lord
has very often renewed his promise of delivering his out of all their
troubles. All of which for the most part being the fame, both in sense and
words a few may suffice for many. David had great proof hereof, and therefore
after a mighty deliverance (and that by a hard shiftfull of infirmity) he
composed that excellent Psalm 34 where magnifying Gods mercy for so great
deliverance, he rises higher to set out the like goodness of God to all the
faithful, saying, verse 7. The Angel of the Lord (...) round about them that
fear him, and delivers them* and verse. 17. speaking of the righteous he
says, they cry and the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their
troubles, and verse 19. many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers him out of all. so Psalm 27. 39. 40. But the salvation of the
righteous is of the Lord, is their strength in the time of trouble. And the
Lord shall help them and deliver them, he shall deliver them from the wicked
and save them because they trust in him.

These shall suffice in so clear a point: for there are none that be any whit
exercised in the Scriptures but may find like testimoninies and proofs of the
truth, though not always in the same words. It is fully to the same purpose,
that the Apostle ^. Cor. 10. 13. comfort them with this amongst other
Arguments, that God will with the tentation make away to escape^ (...) ye may
be able to bear it, and that of Jeremy 29. 11. For I know the thoughts that I
think toward you says the Lord, thoughts of peace; to give you an expected
end. By these and very many other the like, it is clear that this is Gods
wonted favor toward his Children, that though for sundry and those most just
causes, he lead them into troubles, and often leaves them a long time under them,
yet he never finally forsakes them: but when the time to have mercy is come,
Psalm. 102.
the^ the Lord will surely succor all his, and deliver them by one means or
other, such as shall make most for his glory and the good of all his.

All of which being so certain, Application.
that how many and great soever, and of long continuance the afflictions of
Gods children shall be, yet the Lord will never leave nor forsake them, but will
be a present help in time of need, ministering all needful comforts, both
outward helps and inward graces to support them, and in the end will one way
or other fully set them free, and quite deliver them out of all their fears
and troubles: we may see what small cause we have to be discouraged by our
afflictions, or to fret and repine at them: yea rather we have most just cause
to rejoice in the^ to bless God for them, and to labor both to bear them and
to profit by them, that God may have glory thereby, our selves may reap the
benefit by them, and others may profit by our example. And thus laying all
together which has been said of afflictions, we shall find that they be no
lets, but special helps as to godliness in this life, so to happiness in the
life to come. Thus much for this fourth point how to live by faith in all
afflictions of what sort soever.

THE FIFTH GENERAL HEAD, OF living by FAITH, is for earthly blessings.
THvs have we in these four points handled how well God, has provided for our
spiritual life all needful blessings, that whatsoever our condition shall be,
yet we may comfort our selves in God, who as he has promised, so will he
perform, that we shall not want any thing that is good: And whatsoever does
befall us, (though never so hurtful in it self) yet it shall turn to our
good in the end.

Now we are come to the fifth general head of this Treatise of living by faith,
which concerns all earthly blessings, how we may be provided of all things
needful for this natural life; which being so necessary (as we well know)
that we cannot be without them, we be naturally so addicted to them, that
nothing does more take up our minds and hearts, Care for earthly is a
hinderance to spiritual.
then our care and labor for these, neither does any thing more hinder our
spiritual life.

All which the Lord our God well considering, has herein most bountifully
provided for us, and promised unto us all needful blessings for this life, in
such sort, that were we wise to see and embrace this bounty of the Lord, we
should not only be freed from a world of cares and troubles, (wherewith most
men be usually so encumbered, that they can find or spare no time nor travel to
seek after the things which belong to a better life) but we should be so
furthered by our contentment in those outward and earthly blessings, that with
more cheerfulness we should run our race of Christianity, and be every way
more fit to all holy duties.

Let us then hear and consider what the Lord says unto us in this behalf.
General promises for earthly blessings.
And first to begin with those earthly blessings, which be general, and
contain all the particular blessings of this life. It may appear, that this
is Gods gracious intent to succor our weakness, who although we enjoy many good
blessings for this present life, as health and wealth, food and raiment, and
the like many, yet if we wanted but one, it would much molest us, and take away
our comfort and cheerfulness in his service, for this cause, the Lord as a
tender father desiring the welfare of his beloved child, bids him be a good and
obedient child, and so promises him he shall not want any thing; So, I say,
the Lord our kind and tender father bids us, as good children hearken to his
voice, and to be ruled by him, and tells us we shall not want any thing that is
good, as is expressly said Psalm. 34. where David led by a late experience of
Gods mighty delivering him out of a great danger, composeth a Psalm of
thanksgiving unto God for the same, wherein he provokes all other the
faithful servants of God as to praise God with him, Psalm. 34.
so to consider this bounty of the Lord, Verse. 3.
saying; O ^ast and see that the Lord is good. 8.
Blessed is the man that trusts in him. 9.
And again; O fear the Lord ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that
fear him. Yea, more speaking (as I understand him) of the mighty and cruel
oppressors of the world, who like devouring beasts do eat up as sheep Gods
poor people, Verse. 10.
says; The Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord
shall not want any good thing: and to like effect much more in that Psalm, as
you may read. Psalm 84 11.
The Lord God is a Sun and shield etc. and no good thing will he withhold
from them that walk uprightly.

Again, beholding how much it vexed Gods children to see the wicked prosper in
this world and the godly many ways distressed, ^e of purpose made the 37.
Psalm to hearten the godly against this sore tentation, which has in all ages
much troubled Gods people, as may be seen by the complaints of Job and Jeremy,
Job. 21.
and many others. Ier. 12.


In this Psalm the Prophet does plentifully handle this point, Psalm. 37.
that the state of the godly is far better* even in this life, then the
wicked (besides the infinite odds in the life to come) for proof whereof as
he in many words sets out the short and soon fading prosperity of the wicked,
so does he more largely lay down the blessed condition of the godly in things
belonging to this life. As verse. 3. Trust in the Lord and do good, so shall
thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shall be fed. Verse. 4. Delight thy
self in the Lord, and he will give thee the desires of thine heart. Verse. 5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him and he shall bring it to pass.
Verse. 1^. But the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves
in the abundance of peace. Verse. 16. A little that a righteous man has is
better then the riches of many wicked. With many other like in the same Psalm,
as you may see.

To the same purpose was made the 73. Psalm, where he begins, Yet God is good
to Israel, and to such as are of a clean heart; and doubtless many other
Psalms were made to comfort the faithful in this life, that God would be
their portion and relief in all their necessities, as Psalm. 16. 5. 6. Psalm.
23. is wholly to the same end, which he propounds, v. 1. The Lord is my
Shepherd, I shall not want; and so proves it in the verses following. I might
heap up many other scriptures to this end, for God has not been sparing in
this kind, as every one who is exercised in the Scriptures can witness. Mat.
6. 33.
But seek ye first the ki^gdome of God and his righteousness, and all these
shall be added unto you. This is that which is so often repeated, Deuteronomy. 5. 16. 5
33. 6. 3. 18. 22. 25. 28.
That it may go well with thee in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

This also must needs be meant in those Scriptures which set out the goodness
of the Lord; as Psalm. 3^. 19. O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid
up for them that fear thee, which thou have wrought for them that trust in
thee before the sons of men. And Psalm. 145. 9. The Lord is good, and his
tender mercies are over all his works. Its needles to cite more of these,
which be so common, wherein Gods goodness, loving kindness, and mercy, and that
specially in things belonging to this natural life, are commended unto us; For
seeing godliness has the promises of this life as well as of the life to come.
It cannot be doubted* but in all those general promises wherein God says, He
will dwell with his and not forsake them; That God will love and bless his
people; That he will be their God; Will rejoice over them to do them good;
Will compass them with favor as with a shield; Will keep his covenant with
them; That he will see peace in their borders, and prosper them in all they go
about. In these, I say, and the like many, it cannot be doubted, but all
needful blessings of this life be contained.

And therefore this should be the Use* Use of all these general promises.
we should make of them all, that whenever we feel our selves pinched with
any earthly necessity, then to run to any one of these gracious promises,
that so, well considering what abundant relief is contained in them, we may
quiet and content our minds therewith, assuring our selves, that seeing he is
faithful who has promised* we shall not want any earthly blessing, at what
time, and in what measure it shall be good for us. These general promises of
all good things for this life, are the more to be observed in reading the
Scriptures, and (at least some of the most principal in our conceit) to be
kept in memory, that they may be ready* for our use in time of need, both for
that these be many mo, and more often repeated in Scripture then any particular;
and also for that we cannot always have ready the particular promises for our
special necessities, when we have most need of them.

And this might be sufficient to have spoken of this point for the strengthening
of our faith, in the assurance that we shall not want any earthly blessing
which shall be needful for us.

But seeing the Lord has so far yielded to our infirmity, Special promises.
as to apply his promises to our special necessities, it shall be available
for our comfort to take knowledge of them, that so we may make our use of them
as need shall require.

Among all earthly blessings, Long life.
life it self is the chief; for upon it all other depend. And the Devil
himself who is so well acquainted with our disposition, could say; All that a
man has will he give for his life: for this cause the Lord the more to hearten
us to all obedience, does make so many promises of long life, and many days;
as in the fifth Commandment, which the Apostle says, is the first Commandment
with promise. Exodus 20. 22.
Every child is there commanded to honor his father and mother, upon this
promise, That his days may be long in the land. So Deuteronomy. 5. 3. You shall walk
in all the ways which the Lord your God has commanded you, that ye may live,
and that it may be well with you, and that ye may prolong your days in the
land which ye shall possess. The like Deuteronomy. 25. 15. and 30. 20. In the book
of the Proverbs, this is very often repeated. chap. 3. 1. 2. Solomon in the name
of God as a father exhorting his son, says; My son forget not my law, but
let thy heart keep my commandments, adds this promise, verse. 2. For length
of days, and long life, and peace shall they add to thee. More to like effect
in the same Chapter, where setting out exceedingly the great gain of wisdom,
(that is of saving knowledge) among the rest, he adds this verse. 16. Length of
days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor. And verse.
18. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every
one that retains her. Chap. 4. from verse. 5. to verse. 14. you shall read both
this promise of life, and many other blessings belonging to this life repeated,
which I will spare to set down (finding writing to me now more tedious then
formerly) read the place, with these following, 8. 35. 9. 11. 10. 25. 27. 11.
19. 30. 11. 14. 30. 21. 21. 22. 24. This God promised to Solomon, 1 Kings 3.
14. and the like is spoken more generally, that the Prince that hates
covetousness Pro. 28. 16.
shall prolong his days.

Thus we see how plentifully the Lord has promised long life to those that
will be ruled by him: Use of long life.
whereas on the other side, Psalm. 55. 23.
the wicked shall not live out half their days, but shall soon and suddenly
be cut off. Which as it was intended by God to be a strong reason to persuade
us to obedience: so we are to be moved by all these promises, to believe them,
and thereby to be stirred to a more careful walking before God.

But seeing that which I chiefly intend, is to strengthen our faith, that we
shall not want any of these earthly blessings, Use.
this must be the use we are to make of all these promises concerning long
life, that in all the perils of this life, by sickness, war, famine, thieves,
witches, or any wicked enemy whatsoever, we might call to mind some of these
promises, and so rest our selves quietly thereupon, that none of these, nor any
thing else should shorten the days of our life, more then should turn to our
greater good. Yea, further seeing the Lord has made it so great an
encouragement to fear and serve him, as if he had not a greater reward in
matters of this life, to bestow upon his faithful servants, (and so the
faithful have in all ages esteemed it, and desired it, Esa. 39. 19.
as Hezekiah and David oftentimes: Psalm. 6. 4.
yea, and many of them did enjoy it, as the holy Story records for a blessing
of God upon them). The consideration of these should move us so to prise this
blessing, and desire it as they did (which I the rather mention, for that* I
have heard preached, and read in the writings of some both godly and learned
Divines, many persuasions to be weary of life, and to be desirous of death:
which (to say no more) quite crosses this wisdom and goodness of God, in
promising life to his best servants, as a chief reward of their good service)
let us then so account of long life as a rich blessing, which makes all other
blessings of this life the more excellent, and useful, both to God and man, to
our selves and others: and the want hereof the quite contrary, as may be easily
showed in all particulars: how does it abate the use and comfort of health,
wealth, strength, and valor, of learning and generally of all excellent gifts
of the mind, or body: if these be nipt off in the bud, and not suffered to come
to full ripenes, and so to continue to their full term and end. Let us then (I
say) so accept these promises, that in all time of need we may stay our selves
upon them, and that we may find comfort in all tentations to the contrary.

This being the first and chief blessing of this life, Long life, I mean, if
this should not be accompanied with health, wealth, peace, and other like
blessings: it would make long life more wearisome then welcome unto our frail
nature.

For this cause God is not sparing in making promises of these and all other
comforts for this natural life; As namely, of bodily health, Health.
and strength, whereby* we may better enjoy and make use of these earthly
comforts.

This is that which the Lord promised to his people of Israel, immediately after
they came out of the red Sea, where it is said, the Lord proved them, and said;
If thou will diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God; Exodus 15. 26.
and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give cure to his
commandments, Deuteronomy. 7. 15.
and keep all his statutes* I will put none of these diseases upon thee, which
I put upon the Egyptians for I am the Lord that heals thee. And Exodus 23.
25. I will take sickness from the midst of thee. So Job. 5. 18. its said of
God, For he makes sore and binds up, he wounds and his hands make whole.
And so goes forward to the end of that chapter in setting forth Gods goodness in
preserving his in all estates from all manner of troubles, and supplying them
with all needful blessings for this life, as there further may be seen. Psalm.
41. 1. etc. David setting out Gods goodness to those that show mercy to the
poor in their distress; among many other blessings adds this, verse. 3. The
Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, thou will make all his
bed in his sickness. Solomon Pro. 3. 7. exhorting us to fear the Lord and to
depart from ^^vill, adds this as a promise, ver. (...) It shall be health to
thy navill, and ^arrow to thy bones; meaning thereby, soundness of health to
the whole body. And to like effect, chap. 4. 22. he says, that the true
receiving of instructions is life to those that find them, and health to all
their flesh. So the Prophet Esaias in many words setting forth the manifold
blessings of this life, Esa. 33. 15. etc.
which God promises to those that walk uprightly etc. says verse. 24. And the
inhabitant thereof shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell therein
shall be forgiven their iniquity. The place is worth the reading.

To the same intent is bodily strength so often promised, as Job* 17. 9. The
righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands* shall be
stronger and stronger. So Psalm. 29. 11. The Lord will give strength unto his
people; the Lord will bless his people with peace. Psalm. 103. 5. This is
numbered among Gods mercies, for which the Prophet prayseth God, who satisfies
thy mouth with good things so that thy youth is renewed like the Eagle. And
Elihu Job, 33. showing Gods mercy to a sinner truly converted, adds this, verse.
25. His flesh shall be fresher then a childs, he shall return to the days of
his youth. Psalm. 84, 7. They go from strength to strength, every one of them
appears before God in Sion.

These and many more be the promises which God has made us concerning bodily
health, Application.
and strength, whereby we may be able to perform the duties* of our places and
callings, and more comfortably enjoy all other the good blessings of this life,
which does sufficiently commend the great and most needful use we have of
these, as, our daily experience shows. And therefore these are so much
esteemed, and by great cost sought for, even by mere natural men (though often
in vain) all which not only commends Gods fatherly, affection to his
children, in providing and promising these unto them: but ought in special
manner to comfort us in all our bodily infirmities, and sore diseases: that
how, or whenever the Lord shall visit us with sickness and weakness,
whereby we be hindered from many duties, both toward God and man, (which he
never does, but when need requires, and then also for our greater good) then we
may remember some of these promises, and so lay hold upon them by faith, that
we faint not, nor murmur (as men without hope) but comfortably quiet our
selves, that the Lord will in due season raise us up to our former health, and
strengthen us that we may with more watchfulnes and chearfulnes serve him.

Such as never or seldom have felt the want of this blessing of health, cannot
so prise it, or be thankful for it as they ought, but they whom God has much
exercised with long and tedious pains, and bodily infirmities, will make no
common reckoning of health, but prefer it before wealth and honor, (which be
so much set by) and they be they who will prise these promises, and who
believing them, shall patiently wait for the accomplishment of them. They
shall reap the fruit of them, both more comfort and conscience to hold out
their holy profession unto the end.

Among whom seeing it is well known to all that have lived with me for these
last ten years (at least) that I have had my part in much bodily infirmity so
much as my experience may be useful to others in like case, I do acknowledge
to Gods praise, that I have had good proof of the truth of this which I have
written, and do daily expect more, both for my comfort and strengthening to
hold out to the end. And so much for this blessing of health, which God has
promised to his obedient children.

The next is wealth, Wealth.
that is abundence of earthly goods, such as be needful for our more
comfortable living in this world which seeing they be many where of we stand in
need, and which our nature does exceedingly desire, therefore the Lord is most
plentiful in promising these; that hereby he might win our hearts to more
cheerful obedience, for this purpose that might suffice which is written
Levit. 26. from verse 3. to 14 and Deuteronomy. 28. from verse 2. to 15. 7. 12. to 17.
I leave svch as desire to see these, to read the places, so likewise the 128.
and 23. psalms in which is as much said as may be desired, and more then is well
believed.

For did we believe that in harkening to the voice of the Lord, to observe and
do all his commandments, we should be every way so abundantly blessed, it
could not but make us much more afraid to offend so bountiful a Father, and as
careful to please him in all things.

But to cite some of many, Prove. 3. 9. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and
with the first fruits of all (...) increase. verse. 10. so shall thy bar^es be
filled with plenty, and thy presses ^urst with new wine. verse 16. setting out
the incomparable commodities of wisdom he adds this, Length of days is in
her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor. v. 17. Her ways are
ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. verse 18. She is a tree
of (...) to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that retaynath
her, Again Chap. 8. 18. 19. (...) and honor are with me yea durable riches
and righteousness. My fruit is better then gold, yea then fine gold, and my
revenue then choice silver. Prove. 10. 22. The blessing of the Lord makes rich,
and he adds no sorrow with it. Chap. 15. 6. In the house of the righteous is
much treasure, etc. Job 22. 23. If thou reiurne to the Almighty, etc. verse 24.
Then shall thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the
brook.

Notable is that promise concerning these earthly blessings made to the people
of Israel at their return, Iere. 31. 12. Therefore they shall come and sing in
the height of Sion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for
wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock, and of the
heard, and their soul shall be as a watered garden, and they shall not sorrow any
more at all, etc. The like Mala. 3. 10. Bring ye all the tithes into the
storehouse, etc. If I will not open unto you the windows of heaven, and pour
you a blessing that there shall not be romme enough to receive, so the Apostle
exhorting to liberality to the poor Saints, says, 2. Cor. 9 verse 6. He that
sows bountifully shall reap bountifully, verse 8. And God is able to make
all grace abound toward you, that ye always having all sufficien^y in all
things, ^^y abound to every good work, etc.

I find my self wearior in writing out these promises, and I fear many will
be more weario^ in reading them over, then any of us would be weary of
receiving and enjoying these things so promised; And yet I may boldly affirm I
have not see down one quarter of those, which I have gathered out of the
Scriptures, for how often does the Lord promise plenty? that the land shall
yeel^ her fruit, that he will give them (...) in d^^ season, that there should
be none barren but he would increase them in all their substance both ground
and cattle, Ezekiel. 36. 30.
that they should eat old store, Levit 26. 50.
that threshing should reach unto vintage, and the like many, as they who be
exercised in the Scriptures can tell.

What should the Lord mean, Application.
in multiplying these promises so often, but in mercy to meet with our weakness,
who are so impatient of the want of these, and thereby so discouraged and
hindered in all our duties, we are therefore as with all thankefulnes to
acknowledge this bounty of the Lord: so by true faith to make these promises
our own, that in all time of scarcity of any of these (which often sore
pincheth) we may run to some of these promises, and so rest our selves quietly
and comfortably that we shall surely find relief in such time and measure as
God shall see fit and shall be most for our good.

I have hitherto said nothing of that love and favor with God and man, peace,
rejoicing good success, and prosperity, safety, freedom from all evils by
adversaries or other judgments which light upon the wicked. All which with
other the like be contained under this our welfare, and be no less promised
then the former, take but one or two places in each for a pattern.

For the first of Love and Favor. Favor.
Prove. 34. So shall thou find favor and good understanding in the sight of God
and man.

For Peace, Peace.
Levit. 26. 6. And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and
none shall make you afraid, etc.

For joy and rejoicing Esa. 65. 13. 14. Behold my servants shall rejoice,
Rejoicing
but ye shall be ashamed. Behold my servants shall sing for joy of heart: but
ye shall cry for sorrow of heart.

For good success and prosperity, Good success.
Psalm. 122. 6. 7. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
thee. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.

For safety, Safety.
Prove. 3. 23. Then shall thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not
stumble. Pro. 18. 10. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous
runs unto it and is safe.

For preservation from evil, Free from evil.
Pro. 1. 33. But who so hearkneth unto me, shall dwell safely, and be quiet
from the fear of evil. Job. 5. 19. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea
in seven there shall no evil touch thee. Verse. 20. In famine he shall redeem
thee from death, and in war from the power of the sword. Verse. 21. Thou shall
be hid from the secourge of the tongue, neither shall thou be afraid of
destruction when it comes, etc.

How welcome these, Application.
or any of them would be unto us when we feel the want of them, cannot be
doubted: but pity it is, that so few reap the fruit of these promises, to
uphold them in their greatest need, which comes especially through want of
faith; for all desire these, and many know that such things are promised in the
Scripture* but either they doubt they do not belong unto them, as being none
of Gods children (who be the only heirs of all the promises) or if they be of
this number, yet either forget the consolation offered, or through mistrust do
not apply them to their present necessities, and so languish in their
extremities without comfort.

By this may well appear, what need there is to live by faith for these
earthly blessings, which if we did, we should not only be free from many sore
vexations, which torment many ungodly in their distresses: but have quiet
minds in greatest storms, and in due season find such relief, as shall be
most expedient. This if it were considered, would move many to labor more for
this precious gift of faith, which will so abundantly supply all our earthly
wants, whereof we be so sensible, and thereby so distracted.

There remain sundry other earthly blessings, which as they be much desired,
so are they abundantly provided, promised, and bestowed as need requires upon
the faithful.

I will mention but two more, Good name.
viz: a good name, and posterity for the former; Eccles. 7. 1.
whereas a good name is better then a precious ointment, and rather to be
chosen then great riches God has made many promises concerning this, that he
will honor those that honor him, Pro. 22. 1.
and bring forth their righteousness as the light, 1 Samuel 2. 30
and their iundgement as the moon day, Psalm. 37. 6.
that though they be falsely accused by the ungodly, yet God will clear their
innocence, and free them from the reproach of such as defame them. To like
effect is that Pro. 4. 18. But the path of the just is as the shining light,
that shines more and more unto the perfect day. This is that which Solomon so
often repeateth; That wisdom will honor those that honor her, as Pro. 4. 8.
Exalt her and she shall promote thee, she shall bring thee to honor when
thou do embrace her: So its often said, Riches and honor are with her. Pro.
9. 18. 3. 16. and verse. 35. The wise shall inherit glory. So chap. 13. 18. He
that regards reproof shall be honored. Deuteronomy. 28. 1. Esa. 58. 14. Psalm. 132.
18. the like.

This also is meant by all those speeches where it is said, that harkening to
instruction will adorn and bring into estimation, as costly ornaments of
bracelets, jewels, and the like will do; so it is Pro. 1. 19. They shall be an
ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck. Chap. 3. 22. So
shall they be life to thy soul, and grace to thy neck. Chap. 4. 9. She shall
give to thy head an ornament of grace, a crown of glory shall she deliver to
thee.

In all which we see that howsoever the godly be hated, and basely esteemed of
the wicked, yet the Lord does not only highly esteem of them himself, but
will make them honored in the world, even of them who have no saving grace
themselves, as it is said Act. 5. 13. And of the rest durst no man join
himself to them: but the people magnified them. Rev. 3. 9. Behold I will make
them to come and worship before thy feet etc.

Seeing then, Application.
that to be well esteemed, especially of the better sort, is so sweet and
comfortable a blessing; and the contrary of ill fame is so bitter, as scarce
any thing makes many a one more weary of their lives, we are to behold Gods
tender care over his children, in preserving their good name, yea in making
them honorable, that is, of good esteem, not only among the Saints, but
among mere natural men, who beholding their good works, may glorify God in
the day of visitation, as the Apostle Peter speaks: 1 Pet. 2. 12.
And not only be careful our selves, by well doing to put to silence the
ignorance of the foolish: 15.
but when we shall be wrongfully defamed and that many times by our brethren,
then set us comfort our selves with these promises; which will uphold us from
sinking in the greatest storms that may this way befall us.

A worthy pattern herein to follow; we have the Prophet David, who being much
exercised wit^ (...) ^courge of the tongue, as (...) many of his Psal^es he
complains, yet he by this shield of faith, defended himself, and by the
anchor of hope stayed himself, that he sunk not, as Psalm. 3. ^* from v. 11.
to the end; and Psalm. 69. seems specially to be made to this end, yea, almost
in every part of Psalm. 119. as the complimeth hereof, so he comforts himself
in his God. I^b also being exceedingly wronged this way, even by his friends,
does worthily uphold himself, saying in one place; If my ^^^^sary had written
a book, surely (says he) I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a
crown unto me; I might allege many more examples (...) shall suffice for this
point.

Thus have we seen what excellent blessings, pertaining to this bodily life,
God has provided for his children, all which do belong to themselves.

Now in the last place, Posterity.
that nothing may be wanting, God has made promises to them concerning their
posterity.

1. That he will abundantly increase them.

2. That he will every way bless them.

Both which be so desired, that many have little comfort in their lives through
want of these. Let us therefore take knowledge of these for our comfort.

First, whereas barrennes was esteemed a heavy punishment, and full of
reproach, as many Scriptures testify. Genesis 30. 23. Rachel said, when she
conceived and bare a son; God has taken away my reproach. Luc. 1. 25. the
like is said of Elizabeth; so of H^^^^h* 1 Samuel 1. 10. it is said; And she was
in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore. This being
so, the contrary to be fruitful in bearing of many children was accounted a
great blessing, therefore the Lord in all ages promised this to his people as a
token of his great favor.

I will rehearse but a few for many, whereof the Books of Moses and the
Prophe^s are full. (...) 619. For I will (...) respect unto you, and make you
fruitful, and ^^^ply you, (...) establish my covenant with you. Deuteronomy. 7. 1^.
And he will (...) and bless thee, and multiply thee* (...) will also bless
the fruit of thy womb* and the fruit of thy land, thy corn and thy (...), and
thine (...), the increase of thy (...), and the flocks of thy sheep; etc. The
like Deuteronomy. 6. 3. (...). Job 5. 25. this is reckoned among many other blessings;
Thou shall know that thy seed shall be great, and thy offspring a^ the grass
of the earth, Es^. 48. 19. (...) to this Job 8. 7. Psalm. 115. 14. The Lord
shall increase you more and more* you and your children* Psalm. ^27. 3. (...) of
the Lord, and the (...) is his reward. Psalm. 127. ^3: Thy wife shall be as a
fruitful vine by the sides of thy (...). Notable is (...) 14. 5. 6. 7. which
serves (...) in this point intended Read the place.

These may abandantly suffice to settle the minds and hearts of any (...)
believer under this (...) of grief for want of children, that assuredly God
will fulfill their desire, if it be good for them. Application.
If this will not (...) thy man, let him go further and (...) worfer.

The other promises concerning posterity, (...) that God (...) under which all
good things belonging to them are contained, This is to be found in sundry of
the former Scriptures alleged, but to add a few more* Genesis 17. 7. This is
intended in all those places where its said; I will be the God of thy seed.
Psalm. 112. is notably set out the happy condition of every one that truly
fears God, among all, this is not the least, His seed shall be mighty on
earth, the generation of the upright shall be blessed. Psalm. 37. 25. David tells
us what his experience was, saying; I have been young, and now am old, yet
have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. Verse. 26.
He is ever merciful and lends, and his seed is blessed. Pro. 20. 7. The just
man walks in his integrity, his children are blessed after him. Esa. 44. 3.
I will power my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring. Ver.
4. And they shall spring up among the grass as Willowes by the water courses.
Esa. 61. 9. And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their
offspring among the people: All that see them shall acknowledge them, that they
are the seed which the Lord has blessed. Esa. 65. 23. the like. Iere. 32. 39.
is the same in effect; I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may
fear me for ever for the good of them and of their children. Besides these
general, promises of blessing the posterity of the faithful; there be some
more special, as Psalm* 102. 28. The children of thy servants shall continue,
and their seed shall be established before thee. Pro. 11. 21. Though hand join
in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished, but the seed of the righteous
shall be deli^ered; So chap. 14. 26. In the fear of the Lord is strong
confidence, and his children shall have a place of refuge. Esa. 54. 13. All thy
children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy
children. Pro. 13. 22. A good man leaves an inheritance to his childrens
children, and the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just. And many the
like.

Behold ye parents, Application*
what good things God has laid up in store for your children after you, that
as all they who fear the Lord, shall be blessed in themselves with all
needful blessings, so they shall see all Gods blessings upon their children
after them, yea, upon their childrens children to many generatio^s; which is
plainly promised in the second Commandment, that God will show mercy to
thousands of them that love him and keep his Commandments; under which be all
needful blessings contained.

The use then to be made of all these blessings promised to the posterity of
the faithful, Use.
is this; That whereas godly parents having comfort in themselves, and often full
of fears for their posterity, what shall become of them, especially, in
pe^illous times, this may and must quiet their minds that God will be the God
of their seed after them, and (...) shall not want any thing that is good.

If any want this comfort, the fault is in themselves, that either they know
not, or at least (...) not the sweet promises made to the posterity of the
faithful. The only remedy then of this fear is, acquaint our selves with
these promises, that in all temptations of this kind, we may set them before
us, and so by prayer and meditation upon Gods mercy in making these promises,
and truth in performing what he promises, we may come to believe them, and so
(...) upon Gods mercy for his blessing on our children^, as well as upon our
selves: which if we do I cannot well see, what shall be wanting to the full
content^^^^ of all Gods children, even in earthly blessings, which are so much
desired, and the want whereof is so distasteful, and unwelcome to our nature.

And thus to conclude this fifth point, I have showed how we may live by faith,
that we shall not want any earthly blessing, neither for our selves, nor for
our posterity, which being added to all the former, will prove there is no
life comparable to the life by faith, and therefore this about all is to be
labored for, by all that desire true comfort in this life, and thereby hope of
a far better to come.

THE SIXTH AND LAST GENERAL HEAD, Of living by Faith, is for Perseverance.
THere is now, but one thing wanting (as far as I can see) to the making up
of the full comfort of the true believer, so much as may be attained in this
life, namely, how he being so frail every way, his enemies so many and strong
should be sure that he shall hold out to the end, and so overcomming receive
the end of his faith, the salvation of his soul: which being a matter of so
great difficulty, and so rarely attained, they be not a few who flatly deny
this certainty of perseverance, and many more do mistrust themselves herein,
and thereby much weaken all the comfort of their life.

It shall be therefore highly needful, to add this to the former, how a true
believer may attain to this certainty by faith, that notwithstanding all his
own weakness, and strength and malice of his spiritual enemies, yet he shall
persever to the end.

I intend not to make a treatise, of this point of the perseverance of the
Saints, either to prove the truth of the doctrine, or to confute the contrary
error, which is done already, and that soundly, as by argument, so by example,
both by ancient and latter Divines.

But as in the former points, I have chiefly labored to strengthen the faith
of Gods children, to depend upon God, with hope and patience, for succor in
all their necessities, spiritual and earthly: so in this, my only labor
shall be, to establish our hearts in this confidence, that he who has begun a
good work in us, Phil. 1. 6.
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. Which as it was the
confidence of the Apostle, for the believers in his time, so ought it to be
ours, in all succeeding ages to the worlds end, seeing we have the same
promises whereon to build our faith, which they had, and which the Lord made to
his people of old.

Let us now then consider of these promises, and so make our use of them. It is
not to be doubted, but this was intended in the first promise which God made,
that the seed of the Woman should bruise the head of the Serpent; Genesis 3 15
and in that made to Abraham, that he would stablish his covenant with him for
an everlasting covenant. Genesis 17. 7.
Which is often repeated; but seeing we have very many more clear promises
hereof, we will pass by these.

This was plainly promised by God to David concerning (...), 2. Sam. 7. 14.
and afterward as truly performed. I will be his father, and he shall be my
son: if he com^^^ iniquity, I will chasten him with the (...) of men, and
with the (...) of the children of men. ^5.
But my mercy shall (...) depart from him, Psalm. 89. verse 28. the like is
recorded.

Ths is more generally spoken of the blessed man, Psalm. 1. 3. His (...) shall
not (...). The book of the Psalms is full of these comfortable promises,
Psalm. 9. ^0. They that know thy name will (...) for thou Lord have not forsaken
them that seek thee, and verse. 18. for the needy shall not always be for
gotten: the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever. Psalm 15. 5.
He that does these things shall never be moved, the like Psalm. 112. 6. 125.
1. Pro. 10. 30. and 12. 3. Psalm 23. 6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow
me all the days of my life. Psa. 48. 14. For this God is our God for ever and
ever; he will be our guide even unto death. Psalm 73. 24. Thou shall guide me
with thy counsel, and shall receive me unto glory. verse 26. My flesh and my
heart fails, but God is the strergth of my heart and my portion for ever.
Psalm 103. 17. But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting
upon them that fear him.

In the writings of the Prophers we may read many such promises for
perseverance, Es^^ 54. 8. But with everlasting kindness will have mercy on
thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. chap. 55. 3. Hear and your soul shall
(...). And I will make an everlasting covenant with you, eve^ the sure mercies
of David, the like. Ezekiel. 16. 60. and 37. 26. is a special promise to this
purpose, I will put my fear into their hearts that they shall not depart from
me. Iere. 32. 39. 40.
Many more might be gathered out of the old Testament, Esaias. 59. 21.
but I fear some will think them to many: who if they shall well weigh either
the excellency of these promises, or their own backwardnes to believe them,
when they most stand in need of them; then will they find all to little to
uphold them against their fears of falling away.

We will therefore proceed to see what comforts for our persevera^ce are
delivered in the new Testament which we shall find to be more clear then the
former, for that (as I think) we be in more danger in this last age of the
world, seeing the Devil knows his time is but short, Revel. 12. 12.
is more full of wrath against Gods people, to seek their overthrow.

This moved our Savior Christ himself so much to comfort Mat. 28. 20.
his Disciples, and so all the faithful, that he would be with them unto the
end of the world, Luke (...). 22.
and bids them fear not little flock, John 16. 33
for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom. Be of good
comfort I have overcome the world which we see is of great force to persuade
them they should never be overcome, but should hold out till they were received
to glory: for further assurance whereof, he confidently affirms saying, John
6. 47
veritly verily, He that believes on me has everlastingly, (...), and
therefore can never perish or fall away, for further assurance it is said, John
13. 1. That (...) Christ loved, he loved unto the end.

And what greater assurance can we desire and look for then this, 1. These. 5.
24.
that God* f^ithful who has called us, who also will do, that is (as goes
before immediately) Pres^rve our whole spirit soul and body blameles unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is est repeated (...) Cor. p. 9. and
10. (...) that we might have it in better remembrance and use: And for
confirmation hereof; 2. Tim. 2. 19.
its said the foundation of God (...), grounded upon this, the Lord knows who
(...) his, meaning that they who^ God before the foundation of the world did
chose, and ordain to be saved, cannot possibly perish; as it is said, Mat. 24.
24. If it were possible, intending, that it is not possible, for then should
God be, either m^table to change his decree, or not Almighty, as not able to
perform that which he did purpose, both which be most blasphemous to think of
God, for this cause Christ did bid his Disciples rejoice that their names were
written in heaven, Luke 10. 20. yea more in the same place, 2. Tim. 2. 19. is
said that this foundation of the certainety of salvation to all the Elect, has
a seal, which is after expressed in these words: Let every one (...) of Christ
depart from iniquity; which I conceive the same, which is said, Ephesians. 1. 13.
that they after they believed more (...) with the holy spirit of promise, which
is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
possession unto the praise of his glory.

In both this is mean^, that the work of true sanctification, which the holy
Ghost works in every true believer, is an infallible mark that we are true
beleever^ effectually called and elected to salvation by Christ, and therefore
are sure we cannot perish, but shall persevere and be saved. This is notably
set down 2 Cor. 1. 21. 22. Now he which establishes us with you in Christ,
and has anointed us. is God, who has also sealed us and given the earnest of
his spirit in our hearts; so that as true dealing men, do make sure their
grants and covenants by seals and giving of some earnest, which being a part
of the prise covenanted, does assure the whole payment: so does the most
faithful God, by these first fruits of the spirit of sanctification* assure
unto us* that we shall never quite fall away from grace, but shall be fully
sanctified by his holy spirit at the time appointed. The Apostle Peter 2. 1.
10. by this moves the faithful to make their calling and election sure.

And yet more, if this be not enough to assure us, that we shall never fall
away, but continue to the end and be saved, how often does the Lord pass his
word unto us, that his spirit shall abide in us for ever? Notable is that place
of the Prophet Esa. 59. 21. As for me this my covenant with them, says the
Lord; My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

By this did our Savior Christ much labor to comfort his Disciples, who were
full of sorrow to hear of his leaving them; Ioh. 14. 16.
And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter* that he
may abide with you for ever. 17
Even the spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him
not neither knows him, but ye know him for he dwells in you, and shall be
in you. So again, Ioh. 15. 16. Ye have not chosen me; but I have chosen you,
and ordained you, that you go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit
should remain. Ioh. ^6. 22. Your joy shall no man take may: and more to like
effect, as John 10. 28. 29. I give them eter^all life, and they shall never
perish, etc.

So the beloved Apostle John, wrote his first Epistle to this end especially,
to confirm the faithful in the certainty of their salvation, that they
should not fall away as many hypocrites then did, and daily do. To this end,
as he sets down sundry marks, whereby they may prove themselves to be in
the state of grace; so he gives many comfortable promises, that they shall
continue, 1 Ioh 2. 24.
and abide for ever: and more specially verse. 27. 17.
But the anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you, and ye need
not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all
things, and is truth, and is no lie; (...) as it has taught you, ye shall
abide in him, etc. Chap. 3. 2. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it
does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that when he shall appear
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Verse. 9. His seed
remains in him; and much more in this Chapter and the rest, I n^ed not
rehearse all.

To shut up this point. A principal cause of this certainty of our
perseverance, is that which the Apostle Peter expresses, 1 Pet. 1. 4 5
saying; that their inheritance is reserved in heaven for them, who are kept by
the power of God, through faith unto salvation. And to like effect the Apostle
Jude closes his Epistle with these words; Now to him that is able to keep you
from falling, and to preserve you faultlesse before the presence of his glory
with exceeding joy, to the only wise God, our Savior be glory and majesty,
dominion and power, now and ever, Amen.

Thus have I gathered (you may see) good store, Application.
yet not all of those comfortable promises which God has made to his Church in
all ages, to confirm their faith, that seeing he has freely loved them,
chosen them, and called them to be his, therefore none shall ever be able to
pluck them out of his hand. What remains then for us (who be compassed with
such a cloud of testimonies, which all agree in one) but to be persuaded with
the Apostle, Romans 8. 38* 39. That neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come: Nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Let us then whenever we fall into this temptation, (oh, I shall never be
able to hold out: I find my corruption so strong, or if I should be called to
any such fiery trial as in Queen Mary's days, I shall never be able to
endure them, but shall (as many then did) for fear fall away, and deny the
truth.) Let us I say, against this tentation set the many promises which the
Lord has made unto us, that he will never leave us nor forsake ^s, Heb. 13. 5.
yea more, that we shall be kept by his power unto salvation, that hell gates
shall not prevail against us; Mat. 15. 18.
with many the like, whereof before: that duly wayghing these, and the
faithfulness of him who has promised them, we may comfort our hearts, that he
who has begun the work of grace in us, will never give it over till he has
fully finished it; Heb. 12. 2.
for as he is the author of our faith: so is he the finisher of it. Ioh. 10. 29.
And he is stronger then all, so that none shall be able to pluck us out of
his hand.

Be then of good cheer thou poor soul, who find some work of grace begun
in thee, yet feeling thine own infirmities, and often oppressed with many and
sore tentations, and beholding or hearing of the falls of many great
professors, art much shaken, and filled with fears of falling away; for
assure thy self, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
that (being borne again not of corruptible see^, but of incorruptible by the
word of God, which lives and abides for ever) it is not possible thou
should perish, or ever loose that faith and grace which is begun in thee,
neither can thou sin unto death, (as I understand the Apostle 1 John 5. 16.)
seeing this immortal seed remains in thee.

And this I will add, for the comfort of all such as be troubled with these
fears (that they shall never hold out to the end, and thereby be stirred up to
be more diligent in the use of the means ordained for their growth in grace,
and perseverance therein) that I never did know, or hear of any such to fall
away: but usually they who finally fall away, are such as be secure, and
presume of Gods mercy, that they shall stand, when others fall, and take this
withal, that then we be strongest, when we be weakest, that is, when feeling
our own weakness, and distrusting our selves, we run to God, and rely upon him
in all our necessities; which is that I have labored to effect in all this
treatise. The sum whereof I will in few words set down, as for the help of
memory, so for the quickening of our spirits more to labor for this happy life
by faith, which both in life and death will be our chief comfort.

For so much as the lives and deaths of the most professors of Christian
Religion, do show that few attain either that comfort of salvation, or
conscience of holy conversation, which God has prepared for true believers. My
maine scope has bin to redress this sore evil, and to this end I have showed
that this blessedness is enjoyed only by living by faith, and what saving
faith is, how its gotten, and how we may know that we have it, both by the
causes and effects, joined together not separated. Wherein seeing many be
deceived on either side, some presuming, others mistrusting, there be plain
marks of soundness set down, whereby every one may try himself.

In the next place we are taught how to live by faith: herein what it is to
live by faith, and how this is obtained, which is by due application of Gods
promises, whereto is required serious meditation, and prayer, wherein seeing few
be so fervent, as in this case ought to be, the singular gain hereof is
largely laid down, both for consolation, and for reformation of our lives; and
herein four rules, which be of excellent use.

The second part of this treatise is a direction how to apply to our particular
necessities Gods promises, which being of diverse sorts, absolute, or
conditional, simply necessary, or with limitation, general or special, are
all accordingly to be considered. All of these being so exceeding many to bring
them to some easy order, for our better use of them all, they be drawn to six
heads, to which all may be well referred.



In the next place is more specially showed, how we may be more assured by
faith of our justification, in both the parts thereof, 1. the forgiveness of
sin, 2. the imputation of righteousness. And likewise of the fruits of
these, which be 1. our Reconciliation, 2. our Adoption, 3. hope of glory. For
further proof that we be Gods children, we have assurance by sense, when we
see the spirit of God working in us such graces, as cannot be in truth in any,
but such as shall be saved. Among which 1. Faith it self is chief. 2. The
gift of the spirit. 3. Sincere obedience, 4. Promises made to many particular
graces, as to the love of God, and of our neighbor, to the fear of God. And
so to all other fruits of faith, which be marks of salvation. And because many
weak, yet true believers, have no feeling of their faith, and thereby be sore
discouraged, there be four marks of true faith where it cannot be seen.
Sundry other promises of Gods favor to strengthen our faith.

The second general head of mortification of our corrupt nature, w^erein our
faith being so weak, we have manifold encouragements to assure us of a full
and final victory. The general promises, that God will cleanse us from all
unrighteousness, may suffice for all particulars.



In what special duties in every Commandment we be most failing. General
promises that we shall want no saving grace, with the right use of these. For
our further help, God has made many promises of particular graces. 1. that he
will teach us. 2. that he will set our hearts in frame. 3. that he will give us
faith, trust, hope, joy, (which few attain to for want of faith) to love and
fear him, with the right use of all. Whereas we fail much in all holy
exercises, God promises he will both assist us and accept us in them, as in
prayer, few prayers made in faith.

This is to be referred to all spiritual Sacrifices. Whereas there is much
unfruitfulness in the exercises of the Word and Sacramants, even in such as
have true grace, through want of faith; the remedy is to apply Gods promises
(which be many) especially when they go to these duties. The Sacraments be
much more abused, the remedy is to consider Gods faithfulness in the seals.

The fourth head concerns Four grounds of comfort, 1. All afflictions come
from God, and that to all of his children. 2. In what manner God afflicts
his, most wisely and most lovingly, his wisdom is in the meetnes of the
correction, and in the just measure and continuance thereof, Gods loving and
tender dealing with his, is plentifully set out unto us for our comfort. 3. the
excellent ends and fruits of afflictions, general is blessedness. 3. special
benefits by afflictions, 1. they be trialls of our strength and weakness many
judge amiss and be misi^dged by others. 2. benefit by afflictions is, we be
purged from our corruptions. 3. by these Gods graces in us be quickened,
specially faith and patience. All which benefits being so desired, and not
attained without afflictions, should make us rejoice in them. 4. comfort in
afflictions, God will help us and deliver us.

The fifth head, is that we shall not want any earthly blessing needful. 1.
general promises. 2. particular. 1. long life. 2* health 3* wealth under
welfare many other be contained. 4. good name. 5. and lastly for our
posterity. ^. that God will increase them. 2. abundantly bless them.

The sixth and last head of promises for our living by faith is for
Perseverance, which being not only doubted of, but gain said, God has spoken
much for our comfort, on which we are often to meditate, that we may hold out to
the end, and so overcomming we may enjoy al those rich promises mentioned in
the second and third chapters of the Revelation.

This is the sum of that which more at large (according to my poor ability)
I have laid out in this Treatise: what I have sought herein, I must leave to
him who knows and shall judge even my intention, as well as my actions; what
may be the profit hereby to Gods people the effects shall show.

And this I may say that had I not conceived good hope thereof, I should never
have spent so many years about it. And if I had not been much encouraged by
sundry men of good esteem in our Church, who perusing it, after a sort charged
me, not to bury my labors, but to communicate them to all that will receive
them, mine own mean conceit of my self and labors, would have kept them
still close from so public a view and censure.

Now to shut up all, Exhortation to labor for faith.
I do instantly beseech in the Lord, every soul, who truly lamenteth his
want of comfort in Gods favor, in all his necessities, and weakness of
obedience in all duties required, both which do principally arise from the
want, and weakness of faith: that they would above all (as the Apostle
himself exhorts, Ephesians. 6. 16) labor to get, and strive to maintain this
precious grace of saving faith, in such manner, and by such means, as in this
treatise has been set down.

And for the better attaining hereunto, their own experience shall show how
needful it shall be to make this a daily practice, to meditate upon Gods
promises, specially such as most concern their present condition, and to this
end to commit to memory, To learn special promises.
and to learn without Book one or two principal promises for every purpose
as I have set them down, or themselves may observe, that so they may have them
ready for their use.

As for example, when they would go to Prayer, think seriously of that
promise, Romans 8 26. Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities: for we
know not what we should pray for, as we ought; but the spirit it self makes
intercession^er us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. Verse. 27. And he
that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the spirit, because he
makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of God. Or that of
James. 1. 5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives
liberally to all men, and vpbraideth not: and it shall be given him. I make no
doubt but the due consideration what God has said in either of these, will put
life into any Christian heart, more comfortably to set himself to this holy
duty.

The like is to be done when we go about our callings. Psalm. 121. 8. The Lord
shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in, from this time forth and for
evermore.

So when any cross befalls us, remember that invaluable promise, Romans 8. 29.
Also we know that all things work together for good, to them that love God, to
them who are the called, according to his purpose. And that 1 Cor. 10. 13.
There has no tentation taken you but such as is common to man, but God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be able: but
will with the tentation, also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it. The same is to be said for the rest, as more largely has been
handled.

To this end I do advise every one to set apart some time every day (if there
be no just hinderance) to this duty of nourishing their faith, To set apart
some time every day.
by prayer, and meditation on Gods promises, which although I fear it be
rarely practiced, yet I dare commend it to be of admirable gain to all good
purposes, and holy practices of Christianity, even in days of prosperity,
though more specially in times of adversity.

And herein, the more to stir up all who desire to see the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living. I will add this of mine own experience both
in my self, and others not a few, with whose state I have been acquainted,
that as there can be no sound comfort in any part of our life without faith,
and yet nothing more hard to keep in life, then true faith: so this is the
chief cause, why so few find that good assurance of their salvation, that
comfort in afflictions, that power against their corruptions, and that growth
in grace, which full well they might, if the fault were not in themselves, for
that they do not make this a daily practice to examine themselves, whether
they be in the faith. 2. Cor. 13 5.
(as the Apostle exhorts) that so finding their weakness, they might be
stirred up more constantly and painefully to strive for the maintenance of
their faith, whereof they shall have such daily use, that without it there can
be no proceeding, but rather a daily decay in all Christianity.

In consideration of all which I make this my last suite to all such, only to
make trial of this duty of daily nourshing and in creasing their faith, which
if they shall endeavor not slightly, but carefully with knowledge and
conscience, I make no doubt, but that they shall find, at least so much as shall
encourage them to go forward, till they shall be further satisfied, only we
must refer to God, both the time when, and the measure how much, it shall
seem good to his wisdom to bestow on us.

And for my part, I will not cease to pray unto God for them all, that he would
fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness and the work of faith with
power. So be it.

FINIS.

