A new years gift, wherein is taught the knowledge of our self and the fear
of God. Worthy to be given and thankefullye received of al Christen men.

Imprynted at London by Robert Crowley dwellinge in The rentes in Holb^rn. The
year of our Lord. M. D. xlix. the last day of December

Autore eodem Roberto Croleo

Cum prunlegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the Christian Reader.
Have here (gentle reader) a thing very small
In utter aparaunce (as thou may well see)
And yet in effect it contains all
That Christ in his Gospel requires of the,
Wherefore as a miroure or glass let it be,
Wherein thou may se thine own Image plain,
And have thereby cause thy lust to restrain.
AS bread to the hungry is better then gold
And Drink in out drought, a treasure most hie:
And as the fire pleases the man that is cold
So does honest knowledge such as be witty. Proverb. ix.

For such men do feel them selves eased thereby.
And as the man that does a great treasure find
So are they delyted therwyth in their mind.
Intending therefore to give to the wise.
A present of pleasure at this newyets tide
A more pleasant thing. I could not devise
Emonge all the treasure of this world so wide
To such men as be not pufte (up with pride)
Then for to teach them with words most plain
By what means they might all their vices refrain
First se that ye learn your self for to know
From whense ye are come, Romans xiiii.
and whither you shall
And that God will judge as well high as low
When he shall be set on his tribunal.
Not fearing the great, nor sparynge the small
But geueyng to all men of every degree
Accordynglye as their doing shall be. ii Cor. v.

For who so that knows him self thoroughly
Shall never be haute nor lofty of mind
But shall be in heart evermore low lie
Confessing the fautes that are in mankind.
The love of him self shall him never blind. Esai. lxiiii

He shall know him self to be but vile duste
Which knowledge shall cause him to bridle his lust.
If he be a king, a Lord or a knighte
And have of his country the chief governance
He shall ever have him self in his sight
When flattering fortune shall him advance.
His rentes and his fees he shall not er. haunce
For he shall always have mind of his end
And study the innocente for to defend. Eccle. vii.

For why he ne knows how soon he shall go
To duste whe^se he came as nature does bind
And certain he is to have endeles woo
If happlye he frame not his heart and his mind
With all his endeavor to search and to find
The way that shall led him into endless bliss
Which all men have lost by that one did amiss
He knows not the time, Rome. v.
the manner nor place
Of his going hense, it is so uncertain
Wherefore he will call to God for his grace
To govern the Fancies of his fleshlye, brain
That after this life he may live and reign
With the king of al kings, who gives the same
To all that do ask it in Christ (his sons) name. John. xiiii.

In fine, al estates what so ever they be
That do know them self, Eccles. vil.
and think on their end
Will seek to walk right in their own degree
And all their enormities for to emende.
And that which they seek for, god will them send.
For he of his promise is certain and sure
And will be as long as this world shall endure. Math. vii.

I areade you therefore this knoweledge to get
With all manner haste and expedite speed
Remoueynge al things that may do you let
Lest haplye ye lack it in time of your need
And count your self corn when you be but vile wede
Or else to be branches of Christ the true vine
When your fruit is apt to make no good wine.
First know yt the matter whereof ye do grow
Is more vile in sight then the dirt of the street. Gene. ^^

And when ye be grown up ye do not know how
Then do ye begin away for to flete
Even as does the flood after ple^tie of wete Job. xiiii.

And when ye be furnished best to enoure
Then of your abiding you are most unsure
Your norishyng up in your tender age
Is very paynful, and right daingerous
And when ye be strong, then ginne you to rage
And to follow manners voluptuous
Not one emonge twenty is found desirous
To furnish him self with manners vprighte
And to be found honest in every manes sight
Yea where have we one that does him apply
To any good thing by his own accord? Psalm. xiiii.

Without chastismente we do nothing pardie
Till we be out of the reach of the rod
Except special grace be given us of god
To bridle our lust and our fleshly will
Which can of it felfe do nothing but ill
And when we be come to our own governance
Then either we endeavor right shortli to clime
Or else do we give up our self to pastaunce
And in Idleness consume all our time
As though Idleness were not a foul cryine. Math xxiiii. Luke. xii.

And for to mispend that god has us sent
Did not at gods hand, deserve punishmente
Now when we wax old and draw to our end.
Then enters Avarice into our heart
And causes that when we ought chiefli to emende
We are given wholi to the contratie part
No promise nor threatnynge can us convert
Unless the lord god do draw us by his grace
Forgeueinge our sins and our wicked tresp^se.
Thus see ye how vile, how k^e^ke and how wild
How wyckedly bente, and how abominable
How hard to emende, and eke how detyl^e.
Ye are, and in all points how miserable,
How in your desires insatiable
And how of your self ye be worst in the end
When reasone would rather that ye should emende
Consider therefore your self in this glass
And let not your Image go out of your syghte
And then I ne doubt it will come well to pass
That you shall endeavor to walk still vprighte
And in the Lords law to set your delighte Psalm. xviii.

So that by his grace ye shall never blinne
To call for his mercy and repent your sin
This done, you must learn that god is your judge
Who judges all men wythouten respect. Job. xxxiiii.

He is not a frayde of your arms hudge
Nor of the strong fortes that you do erecte.
He is ever able such things too deiecte.
And will when he lusts beat down to the ground
All such mighty things, Genesis iiii.
wherso they be found
He feared not Caine that killed Abell
No more did he spare poor Lamech the blind
Stout Nemroth also that builded Babel, Gene. x.

In part of his plages was nothing behind: Gene. xix.

The fylthie Sodomes did small favor find
Right so did in Egipte the king Pharao, Exo. xv.

And Nabuchodonozer with other more. Dani. iiii.

What should I rehearse how in wilderness Nume. xi. Exodus xxxii.

He plaged his people that often did repine
And how afterward for unthankfulness
They planted the vines and drank not the wine
Such is the power of the Godhead divine
Wherefore I advise you for to repent.
Before he do come to sit in judgment.
For when he is set, he will judge you right
It is the^ to late for mercy to crave
And in no place can you be out of his sight
For he sees the corners of every cave
To him lies open both hell and the grave. Psalm. xxxxix.

Wherefore while you may do there upon thyncke
And let the lords fear into your hertes syncke.
Embrace the lords fear: for thereof does spring
The rote of all wisdom, Psalm, xxi.
as David does say
And if ye lack that then know ye nothing
Belonging unto the heavenly way.
For upon gods fear all knowledge must stay
Else must it needs be reproved as vain
Because it proceeds of manes Idle brain.
But knowledge yt does spryng out of the Lords fear
Is evermore constante, certain and sure
And causes each man his cross for to bear
And in all his trouble for to endure
It causes a man to have little pleasure,
In any thing that does upon the earth lie
And to seek his conforte in heaven on hie.
Gods fear teaches as to seek for his will
And eke for to frame our life to the same
Right so does it teach us to do no man ill
In hurtinge his person or staineynge his fame
It teaches us to lead a life without blame.
And to do our best to profit al me^
With all the gifts that God has to us given.
Thus knowing my self, and fearinge the Lord
I wyshe to all men a luckie new year,
And grace for to seek after peace and concord
That the love of Christ may in them apeare
And that banketting in spiritual there
They may all their faults espy d^^em end
Before the twelve months be come to an end.
Finis.

