A short declaration of the end of Traitors, and false Conspirators against
the state, and of the duty of Subjects to their sovereign Governor: and
wythall, how necessary, Laws and execution of Justice are, for the
preservation of the Prince and Common wealth. Wherein are also breefely
touched, sundry offenses of the S. Queen, committed against the crown of this
Land, and the manner of the honorable proceeding for her conviction thereof, and
also the reasons and causes alleged and allowed in Parliament, why it was
thought dangerous to the state, if she should have lived.

Published by Richard Crompton, an Apprentice of the common Laws.

Seen and allowed.

ECCLESIA. 10. Wish no evil to the King in thy thought, nor speak any hurt
of him in thy privy Chamber: for a bird of the air shall betray thy voice,
and with her feathers she shall bewray thy words. AT LONDON, Printed by I.
Charlewood, for Thomas Gubbins, and Thomas Newman. 1587.

To the most reverend Father in God, John by the divine providence,
Archbyshoppe of Canterbury, Metrapolytane of England, his Grace, and one of her
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel: Rychard Crompton wysheth everlasting
felicity. ()
FOrasmuch (most reverend Father) as these days are very dangerous, and full
of peril, in which wickedness has so deeply entered into the hearts of many,
who not having the fear of GOD before their eyes, nor regard to the faith and
loyalty, which every Subject ought to bear to his sovereign Governor, nor
respect to the zeal and love that every good manne naturally ought to carry to
his native soil and Country, have in these days so often entered into such
wicked treasons and conspiracies as well against her Majesty's sacred person,
as also this most happy government, as the like has not been heard of in
the reign of any her noble Progenitors, Princes of this Land, sithence the
Conquest thereof unto this day. And for that the same has been pretended to
be for matters touching Religion, I have therefore set down in this small
Treatise, the miserable end and confusion of diverse, which within our memory
among us most justly have suffered, for such their wicked conspiracies and
treasons, and withal, the duties of Subjects to their Prince and sovereign
Governor, both which, at the general Sessions of the Peace, in the County of
Staff: among other things pertaining to that service, I lately published, as a
matter which I thought then much necessary for this present time, to the end,
that the one, might be a terror to all men to offend in the like, and the
other, an instruction in the duty and obedience, which every good Subject
ought to embrace. And because some of that audience seemed (as they said) to
like well thereof, and thought it in their opinions convenient to be made common
to all men, I have at their request thought good to publish the same. And
forasmuch as no Kingdom nor Common wealth can stand, where good Laws are not
established, and Justice executed, I have therefore also herein set down in
part, the commodities and profittes which grow to the same thereby. And
because the Laws of themselves are dombe things, remaining in Records,
Books and Customs, and must therefore be published and put in execution by
officers thereunto appointed, I have showed what persons they ought to be,
which should be called to sit in place of Justice, and to whom the trust
and confidence of the execution of Laws ought to be committed, and what great
care they ought to have to perform the same: and withal have touched the
duties of Jurors, and what regard they ought to have of their oaths, verdytts
and presentiments, since that without them, justice cannot be done upon
offenders, and transgressors of Law cannot be punished. And am bold under your
Graces favor, to present these few leaves to the same, as to one, who I am
assured wysheth well to this whole state, and daily prays for the
presertation of her Majesty, whom God of his mercy long preserve and continue
unto us. From the Myddle Temple, the xij. of February. 1587. ()

At the commandment of your Grace most humbly. R. C.

A Declaration of the end of Traitors, and false Conspirators against the
state, and of the duties of Subjects to their Prince and sovereign Governor.
etc.
IF ever Kingdom were blessed, if ever Nation enjoyed happy days, if ever
people lived in a golden age, The happiness of this state.
surely this is that Kingdom, we are that Nation, and we are that people.
First, in that it has pleased God to First for the light of the gospel.
give us the light of his Gospel, whereby many errors, and much superstition
(which has crept into the Church of God) are reformed. Then in that it has
pleased him, to give us so gracious a Sovereign For so gracious a Queen.
Lady and Queen, not a forreyner, not a stranger borne, but one of our own
Nation (which is observed as a great blessing of God in the sacred Scriptures,)
Deuteronomy. 15. 17
and of the right line and dyssent of the Noble Kings, and Princes of this
Realm. One by, and under For this common peace so long continued.
whom, we have enjoyed such common peace and quietness within this land these
xxviij. years and more, as the like has not been heard of, neither is to be
found in Record or Chronicle since the Conquest of England For this her
Majesty's merciful and gracious government
to this day, for the like time of government. One desirous to reign with
mercy, with love, with pity, with clemency and fender compassion, and not by
effuston of blood, not by tyranny, not by oppression of her Subjects, neither
always by inflicting the extremity of her Laws, upon such as justly have
deserved the execution For that her majesty is assisted with grave sage, most
wise, and honorable Cou^sellers
of the same. In that also it has pleased him to assist her, with such grave,
sage, and honorable Counselors, men of such great wisdom, of such deep
consideration, of such policy, forecast, and experience, as to speak it
plainly and simply, no Prince under yesunne is furnished with the like, or at
the least with a better. By whose great wisdoms, trauelles, and indeuoures,
Fruits of their travel to the common wealth
this common peace and quietness, has been the rather preserved and
maintained. If any thing has been purposed or meant, which might any way
tend to the danger of her Majesty's person, or to the trouble or peril of
this state, that has been by them quickly espied, deeply looked into, and
with great wisdom and policy in time prevented and avoided, to their
immortal fames, glories, and renownes for ever. Whereby There is a most happy
state where wysemen rule. Eccle. 10.
the saying of the wise Solomon is found to be true. Happy is that kingdom,
where there are many that can give good counsel. And Jesus the son of Syrack
says: Where they that are in authority are men of understanding, there the
city does prosper. And again Solomon says: Where no counsel is, there the
people decay. Prouer. 11.
But where many are that give good counsel, there is wealth. If you well
consider, and look into the civil wars and discention, into the horrible
murders of Miserable state of other Countries.
great personages, into the pitiful slaughter of men, women, and children,
by fire and sword, into the lamentable rauishments, and deflowringes of Maids,
Wives, and Widows, into the ransacking and spoiling of Cities and Towns,
with a number of other miseries and calamities, which have happened of late
years in other Countries, not far hence, you shall find that this Realm of
England above all Nations under the Sun at this day, has most cause to
think it self bound to the goodness of almighty God. In that he has not
suffered us to be afflicted or visited with the like. And now, what shall I say
of them to whom this her Majesty's most gracious government, these Enemies to
this government.
happy days, these blessed years, have been thought tedious, and too long to
have continued, and therefore have most unnaturally, most wickedly, yea, and
most trayterouslie sought the untimely death and destruction of her, under
whom (by Gods great mercy and favor toward us) we have enjoyed all these
good things. Shall I say they were unkind people? Shall I say they were
unnatural Subjects? Nay I will rather say that they were, and such as they,
are more meet to They are not worthy to live under so gracious a Prince.
live under an Infidel, under a Turk, under a Jew, under a blooddy Prince,
or Tyrant, rather then under so gracious and so merciful a sovereign Lady
and Queen, as she has showed herself to be to all sorts of her Subjects,
even from the beginning of her blessed reign to this day, whereof we are all
witnesses.

What good Subject will not heartily lament to think what sorrow her Majesty
does make, what inward grief she has conceived, what deep sighs proceed
Her Majesty's grief for her kindenes to be so unkindly recompensed by false
traitors and conspirators.
from her noble heart, what tears distill from her tender eyes (as we may
imagine and suppose) when she calls unto her gracious remembrance, the
great love which she does, and always has born to her good Subjects, the
daily care she has of their prosperity and well doing, her continual
desire, that they may live in peace and rest under her. To have this her love
so unkindly requited, her care so vngentlie recompensed, her desire so
vngratefullie rewarded, as to have her death so often conspyred, her
destruction so many ways intended, and this her most happy government, many
times trayteroustie devised to be suppressed, where it is the part and duty
of every good Subject, to be true, faithful obedient, and loyal to his
Prince and sovereign Governor, whom God has appointed to reign over him,
though her Majesty by these her manifold kindnesses had not (as she has)
merited and deserved the same.

But most gracious sovereign Lady, let not these their wicked and traiterous
conspiracies dismay you, let them not discourage you, but be of good comfort,
and doubt not, but as almighty GOD has hitherto most Causes of comfort to her
Majesty not withstanding these often conspiracies.
graciously saved and defended you, from the most wicked purposes of such, as
have so often most traitorously practiced, and pretended your untimely death
and destruction: so he will protect you from the like her eafter, doubt not but
he will send his holy Angel, who shall pitch his Tents round about you,
that their damnable devises and determinations, shall never take effect. Doubt
not but that he will be your strength and Buckler, for he is, and ever will be
the sure defense of his anointed, as the Prophet David witnesses. Comfort
your self also in this, that there are within your Realm of England, even
thousand of thousands, which according to their bounden duties, do daily most
heartily pray to God for the preservation of your sacred person, that will
shed their bloodes, spend their lands and goods in your defense, before such
wicked Traitors or their adherents shall ever have their purposes. Comfort your
self also in this, that you have so grave and faithful a Counsel, that is
most studious and careful of the safety of your noble person and this state,
that can so politiquelie spy out these wicked Conspirators, and trys out their
most deuillish devises, tending to your Majesty's untimely death, and to the
utter subversion and ruin of this your most happy government, that can so in
time prevent the manifold perilles and dangers, which otherwise might by such
treasons have ensued unto the same.

Comfort your self also in this, that they (even they I say) which have thus
conspired to take your Majesty from us, when they have come into your presence,
meaning then to have accomplished their most traiterous purpose, have been so
diswayed upon the sight of your princely person, and in beholding your most
gracious countenance, that they had no power to perform the thing, which
they had before determined upon. A most certain token of the great mercy and
favor of God toward your Majesty, and to us all. If Not lawful for the
subject to enter into the examinacien of matters appertaining to the Prince.
it were lawful for the Subject, to enter into the examinations of causes or
matters appertayning to ye Prince and sovereign Governor, as it is not, what
could these sorts of men (I pray you) object, or what could they say, why
they thus most wickedly, thus most unnaturally, and thus most traitorously,
should seek the death and destruction, of so gracious a Sovereign Lady and
Queen.

It is trow you, because they thought that her Majesty What good things do
proceed from her Majesty.
is not studious, to set forth the honor and glory of God? Compare the time
present, with the great abuses, which have entered into the Church of old time,
and thereby you shall plainly perceive, how Her highness is most studious to
set forth the honor of God. She does ordain good laws
careful she is, and from time to time has been: to advance the true
worshipping of God, to the uttermost of her power. Is it trow you, because
they thought that she has not made and published wholesome and necessary Laws,
for the preservation and mayntenaunce of the state of this Common wealth? Look
into the most gracious Acts of Parliament made in her time, and you shall find
as good, as necessary, and beneficial Laws published by her most high Courts
of Parliament, as better or more necessary have not been given by the like
authority, in any Princes time heretofore. Is it because they thought that
her Majesty is not desirous, that right and justice should be ministered unto
all sorts of her Subjects without respect She is desirous that Justice should
be equally ministered.
of person? Look into the proceedinges of her most honorable Counsel in
her high Court of Star Chamber, and there you shall see the causes of her
people (iudiciallie brought before them) so indifferently examined, so deeply
looked into, and with such great wisdom and equity, ordered and decreed,
that every man has just cause therewith to content himself. Again, look
into the proceedings of her grave and sage Justices of her Laws? And you shall
find the causes of her Subjects brought before them, so learnedly debated, so
uprightly handled, and with such equity adjudged, and determined according to
the Law, that no man can therewith justly find fault.

Is it trow you, because they thought that her Majesty is not merciful to
such as are transgressors and She is merciful to offenders.
offenders of her Laws? Look into the Records of her high Court of
Chauncery, and there you shall find a great number of her most gracious and
merciful pardons, as well touching life and member, as other great and deep
offenses, that for greater things, none has been granted by any Prince of
this Realm, sithence the Conquest of England to this day, for the like time of
government. Is it because they thought that she She is liberal to well
deseruers.
is not bountiful, and liberal to such as deserve well of her Majesty and
their Country, look into her Majesty's most gracious Letters Pattents,
remaining also of Record in her said Court of Chauncerie, and there you shall
find such a number of graunts of Castles, manours, lands, tenements, rents,
annuities, pentions, portions, fees, offices, and whatsoever other thing a
Prince may conveniently grant, so bountiful, so liberal, so honorable, and
so princely, as of greater things, none has been granted by any Prince of
this Realm, sithence the Conquest thereof unto this day, for the like time of
government.

Is it trow you, because they thought that her Careful to defend her Countries
from foreign invasions.
Majesty is not careful to defend the borders and frontures of her Realms
and Countries against foreign invasions. Look into the common peace and
quietness before remembered, and thereby you shall see that her Majesty has
always been most studious and careful to defend the same, and to that end
and purpose has expended her princely treasure. Is it trow you because they
thought that her Majesty has laid upon her No new impositions laid on her
subjects.
Subjects, any tax, tallages, or impositions, the like whereof has not been
heard of before her reign. Look into the reigns of her most noble Father,
Henry the eight, her most dear Brother, Edward the sixth, and her Sister Queen
Marie touching such matters, and you shall find that she has not required of
her people any other then such, as have sundry times been willingly yielded
and paid before her days, yea, and greater also. These are the good things
which proceed from a gracious Prince, and which her highness from time to time
has most honorably performed and accomplished in each respect, to her great
and immortal same and renown.

What is there then that should move these sorts of men, thus most
wickedlie, and thus most trayterouslie to conspire the death and destruction of
so gracious a sovereign Lady and Queen. Is it trow you, because they would
have alteration of this most godly Religion Desire of alteration of religion is
cause of these conspiracies.
established amongst us, and of this peaceable and gracious government: surely
that should seem to be the only cause of these conspiracies, and treasons,
and it does the rather appear to be so, for that they who have always been
parties to the same, have been such as from time to time, have misliked of her
Majesty's proceedinges therein. Certain it is, that no man can please God
without faith, as the Scripture says.

But what then, is it therefore lawful for the Subject Not lawful to rebel
for religion whatsoever it be.
in defense of his faith or Religion, whatsoever it be or to advance the same,
to conspire the destruction of his sovereign, or to rebel and take arms
against her, (wherein always the peril of the Princes person is employed)
God forbid. We read in the 18. Chapter of S. John's Gospel, that when Malchus,
with other of John. 18.
the high Priests servant came to take Christ. Peter the Apostle cut of
Malcus ear with his sword: when Christ did see it, he said to Peter, put up
thy sword into Math. 26. 52
thy sheath, for all that take the sword, shall perrish with the sword,
think thou that I cannot pray to my Father, and he shall give me more then
twelve legions of Angels, but how should then the Scriptures be performed.

The famous Clerk Erasmus, in his Paraphrase upon Frasmus.
this place of Scripture, speaks these words to Peter, as it were in the
person of Christ, saying. Put thy sword into thy sheath, matters of the
Gospel, are Nota.
not in such manner to be defended, if thou will succeed me as my Uicar, thou
must fight with no other sword then of Gods word, which cutteth away sin
and saves men. When Christ was brought before the high Priest, for that he was
accused to them for teaching of new learning, (as they termed it) he did not
resist, but did acknowledge that they had their authority from above, although
in respect of his divine power, he was able to have withstoode them all, and
delivered himself, and could have set forth his doctrine mawger their
heads, but he would not so do, but rather submitted himself to the sentence
of death, which they most unjustly pronounced against him, hereby giving to
us an example of obedience to authority, though the cause be never so just.

If a Prince should set forth a Law, touching the worshipping of God, or
matter of conscience against the word of God, and limit a pain to the
infringers thereof, though the Subject be not indeed bound in conscience to
observe the same law, yet he may not resist or oppose himself against his
Sovereign, but must rather submit himself to the punishment of Law, as S.
Peter says: Submitt your self unto every ordenaunce of 1. Peter. 2.
man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the king Subjects must submit
themselves to every ordinance of the prince, yea though against the word of
God they be made.
as to the chief, or to them that are in authority under him. Then if he must
submit himself unto every ordenaunce of man, it follows that he may not
withstand the same in any case. Now let us see by some examples, what has
happened within our memory amongst us, to such as have conspired the death of
their sovereign Governor, or forciblie opposed themselves against her:
whether it has been for Religion or any other cause whatsoever, and what
success they have had, Examples of such as have suffered for conspiring
against the state under color of Religion.
and thereby shall you see whether their inventions and purposes, have been
pleasing or acceptable to almighty God or not?

I find in the twenty eight year of King Henry the eight, when he went about
to suppress certain houses of Religion, that there assembled in
Lincolneshyre, Rebellion in Lincolneshyre. 28, ^. 8.
about twenty thousand men, whose pretense was to to have withstoode him in
that action, because they thought that thereby the Religion then professed,
should have been subverted. But what happened to Doctor Makerell and others,
of the chief of that rebellicus company, Doctor Makerell
were not they justly hanged, drawn and quartered as Traitors to their
Country. Look into Graftons abridgment of Chronicles, and there you shall see
it. Then come to the third year of the reign of King Folio. 140.
Edward the sixth, when a great number rebelled in the west parts of this
Realm, whose pretense in part, was to have had the Religion then (which is
also now Rebellion in the West parts.
professed) to have been suppressed. But what chanced to Sir Humfrey Arundell
knight, and others of the Sir H. Arundell.
principalest of that faction, were not they rewarded by Justice in like sort.
Look into the said abridgment, and there it appears. Let me tell you of the
rebellion Ibide^. 155.
of Wiat and others, in the first year of the reign of Wyatt.
Queen Mary, which was to the end to have withstoode her marriage with the
Spanish King, and that the Religion now professed (which was also professed,
when she came to her Crown) should have been continued, which
notwithstanding was suppressed by her. Was not the said Wiat and diverse other
executed for the same Rebellion. Look into the same Book, and there it is
plainly set down. Did not ye Earls Ibide^. 165.
of Norththumberland and Westmerlande, with fifty Knights, Esquires and
Gentlemen, besides a great Northern rebellion.
number of the common sort, rebel in the North parts of this Realm, in the
xi. year of her Majesty's ratgne, to the end to have had alteration of this
Religion and most happy state. But what was the end of these ^^. de^. 192.
Earls, were not they both attainted of treason, was not the Earl of
Northumberlande beheaded at York, and did not the other fly the Realm, and
were not the said fifty persons attainted also of high treason. Look into the
confirmation of their attainder, by parliament Decimo tercio Elizabeth.
in the xiii. year of her Majesty's reign, and you shall find it there
apparent. Diverse of which said fifty, persons, besides many other of the
common sort, were executed for that rebellion.

Consider of Arden, which about the 25. year of her Arden.
Majesty's reign, conspired her Majesty's with others death, to the end to
have had alteration of this Religion and estate, were not they also then
attainted of high treason, was not Arden executed like a Traitor, and did not
Ientleman an other of them after his condemnation sor that offense, hang
himself in Newgate, ye day before he that should have been executed. Then
remember yt most rankest Traitor yt has been heard of in our time, Parry Parry.
by name, who notwithstanding he had been attainted for Burglarie, and for
the same attained her Majesty's pardon, went afterward beyond the Scas, and
there carrying an offensive mind against this state and Religion, most wickedly
with other forrainers, conspired her highness destruction, and did remain in
that damnable purpose by the space of two years, and then returned into
England, meaning to have performed the same: was not he in the 26. year of her
Majesty's reign, hanged drawn and quartered, as a detestable traitor to his
Earl of Northumberland. L. Pagget. Charles Paget Throgmorton, Shelley.
Prince and Country. Did not the Earl of Northumberland conspire with the
Lord Paget, and Charles his Brother, with Shelley and Throgmorton, to have
suppressed this Religion, to have advanced the Romish Religion, and by
foreign invasion into this Land, to have utterly subverted this noble state,
and to have advanced to the Crown the S. Queen. In which their treasons was
also employed, the destruction of our most gracious sovereign Lady. So it
appears by a small Treatise, wherein these treasons are particularly set
forth. Was not the said Throgmorton, about two years last past executed as a
Traitor for that cause. Did not the said Earl, knowing himself guiltye of
Fail of Northumberland.
those treasous, most miserably destroy himself with his own hand in the
Tower of London, the xxvii. year of her Majesty's reign. Was not the said
Shelley shortly after condemned for that conspiracy, and remains at the
Queens mercy: and are not the said Lord Pagett and his Brother attainted for
that offense by vtlarie.

Was not Babington and thirteen other, also executed in the xxviii. year of
her highness reign, as Traitors for the like crimes. And lastly, have not
fourteen Babington. Jesuits.
Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, within these five years been erecuted as
Traitors, for practicing to withdraw her Majesty's subjects, from there due
allegyance to her highness, and for that intent, from the Religion now
established, to the Religion of Rome, and to yield subjection to that Sea.

By these notable and memorable examples, you may plainly see, the shameful
and miserable end of Traitors, false conspirators, and Rebels against their
Prince and sovereign Governor, what soever their pretenses of Religion has
been. And these examples are here set down for warnings to other, and
happy is he that can take beede by an others danger, and mishappe, as the wise
Cato says, Faelix quem faciunt aliena Cato.
pericula cautum. And was not the said late S. Queen, privy to sundry of the
said conspiracies, and treasons, was she not a principal, a better and
comforter of the said offenders therein: It is very evident by a Treatise,
published in print, whereby appears, that the Lords and Commons of the high
Court of Parliament, having of long time to their intolerable grief, sound,
by how many practices the said Scottish Queen, had compassed the destruction
of her highness most royal person (in whose safety next under God they
acknowledged their chief felicity to consist) thereby not only to bereave
them of the sincere and true Religion in this Realm professed and established,
but to bring back again this noble Realm into the thraldom of Romish
tyranny, and to overthrow the happy estate thereof: wherein, although her
highness of her abundant gracious natural clemency, and princely
magnanimity, had either lightly passed them over, or with no small indulgence
tolerated, notwithstanding, the often and earnest instances of her Nobility
and Commons, in sundry Parliaments heretofore: and further had protected her
from the violent pursuit of her own people: she yet, as a person obdurate in
malice (as it appeared) continued her former practices, as had been lately
manifested by certain wicked conspiracies, plotted by the said Babington, and
diverse desperate persons, that had combined and confederated themselves by vow
and oath in a most horrible enterprise, by murder to take away the life of her
Majesty: where in the Scottish Queen did not only advise them, but also
direct, comfort, and abette them, with persuasion, counsel, promise of reward,
and earnest obtestation. Whereupon, her Majesty, at the earnest request of
such as tendered ye safety of her royal person, and the quiet of the Realm,
did direct her Commission under the great seal to sundry Lords and others of
her Majesty's privy Counseil, and a great number of Lords of Parliament, of ye
greatest and most ancient degree, assisted with some of the principal Judges
of the Realm, to hear, examine and determine the same, according to a Statute
in that behalf made in the xxvii. year of her reign. Who to the number of
thirty six, having artended the execution of the said Commission, and diverse
days and times, heard the allegations against the said Scottish Queen in her
own presence and hearing, (she beeingpermitted to say what she would in her
own execuse,) did with one assent, find her culpable both in priuitie, and
consent to the said crimes objected, and also in compassing the Queens
Majesty's death. Which sentence, by her own directions, upon the hearing of
the proves and process in Parliament, was judged to have been most
honorable and just. And for as much as the said Queen of Scots, was the very
ground and only subject, whereupon such dangerous practices and complots, had
been founded against her Majesty's most royal person, and the estate of this
Realm for these many yeenes, to the overthrow of sundry of the Nobility of
the land; and danger of Christian Religion, and that they could see no hope
of her, desisting, and her adherents but that still her Majesty's safety must
be hazarded, and stand to the event of the like miraculous discoueries:

Therefore, as most humble and instant suppliants, they did upon their knees at
her most gracious feet, beseech and request in most earnest manner, that
as well for the continuance of Gods Religion, the quiet of this Kingdom,
preservation of her person, and defense of them and their posterities, that it
would please her highness to take order, that the said sentence might be
published, and such further direction given, as was requisite in this so
weighty a cause, according to the purport and intent of the said Statute,
touching the dangers that her Majesty's person was in, by the practices of the
Scottish Queen, and her favorers they appear in that they did think that
she had right, not to succeed her Majesty, but to enjoy her Crown in
possession, and therefore as she was a most impatient competitor thereof, so
she would have spared no means whatsouer, that might have bereft us of her
Majesty, the only impediment that she could not enjoy her desire.

She was obdurate in malice against her royal person, notwithstanding her
Majesty had showed her all favor and mercy, as well in preserving her
hingdome, as saving her life, and saluing her henour. And therefore there was
no place for mercy, since there was no hope that she would have desisted from
her most wicked attempts.

She boldly and openly professed, that it was lawful for her to move
invasion upon her Majesty, and therefore, as of invasion victory might ensue,
and of victory, the death of the vanquished: so did she thereby not obscurely
bewraie, that she thought it lawful, for her to destroy her Majesty's sacred
person.

She did think it not only lawful, but honorable also and meritorious to
take her Majesty's life from her, as being all ready deprived of her Crown,
by the excommunication of the holy Father. And therefore it was like she would
(as she had done) continually seek it by whatsoever means.

That she was greedy of her Majesty's death, and preferred it before her own
life and safety, appears, for in her direction to one of her late Accomplices,
she advised (under covert terms,) that whatsoever should become of her, that
tragical execution should be performed, upon our most gracious sovereign
Lady, namely, the destruction of her royal person.

She was the only hope of all discontented subjects, she was the foundation,
whereon all the evil disposed did build, she was the root from whence all
rebellions and trecheries did spring: And therefore, while this hope lasted,
this foundation stood, and this root lived, they would have retained heart,
and set on foot whatsoever their devises against this Realm, which otherwise
will fall away, die, and come to nothing.

All these matters her Majesty did most deepelye consider of, and yet to the
end it might evidently appear, how vnwylling she was to take away ye Queen
of Scots life, she required to understand by the consideration and resolution
of the high Court of Parliament, whether any other means could be thought of,
or sound by any of them, how the Scottish Queens life might be spared, and
yet her Majesty's person saved out of peril, and the state of the Realm
preserved in quiet: For her Majesty's further satisfaction, they enteredinto a
new consultation, and for that prupose, selected a great number of the choysest
persons of the higher house of Parliament, to confer thereof, either
prinately, or together with the lower house: and upon sundry conferences had
in that behalf at several times, it was concluded by the whole assemblic of
both houses, that there could be no other assured means for the preservation
of her Majesty's life, continuance of Gods Religion, and quiet of this state,
then by the full execution of the said sentence.

That if her Majesty should be safe without taking away the life of the
Scottish Queen, the same were most likely and probably to grow by one of these
means following.

First, that happily she might have been reclaimed and become and repentaunt
convert, agnising her Majesty's great mercy and favor, in remitting her
heinous offense, and by her loyaltic have performed the fruits of such
conversion.

2. Or else, by a more straight guarde might have been so kept as there should
have been no fear of the like at tempts after.

3. Or, that good assurance might have been given by O the, Bonds or
Hostages, as cautions for her good and loyal demeanor from thenceforth.

4. Or lastly, by Banishment, the Realm might have been boyded of her
person, and thereby the perils further removed, that might grow to her
Majesty by her presence.

All which matters being duly pondered, it did yet appear in all their
judgments, that they durst not advise any security to rest in any, no, not in
all of them.

For touching her Conversion, it was considered, that if piety or duty could
have restrained her from such heinous attempts, there was cause aboundantlye
ministered to her on her Majesty's behalf, when she not only protected her
against the violence of her own Subjects, who pursued her to death by
Justice, but covered her honor, when yt same by public fame was touched, and
by very heinous and capital crimes objected and proved against her, before
certain Commissarie delegates assigned to examine the same, more then
blemished and spared her life, when for her former conspiracies and
confederacies with ye Northren Rebels, her highness was with great instance
pressed by both the houses in the fourteen year of her Majesty's reign, to
do like Justice upon her as now was desired, and as her treasonable practices
then, had most justly deserved.

And where the penalty of this Act sufficientlye notified unto her, should
have terrified her from so wicked attempts, she did nevertheless insist in her
former practices, as a person obdurate in malice against her Majesty, and
irrecouerable: so as there was no probable hope of any conversion, but rather
great doubt and fear of relaps, forasmuch as she stood obstinatly in the
denial of matter most euivently proved, and most justly sentenced against
her, and was not entered into the first part of repentance. The recognition
of her offense, and so much the farther off from the true fruits that should
accompany the same.

As for a surer guarde, and more strait imprisonment, it was resolved, that
there was no security therein, nor yet in the other two means propounded of
Bonds and Hostages. forasmuch as the same means that should be practiced to
take her Majesty's life away (which God forbid) would aptly serve, both for
the delivery of her person, and release of the Bonds and Hostages, that
should be given for cautions in that behalf: which being vnaptlie atchiued,
and to our irreparable less, who should sue the Bonds, or detain ye
Hostages? or being detained, what proportion was there in bonds or hostages
whatsoever, to counteruaile the value of so precious and inestimable a Jewel,
as her Majesty is to this Realm, and to us all?

That she would solemnly have vowed and taken an oath, that she would not have
attempted any thing to the hurt of her Majesty's person: She had already
sundry time falsified her word, her writing and her oath, and held it for an
Article of Religion. That faith was not to be holden with Heretics, of which
sort she accounted her Majesty, and all the professors of ye Gospel to be:
And therefore there was little reason to trust her in that, whereof she made so
small a conscience.

As for banishment, that was a step de malo in pei^s to set her at liberty,
being athing so greatly desired and thirsted for by her adherents, and by some
Princes her Allies, who sought her enlargement chiefly, tomake her a head to be
set up against her Majesty, in time of invasion.

Upon all which reasons and matters opened, and petitiones made to her Majesty
as is aforesaid, she not withstanding thought good and very necessary in so
great a cause to deliberate, as by her most wise and grave answers to the
premises, in the said Treatise, set down among other things, plainly
appears: and afterward the said Scottish Queen was executed in the Castle of
Fodringham in the County of North-hampton, (where she was most carefully kept,
under the charge of that right honorable, trusty and right faithful
Counselor to her Majesty, Sir Amyas Pawlett Knight) on Wednesday, the 8, of
Feburary. 1586. And the next day after, there were Bonfiers, ringing of Belles,
and singing of Psalms, by children and many others at the said fires, in the
City of London, whereby appears that the people were joyful that so
dangerous an enemy to this Common wealth was taken away.

Let me Remember the most unnatural and horible Princes not spared which have
opposed themselves or laidha^ds upon the L. anointed.
murder, of the two sennes of C. 4. committed, by the commandment of K.
Richard the third who thereby attained the crown, and was afterward slain
in the battle of Bosworth in Leicestershyre, ^y the Earl of Richmond, who
succeeded him in the crown by just title, whose dead corpse was laid cross
upon an horse, and so brought to Leycester, his legs and arms, hanging down
all naked, be sprinkled (with turt, and blody with such wounds as he received
in the field) and there buried basely without any manner of solemnity, Hall fo.
a inst plague of God and a most worthy spectacle for so monsterous an act,
and likewise how H. 4. having obtained the crown rather by force, then lawful
succession, doubting that he could not be in saftie thereof so long as R. 2.
did live, caused the said R. 2. to be destroyed in Pomfret Castle, whereupon
great troubles and sundry insurrectiones, within this Realm did happen unto
him, and though he dyed possessed of the Crown, yet H 6. his sennes son was
put from the same by E. 4. as Grafton does set it down, whereby the old
saying appears to be true, De rebus male partis vix gaudebit tertius haeres.
By these examples you may see, how almighty God has punished even Princes,
which have conspyred or opposed themselves, or laid violent hands upon the
Lords anointed, and not spared the offspring of the offender in that behalf.

And because some will perhaps say, that the Queens Majesty could not
proceed against the said Scottishe Queen, as is above mentioned in respect
of the dignity of her person, therefore (although the said trial by the said
Commission and Estatute, and resolution of the reverend Confirmation by
authority of Law in this proceeding.
Judges of the Law therein, and that her Majesty might have tried her by
course of the Common Laws, ought to satisfy every dutiful Subject in yt
behalf) yet it shall not be in vain beer to set down some authority for
confirmation of their grave and sound judgment in this proceeding. Whereupon
it is to be noted, that there is no difference in our Law betwixt natural
Subject of this Realm, and a mere Stranger or Alyen borne, that in time of
peace shall come into this Realm, and commit any offense there, for which
any natural subject thereof, should incur the judgment, either of felony or
treason, but the same stranger or Alien shall be also in the same state or
degree. Dyer. 145,
For example, in the case of Felony it appears, by a Record in the third
year of King Edward the sixth, that Charles Gauare a Spaniarde, for murdering
of one Gambo in England, was attainted and executed for the same in Smithfield.
And for example of treason it appears, by a Record in the third and fourth
Dyer, 14,
years of Phillip and Mary, that one John Sharles a Frenchman, in the time of
peace betwixt the said Phillip Bro, 32. 4, Ma,
and Mary, and the French King, with one Stafford an Englishman, did
rebelliously take ye Castle of Scarborough, in the North parts of this Realm,
and the same detayned certain days, for which they both were arraigned and
attainted of treason (for such taking or detayning, is a leuying of war
against the Prince) and therefore it is treason, and the indictment 25, Ed. 3,
Bro, 24, 1, Ma.
whereupon they were arraygned, was, contra legianciae suae debitum, that is,
against the duty of their allegiaunce, but if it had been in the time of
war betwixt the said Princes, then it had been treason only in Stafford, and
the other should have been counted but an enemy to be raunsemed according to
the law of Arms. But it may be that some will say, that the said examples
prove nothing in this case, for yt she was a Queen. Scottish Queen not exempt
from the sensure of our law though she were a Queen.
To that I answer, though she so were, yet she was not our Queen, neither
were we subjects to her, and that which almighty God says by his Prophet David
Touch not mine anointed, did not exempt the said Scottish Queen, but she was
to be taken of necessity as a Subject, and ordered by the Laws of this Lands
so long as she was resident here, since she had not any title to the Crown of
this Land, for otherwise, if any foreign Prince in the time of peace, should
come into an others Kingdom, and should enter into any offense against the
Crown, as join with the Subject to leauy war against that Prince, or
conspyre his death, and should not therefore be punished by the Law of that
Land, every Prince might be destroyed and state subverted.

And now to return again to the matter, touching the duty of Subjects to
their Prince.

There is a saying in the tenth of Ecclesiastes, very notable, where it is
written thus. Wish no evil to the King in thy thought, nor speak any hurt of
him in Ecclesia. 10.
thy privy Chamber, for the birds of the air shall betray thee, and with
their wings shall bewray thy Not lawful to wish evil to the Prince.
voice. And surely it is most true, for though their conspyracies be never so
secret, their treasons never so cunningly contrived, yet God does in times
always reveal them, to the destruction of the parties to the same, as by the
said examples may appear. Now for proof by the word of God, that it is not
lawful for the Subject to touch the Princes person. How often does almighty
God by his Prophet David, say (as is above said) Touch not mine anointed, as
though he should say, Forasmuch as I have placed her in the kynglye throne of
this Realm, and have appointed her to rule and govern my people, look thou
touch her not, lay no hands on her, offer no violence unto her person, for I
have anointed and consecrated her to that office and function.

I find in the first Book of Samuel, where David was urged by his men to
have killed Saul, a great Samuel, 1.
and mighty Prince, and yet out of the favor of God, a mortal enemy to David,
of whom almighty God so often says: I have found David, a man even according
to my hearts desire: but what did David, did he lay his hands on him, no, he
made his prayers to almighty Not lawful to lay violent hands upon the Prince.
God, saying: Lord keep me that I lay not my hands upon my master, the Lords
anointed, for as surely as the Lord lives, except he discende into the
battle and there perish, or that his day become to dye, or that the Lord do
smite him, the Lord be merciful 1, Sam. 26
to me that I lay not my hands upon the Lords anointed, and so they
departed without doing any hurt to Saul.

I find also in the same Book, that David and Abysay his servant, at an other
time came into the Tent where Saul was fast a sleep, and Abysay said unto
David, Forasmuch as the Lord has delivered thy enemy Saul into thy hands at
this time, suffer me to strike him but once with my spear, and I will not
smite him the second time. Meaning to have killed him even at the first blow,
but David said, destroy him not, for who can lay his hands upon the Lords
anointed, and be guiltles, for as sure as the Lord lives, except he descend
into the battle, and there perish, or that the Lord does smite him, or that
his day become, God forbidd that thou should lay thy hand upon the Lords
anointed, and so they departed without doing any hurt to him.

I find also in the History of Kings, that an Amelekite 2. Sam, 1,
taking upon him the death of Saul whom he found dead, brought his Crown of
Gold unto David, because he thought thereby the rather to persuade David, that
he was the man that had slain Saul, and hoped to have had some great rewad
for his labor, when David did see the Crown, and did know that it was Saules
Crown, he rent his clothes and wept, saying to this Amalekite, How is it that
thou wast not afraid to lay thy hand upon the anointed of the Lord, to
destroy him, as truly as the Lord lives, forasmuch as thy own mouth does
witness against thee, thou shall dye the death, and so he commanded his
servants, and Not lawful to murmer against ruiers.
they did kill him presently. Now let us see what has happened to murmurers
against the Rulers and Magistrates appointed over them by God. It appears in
sundry places of the Scriptures, that some of them Examples of the purishment
of murmerers by God. Nu, 11, 12,
were stricken with foul leprosy, many burned with fire suddenly sent from
God, sometime a great many of thousands were consumed with the pestilence,
some times they were stinged to death, with fiery Serpents of strange kind,
sometime the earth opened and swallowed up quick into hell, their Captains
and bands of murmurers, and their wives, children and family. Thus you see
what strange and horrible plagues has Number, 16.
fallen upon such subjects, as did but only murmr and speak evil against
their heads and Rulers. Then touching such as have apposed themselves against
their Punishment of rebellion of gods hand.
sovereign Governor by rebellion, though they have not laid violent hand
upon him, yet it appears they have been by Gods just judgment sundry ways
punished, as by the example of Absolon is manifest, who entered into conspiracy
against King David his father, ^. Sam. 15, 17
and used the advice of many witty men, and assembled a very great and huge
company of Rebels: which Absolon, though he were most goodly of person, of
great nobility being the Kings son, in great favor of the people, and so
dearly beloved of the King himself, so much that he gave commandment
notwithstanding his rebellion, his life should be saved. When for these
considerations most men were afraid to lay their hands upon him, a great Tree
stretching forth her arm (as it were for that purpose) caught him by the great
and long bush of his goodly hair, lapping about it, as he fled hastily 2
Samuel, 18
bare-headed under the said Tree, and so hanged him up by the hair of the head
in the air, to give an eternal document, that neither comlines of personage,
neither nobility, nor the favor of the people, nor the favor of the King
himself, can save a Rebel from due punishment, God the King of all kings
being so offended with him, that rather then he should lack due execution for
his treasons, every tree by the way will be a gallows or Iebbet unto him, and
the hair of his own head, will be unto him in stedde of a haulter to hang him
up with, rather then he should lack one. A fearful example of Gods
punishment to consider. Achitophell, 2, Samu, 17.
though otherwise an exceeding wise man, yet the mischeuous Counselor of
Absolon in this wicked rebellion, for lack of a hangman (a convenient seruiter
for such a Traitor,) went and hanged up himself, a worthy end of all
Rebels, who rather then they should lack due execution, will by Gods just
judgment become hangmen to themselves. Thus happened it to the Captains of
that rebellion, besides forty thousand of rascal rebels slain in the
field, and in the chase, likewise it is to be seen in the holy Scriptures,
how 2, Samu, 20.
that great rebellion, which the Traitor Seba moved in Israel, was suddenly
appeased, the head of ye Captain Traitor, (by means of a silly woman) being
cut off. Thus you see also the end of Traitors and false Rebels, though their
intent were not to touch the person of their sovereign Governor. Surely it is
not lawful for the Subject of the Turk, nor of the most vngodliest King that
reigns, to murmr or rebel aagainst his Prince, whom God has placed in ye
throne The Subject of the wicked Prince may not rebel. Pro. 1. 6 2. Para. 2.
Job, 34, Osee. 13. Prou, 21, Esdras, 7. Subjects must be obedient. Rom, 13,
Wisdom. 6. Damnation No difference betwyxt the christian prince and the heathen
touching submission to higher powers. Ioh. 19. 6, 10
of government, either for the comfort of good people, or for the punishment of
the bad, if ought be to be reformed touching government in the king, it does
not belong to the Subject to redress the same, but he must refer the matter to
God only, who has the hearts of Kings in his order, and disposes them as it
seems best to his godly wisdom. The duty of the Subject is always to be
obedient, as S. Paul says, Submit your selves unto the higher powers, for
there is no power but of God, and all powers that be, are ordained of God, who
that resists powers, resists the ordenaunce of God, and procures unto
himself damnation. Here is no exception of Turk nor Infidel, of the wicked
and ungodly Prince, more then of the Christian and virtuous King, for his
words be general, there is no power but of God, and all powers that are be
ordained of God. When pilate said to Christ, Know not thou that I have power
to loose thee, and also to crucify thee? he answered, thou could have no
power at all over me except it were given thee from above. As he confessed his
authority to be from above, so he submitted himself unto the same, though he
were an heathen Governor, to give us an example so to do, whether they he
Christian Subjects must pray for their Rulers.
Rulers or others. And as the Subject ought to submit himself unto the
higher powers, and to their ordenaunces, to beware of murmuringes,
conspiracies, and insurrections against their sovereign Governor, so is it
also their duties to pray for them, as S. Paul 1. Timo. cap. 2.
says. I exhort you above all things, that prayers and supplications,
intercessions and giving of thanks be had for all men, for Kings and all
other that are in authority, that we may live a quiet and a peaceable life,
withal godliness, for that is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior. When Gods holy spirit by S. Paul gave this Lesson to the Christians,
they lived for the most part under Calygula, Clodius, and Nero, who were
heathen Princes, Pagans, and such as Hethen Princes prayed for.
did not know God, and were cruel tyrants, and yet the Christians that lived
under them were exhorted to pray for them. When Nabuchodonasor, king of
Babylon, had slain the king and many nobles of the Jews with a great number
of their Children and kins-folkes, burned their Country, and Cities yea, and
Jerusalem it self, and the holy Temple, and had carried to Babylon the rest of
them captives. The Prophet Barucke Baruck. 1
said unto the Captives, being the people of God, pray ye for the life of
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and for the life of Balthazer his son, that
their days may be as the days of heaven upon the earth, yt God also may give
us strength, and lighten our eyes, that we may live under the defense of
Nabuchodonasor, king Tyrant Princes prayed for.
of Babylon, and under the protection of Balthazer his son, that we may long
do them service, and find favor in their sight. If then the people of God
were willed to pray for Infidels, for Pagans, for Tyrants, for murderers, and
cruel oppressors of them, and that they might long live under their
protections, it follows consequently, that it is utterly against the will of
God to destroy, or to appose themselves against the Prince, by making of
insurrections or rebellions, if they shall pray for such Princes and Rulers,
then how much more ought we to pray for the prosperous estate of our most
gracious sovereign Lady, that we may long live under her gracious
government, being a Christian Prince, one that does set forth the honor and
glory of God, that does love God, serve God, and fear God, that makes good
laws, that desires that Justice may be equally ministered to all that desires
to reign with pity, mercy, and with clemency, and not by tyranny, not by
shedding of blood, nor oppression of her people, that is merciful to
offenders, bountiful to weldeseruers, careful to defend her dominions and
Countries, under her subjection from foreign invasions, that her subjects may
live in peace and rest under her. Forasmuch therefore, as it has pleased God
to place her in the kingly seat of this Realm, to addorne and deck her head
with a Crown of gold and precious stones, to anoint her Queen of this Land,
according to her most just and rightful title thereunto, and for that we
daily do enjoy so many blessings of God, under her most gracious regiment, and
such daily benefits by her great kindness and love toward us. Let us
therefore be humble suitors to almighty God, that it may please We must pray for
her majesty.
him to hold his holy hand over her, to grant her life, with most prosperous
health, long to endure, and that she may in high felicity long reign over us:
to defend her from Traitors, and false conspirators, to discover them in time,
that they may be rooted out as corrupt members of the body of this Common
wealth, that others her good and faithful Subjects may thereby the rather be
encouraged to continue in their wel-dooings. Let us also pray for her most
honorable Counsel, that it will For her most honorable Counsel.
please God, that they may long live, and love together like Brethren, that
they may continue faithful Counselors to this most happy state and
government, as they have done hitherto to their great honors and fames, never
to dye. That it will please him also to give us grace, that we may love, honor
and obey her, in God and for God, acccording to his blessed word and
ordenance. And that we may show our selves in heart, word Pray for our selves to
be true subjects.
and deed, true, faithful, loyal and duetiful subjects unto her, Ma. as we
are bound by ye laws of God, by the laws of nature, and by the laws of this
land. And now The prime and common wealth preserved and maintained by law and
execution of Justice. Princes are ordained to govern.
because yt by the laws and execution of justice, ye Prince is preserved, and
the common wealth maintained, as by the said examples you may plainly see, it
shall not be impertinent to set down here, what law and justice is and in
particularity, some of ye great benefits and profittes which grow by ye same
to the Common wealth and state of every kingdom. By that which is said before
among other things, it plainly appears, that kings are ordained to govern
the people, and subjects, commanded by God to submit themselves unto their
authority, for there is no Common wealth, state, or society of man No common
wealth where thereis not superiority in government. Cicero de legib'. li. 3.
kind, that can continue, where there is not superiority or pre-eminence in
government, according to their kind and quallity, as Tully the famous Orator,
in his book de legibus, entreating of government (even by the law of nature)
says. Nihil tam aptum est ad legem condicionemque naturae, quam imperium sine
quo nec domus vlla, nec ciuitas, nec gens, nec hominum vniuersum genus, nec
rerum natura, nec ipse mundus stare possit, nam et hic deo paret, et huic
obediunt maria, terraeque et hominum vita iussis supreme legis obtemperat. That
is to say, nothing is so apt to the Law and condition of nature, as authority
and Government, without which, no house, no City, no nation nor mankind, nor
the nature of things. nor the world it self can stand, for the world obeys
God, and to him the Seas and lands are subject, and the life of man to the
commandment of the highest Law does obey, as superiority then must be in
government, so must there There must be good laws to govern by.
be also good laws, statutes and ordenaunces to rule and govern. Nam sicut
per naruos compago corporis solidatur sic res publica per lege^ (quie aligando
diciturae ligatur et seruatur.

As by the sinnowes the body is made strong, so the Justice must be execused,
otherwise neither Prince nor Law avails.
Common wealth by Law (which is so called of bynding) is knit and preserved
together, yet neither Prince nor law can much profit, where justice is not
executed. Almighty God therefore, knowing in his everlasting wisdom and
prescience, how necessary good and wholesome laws, and the execution thereof,
should be to rule his people, after they had been both before the universal
floodde, and by many years after, governed by the Exodus 20.
law of nature; did give the Law of the ten Commandments in the Mount Sinay,
wherein is first contained Law of the ten Commandments.
our duty to God, and next to our Neighbors, and also did ordeyne Kings and
Magistrates to rule and correct them by the same and other laws, as in the
Book of Exodus, and sundry other places of the holy Scripture appears, he
gave also power to Princes to Exodus 19. By God power is given to Princes to
make good laws. Prou 8.
make good laws, for the preservation of their kingdoms, Countries, and
seignories, and for the politic regiment of their Subjects, as it is written
in the Proverbs of Solomon. Through me Kings reign, and Princes make just
Laws: which Laws must be consonant and agreeing, or at the least not
contrary to the Law of God. For woe is threatened in the Scriptures to them
that make unrighteous Laws, too hard for people to keep, and withal, did
give special commandment to the subjects, to submit themselves to their
Laws and ordenaunces, as S. Peter does tetifie, as is before remembered. Peter.
2.


Now touching what thing law is, some define it thus, Lex est summa ratio
intua in natura que iubet que faciendo sunt prohibetque contraria, that is. The
Law is Law of Nature.
the highest reason grafted in nature, that commands the things which are to
be done, and forbids the contrary. And Cicero in his second book de
legibus, affirms, Cicero lib. 2 de legibus
Legem neque sapientissimorum fuisse sententiam, Law of Nature.
neque hominum ingenijs excogitatam, neque scitum esse populorum, sed eternum
quiddam quod vniuersum mundum regeret, imperandi prohibendique, sapiencia, that
is, the Law was neither ye judgment of ye wisest, neither found out by man's
wit, nor established by the people, but a certain everlasting thing which
should govern ye whole world by wisdom, to command, and to prohibit, which
saying, rather seems to be a diffinition of ye Law of Nature, then of the Law
generally, after the opinion of Osorius. Osorius. 178.
Lex est recta ratio deterrens a flagitijs, et ad studium honestatis impellent.
That is, the Law is the perfect Definition of law generally.
reason, fearing men from evil and wicked acts, and forcing them to the
studdie of virtue and good things. And Musculus in his common places, says.
That Law may be said to be reason, rule and sentence, which is strengthened
Musculus. 76
with authority and Justice, whereby are commanded such things as are to be
kept and performed, and such things as are to be avoided, are forbidden, which
me seems is very aptly said. Now touching what justice is. Bracton says,
Iusticia est constans et Lib primo.
perpetua voluntas ius suum cuique tribueus, that is justice is a constant and
perpetual will, to yield to every one his right, he calls her constant,
because she is not mutable: perpetual, because she shall never decay, touching
the qualities of law, Tully says, that Leges sunt fundamenta Cicero.
Commodities of law.
ciuitatum sunt humani generis praesidium atque regimen, quibus homines
astricti abstine^t iniurijs et faciunt ho^mines mitiores ac valde exultantes
repremunt legum habene. That is, the laws are the foundations of Cities, the
safeguard and governors of mankind, by which men being bound, abstain from
injuries, they make men gentle, the reigns of law, do greatly bridle and
restrain the proud and haughty persons. And yet Anacharsis Anacharsis
the wise Sythian was wont to say, that Laws are made like Spyders webs,
wherein the weakest and most Laws are compared to Spiders webbes.
seeblest beasts be catched and stick fast, but the strongest break out: so
laws bynd the poor and mean persons, but the rich cubbes escape unpunished,
but this is not the default of law, which is indifferent to all, but of them
that have the law in government. The same is not more necessary to the world
(says Aristotel) the^ good and wholesome laws are for the preservation of
Aristotel.
the weal public, and surely he says true, for as the sun by his natural
heat and influence, does comfort The Sun is not more necessay to the world
then good laws to the common wealth.
preserve and mayntaine every living thing, herb, plant and tree, and gives
virtue and strength to them, whereby they yield fruit in their due time,
according to their kinds and properties, necessary for man's use, so do good
and wholesome laws preserve and maintain the state of every kingdom and
common wealth, for by law, the honor of God is advanced, Traitors, rebels,
and false conspirators (the mortal enemies to enery Common wealth, as the Poet
says, Regnorum Profits of law.
pessima pestis, seditio) are cut off, whereby the Prince sits the more
sure in his royal seat. By execution of justice, we possess our lives, our
wives, our children, our lands, our goods, and what soever other things we
have, when murderers, thieves, robbers, and other offenders have their
deserving. By law, common peace and quietness is maintained, if there were no
law there would be no order, if there were no order, al things would be
confounded, as the Scripture says, vbi nullus ordo, ibi est confusio. The law
of it self is an honorable thing, it has no desire of revenge, it does carry
an indifferent mind to all sorts in point of Justice, it oppresses none, it
is not angry with any, it coueteth no man's life, goods, nor lands, it is
induced only for equities cause, to punish and redress wrongs and injuries,
it hates none, for it knows not when nor upon who^e it should be revenged,
it condemns none without premonition or forewarning to speak for himself.
It generally forbids all men to do evil, it threatens to all revenge
which do transgress her precepts, like as the bridle and the spur drives
and constrayneth the horse swyftly and well to perform his iurney, so do good
and reasonable ordinances and laws, lead and direct men to use good manners
and conditions, and thereby to honor, dread, love, and serve God, and
virtuously to live among their neighbors, in continual peace and
tranquillity, in firm concord and agreement, in a unity of will and mind,
and in sincere love and charity, which thing duly to perform, is not given
to mankind immediately and only by nature, as is given to all other creatures,
which are by nature constrained to do and to live after their kinds, but by
Gods reasonable ordenaunces, to instruct and direct men to the same, the law
induces the good subject to be true and faithful to his Prince and sovereign
Governor, it encourages him to do well, whereby he increases in wealth, and
enjoys the fruits of his own endeavor. The Law is terrible to offenders,
but comfortable to well dooers, Romans ca. 13 Laws are terrible to offenders but
comfortable to well dooers
as S. Paul says: The Magistrate is not fearful to them that do well, but
to them that do evil. Wylt thou be without fear of the power (says S. Paul)
do well then, and so shall thou be praised of him, for he is the minister of
God ordained for thy wealth, but if thou do evil, then fear, for he bears
not the sword in vain, for he is the minister of God to take vengeance on them
that do evil, which is meant by Law and Justice. The law that yields such
good Laws can not be sufficiently praised.
things as aforesaid, ought to be had in great price, and cannot be
sufficiently advanced, magnified and praised, and therefore let every good
Subject say always, viuat Rex et currat lex. God grant the Prince long life,
and the Law to have his course. If you will consider the miserable estate of
such people as live under heathen Princes, The miserable condition of people
that live where no laws be.
quorum arbitria pro legibus extant, whose judgments are holden for Laws, and
where the King says, Sic volo sic iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas, so I will,
so I command, my pleasure does stand for reason. And compare the same with the
most happy condition of such Nations as live under the Christian Princes, and
Monarks of the world, ye shall soon see the great bendage of the one, and the
most happy condition and liberty of the other, and among other Christian
Nations, how much are we bound to the goodness of almighty God, that live under
so gracious, and so christian a Prince, that does not only make wholesome
laws, but also does maintain The happy state of people that live under good
laws
all the good laws of her noble progenitors, and among other, that most
honorable, most reasonable, most indifferent Law that any nation in the
world has, or that can be devised, which was ordained by Parliament, in the
ninth year of the reign of the noble King Henry the third, in this manner.
Nullus liber 9. H. 3. ca. 28. The honorable law of Henry the third
homo capietur seu imprisonetur aut disseisietur de libero te^to suo, nec de
libertatibus aut liberis consuetudinibus suis nec vtlagetur aut expuletur, vel
aliquo alio modo destruetur, nec super ipsum ibimus nec super ipsum mittemus
nisi per legale iudicium parium suorum, vel per legem terrae, nulls vendemus,
nulli negabimus, nulli differemus iustitiam sine rectum. That is to say, no man
shall be taken or imprisoned, nor disseised of his freehold, nor put out of his
liberties or free customs, or shall be outlawed, or exiled, or by any means
destroyed, neither shall we go or pass upon him but by ye lawful judgment of
his Peers, or by the Laws of this land, we shall sell, deny or defer justice
or right to any. I find in the xlii. year of Edward the 42, Ed, 3,
third, that a Commission was granted out of ye Chancerte, to take a man and
his goods, and to put him in prison, and it was adjudged to be a void
proceeding, because it was done without indictment or suit of ye parties, or
other due process, and not according to the said Estatute. There is also an
other honorable Law made in the xiiii. year of king E. 3. That the Justice of
any 14 E 3. ca 4, sta 1.
Court whatsoever, shall not let to do the Common law for any commandment
which shall come to them under the great seal, or the privy seal. And to the
end the Justices of the Common laws should be the more The Justice shall not
let to do justice for any comman dement of the Prince.
careful to perform that law, it is ordained by a statute made 18 E. 3.
statuto tertio, that it shall be part of their oath, when they are made Justices
(and so it is indeed) so as they are bound as well by that statute, as in
respect of their oath to do justice to all men: and every P^^nce of this
Realm, does take a solemn oath in the day of their Corronation, to maintain,
and to cause to be observed, the laws, statutes, and customs of this Realm,
and her Majesty is also well pleased, (albeit she be above her laws in some
respect) yet to be ordered and yield to the same, as other her noble
progenitors Prince sworn to maintain law.
have done, to her and their great honors, and immortal fames. And because
the Law of it self is as Tully says. Mutus magistratus sed magistratus est
lex loquens, that is. The Law is a dombe Magistrate, Cicero Lib 3. de legibus.
but the Magistrate is a speaking Law, therefore officers and Ministers must
be appointed to execute the same laws. And for that her Majesty cannot be in
every minysters must be appointed to execute Laws.
place to do justice, nor can in cases betwixt her self and her people be a
Judge, she is of necessity to impart her authority to others, to aid and
assist her in the administration of justice, in the choice of which officers
she has great care (as by ye ancient statute made in the first year of E. 3.
is ordained touching Justice of peace, that they shall be no maintainers of
evil, nor barators 1. E. 3. ca, 16, What men may not be Justices.
in the Country, but shall be such as Bracton writes of: Viri sapientes et
timentes Deum, in quibus est veritas eloquiorum, et qui oderunt auaritiam quae
inducit cupiditatem, Fcc. e, 10.
qui ad ^extram neque ad sinistram vel propter What men men ought to be chose^
to be Justices. what they must do.
pros^ eritatem terrenam vel aduersitatis metum, a tramite iusticiae declin^nt,
sed iudicent populum dei in equitate, vt dici possunt quod psalmista vult eos
dici, de vultu little iudicium prodiit veritatis, et quod considerent
efficasiter quid oportuerit secundum necessitatem, quod expediret secundum
vtilitatem, quod ligatum fuerit secundum promissionem, et quid deceat secundum
honestatem, et tale iudicium diliget honor regis, cuius personam iudicando
representant, nulli au tem iuris beneficium denegent, a nullo praemium petant
recipiantue, vt quisque ius suum libero prosequatur vt in causa vid uae ad eos
introcatur, vt sint Orphano et pupillo adiuto, res vt nulli calumniam fieri
patientur, vt constitutiones eorum et edicta iure et consuetudinibus approbate
co^muni vtilitati conueniant, coram eis nulla deprimat aduersariorum potentia
sed agat vnusquisque quod causa suae desiderat et se temperat, ab iniuria, nec
a limitibus iudiciorum iustorum auertat eos odium favor, aut gratia, vt dici
possit de eis iustus es domine et rectum iudicium tuum. That is to say: Wisemen
fearing GOD, in whose mouth is truth, which hate covetousness, that brings
desire, which neither to the right hand nor to the left, either for worldly
prosperity or for fear of adversity, from the path of right shall decline,
but shall judge the people of God in equity, that it may be said of them, as
the Psalm speaks, out of their countenaunces the judgment of truth does
proceed, and that they consider effectually, what is to be done for
necessity, and what is expedient for profit, what shall be bound according to
promise, what is meet according to honesty, and such judgment the honor of
the King does love, whose person in judgment they represent, which shall deny
the benefit of Law to none, nor shall ask or take any reward of any, that
every man may freely prosecute law, that the widow may have access to them,
that they be helps to the Orphans and infants, that they suffer no wrong to
any to be done, that their constitutions and edicts approved by Customs,
may agree to the common profitte, before them no power of the adversary must
suppress any, but that every one do that which his cause does require, and
temper himself from wrong, and that from the lymits of the judgments of the
just, no hatred, favor, nor thanks do turn them, that it may be said of
them, just art thou Lord, and thy judgment is right. Which saying of Bracton,
though it be spoken chiefly of Justice of the Cammon laws, for that Justices
of Peace, were not til long after this time ordained, yet in the choice of them
his opinion is so convenient to be used. A Justice must be also mild, patient
Property of a Justice
and gentle, in hearing the causes brought before him and grave in his answers,
as it is well written.

Si fueris Iudex mitisis cord momento, dicito quae possunt dicta decere senem,
He must also remember that which Perenesis Isocrates writes: Ad demonicum,
quicquid Perenesis, Isocrates,
dicturus es prius apud animum tuum expende, multorum enim cogitationem lingua
praecurrit. That is, whatsoever thou shall speak, first way it in thy mind,
for many Nota.
men's tongues do run asore their thoughts. And to the end the Justice of
peace shall be the more careful to do justice according to the laws, statutes,
and custemes Every Justice is sworn to do Justice
of this realm, every of them in their entry into that office, does take a
solemn oath, upon the holy Book of God, as by a statute made in the 13. year
of the raygne of R. the second is ordained: whereby the most godly, 13 R. 2.
gracious, and honorable desire, and disposition of the Princes of this land,
that justice should be equally ministered to al sorts of her people, does most
manifestly appear. Now they which are called to sit in place of justice, are
further to consider, that they occupy the judgment The Justice does sit in the
place of God.
seat of God, and therefore it is said to them, Vide te quid faciatis non enim
hominis sed des exercetis iudicium, that is, take heed what you do, for you
do not exercise the judgment of man but of God, and the Gospel says
Quodcu^que metieritis et vobis metietur, Whatsoever you measure to others, it
shall be measured to you again. And almighty God says to the Judges, Audite
illos, et quod iustu^ est iudicate sieve sit ille ciuis sieve per egrinus, nulla
erit Deu. 1. His duty in Judgment.
personaru^ dista^tia ita paruu^ audietis vt magnu^, quia dei iudiciu^ est.
That is, here them, and judge rightly whether he be a Citizen or a stranger,
there shall be no difference of person, here the small as well as the great. And
again. He must take no rewards to do Justice.
Non accipies persona^ nec munera quia munera excaecant oculo siudicu^, et
mutant verba iustorum. That is, accept no person in judgment, nor gyfts, for
gyfts blind ye eyes of the Judge, and change the words of the just. And
almighty God by Solomon, says unto the Judges, take Pro, 17. He may not save
ye wicked nor condenme the Just
heed thou justify not the wicked, nor condemn ye just, for both are
abomination to the Lord, let it not be said of you as it is written, Christus
crucifigitur, Barrabas autem demittitur. That is, Christ is crucified, and
Barrabas (which was a notable thief) is let go, for then it may be rightly
said of you. Dat veniam coruis, damnat Lib, primo in fine Thoffice of the
Justice in causes brought a fore him in judgment. Deu, 16,
Censura columbas. That is, he pardons the Raven which is a ravening foul,
and condemns the Dove, which is a simple Bird. The office of the Judge (as
Bracton says) is also diligenter examinare et cuncta rimari. That is,
dilligently to examine, and all things to open and make plain, he must make
doubtful things certain, and that which carries likelihoode of truth, he
must search out. Almighty God further says to ye Judge, quod iustum est
persequeris vt viuas, et possedeas terram Deu. 16.
quam dominus deus tuus dabit tibi. That is to say, that which is right pursue
and follow, that thou may live and possess the land which the Lord thy God
shall give thee. They are with all do consider, that they have taken in hand a
thing of right great importance, namely, the execution of Law and justice.
whereby the honor of God is advanced, the Prince preserved, and the Common
wealth as is aforesaid maintained. Therefore they ought with all diligence and
discretion, effectually to pursue and execute the same, according to the trust
reposed in them, in doing whereof, God shall assist them, and the Prince will
and ought to aid and maintain them in that they supply her place, and so you
shall show your selves worthy to sit in place of Justice, and to be accounted
good members of the Common wealth, for the preservation whereof, each good
subject ought to employ himself, and the rather, since every one is borne to
Every good man must have care to leave after him a commendable memory of his
good acts.
serve his Prince and Country. And every man ought to endeavor himself, and
have great desire to leave to his posterity, a commendable memory of his good
acts done in his life time. Quia viuit post funera virtus. for a man's good
deeds live when he is dead, and what better fame or commendation can a Judge
leave after him then that he was a righteous Judge, a grave, discrete and sage
man in his doings touching justice, that he regarded always the truth and
right of ye cause brought before him, and not the person, and that he would
patiently and quietly bear both parties, and not unadvisedly credit the one,
before he has heard the other, for which cause, almighty God has given a man
two ears, one on the one side, and the other on the other side of his head,
and reason, sense and under standing has placed betwixt both, to conceive and
decerne the cause, and a tongue to utter that which is right. And forasmuch as
the Justice cannot by course of law proceed in the era* execution of justice
without information of others therefore the Jurors which are called and charged
to inquire and present offenses before them inquirable, or to Duty of Jurors.
try any cause, are to consider that they have also taken upon them a great
charge, wherein, if they be remiss or slack in doing their duties,
offenders cannot be punished, for the Justice cannot be a Judge and an informer
or accuser also, and so the evil should not only be encouraged to continue
in their evil doings, but also others would be imboldened to attempt the
like, to the great loss, hinderaunce, and discouragement of such as desire to
live in the fear of God, and due observation of her Majesty's laws. These
Jurors take a solemn oath upon the holy book of God, truly to inquire, and
Jurors are sworn to do truly.
true presentment to make of such things, wherewyth they shall be charged, and
shall not let for favor or affection, dyspleasure or malice, to say the truth,
as God shall help them and the contents of the Book, wherein they are to
consider, that in this book are contained Gods everlasting truth, his most
holy and eternal word, What consideration men ought to have which take an oath.
whereby we have forgyuenes of our sins, and be made inheritors of heaven, to
live for ever, with Gods angels and his saints in joy and gladness. And in the
same Book is contained also Gods terrible threats to obstinate sinners, which
will not amend their lives, nor believe the truth of Gods holy word, and the
everlasting pain prepared in hell for hypocrites, vain swearers, perjured
persons, false wytnes bearers, unjust condemners of innocent and guiltles men,
and for them which for favor hyde the offenses of evil dooers, that they
should not be punished, so that whosoever wilfully forsweareth himself,
having taken an oath as is aforesaid, does utterly forsake Gods mercy, goodness
and truth, by the merits of Christ's death, and whatsoever he has deserved
for us. They refuse forgiveness of sins promised to all penitent sinners, the
joys of heaven, the company with angels and saints for ever. Al which benefits
and comforts are promised to true Christian persons in the Gospel, and they so
being for sworn do betake the^ selves to the devils service, the father of
all liars, falsehoode, deceit, and perjury, provoking the great indignation
and curse of God, against them in this life, and the terrible wrath and
judgment of our Savior Christ, at the great day of the last judgment, when he
shall justly judge both the quick and the dead, according to their works. For
whosoever forsakes the truth for love or displeasure of any man, or for lucre
or profitte to himself, does forsake Christ, and with Judas does betraye him,
and although such perjured men's falsehood be now kept secret, yet it shall be
opened at the last day, when the secrets of all men's hearts shall be manifest
to all the world, and the truth shall appear and accuse them, and their own
conscience, with all the blessed company of heaven, shall bear witness truly
against them, and Christ the righteous judge, shall then justly condemn them
to everlasting shame and death. This sin of Mala, 3.
perjury, almighty God by the prophet Malachy does threaten to punish
severely, saying to the Jews, I will Punishment of per jury by God.
come to you in judgment, and I will be a swyft wytnes, and a sharp judge upon
sorcerers, adulterers, and perjured persons.

Which thing to the Prophet Zacherie, almightye Zach. 5.
God declares in a vision, wherein the prophet did see a Book flying in ye
air, which was 20. cubits long, and 10 cubits broad, and God said then to him
this is ye curse that shall go forth upon the face of ye earth, for (...),
false swearing, and perjury, and this curse shall enter (...) house of the
false man, and into the house of the per^^^ed man, and it shall remain in the
midst thereof and consume even the timber and stones of the same. Thus you
see how much God does hate periorie, and what punishment he has prepared for
false swearers and perjured persons. It is commanded by the law of God, that
none should take his name in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltles
that takes his name in vain, and how can a man more deeply offend against
that law, then when he swears and takes God to witness that he will say
truth, and yet sets forth falsehood, and covers the truth, and as the
offense of perjury is detestable before God, so are the offenders therein
subject to the punishment of the Law of this Realm. For by a 3. H. 7, Cap. 1.
statute made in the 3. year of the Reign of the noble king Henry the
seventh, it is ordained, that the Justices before whom such men are sworn,
have power to impanell a Jury, to enquire of their consealinge Punishment of
Jurors by the law for conseling of the truth.
whereof if they happen to be indicted and convicted, they may impose such fines
upon them, as to their discretion in that behalf shall seem convenient:
besides this, none of them shall afterward be received to give testimony in
matter of truth, nor be put in Iuries for trial of any cause, so much does
the law detest their unjust and wicked dealinges, to their utter reproach and
discredit for ever. Wherefore, as they will show them selves to fear God, to
advance his honor, to tender nota.
her Majesty's service, the Common wealth of this Country, avoid the danger
of Law, and desire that the world may continue in that good opinion which it
has conceived of their upright and just dealing, so they are to endeavor
themselves to discharge there duties in the things to be committed to their
charge.

FINIS.

