The Confutation of the misshapen Answer to the misnamed, wicked Ballade,
called the Abuse of ye blessed sacrament of the aultare. Wherein, thou haste
(gentele Reader) the right understanding of all the places of scripture that
Miles Hoggard, (with his learned counsel) has wrested to make for the
transubstanciacion of the bread and wine.

Compiled by Robert Crowley. Anno. 1548.

To the Reader
AFter I had perused (...) a^swere (christian Reader) and perc^iu^^ how
greatly the papists glori^^ therein thinckeinge (yea and make ^s their crakes)
that no man should be able to confute it, or if any man should take in hand
to writ again, he should be aunswerede in like manner: I ^hou^ht it my (...)
(amongeste other my labors for the sitteyng^forth of the truth of the
christian fayeth) t^ overthrow this their bullwarcke, that these proud
philist^ans may know that the Lord of host^s has not left his church so
^estitut^ of the good gifts of the spirit, but that the very little ones (of
his army) are able to driu^ them from al their holds, and cause them to ^ee
when* their stouburne stomakes* will no^ suffer them to yield to the truth The
spirit of the lyueinge God lead the in the way of truth, that thou be not
deceived by these false a dissemblinge hypocrites, which under the name
catholic fayeth would still maintain the Romish ruff and Kindome of Anti
christ.

AMEN.
The preface to the reader.
GOod readers all, of each degree
To you I make, humble request
When that you do this read or se
To judge my mind unto the best
And blame me not, though I ^rnest ^e
In this hige point of our faith
Which now, so many enmyes has.
All things, says Paull, that written be
Are written plain for our learning
Then sy^h in scripture t^us we se
That Christ to us was so louinge
Not only death for us sufferinge
But also left us his flesh and blood
Of body and soul to be the food
Namely to such as worthily
Re^eyue it with a fayeth perf^te
That Christ is there soul and body
Whom the Jews slew^ with great despy^^
Without which fayeth as I resyte
They do receyu^ it damnably
Not des^rninge our Lords body
Good rea^er mu^e not on this thing
How by thy reason it should be
For tha^ in error will the bring
If thou by reason seek to se
How God can work this mist^rie
Can thou vile dust at this ceason
Measure Gods work by thy reason
Thou ar^ (...), bu^ a creature
Wyl^ thou w^t^ thy maker contend
How he can work at his pleasure
A^oue that ^hou can comprehend
He has made the unto such end^
That thou by faith, to him should ^leane
Above reason, for to believe
Therefore I do, the aduertyse
Thy reason there, to captyuate
It is no reasons exercise
With, how, to know the perfy^e ra^e
How God does work, in this estate
Therefore again to the I say
Thou ough^est him in faith to obey
Thus end I now my preface
Desieringe you good readers all
The perfyte faith for to embrace
The which is most catholicall
And if in this answer you shall
Find any fault, I it commyt
To such as can, truly mende it.
FINIS
The confutacion
In this preface of yours I note.iii. things First that you say the sacrament
has many en^mies. Secondly, that you father your fond opinion upon the
scripture. Thyrdely and last that you go about to make that thing plain
whereof never man doubted.

For the first, It is easy to be coniected what manner of men you account for
the enemies of this sacrament, even the author of the ballad that you brabble
about and all other of his mind (I doubt not) are those you mean of, But for
as much as it is no small reproach to a christian man to be accounted an enemy
of christ's sacraments: it shall be good to bring this mattier ne^e the light,
that al such as have eyes that can abide the light, may judge whether of both
the parties, your sort or ours, be the enemies that you spal^ of, It shall be
necessary therefore first to describe the enemy of Christ's sacraments,
setting him forth in his lively colors and then set him up between boeth
parties, that other men may judge which* of the^ both he does most resemble.

The enemy therefore of Christ's sacraments is such one as by any mean
endeavors to diminish or take away any part of the virtue and strength of
the same, as for example, he that will take away from baptism the virtue and
power to declare unto us by the eternal and outward wassheynge of the body,
that the soul is (by the blood of the immaculate and unspotted lamb) washed
and purged from all the fylthe and corruption of sin: the same is an enemy
unto baptism and denies it to be a sacrament. For longer the^ it is the
visible sign of invisible grace, it is no sacrament.

In like manner, he that endeavors, to take a way from the most blessed
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ the virtue and power to declare
unto us that as the bread is made of many grains and the wine of many grapes
and yet is but one loofe or piece of bread and one cup of wine, so we being
many faithful beleuers and professers of christ are but one body the head
whereof is y^ same our savior and redemer Christ: does no less the^ deny
these most worthy sacraments, bread and wine, to be any sacraments at all,
or at the lest way he takes away from them their chiefest and principal
office, leaueinge them as it were things scrueynge in manner to no purpose. For
not withsta^deynge that they signify unto us, that in like manner as they are
the food of the body, so is Christ the fode of the soul: yet the chi^feste
thing that they were ordained for, was to declare the unite of the fayethfull
m^mbres of Christ's musticall body, the church and congregac^ on of christians.

What so ^uer he is therefore, that takes away from these sacraments the power
to signify this unity: denies them to be sacraments, and therefore is an
enemy to Christ's sacraments.

Now let them that have the spirit of god wellinge in them: judge whe^ther of
boeth parties be these enimes* We that say they be bread and wine, and
therefore made of many graynes of corn^ and many grapes, whereby is signified
the unity of us the me^bres of Christ's mistical body: or you that deny them
to be either bread or wine, and therefore to have any such signi^ication? You
are to young (master Hoggarde) to defend this mattier. You know not on which
side your bread is buttered, You took your (...) to be an high friend to
Christ's sacraments and now you are proved to be their mortal enemy.

Now for you secounde part. You say (and true it is) that Paul teaches all
things that be written, to be writ^en for our learneing. Fre^d Hogg^rde, I cun
you thank that you have learned some what at father Latimers sermons, thought
your coming thither were for like purpose as you have heretofore haunted other
men's sermons to ^ere and note and bear tidinges you wot whether. But I would
wish that you had learned a little more, and then I doubt not but you would
have been atrayde eythere to belie Gods most holy book or to set any of
gods scriptures on the ^acke or else to crxampe them. Where find you it in gods
book y^ Christ's body and blood, is the ^ode of our bodies? Did not Christ
rebuke the Capernaties for this your gross and carna^l opinion? did he not bid
them work the meat^ that remains for ever and not that which perishes? And
wha^ they asked him what they might do to work the worckes of God: did he not
make answer y^ to beli^ue in him who^ God has sent, is the work of God? Is
Christ's immortal body become the fode of our mortal bodies? Oh more then
owlieshe blyndnesse, Where find you in all gods book, yea in a^y foude
Philosophers writteinge, that mortal bodies can be fed with fode that is
immortalle? The time would fail me, if I should not leave writing til I had
declared your beastly blindness to the worthiness.

But I will leave you to the judgment of them y^ shall read your words, which
are so open blasphemy, that every man that has any little spark of godly
knowledge may easilye judge whose spirit you are.

Then do you proceed to heap error upon ^rrour, and thus you say. The
perfect fayeth wherein this sacrament must be received: is to be lieue that
Christ is there, body and soul.

To scanne these your words to the worthiness I can do not less then judge
your meaneinge herin to be al one with that wicked article for the not
belieueinge whereof so many have been most cruelly murdered, even one of the syx
which God has now confounded. For what other thing can you make of your
ioyneing of body and soul to the sacrament: but to mak^ it natural man which
consists of these two parts. And then it is easy to be coniected what
arguments you will ground upon this sand. Forsooth even the same that the
great patrones and defenders of this articles have hertofore framed to their
purposse. And had if not ben for fear to encure the danger of the late
proclamacion. I doubt not you would have lashed them out as fast as never did
any of them. But you think^ your self to have escaped al these dangers and
yet to have placed your words so that al your frindes may perceive your
meaneinge to ^e nolesse but that the sacrament is not bread nor wine, but
^^eshe, and blood and bones because it is body and soul. But if you remember
the words of the proclamacion well, you shall s^ that you have over shot your
self a little as w^relye as you have walked. As I remember, the proclamacion
permits none other names to be given to the sacrament. But such as are
expressly found in the scripture, And I prai you where find you in the
scripture, that the sacrament is called the soul of Christ? Se you no^ into
what case you have brought your self Well shifte for your self as well as you
can. I ^eare me the proclamacion wylbe laid in your neck. And if it be, take
it for a plage, for amongst those things that be wryiten for our learning:
are found these true sayeinges. Who so strikes with the sw^rde shall perish
with the sw^rde. He that shows no mercy, shall find no mercy.

And the same measure ye make unto other shall be made unto you again.

Remember your self (frynde Hogherde) how^ many you have set forward
toward (...) in the time of persecution. Men thy^ke that from the ^yme of
John Fri^h to (...) of (the constante witness of gods truth) Anne askwe, there
was no blood shed in Smythfylde, but your part will be in it at the last
day* Repent therefore and acknowledge your ^aute, God is merciful to the
penitent, He is able to take from you your stony heart and to give you one of
^^esh. But if you will be still stubburne, he will make you utter you^ own
folly further yet, and at the length to run into the red sea with cruel
Pharao.

Now* in the third and last part of your preface: you labor greatly to
make that thing plain y^ never man doubted of, that is y^ god is able to make
his body and blood of bread and wine.

Who ever doubted of gods omnipotency and almyghtie power? Who believes not
certaynelye that he which was able to make heaven, the earth and all that is
therein of naught: can also make his body and blood of bread and wine? You
bid us captiuate our reasone, because it surmunteth reasone to know how god
works this wonderful work above teaso^ Surely I never hard reasonable
beast braylle with less reasone. For what resone leads you to conclude.
Aposse adesse, that is if you understand not the terms of logic (as I
coniect by your wryttynge that you do not) to affirm a thing to be done.
because it is possible it may he don* It is possible that you (being to your
power) a cruel Saulle should be converted and made aperfecte Paul and
preachers of y^ way which you have long persecuted: but y^ you are so, does,
not yet appear wherefore I dare not conclude because it is possible and God is
able to change your heart therefore he has done it. But if I did percei^
either by any manifest sign or ^oken or else by the testimony of gods holy
word that you we^ converted: I would forth with believe it without asking any
question how it might be Right so do I say of the sacraments of the bodi and
blood of Christ If I might perceive that God had (accordeinge to his power)
changed this bread and wine into his body and blood or if the word of God
did tell me that Christ had made this alteracion or change: I would and so
would we all) be as ready to believe it as you on any of your doctors thought
it we my Lord of Winchester whose arguments you use in your answer. But here
you begin to prepare your self to speak. You have an objection ready at
hand, I pray you sir (say you) what playner words would you have then
those which Christ spoke to his disciples when he instituted this blessed
sacrament? did he not say this is my body? How say you sir to this, was it
his body that he gave them or did he make alye to them? For one of the boeh
you must needs grant me. Not so sir by your l^eaue Nether did he lie unto
the^ nor yet was the bread that he gave them his body other wise the^ the cup
was the new testament or covenant established by his blood shed on the
cross, that is to say in signi^i^acion and not in substance and so we
believe more firmly than all my Lord your masters faggottes can remove out of
our hertes. We shall speak more largelye of this matier in the confutacion of
your answer to the ballad.

OF late a new balad came to my hand
^ompyled by a ^al^e christen man
As it is easy for to understand
In y^ so madly he does y^ thing scan
Which ^e reproves, but here after
Ye do rea^e the answer it shall apeare (wha^
What deuilishe doctrine he has written here
And because his error shall be seen plain.
Each staff of his time I will answer so
That then he shall have no cause to compain
For all his hole pro^esse as it does go
I will wryt forth and not add one word m^
In than swear whereof, he shall se evident
How wycke^lye his time in it he has spent
And now for his matter to en^er in
As after follows it does begin.
The confutacion.
You enter into your mattier, as though you had been at schole with Tertullus
y^ ora^our that accused Paul before Felyx the debtie, A faulse christian, you
say, has made a ballad, a fond talker, a wrytter of diuillishe doctrine, one
that has spent his time wickedlye in writeynge this ballad. But your master
(...) had one cast that you lack. He had substanciall men even of the
auldermen of Ierus^lem to wittynesse with him that all was true that he ^ayed.
I am a f^ade the auldermen of o^don will not do so by you.

Well you say he is a false christian, but because you have no record I dare
not believe you. For if ye be remembrede, you complained in your preface of the
great number of enimes that the sacamentes of Christ have: and ye^ in
conclusion it was proved that their was none so great and enemy as your
self. Even so (...) this point I will not swear for you. For he that is tried
to be an enemy to Christ's sacramen^^s, is not like to be a true Christian.

Come nere the light therefore that we may deserne whether your hear be
natural or conterfaite. A woulfe may have a shepes fell one his back: and so
I fear me you have. But we shall not be desce^ued in you, for our master
Christ has appointed us tokens to know you By their fruits (says he) you
shall know them, They do the works of their father the devil who was an
homiside or manquellar even from the beginning. The great desire that you
have to shed man's blood declares your nature. The name of a christian can not
make you aper^it christian and a sheep of his flock.

No though ye go in company with the sheep of Christ even to their pasture
and feadyng: yet so long as ye be ashepebyter, we can not take you for other
then a woulfe, though you were lapped in.iiii. sh^pe skynes,

The true christians are in this world as lambs in the mids among woulfes,
All they therefore that be as woulfes among lambs, are false christians. If
you therefore do know the Author of this Ballad to be such one: the^ may you
iustby call him a false christian, other wise you slander him.

Certain fruits there be whereby these false christians be known, which if I
find in you ye must pardone me though I translate this name from him to you
as to him that is most worthy to bear it.

The first of these fruits, is delight in outward holiness, which Christ
reprehended in the phariseis, An other is the faruent zeal to set forth man's
doctrine, and to measure the scripture therb^, which was rebuked in them also,
The third and last, is the gloriyng in their own Justice and merits,
sekeynge satisfacions besides Christ, either by the^ selves or other Which was
the common fault of the Jews

Whether these fruits may be found in you (friend Hogarde) let them judge
that know your opinion in all matters, which (I doubt not) as many as shall
diligently read and mark your answer shall* do.

And to make the matt^er more plain I shall upon occasion given, some what
note in the co^futation of that, that folowethe, And when I have showed your
fruits I shall desire you not to^ stomach the matter* though I say (as the
trneth is) that a false christian has defamed a faithful brother. As for the
scanninge of his mattier (madly as you say) shall appear in the progress. In
the mean time I shall desire you to call to yonr remembrance your Deprofundis,
setting it before your eyes as a matier madly scanned, till: I have scanned
your mysshapen answer, and then if you lust, put of your thymble and take
your pen in hand and scane the mattier with your learned counsel (you wot
whom I mean) and declare your self to be no writter of deuyllishe doctrine,
and say that you were not the father though you bear the name. Yet tell them
that did it, that if they write again they shall be answered.

The ballade.
What means this gyse, I would feign here
Strange sightes in my eyes, there do apere*
Defended with lies, boeth far and nere
Great ruth it is,
The answer
What this (...) does mean is here strange to me
For if he be christened then dare I say
That that thing which he mak^th so strange to be
Sith he, he came to reason every day
The sacrament he saw honor always
But if he be a panym, than truly
I ^lame him not much for his great outcrye
The confutacion
Your answer declares that to be tru^ that (...) w^itten by Paul to the
Romans, The natur^ll man perceyueth not the things that be of the spirit of
God, You comp^ it no strange sight to se the sacrament honored with divine
honor, because in your time it has been so ho^oured. I deed to the bodily eye
this sight is nothing^ strange because it is a continual object and dayelye
re^ued Image in that christ^lli^^ humor: But so many as have the eyes of the
inward man opened wherewith they s^ the true honourers and that honor God in
spirit and truth, may well call thy^ a strayng sight. For sens the beginning
of creatures, th^re was never such honor seen to be g^uen to any creatur among
the honors that the spiritual eye behouldeth. Wherefore when it chances the
spiritual man to behold the abhominacions of this world he may ^ight well call
them strange though they be continually in the eyes of his body. Justly and
tru^lye therefore says the author straynge (...) in mine eyes there do
appear, yea and that defen^ed with l^es, For what ^rueth can you have to
def^nde the thing that fyghhteth with all truth? All truth agrees that the
true honourers of God shall honor him (...) the spirit and truth, and not at
Ierusal^m nor yet in the hyl of Samaria. That is to say, another with cerimonial
worship prescribed by a law, nor yet with any outward worship invented of
their own brains. If you have any truth against this truth then stand up
and declare how these strange syghtes be defended therwyth.

The balad
Ise men honor, Both bread and wine
For christ our savior, which he left for a sign
To the beleuer, Of his death deuyne
Lord amend this
The answer.
Whoeuer heard beast so shamefully ly,
No Christen man does honor bread or wine
For nether kynds be there though to our eye
They do so apere, yet faye^h does defyne
Christ hole to be there by his power divine
To whom the godhede is knit there Ioyntlye
Whom we are bound to honor of duty
The confutacion.
Here you will hang your self and ask me no leave, you will not walk out of
the reach of the proclamacion. You will still be sayeing that scripture
denies, and deny that scriptur affirms. I am sorry that I was not of your
counsel before you published your answer, for if I had I would have showed
you this daynger before. Well now it is to late, for I am sure you can not
stop it but it will be showed to the maiestrates, and then you know their
charge alredie. The best counsel that I ca^ give you now, is to make haste
and recante. For so shall you yet save some part of your honesty though it be
but a very little.

You say no christen man does honor br^ade and wine Hitherto you say^ ^rue,
for to honor bread and wine, is the work of an infidele. But then you show
a good, cause why men honor not bread and wine. because the^ is none to be
honored.

Here is occasion offered of more questians then ever you would be able to
solute even with the help of all your secret counsalours I might ask you
what thing that is which the bodily eye sees, that the hand feleth, that the
taste discerns, that is broken, that wa^th ^^a^mye when it taken weate, that
will putrify and rotte if it be kept longer time then bread may endure,
finally what that is which must be burned when it is muldie so that* the stomak
abhors it, I am sure you will not say it is the body of Christ, for that
is not nor can not be otherwise seen with the bodily eye) the^ as it was, is
and shall be, in the form of man it can not be broken, for it is impassible, it
can not wa^ slymye nor clammye, for it is purified from all slymie nature, it
can not putrify, for it is with out all corruption, it can not be burned*
because it is immortalle. But here you will say that you have allredie answered
to these questians, It appears (you say) to be bread or wine but fayeth
defyneth an other manner of thing. That is that whole Christ as there, and
that the godhead also is ioyntlye knytte unto the same Christ being there, so
that of duitie we must ho^our him in these forms Then note you in the
margent, Blessed be they that believe and se not. Where you fal^ifie the text,
which has. Blessed are they that saw not and b^leued, spoken in reproach of
the herd belyue of Didimus that would not believe the resurrection of his
master Christ by the report of them that saw him risen (not wythstandynye
he knew that Christ had promised before his death that he would rise again
the third day) but said he would first se the fastening of y^ nails in
his hands and put his finger in the holes and his hand into his side: yer he
would believe. But when he had seen and confessed sayeinge. My Lord and my
God: then Christ said unto him. Because thou have s^ne me Thomas, thou have
be leued. Happy or blessed are they that saw not and believed* meaneyng thereby
the fathers and prophets of the old law which saw him not, with the bodily
eye, and yet believed all that they writ of him concerning his cominge in the
flesh which Thomas would not b^leue till he saw it.

Thus you declare your knoledge in the scritures to be but base, as theyrs is
that are of your counsel. But now let us return to your answer. It
appears to our eye (you say) to be bread and wine but faith defines whole
Christ to be there by his power divine Here you speak subtyllye. You think
you have plenty of startynge holes in this piece of your answer. Faith
defyneth (you say) that whole Christ is there by his power divine so y^ if we
would charge you with the proclamation and say that you affirm the natu^all,
real* and to ^all presence of Christ God and man flesh blude and bones, toth
and naiale and all together: then you will say no sir* I mente no such
thing. He is there by his power divine even as he has promised to be with his
church unto the end of the world. You are answered Not yet friend hogherde.
For this presence that you speak of which Christ promised to his sayethful
is an invisible assistence of grace as appears by the circumstaunce of the
text where this promise is mentioned. For after he had given them in
commandment to preach unto all nations, and to baptize them in the name of
the father the son and the holy ghost ^^achinge them to keep all things that
I have given you commandment: he said Behold I am with y^u even unto the end
of the world meaneinge none other thing then he did when he said where so ever
to or three be gathered together in my name, there am I in the mids of them
That is to say, be you never so few in number, be you never so little
regarded of the world and worldelye wys^: fear not to t^stifie and witness
my truth unto all nations baptiseynge and teaching them to keep all things
that I have commanded you, not your own dreams, not your own fantasies for
then you go in your own name and* not in mine, and be hold I am with you all
the days even to the end of the world, I will confound your enemies, they
shall not be able to re^iste the spirit that shall speak in you I my self
which am all one with my father wylbe continua^ly with you.

Thus you se (friend Hoggarde) that this pre^ence of Christ with his church
is not anatural and invisible presence under a visible form, as my Lord of
Wynchester teaches you, but it is a merciful assistence of, the immense, and
in comprehencible godheade wych is present in all places, but assistent to his
elect only. So that if you will not have Christ naturally, really and carnally
present: you must not say^ that whole Christ is there that is to say God and
man, for so (as saint Augustine witnessethe with express words) he was on the
earth and not in heaven ^where he is now, in as much as he was man) when he
said. Noman ascends into heaven, but only the son of man which is in
heaven and did also des^ende from heaven. One person (says the same
Augustine) is ^oeth God and man, and boeth these natures are bu^ one Christ,
by y^ he is God, in all places, but by that he is man, he is in heaven. And yet
more playnelye. One and the self same Christ (says Fulgentius according to
his humane substance, was absente from heaven when he was upon earth and left
the earth when he ascended into heaven

By this you may perceive how far you are deceived in your opinion of y^
total presence of Christ in the sacrament. But because I would gladlye you
should forsake your ex^oure and embrace the truth: I shall open unto you one
other doubt that might chance to trouble your mind.

The godheade you say is ioyntely (...) to the manhood and can not be separate
whereupon you conclude that as the one is i^mensse and fylleth all places so
must the other neades be. To this objection, saynct Augustine shall make you
answer. (...) follows not says he that the thing that is in god, should be
in all places as he is. For the scripture does most truly report of us,
that we do live, move and ^e in him: and yet be we not* in all places as he is.
But man is in God after one sor^ and god in him after an other sort* After a
certain propre and peculiar sort. The ma^hode therefore being jointly knit
unto the godhead is not in all places as is the Godheade, but the scripture
teaches and we do constantly^ believe: that the manhood of Christ haueinge
finished the purpose of his coming in the flesh (that is to say offered him
self one the cross for our redemption and risen again for our
justification) is ascended into heaven and sits at the right hand of God
the father whence he shall come to judge the quick and dead. As for his
presence in the sacrament we believe it to be such as it is in us his faithful
members whom Paull calls his members, of his flesh and of his bones. And yet
is not the presence of Christ in us such, that we ought thereby to be honored
as gods: (...)
No more is he so present in the sacrament that it ought to be honored as
God.

Thus largely have I spoken of this matter because I desire more to win you
to Christ then to confound you before the world For If I had not desired your
co^uercio^ from y^ Romeyshe way: I would have opened your fond assercions
whrein you af^irme that there is another bread nor wine in the sacrament
though boeth appear to our eye, and so have left you to your self. It had been easy so to have done. Boeth for that the eye is the instrument that God
has given to judge decerne and know al visible things by: and also because
the elect vesse of God Paul, and our^ savior Christ him self, do call them
boeth bread and wine, and that even after the consecracion (if there be any) as
I shall herafter prove more at large.

The Ballad.
Wonderful syghtes, I could declare
I looked in the pixte Dome gods I saw there
Made of the priests, Which sinners are
Living amyse.
The answer
Wonderful it is unto a pagan^
How a pure virgyn should bring forth a child
But easy it is to a Christian man
Which has this, how from his reasone exild^
Obeyinge to fayeth on which he does bylde
So if this man would reasone captiuate
He should not ieste after this folishe rate
Dome gods it pleases this wre^ch them to call
The hosts he means which are consecrate
Because they speak not nor be seen vital
Ergo, they be dome: o beast intoxicate
If Christ could be seen there after that rate
That he walked here, where were the^ thy faith
Where eye, may persuade, faith has no merits
The Confutacion,
You go about to make the matter plain by a similitude, It is wonderful (you
say) to a pagane) how a vyrgyne should bring forth a child: but to a
christian it is no wonder at all, his fayeth you say, puts away all
wonder. So if this man (say you) would captiuate his reasone, he would believe
(as you do) that the hosts can speak.

First I will examayne your similitude and tri how it serves for your purpose.
The whole meaneynge of your similitude is no more but this. In like manner as
achristian will not wonder how a virgin can bring forth a chyld^: so will he
not wonder how the hosts in the pyxe should speak. Or for the first part.

As it is a point of a pagane to wonder how a virgyne should bring forth a
child: so is it to believe that the hosts in the pyxe be dombe. But I pray
you sir with your pa^nce. Are not you a Christian man? Yes mary s^ye you I
would you should know it. And I pray you sir, if your daughter should
bring forth a child, would you think she were a virgyn? It were not like sure.
Well, if you were certain that she were a virgyn would you not wonder how she
should be conceived? Yes verily. For it to contrary to the course of nature,
and therefore to be wondered at. How say you ^o your similitude the^. Apply it
to you purpose, and se how it a greeth. As it is to be wondered how a vyrgin
should be conceived with child, so is it how the hosts in the pyx should
speak. Ah sir, this makes somewhat for our purpose. But here you will say,
that by your ^ayth you will captiuate your reaso^e and believe it to be done
because you se it to be so. But how it should come to pass, you will ask no
question. Then you believe it because you se it and so your faith is grounded
upon the knowledge of the senses. All this makes against you Well yet once
again let us asaye another way. Grant your daughter be with child and you know
not wheth^re she be a virgin or not. What will you say than? Will you straight
way captiuate your reason and sence^ because you are a christian and believe
that your daughter is a virgyn? Tushe say you al this is nothing to the
purpose, all my meaning is of the virgyn Mary of whose virginity al christians
are certay^^. But I pray you How are christian men certified of Mary's
virginity? By* the words of the prophet say you, which were spoken long
before. Behold a virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son, and ^is name
shall be called Emanuel. A ha, the^ y^u do not captiuate reasonne but reasonne
leads you to believe i^, because the Prophet of (...) had spoken it long
before that it should come to pa^^e. How know you that this prophecy was
fulifilled in Marie?

I know that (say you) by the testemonies that I find in the scripture, where
by Christ (who was the first borne of the same Ma^ie) was declared to be that
son that should be borne of a virgy^e. And the testimonies he these. Luk^. ^.
The words of the angel spoken to the virgin in the time of her conception.
Fera^e not Mari^ (said the angel) for thou haste found favor with God,
Behold, thou shall conceive in the womb and bring forth a son, and thou
shall call his name Jesus. This shall be great and shall be called the son of y^
highest and the Lord God shall give him the ^eate of David his father and he
shall reign in the house of Iacobe for ever and his king^dome shall have none
end, An other testimony, y^ words of the angel unto Joseph when he had
thought to have put away his despoused wife privily because he perceived her
to be with child, knoweynge that he never compayned with her. Joseph (said the
angel) thou son of David fear not to take to y^ Mary thy wife. For the thing
that is bourne in her is of y^ holy ghost she shall bring forth asonne and thou
shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall make salfe his people from their
sins. Again the angel of the Lord said unto the herd men in this wise.
F^are ye not, for lo I preach unto you great joy which shall chance unto all the people For this day is borne to you a savior which is Christ the anointed
Lord in y^ City of David. Simeo^ An y^ prophets, y^ wisme^ y^ of ^ast the
witness of John Baptist and the voice o^ y^ father from heaven: do declare this
same son of Marye to be the son of the virgyne spoken of before by the
prophet. Wherefore I believe that Marie brought forth a child without los of
virginity because Jesus the first borne of her body was by these testimonies
declared to be the some seed that was promised to be borne of a virgyne. Well,
by all this it is plain that in this point reasonne is not captiuated, but
drives us to believe because the spiri^e of truth has prophesied it and so
many wytnessed with one assent confirmed it. Right so do I say of the
sacrament. If you can find me but one of the prophets that has said that
any thing that seems not to have life should speak, and that the hosts in
the pyxe be, by the testimonies of the scriptures, proved to be the same: then
will I not captiuate reasone, but wylbe led by reasone to believe that the same
hosts (as you call them) be not dombe other wise you must pardone me though I
believe not that they can speak, ^yll such time ^o I do either hear them
speak my self or else learn it by the report of some credible person that
has heard them speak.

This have I spoken to con^ent your expectacion for the dombnesse of your
gods: because I perceive by your similitude that you are altogether ^leshely
and perceive not the spirit that is in the author of the ballad

Dombe he calls them, because (as you use them) they be taken for gods, and
are but do^be ceremonies or signs, That is to say, haueynge no lyu^lye
signification, whereby the people that should receive them might be edified
Their natural propritie is, to preach and declare unto us the unity of
christians in the body and blood of Christ by faith more plainly then can be
declared with words. For wha^ ^onge can be able to declare the mystery of the
mystical body of Christ (his church and congregation) so plainly with
words: as it is declared by the bread being but one bread made of many
graynes, and the wine being but one cup of wine made of many grapes? Take a
way these lively signifi^acions therefore and what other thing shall remain
but dombe ceremonies and signs declareinge nothing to the edificacion of the
receivers, but holdeynge them still in supersticion under the name of gods?
Truly and justly therefore has he called them dombe gods, for that they are
without significacion, and bear the name of gods being in deed neither gods
nor gods ordinances, as you and your miscreau^t faith fellows do use them.

Then conclude you upon an inconvenience saying. If Christ might ^e sen in the
sacrament as he walked here: then could not our fayeth merit any thing in
beleueinge that we se not.

Graciousely considered. You are loeth we should loss the merit of our
fayeth, You would rather we should believe that good is iuell and iuil good,
black white, and white black, that light is darkness and darkensse light
yea that god is bread and bread God. But now it were wisdom to make a
distinction of meriteinge and then to know how this faith of yours meriteth
that we may be bold to call for our reward when the universal judge shall give
to each one accordeynge to his merits. There be.ii. kinds of meritinge
therefore, y^ is to say of good and of iuel. The good kind of meriteynge, is
by Christ, through Christ for Christ, and in Christ. That is by casteing
all our (...) upon him o^elye, (...) continually beaten and crucified before
our e^es and crucifiynge our selves to the world haueinge o^ or trust in our
self, any, work that we can do, or any other for us, setting up any in
heaven earth or hell to be equalle or partener with him: but beleueings and
confesseing him ^o be all in all thyng^s, the on^lye creator and maker the
only and tree geuer of all goodness, and the only peac^ maker between God and
us. The other kind of meriting^, is by Satan, the world and the flesh,
contrary in all points to this.

That is to say, taking all care upon oureselues sekeing^ waye^ to cru^i^ie
and offer up Christ agayn^, and refu^eynge to crucify our (...), haueynge all
^ruste in our own work^^ and other creatur^s merits, making the deabe
saync^es opteiners of mercy through their prayers and merits Yea making
them mediatou^s and peace makers between god and us.

Now let the godly learned judge by which of these ^ow ways this faith of
yours meriteth. You captiuate reasone, you say, and believe that in the
sacraments of the body and blood of Christ: remains neither bread nor
wine, but the very body and blood of Christ. yea whole Christ god and man,
body and soul And then I dou^te not (your rea^one this captiuated) you will
(with your forefathers the founders of this your opinion) make it a sacrific^
propicia^orye for the quick and dead for plage, penury and all kinds of
deseases* For hauei^ge the inmaculate and unspotted lamb (as you say) even
the son of the lyueyng God conceived and borne of the immaculate virgyne:
what should let you to ^effr him (...) God his father ^ placable sacrifice for
(...) these things, to content the inevitable wrat^ of God bent toward us
for the iniquity tha^ reigns in the world? And so does this faith of yours
drive you to seek other way^s of salvation then by the only Sacri^ice of
Christ once offered for all. You wyllbe still offering of him whom none can
offer but him self. And al because you have cap^iuated your rea^one, to believe
that you have him here upon earth in such manner that you may Sacrifice him.

Now tell me what this fayeth of yours meriteth. It leads you from the sure
tru^te in the only sacrifice that Christ made once for all. It drives you to
open blasphemy, causing you to take upon you the office of Christ that is to
say, to take a way sin by sacrifice yea and to sacrifice him whom none can
sacrifice but him self.

What merit is it then that this fayeth shall have? Forso^h the merit of
unbelief because it is not assertayned that the son of God is comen in the
flesh, and has performed the end of h^s comeinge, that is, has by his death
and passion, satisfied for the sins of all the world, making perfec^e for
ever, as many as believe in him. Yea it shall be rewarded among those
blasphemous lym^nes of Antichrist, that take upon them to be the forg^uers of
(...) (which is the office of God only) makeynge them selves, gods.
Deliver your reasonne out of prisonne therefore, and let her consider how
your supersticiouse fayeth has merited.

Put away this fo^d perswacio^ of yours where by you are led to think that
unless you captyuate reasone and become a brute beast, you can not believe the
chief point of your religion Consider that Christ bade not his Apostles
captiuate reasonne and so believe that he was risen when he appeared unto them,
but said ^ele and se, For spirits have not sleshe and ^ones as you see that I
have, He bade them not go preach unto men wylynge them to captiuate their
reasone and then believe, for then he might have said go preach to the brut
beasts for they have no resone to refuse your doctrine. For what other thing
is it to captiuat reasone then to debar her of her office and to keep her Idle
so that to be altogether without reasone were better, then to be troubled with
the capti^ua^inge of her that she let not belyefe Let reasone therefore lead
you to confer y^ scriptures together and try that doctryn of yours whether it
be of God or not.

The ballade.
From sinners separate, Gods son is, says Paul
Higher then heaven seat, Above y^ powers al
How with sinful hand make, His body then you shall
Sir prists tell me this
The answer.
Truth it is that christ is up ascended
How can sinful hands then make him say you
Who ever so said or that defended
Truly none, nor at this time does now
But this truth all christen men does auowe
That after the words of God there spoken
Christ's ^^eshe is there that for us was broken
The confutacion
Here you answer as though Paul in the^ vii. to the Hebrews where he speaks
of Chri^^es separacion from sins had meant none other thing but his bodily
ascencion into heaven. And then you der^de the authors conclusion, as though
it were no sufficient prou^ nor good argument to say, he can not be made with
sinful hands because he is ascended. As who should say though he be
asended, yet is he here ^^yl. And for the making of him with sinful hands:
you say that never man sa^ed nor defended it, nor does at this time say or
defend it. In very deed you are now al a shamed to say it, and far unable to
defend it. But y^ it has been preached I with many other which are yet on live
can witness, And y^ it has been written, resort to the answer that Anthony
Gylbie made to my Lord of Whinchesters diuillishe detection: and you shall
lear^e that he has half a lease that he tar^ out of a book in Lyncolne
minister, wherein are written these words in latin. O sacerdos, nonne
creauite, ^t dedi tibi potestate^ creandi me? Quare si non sacrificas etc. That
is to say (to your ledwe* understanding) O priest, have I not created the
and given the power to create me? Wherefore if thou do not sacrifice. etc. If
you credit not this, resort to the cau^iles of the mass and then learn of
some expert master of grammar, what this latin word Conficere, signifies. I
shall recite you one of y^ cautyles to give you occacion to desire some prist of
your acquayntau^ce to show you y^ residue, for I am sure you dare not come so
nygh the secrets of the mass your self for fear of losing your sight. Si
ante ^o^ sacratio^em sanguinis (says the cau^il) per^ipiat aquam non esse in
calice: debet statim apponere et conficere. That is to say. If he (mean^yng the
priest) do verceyue before the conse^acion of the blood that there is no water
in the chalice, he must in continent put wat^r into the chalice and make it.
If this be not the significacio^ of (...), in this place: then take your pen in
hand and declare the meaning of this ^a^^yle, and the other which have the
same word In the mean time I shall persuade my self that you think nolesse
(what so ever you say) but y^ by the ^reathinge out of the words upon the
bread, the priste make^h it the body of Christ and the wine his blood. For
you say it is a truth auowed and holden of all christian (...), that after the
words spoken there is christian flesh that for us was broken. But let this
matt^^r pass we have some what to say concerning the (...) of Paul, Separate
^ro^ syniners, (...) he whole course of Paul's epistle to y^ Hebrews is none
other but to prove that all the ceremonies and sacrifices of the law were but
^ha^ owes of Christ and his one oblacion once offered for all, and that the
levites, high priests and ^y shope^ (who had need to offer sacrif^ce for them
selves) could never take away syn by their sacrifices. And after many words
and strong arguments aplyed to the same purpose, he says. It was convenient
and meet that we should have such an high pri^ste or bishope, holy,
innocent undefiled, segregate from s^nners and made higher then the heavens not
haueinge need (as the priests have) daily to offer, first for his own
sins and then for the sins of the people. For that he did once in offer^ing
him self. The law appointed men priests. etc.

Now se what it is to be separate from sinners and to be higher then heauenes
Forsooth, not (...) be after the sort of sinful priests which entered into
sancta sanctorum once in the year with the blood of gotes and (...) to (...)
the tabernacle not made with man's hands, that is to say the true tabernacle
which god made and not man the eternal couenaunte an Image whereof God
commanded Moses to make the material tabernacle Into this tabernacle did
Christ enter offeringe up him self once for all thereby finisheynge the
rede^^ysion of the synn^s of the world and now sits at the ryghthande of
God his father for ever. Wherefore sinful hands can in no wise make him, No
they can not handle nor touch him he is separate from sinners He is none of
those byshopes or priests which did yearly sacrifice and yet remain upon y^
areth still and after their death rotted in the ground, for his flesh saw
not corruption but rose again from the dead and was by the godheade taken up
into heaven and there sits at the rightha^d of his father sep^rate from
sinners.

But here you think your self a subtyle s^phister and able to confound your
self (I judge you by your counsalours whom I know well enough) for I am sure
you will say as your counsaylours do, that for as muchas Gods right hand is
in scripture called his power, and his power is in all places at ^ncent must
needs follow, that Christ setting at the rygt^ hand of the father must needs
be in all places at once, and per consequence in the sacrament^ of the altar
reallye and bodily eu^n as he sits at the right hand of his father and
ascended into heaven and shall come again at the last day to judge the world
by feyre for so he ^itteth at the right hand of his father which you say is
power. Think you these cou^^^lour^ of yours could not if need ^er prove by y^
same (...) little Image or Idol sith gods power is there present: But how
stands this with the consecracion by the virtue of the words spoken over the
br^ade and wine? If Christ be really present in all places then is he so at al
times. Then I pray you tell me (to your co^saillours I speak now^ how the
words chau^g the bread and cause real presence of y^ thing y^ was there before?
By this your argument you prove y^ we ought to honor all, things y^ we se
in the world with divine honor, because Christ is there really present. Se
whether you be not those same false prophets that Christ gave us waneyng of.
For you say lo here is Christ and ^o there is Christ But we a warned that we
shall not believe you Behold (say you) he is in the deserte behold he is in the
privy chaumbres. But we know you well enough.

The balad
Thou say by thy coninge that y^ make him
Who has made of nothing Both y^ and thy kyn
Heaven earth and al thing, contained there in
What lie is this
The answer
A great lie surely of your own making^
Ye can do it well as here does appear
It semyth that the diuill did keep you waking
That so shameful will lie without fere
His seruau^te you are whose badge ye do bea^
The which is lyeng, and our Lord does say^
That the devil is father to liars always
The confutacion.
Well answered and much to the purpose You ieste as thougt it were nothing
like the truth that your priests should say or think them selves to work
this feate by their con^nge. (...) shall s^ that cunning is agreate thing, and
helps as much in this mattier, as quick conue^aunce does in ledgardemayne.
For when qui^ conue^ghaunce fails: the budget must serve. And so says your
ca^tyles o^ your actual habites, that is to say gestures, if they fail, yet
Christ the high priest shall play the budget and help out with the
mattier, so be that the intention^l habit be not lost. Be not ashamed of your
master and father therefore who is and ever has hen the father of liars. y^
devil your good Lord and master, who keeps you still slepeinge in the
drowsy dreams of your dearly beloved father of Rome.

The Ballad.
Thou wylt say with speed, It is not our act
The word in this ded, takes effect
With the I Prosede, that thus dooste obiecte
Answer me to this.
The answer.
The priests that do say it is not our act
But god by the word is worker of all
They that so has said no ^rue judgment lack^
For so it is as after prove I shall
The priest by authority spiritual
But as a minister does execute
And god his creature does there transi^ute
The confutation*
You say you will prove here after that those priests lack no true
judgment which have ^ared that it is not their act to make the body and
blood of Christ, of bread and win^ And thus you say y^ the priest does but
execut^ by authority spiritual as a minister, and God it i^ (you say) y^
does his creature (...) Clarkly handled and like a man well (...) in the
Scriptures. They lack no true judgment, but wherein I pray you? In the
scripture you will say. I deny it. For a great number of them you speak of,
have no true judgment in the scriptures. Yea, they scarsely know whether
there be any scripture or not. Well, grant they do know that there be
scriptures. Yet ca^ not this so true judgment of theirs be in them for
Scripture knows no such transmutation. Wherein is it then that these men have
so true judgment? It is in por^ouse and Miss all matters, I am sure, that you
mean. For therein has been their most study. Well they lack no true
judgment, you say, for so it is even as they say, which thing you will
prove, in this sort I trow. Because the Priest does by authority spiritual,
execute as a Minister, and Christ does transmute his creature. A sira, here is
pithy gear, and strong arguments. Your words sown as much as if you should
say, it is so, and whi is it so? Forsooth because it is so. I would all the
subtle Sophisters of Oxford and Cambrige, would prynte these your arguments
in their minds, and by occation thereof, enlarge the limyttes of their art.
For in all their subtilties, they find no such subtlety as yours is.

But in that you say that the priest executes and God transmuteth: a man might
demand you this question. Whether of these two, is the chief workman, the
priest or God? Your old fathers of Italy would say the priest, for they would
always have the most worthy first named. But what shall we say to the matter?
Is not the priest the chief workman? Yes truly, in mine opinion, for he
receives all the monye for the work when it is done. Yea, and God never
medieth with any transmutation, till the priest set him a work. Yea, and when
any man sets the priest on work, and couenaunteth with him for certain
wages. God must wait at an inche that there be no let when the priest will have
his trinckets transmuted. It shall be best for you therefore, ^^her to sai that
the priest does all himself, or else let the priests from hensfurth, execute
no more till God bid them, and when the work is finished, let God play the
chief workman, and receive money for the whole.

The Ballade.
What word have y^ n^ddy, Wherewith Christ
Of bread his body, As y^ do crake (did make
With all thy study, An answer ^ake
And tell me this.
The answer.
Without great study thanswere is made
Me think ye presume very hye
This is my body Christ plainly said
You dare be so bold to say he does lie
Not so sir, say you that word say not I
Yet does your words prove, sir by your license
That to Christ's words ye give no credence.
The Confutacion,
An answer (you say) is made without great study. And so say I, a fol^s
bolte is sone shot out. Then answer you after this sort. Methinke ^say you,
that you presume very high to tell Christ that he lies, when he says, this is
my body. And than you answer in the person of the author, sa^yng, Not so
sir, say you, that word say not I And then you think to (...) him kyndelye.
Your wo^des sir, say you, by your license, show that to Christ you give
(...). But now sir with yo^re license I shall with great study declare unto
yo^ that the author gives a great deal more credit to Christ's words then
you do. This is my body says Christ, when he had divided bread among his
disciples, declareinge thereby the unity of all them that should beli^ue in
him, his mystical body and me^bres the church and congregation of the
faithful: and that all these faithful should be partakers of all that he
should deserve in that body which he had taken of y^ immacula^e virgin, even
as there were partakers of that bread which they had eaten.

Thus do we credit Christ's words which you credit not for when he says,
this is my body, you ^ynd him to chaung the substance of bread with those
words or else you comp^ him but a found^ talker for you say that before those
words be spoken the bread is but bread, and so you compel Christ in
transmute his creature in his Apostles hands, mouths or healies For certain it
is that Christ had delivered it before he spoke those words. And co^cerninge
the wine Mark says, that they had al dronken thereof before the words were
spoken so that here you are driven into a straight other you must say that
Christ had some oth^^ cast to transmute his creature then you know^ of, or else
that he transmuteth none at all. For I am sure you will not say that he
delivered it before it was transmuted.

The ballad.
Hoc est corpus Meum, you bring
Where with ye clock us, Under your wyng^
But for your purpose, It serves nothing
Who seyth not this?
The answer
Hoc est corpus meum first Christ in brough^
And to all his apostels gave the power
(...) ministers to do, that him self wrought
By the words spoken to them at that hour
Which words are stronger then castle or ^owr
And so shall enduer unto the last day
When all gods enemies shall vanyshe away
The confutacion
Not much unlike is this your Answer, unto the answer that Cayph^s gave in
the counsel house at Jerusalem when the high priests and bishops consulted
how to bring Christ to confucion. It is expedient, quoth he* that one dye for
the people, l^st that al y^ whole nation should perish, meaneynge that it were
^^uche better that Christ, being a seducer; ^houlde suffer death, then that
all the people ^houlde by his doctrine be seduced and perish. But yet his
words were true in an other meaning, that is. That it was expediente for one
to dye to redeem the sins of the people for other wise the whole people
should have perished, Even so in your answer you mean that Christ did
first bring in these words Hoc est corpus meum, to the intent to turn the
bread into his body by the virtue of the same words, and that he gave his
disciples power to do the same by the pronouceing of the sam words which your
said meaning is very false as Caiphases was but in an other meaning it is
very true that you say.

Christ was the first that brought in these words Hoc est corpus meum. And
he gave his Agostl^s power, yea commanded the^ to do* the things that he him
self had done. But herein lies all the mattier. What it was that he had done,
Changed bread into his body, say you. But the Evangelists say^ that he had
divided bread and (...) amongst his discipl^^ And these words are stronger
then either castle or tower, and shall endure even to the last day, when all
you gods enemies shall vanishe a way.

The ballad.
To be the word, Naimely of giving
Which christ our Lord, Spoke to his beleueing
Disciples at board, as they were sitting
Their faith to increase
The answer
Christ promest his disciples before
That the bread that he would give to them al
Was his flesh which he for evermore
Would give for the life of al men mortal
First, at his maundy by power supernal
He fulfilled his promise giving than truly
To them his own pure natural body
Secondly Christ on the cro^se him self gave
In his one bodi as he walked here
And so suffered there al man kind to save
But at his maundy as it did apere
He gave the same body, but this in mind bear
Not as on the cross, rightely to define
But under the form of pure bread and wine
The confutacion
Here you think to show a point of great learneing and knowledge. Christ
promised before, you say, that the bread which he should give was his flesh.

And this promise you say, he fulfy^led first at his maundye, where he gave
them his very natural body, and secondly one the cross but at the last you
add as it were, a correccion of your former words, and say. Not at the
maundye as on the Cross, but under the fourmes of bread and wine.

Well, then Christ (...) ^^crament^ about two years before he did institute it.
Y^a marye say you. And I pray you what said he? For soeth these very
words. The bread that I shall give you, is my flesh. ^ sy^a, ^owe you have us
at a shrwede baye, Christ told his Disciples long before that the bread
which he would give them was h^s flesh, and upon this Prophecy did in
very deed give theym'breade at his maundye. How can it be then but that this
bread was his flesh^ ^ Who is able to with stand this reason, thought^ you?
Forsoeth every one that sauoureth those things that be of the spirit of God.

And if you will apply your self a while, I shall teach you to wythstand it
also. And first I shall demand this questian was not christ as well able to
perfo^^me his word then as he was at the time of his maundye? Yese forsoeth.
For he had before that time fed five thousand and mo^, with.v. barley loves
and.ii ^ishes* And did he not say as much of the bread then as he did at his
maundie? Yese marie say you* for he said these plain words. The bread that I
shall give you, is my flesh. A syra the^ I se well this bread was not to be
traunsmuted (as you call it) when Christ came to the maundy for that was done
two years before. For I am sure you will not say Christ lied when he said
the bread that I shall give is my flesh, for if you would, your former words
should be turned to your^ reproach. But here your counsayloures perchance
will now give you counsel to run to intent of Christ when he speak those
words and to say that he intended not then (...) the bread^ (...) did after
ward. And that is true for he meant nothing less then the sacrament in those
words. But if you once enter into the intent, the^ must we have liberty to
declare Christ's intent when he distributed the bread sayeinge this is my
body. And then I doubt not but your intent will be proved a ^olyshe intent,
when you say that Christ gave his natural body unto his disciples two manner
of ways, that is to say first in form of bread, and again on the cross.
For the Scripture witnesses that Christ was always found in the form of
man, and very man in all points (sins only ^^cepted) and therefore could
he no more be in the form of bread then we may. And it is as well to be
gathered of the scriptures that the priest ^ourneth the bread into his own
body when he says this is my body: as that Christ did by the same words
chau^g it into his.

The ballad.
He is but a beast, knowing right naught
Which says that hoc est, Are words to make ought
This is manifest, In a wise man's thought
Where knowledge is.
The answer.
He is but a beast I may say right well
Which will say that God who is almighty
In sayeinge, this is, did not truly tell
That, that he could do, but rather did lie
What ^east is he this, that dare plain deny
If god say, this is, it is not so says he
Because reason will not there to agree
What and if God wild a thing done to be
About course of nature and yet god would
That man should do it though no word had he
But only a deed as Moses old
(...) him lay down the (...) he did hold
Which when he had done it was a serpente
Then taking it by the tail as is told
Yt turned to a rod even continent
God said to Moses this should be y^ sign
To declare his power before king Pharao
The which after he did by the power deuyne
Without any word that scripture does show
This does your high reason clean over throw
That, hoc est, can not be words to make ought
Much more the^ no words, ye will say I trow
Chiefly being spoken by him that al wrought
Yea spoken by him, that I grant say you
Well, that objection I will defer now
The confutacion
You answer even as you have learned and form your arguments, I po^^e ad
esse, as you are wont to do. Go^ could make y^ his body, whereof he said this
is my body, wherefore you conclude and say that it is so in very deed,
meaneinge, I am sure (as you have said before) his natural body. For in
significacion we grant and defend that it was and is his body, his very
natural body therefore you will have it, and because we say nay to that,
you charge us with denieynge that Christ affirms, because reasone will not
thereto agree. And then to declare your self to be none of the^ that follows
reasone in your dooinges, you bring fourth an unreasonable similitud to
declare your unreasonable faith. And you bring your similitude a minorie
admaius. Moses, you say, was commanded to cast down his rod, and so he
did, haueynge no word of consecracion at all, and yet it was turned into a
Serpente. And taking the serpente by the (...) the commandment of god, it
(...) to a rod again. This was done you say^ thorough gods divine power without
any word ^t all, Much more able therefore is god to do the like with his word.
And then you triu^phe and say you have laid reasonne flat on the ground.
Ualiantlie fought.

But now after your triumph let us return to your similitud and se how it
serves for this purpose. Moses thinking it far unlike that he being a man
without eloquence or goodly vtteraunce of speech, should any thing prevail
among the Egyptians who^ he knew to be men of great learneinge and wonderful
arts: was by this means encoraged. God commanded him to cast down his rod,
and incontinent as he had so done, it was turned into a serpent. Here I my^ht
demand, of you how this proves your purpose: saying that the rod was turned
into a very serpent in nature form and shape, color, quantity and all other
utter appearaunce, and not into a serpente in the form of a rod, as you say
of the bread. This does your foleishnes appear so plainly y^ a man would
wonder how it should come to pass that you or any other reasonable creature
might be so blind in judgment. But considering that your reasone is in
prisone and captyue to your fond opinion, I marvel so much the less^ at your
blind ignoraun^^, both in the pykeynge out of your similitudes so far vn^
mete for your purpose, and also in answering so slenderlye to things that you
would seem to have utterly confounded.

The ballad
If* I say to the, This is my head
It must so be, Before I so said
Or else with a lie, I have the fed
(...)
The answer
Ye forsooth sir, but now if ye should tell
This to a dome beast thee^ durst I depose
That he could skantly vnder^^ade you well
For he can nether judge, head, eye, nor nose
But tell this to a man, and I supose
He would think you to be full drunk or mad
To point him to know his leg from his hose
For he would think in y^ he full knowledge had
But now my knowledge may me here begile
For may hape, ye be a man of grauite
And therefore again I will turn my style
And will speak to you in this thing sadly
By your example ye mean full madly
That christ pointed to his body natural
What scripture have ye I would know gladl^
That christ meant not there of the bread at all
If in the scripture that will not be found
To believe your fancy I am not bound
Mary, your example your parte^trew to try
Says if thrist meant not so, he made a false lie
The confutacion
I ca^ not a little marvel at your folly which drives you to take in hand
to answer to that you understand not yea and that more is, to deride and laugh
to skorne your own folly, making as though you understood the mattier through
lie, when in very deed you utter your self to be in the clean contrary way.

I pray you what do you mean by your merry talk about your do^be beast? I
think you wuld say a brute beast which has not the gift of resone to
deserve and judge things and therefore you say you durst depose y^ he could
sca^tly understand y^ authors words if he should hear them But I pray you
how stands thye with the captiuatinge of your reasone. Is it not al one to
have reasonne captiuated and to be a brute beast? An infaunt that has not yet
the use of reasone, what differs it from a brute beast? And yet has i^
reasone, but not at liberty that she may do her office. Even so the man that
has his reasone captiuated to any opinion, is ^conserneinge that opinion) even
as a child or brute beast. So that in your skoffes and geste's wherein you
would seem to be pleasant, you make an ape of your self, and toyewyth your
own shadow

And the^ (wyttily and like an Hosyar) you lyken the example of the author, to
the appointtynge of a man to know his l^gge from his hoose. This done, you
turn to your grave st^le again as though your former words had been
excedeynge merry and pleasante. And madly you say the author means by his
example, that Chrste poynted to his natural body when he said This is my
body and in this you declare your self not to understand his meaneing, and
yet you would some to answer him to the full, saying that you would gladly
know what Scripture the Authoure has to prove that Christ meant nothing of
the bread when he spoke those words. For if it will not be found in the
scripture: you are not bound to believe it (you say) for it is but his
fantacie. And so you conclude, that the author says by his example, that if
Christ meant not of his natural body, he made a falsely.

I amsorie friend Hogard that your judgment is so slender, that knowinge this
to be an example you can not perceive where of it is an example, What r^sonable
man would be so mad to brabble about a thing so folyshely as you do unless
he were either a very fool or else had his reasone so captiuated and were so
married to his opinion, that he could se nothing that makes against him? The
Author intendeynge to declare that these words (This is) are not words
wherewith ought may be made: brings this example of him self. If I tell the
says he, that this is my head. These words, this is do not make it so: But
it was so before I spoke those words. Other wise I should not say truly
when I say This is my head.

For if the speakeynge of the words should make it my head: then should it
not be my head till the words were spoken. And so wet it a lie to say it is my
head, when in deed it were but in turning from some other substance to be my
head And this example proves that it Christ had me^t by these words (This is
my body) y^ the bread was turned into his body: no doubt it was his body
before he said it, or else he had, lied in s^ sayeinge, which thing is not
possible, that is that the verity it self should lie wherefore he meant no
such thing. But in sayeinge this is my body: he intended to declare unto his
faithful disciples and in them to us) the mystery of his church and
congregation which is of many made one even as the bread is of many graynes,
and the wine of many grapes. As you might have easily gathered of the sta^e
next foloweinge if your reason had not ben captiuated.

The ballad.
Well the^ to say lo, This is my body
Has not made it so, Thou seyst with small study
Wherefore shortly go, Make other words redi
These will do no service.
The answer.
Here lo ye triumph like a noble fire
As though ye had proved all that ye speak
Which is that our savior christ was a lie^
When that he did say when he bread did break
This is my body, his power was to weak
He could not perform that he there did say
He must seek other words that to conuaye.
The confutacion
Yet you harp still on one strenge and that sowneth al a garre. He triumphs
(you say) as one that had proved all that he had said, as in deed he has
sufficiently, and then your vnderstandeing is no better but to burden him with
the affirmeing of that which he never thought, and no marvel for you have
captiuated your reason to your fond flyshly opinion, and ^^icke fast upon
your commune argument, A posse ad esse. And then you conclud that who so ever
denies the thing to be done, denies that god is able to do it, declareinge
your self to taste nothing of the spirit of God but altogether of the flesh
even as the fleshely Caparnaites did which would have eaten him even as he
went on the ground, because he said that they could have no life in them
unless they did eat his flesh, meaneinge thereby the belief that they should
have in him to be y^ spiritual fode and so ea^e him by fayeth. For if he had
spoken there of the eateinge of his natural and real body in the sacrement it
should follow that all such as dye before they receive the Sacrament^ should
have no life in them, that is should be dampened. And contrarywyse, all that
(...) once receive the sacrament, should never dy^ that is, never be damned.
For he says. He that eats my flesh and drincketh my blood tareth in me
and I (...) him, And again he shall (...). I would you would credit saint
Augustyne upon these words or else your self put of your carnal cies and put
on the spectakles of the spirit, and know that the words which Christ spoke
in the.vi. of John are spirit and life, and not gross and carnal as you take
them.

The ballade.
What if in scripiure. Were written one line
Wherewith our savior, Thy god and mine
Into this nature, Did turn bread and wine
Could thou do this?
The answer
What if in scripture there be one line
As there is in bid which I before tell
To prove that our Lord does thy god and mine
Did consecrate his body flesh and fell
Against them which chiefly ye do repel
Nay, amyte, sa^ you that Christ did so d^
Could you master parsone do the same to
Ye for soth sir, Christ did that for our sake
And not for thapostles at that time alone
For priests for that purpose then he did make
Geuynge power to them al every one
To consecra^e his body when he was gone
Saying do this, in my remembrance
Which to this day has had continuance
Ye I grant say you that the Lord did say^
Do this in mi commemoracion
Then is it no more that well se ye may
But a remembrance of christ's passion
It is left for a remembrance I know
And yet christ's true body as I will show
The pascal lamb offered in the old law
Was of christ's offeringe can only ^igure
The rock of stone out of which y^ Jews (...)
Water flowynge out, for them (...)
Which stone figured christ as ^aith scripture
Then if the sacrament be now no more
But a figure only, then these before
Were as good then as is the sacrament
But christ was a priest much more excellent
Which made amends for our transgression
Leaving his sacrament of such perfection
That where as the other were figures only
His is both a figure and also truly
The same thing that is figured thereby
The which is christ's natural body
This to believe I think ye will refuse
Ye will rather leave christ* and follow y^ Jews
Saying how can this fellow give to us
His flesh to eat, it does seem, ^e do thus
The confutacion
Yet once again you will not beware of the proclamacio^. ye will always have
one kn^ck of your own inuencion Christ consecrateth his body flesh and fell
now, before it was body ^ soul, but now it is flesh and fell. It aueyleth
not to lay the proclamacion any more to your charge for you are at a point
already which way you will avoid all the dayngers thereof. It was told me that
the same day that you were sent for to the counsayl for your misshapen anwer:
you were at diner in graciouse street with a man of no small reputacio^, a
friend of your^ (I will not say a mayntayner of you in your found fleshly
faith and th^r you d^d not a little glory in your great conquest as you
though^* in so much y^ by your bold braggs, you brought a man of the contreye
who was there present, so far in love with your book, that he bought one of
them of you, thynking his money well (...) he saw the messengre that came to
^etch you to the counsa^ le, but then he began to repent him of his bargen,
and belyke wished his monye in his pursse again How now master Hogherd,
quoth he. ^ushe man quoth you. Al shall be well inoughe. For once I am sure of
this. Before May day, they can take no vantage at any thing that I have
written. And then if the worste fall, I can deny it again. If this be true
(as I am ^redibly enfourmed that it is) in consience I would wish that you
would do that you say you can do, If you will not: I would wyshe that you were
compelled to do it, that men might se all your ^unnynge both in cantinge and
recanting.

But now to our purpose. In your answer you e^deuour to prove, that these
words (Hoc est corpus meum) pronounced by the priest, are of strength to
^ourne the bread into the body of Christ. How well you perform that
purpose, shall be easy inoughe to be perceived of them that lust to scanne your
words to the worthynesse. First you would seem to make answer to the
objection which the author makes against this argument, Christ did it ^^go
the priest may do it. Grant (says he) that there were in scripture any one
line written wherwyth Christ made his body of b^^ade should, it follow that
thou can with the same words do the same? yea forsooth (say you) for Christ
made his Apostles preistes for the same purpose, geuinge every of them power
to consecrate his body after his departeinge. And this you ground upon this
text of scriptur. Do this in remembrance of me. The godly learned, need not
to have your words made (...) plain then they be of them selves. But for
their sakes that be yet weak, and to confound the obstinate and hard herted I
will open them to the vttermoste, that if you have any shame in you, it may
drive you to acknowledge your lack of knowledge and misbeleue. Or if you be
utterly without grace: it may cause your counsalours (not being altogether
desperate) to take better advise ere they encourage you to the like folly as
you have herein declared. First therefore I note, that you say Christ made
his apostles priests to the intent they should consecrate his body. And
herein I might doubt whether Christ made them pristes at all or not, yea I am
certain that you have no scripture to bear you in this assertion that they
should be made consecrateinge priests to consecrate and offer sacrifise, more
then every christian man is to offer up his own body a lively sacrifice to
God by beareinge the cross of Christ and crucifiynge the flesh to the
world. And after this sort. I read that he made all them that he washed in
his blood priests. Apoca. l.
That is to say all the faithful beleuers of his death and resurrection.
Other priestehode I read of none in the new testament nor of any other
priest then only Christ who is the eternal and everlasting priest, and
other priest or priesthode, is there one named in the new testament. I read
in Paul's Epistle to the Corhinth. that God has appointed certain members in
his congregation, to who^ he has given certain singular gifts. First he
has ordained some Apostles, some prophets or preachers, some doctors or
teachers, some prowres or maiestates, some curares of dseases, some succurers
of the nedie or kepers of hospitality, some governors or (...), some haueinge
diverse kinds of tongues, and some interpreters of la^guages: but amongst al
(...) I find no mention of these cons^rat^inge priests. And the same Paul,
writteynge unto Timothe conserninge the choseinge of ministers: calls them
bishops and deacons, that is to say wachmen and ministers, and not
sacrificers. But here perchance you will say, that by this deacon or
minister: is mente your priest, your consecrater, and sacrificer. Not so sir.
For Paul described him not to be such a fellow as your sacrifier is discribed to
be in y^ cautils of your Mass, The first cautile (says your Mass book) is
that the priest which will celebrate Mass, do after the beast manner prepare
his conscience through pure confession, that he do vehemently desire the
sacrament, and intend to work his feate, that is to consecrate or make
Christ's body and blood. That he know by heart how to be have him self in
all his doings. And that he have than^rlie and devout gesturs. This is your
sacrificer. But saynete Paul's man is an other manner fellow He must be chaste,
not double tonged, not given to much wine, not foloweinge filthy lucre, having
the mystery of faith in a pure conscience. Yea he says not he will have his
man confessed before he minister, but he will have him proved and tried and so
to minister, haueing no fault whereof he may justly be rebuked. Thus se you
frind Hogarde, that in scripture you have no testimony for your sacricer^ and
consecrateinge priests. But yet I know well you ca^ not as yet persuade your
self to be confuted in this behalf, for you have placed apiece of scripture
to the contraie do this in the remembrance of me (say you) was a plain
commandment to the apostles to co^secrat christ's body, and by this
commandment, has every of them power to do it, as well Judas as Peter, And
then I am sure if a man should ask you the questian, you would say that the
most vilanouse creature in the world being a priste (as you call them) has
full power to do y^ same by breathynge out a few words out of a couetouse
heart and blasphemouse mouth, with a mind full of all abominable and wicke^
thoughts. Tushe tush you say he is but a minister. It is god y^ does the
deed. But I pray you sir by your leave. Whose membre is he? Paul says that
who so toupleth him self with an harlot, is the member of an harlot, and he
that works vice is the seruante of sin then tell me, I pray you, whose
minister he is, The member of an whore, the servant of sin and the minister
of Christ? Non coherent.

The^e things agree not. It is necessary, that they be first me^bres of Christ
and afterward^ ministers. But here your counsailours will say (for I take them
to be more subtle then you by reason y^ they are trained in a more subtle
kind of living then you are) that the wicked ministers in the church are the
ministers of God as well as the godly For Judas who was by the testimony of
Christ, a dyuel: was notwithstandeynge Christ's minister and Apostle. Ye^ he
cured diseases and wrought other miracles as well as the othere Apostles did.
Crack me this nut say you. Forsoeth sir you shall son^ have it cracked, and I
beseech God the kernel may do you good. I grant that as Judas was the
minister of Christ and wrought miracles: so are all priests that do resemble
Judas the ministers of Christ as Judas was and may do all that Christ has
commanded them even as he did. Judas was a dyuell but not (...) (Judas being
present) that one of them which put his hand into the dishe with him should
betraye him: the disciples began to ^ske him one after an other, which of
them it was. Is it I said one, is it I said an other. They saw nothing in
Judas his conuer^acion, wherefore they should suspecte him more then them
selves. But your sacrificeinge priests are so far gone that their conversation
declares them to be the members of the devil, and the ministers of ba^^e. They
are of those priests to whom God says by his prophet. You offer defiled bread
on my aultare, and yet you say. Wherein have we poluted the? Even in that
(says the Lord) you say the table of the Lord is but a vile thing. What
other thing I pray you do your sacrificeing priests? They ^an not a bide the
Lords table, nor the Lords supper, they must have an aultare and sacrifice,
They can not be content with communion ^t the Lords table accordeinge to the
first institucion in honest apparayle: but they must have a private Mass in
masking cot^s bashed full of turns and halte turns, be^keinges duckinges,
crosseyng^s, kysseynges, tosseynges and tumblinges, besides the irreuerent
breathynge out of words upon bread and wine, and the^ holdeynge them up to be
worshipped as gods,

Yet once again mark the words of the prophet. Which of you (says the
Lord) shetteth the doors and sets fire on mine aultars ^^thout her? I have
no delight in you says the Lord of hosts, and will receive no gift at your
hand Now tell me whether these words agree not with your priests proverb.
No penye no pater noste^. Let me se if your (...) will do this heavenly work
of theirs without hire. Yea will they not compel men to give the^ wages for
doing it? How say you by the Masses at burialles, are not men constrained to
have them and to pay for them? It shall not need to rehearse their dirige
grotes, marriages money, christeninge crisomes, beadrolle bribes, and such
other pillage. If the king should take of every hoseling person (as they call
the^) yearly.ii. pe^ce. as they do at easter: what would be said trow you? If
he should suffer none to be married without a tribute: what gurdgeinge would
there be among the people? Well I say no more but the plage of God shall fall
upon th^se hir^lings, and make them despised of al nations, because they have
not kept the ways of the Lord.

But now for your text of scripture (do this in the remembrance of me)
whereupon you grounded your folishe faith of consecratinge and sacrifi^eing
priests: we must first consider what it was that Christ bade them do in his
remembrance. Consecrat his body and blood say^ you, for that was the thing
that he him self did. But they that understand the thing aright, say that he
commanded them to divide bread and wine among them as he had done immediately
before. For Paul, speaking of the same thing says. So often as you eat this
bread and drink this cup: you shall declare the death of the Lord till the
come. The eateinge of the bread therefore and dryackeing of the cup: are the
things that Christ commanded his Apostles to do in his remembrance, and not
the consecrateinge of his body and blonde as you say. So often as ye shall do
these things (says Christ) ye shall do it in the remembrance of me. As
though he should have said So often as you shall come together and be partakers
al of one bread and cup to thentente to declare your selves thereby, to be al
members of one body through the faith you have conceived in me: you shall do
it in the remembrance of me: the only head of the body whereof you be
me^bres, calling to your remembrance this thing that I have here done to
certify you of your redemption by my death and blood shed^ing and that every
one of you, is as well pertaker thereof, as you are of this bread and wine,
which I have divided amongst you. This is y^ true meneing of, do this in the
remembrance of me, and not as you phanta^ie geueing power to priests to
consecrate Christ's body and blood.

Well now you proceed and think to wine your spores by vanquisheing a man of
arms of your own appointing. For I never knew any that was so folishe
(o^lesse it were one of your teachinge) y^ would say y^ this sacrament was noght
else but a sign of christ's passion. For we (aga^st who^ you fight so manfulli)
do believe and confess that it is in significacion the very bodi and blood of
Christ, y^ is (the natural proprites thereof co^sidred) spiritually applied, and
do declare unto us the efficacy and strength of y^ body and blood of Christ
in geueing life to our souls: and the couplinge of us together into one body
by faieth. These a^ things of great importau^ce and valor in y^ cies of y^
spiritual me^bres of christ, though in your fleshely eyes which cannot dicerne
the thing of y^ spirit, they be vile and of no valor. Well, you go forward
with the trial of your mastries with your own manne and lay sor^ to his
charge with certain exampls. The pascall lamb you say which was offered in
the old law, was an only figure of christ's offering wherein you help^ the
scripture, for it was als^ a remembrance of the deliverance out of Egypt. But
to our purpose, another exemple you b^inge of the rock of stone out of the
which flowed water, and that stone you say figured Christ, and that is true
But I think it a man should ask you how the stone figureth Christ you would
shape him bu^ a slender answer, Well I will answer for you this once, and
say, that in that the water ishued out of the Rock t^elye without any labor
of man's hand by dygeinge or heweinge therein: it signified Christ, the rock
and fountain of living water, who gives y^ water of lyte for naught without
any of our merits or deserueinges. And right so does the pascall lamb
being without spot and offered up by the whole multitude of the children of
Israel, eaten gredely with wild (...) and unleavened brcade: declare that
Christ our pascall lamb should be without spot of sin, offered up by y^ who^
multitude of the house of Israel, ^^at is for and through their ^innes. For
the sins of the people were the cruci^iers of Christ. The gredie eateinge of
it, with wild lettise (an herb nothing pleasante but bitter) and vnlcuended
bread (a thing unsavory) declares the ^aruent says whereby the fa^ethfull
do ^^te this lamb ^hriste, and bear the betternesse of his cross, nothyng^
regardeynge the werishnesse and the vnsauiourie taste of the (...) which lemed
to be utterly destroyed on the cross.

Now apply these.ii. ^xamples of yours to the (...), and tell me what
inconu^nience th^ugh in (...) they be accommpted as good as the ^acr^me^t. For
even as it was said of the sacrament, this is my body: so was it said of
the pascall lamb. This is the passover of the Lord, and of the rock, y^
rock was (...). So that it this word is (...) to chance substau^cent has
changed the substance of the lamb and rock also.

But to be bri^fe in this (...) your fond al^ercion that the sacrament is
boeth the sign and thing signified: I think it scarte worthy to be spoken
of. But yet co^^id^ring that it has been a commune error, and certain men of
godly zeal and knowledge have gone about to defend it: I will somewhat lay
in i^, to the con^entacion of the consciences of the weak.

The sign and the thing signified, are as the father and the son, or the
mai^ter and the ^eruau^t are. That is to lay contrary, after ^uch sort that
the one can by no means be th. same that the other is, in one and the same
respect. As the master, in the respect of the seruante, by whom he b^areth
the name of a master, can not be truly called a servant, nor contrariwise:
right to the sign of any thing ca^ not (in the respect o^ y^ thing) be a
thing (...), Wherefore I conclude, that the bread being y^ ^ign o^ y^ natural
bodi of christ: cannot be y^ sai^ natural and real body. I am not ignorant
what fond cauillacions some me^ use about this matti^^, referringe the sign to
the accidents of bread and the thing signified to the sustau^ce of the
bread turned into Christ's body. But to make accide^^es the signs of
substaunces, when they be not visible nor otherwise sensible, and a sign must
necessarily be sensible: I think it not worth the speak^inge of. Some hau^
gone about ^o prove by a similitude, that one thing might b^ both ^igne and
the thing signified also. The bread (say they that the baker sets forth
for a sign, is (...) b^ead and yet signifies unto us that there is bread^ to
sell, so that that bread being the sign of bread: is boeth the sign and
thing signified. This reasone is apparent, and has some similitude of the
truth, But if a man weygh it well, he shall perceive that the bread which
stands in the window for a sign of bread within to be sold: is not that
bread which is within to be sold. And otherwise is it not a sign. For as it
stands in the windome to be sold^it is bread to be sold, and not y^ sign of
bred to be sold. And where you charge us with incredulity of the Jews: we
charge you with no less For as they could not believe that Christ's flesh might
be eaten by fayeth: so can not you but look to have him grossly and (even as
they did) that he could no other wise perform his words, the^ if he should
conueigh his body into such creatures as me^ do use to feed upon. But we
believe, and are by our fayeth assured, that he is able and has given us his
flesh to eat by faith according to the fathfull words of Augustine Believe
and thou have eaten. And so eating him we shall never dye, Whereas you
fleshemongers y^ do daielie (as you think) devour him flesh blood and bones,
are not like ^o escape the death everlasting (unless ye repent) because ye
have handled the most worthi sacraments of y^ bodi and blood of Christ so
unworthily. Is making it a sacrifice for y^ quick and dead for all diseases
of men and beasts, for all pla^es the (evident tokens and signs of gods just
wrath toward us) Yea makeinge it utterly a mattier of merchandise, togather
money together and the ministracion thereof a kind of occupacion and work for
money to maintain Idel bellies, y^ nether can nor will learn to be
profitable to the public weal.

The ballad.
Thou have the word, wherwyth god wrought
Man beast fish burd, And all of naught
Can thou good blood, Therewith makeought
That unmade is.
The answer.
We have the same word I do plain confess
And for all your gay talk so do not ye
The word which as saint John does express
Was the second person in trinity
Without who^ there was nothing mad says he
By no words written it was that he meant
But by his son, one with him in deity
Which is with us now in the sacrament
Yet happly here ye will to me object
And will ask me if Moses did not write
The very words which by god took effect
In createinge of man as he did resite
Yesse say I, well then say you gone is quite
Al your hole matter which ye do defend
Except y^ your priests will stoutly stand byte
That they by y^ word ca^ work to y^ same end
Well hit forsooth and spoken like a clarke
Ye make as though ye walk in the light
But like one through blind ye walk in y^ dark
For whom that in scripture has any sight
May sone se that ye take not scripture right
God made all this world we se of nothing
Does it follow y^ man can not by gods might turn things from there nature, god
being wiling
Now what gods will is in the Sacrament
I have told you before by his words plain
In the which the priest is but an instrument
For y^ words y^ christ spoke he spakes again
As christ him self bad, which was not in vain
For after the words our Lord by his power
Creates nothing new there that is cer^ayne
But bring there the presence of our (...).
The c^nfutacion
Here you would seem to se far in a millstone You have espied (you say) that
though we talk never so ^eolilie, we do not confess (which you confess
plainly) that we have the same word wherwyth god made al things

And your proof is substanciall, for you say that, that word is the second
person in Trinity who^ we have not because we believe him to be in heaven. But
you have him you say in the sacrament, And the^ you use a figure of Rhe^orike
called preoccupacion, but I think you knew not his name before. You prevent
your adversary and solute his obicetion before it is made. And wittelye you
say, yesse. Yea, says your adversary, Then is all your matti^r quit gone,
except your priests can help and stand stoutly by it. Well hi^ say you than
and like ^ clarke you braule after your accustom manner till you have declared
your self, as well seen in the scriptures as ever you were.

But some what to open your ignorance, I shall in few words declare unto
you, how we confess that we have the word wherewith God made the world. In
the first of Genesis it is written that God said. Let the light be made, and
forth with it was made, and right so of al his other creatures. This is the
word wherewith we know that god made all thing of naught. But you would seem
to be o^ a more fine opinion, and like an Ape you imitate the thing that you
can not attain to. You would gladlye seem to be of the opiniog of them that
affirm God and* his word to be all one. For you say the word wherewith God
made the world, is the second person ^n trinity. And (...) you thrust him
in to the sacrament and say that we have him there, as though there were no way
but that, whereby we might have him present. And truly after such ^orte as you
dream him to be present, it is not possible to have him present other wise
then in some material substance.

For you are not content to have him present as the Israelites had in the
wilderness, but you will after their exem^ple (...) un to Aaron to make you
gods that you may se with the carnal eye: for the Israelites were not so
gross but they knew that the caulfe which they had made was not God, but
thought they could not honor nor call upon God otherwise then in a visible
form. They were not persuaded of his invisible presence in all places. Even
so you though you confess the invisible presence of God in all places: yet you
appoynte the second person in trinity to his place in the sacrament,
thinckeinge that you can not otherwise have the fruishion of his presence then
by a visible shape, the cause whereof is none other, but the lack of gostly
sight which should show him you in his word, although in the mean time I do
not deny (yea I protest and defend) that the spiritual eye seth him in his
sacraments also, the substance of the sacraments remaineinge in their
natural property of substance Thus much have I said for the haueinge of
the word wherewith God made all things of naught. Now you conclude upon the
author sayeinge. Sir, you take not the scriptures aright. For you say God
made all this world of nothing. And does it follow th^rfore* that man can
not by Gods might turn things from their nature God being willinge they
should ^o do. In this piece you utter your own ignorance and lack of
lea^^^ing. Who would be so made as once to surmise so fond a conclusion as you
inueigh against as gathered by the author upon this infallible truth, God
made all the world of nothing. Does it follow thereupon, say you, that man can
not by the might of God turn things out of their nature? As though there had
ever ben any so made as to co^clud so fo^dli. The author endeavors naught
else but to disprove this argument^, We have the word where with god made al y^
things of naught, why should we not the^ do the same by pronou^ceing those
words? And you clean contrariwise inueigh against him as though he had
fourmed his argument in this wise. We have the word where with god made all
world, ^rgo man can not by gods might alter things out of their nature. Thus
you proceed in your blyndnes and after your notes set in y^ merge^t to co^firm
your saying, you sai you have told us before by the plain words of Christ*
For the priest you say is but a minister and like a parr^t speaks Christ's
words again, eue^ as christ him self bad (sai you) but there, with your leave
you lie, I can nolenger forbear you when you belly my master. For he never bad
any priest or Apostle to speak those words again, No if he had biden the^
speak them again: he would not have bydden the^ (as the cauteles of your
Mass do teach) breath the^ out with one breath without any pauseing or stop, as
though y^ pronounceinge of the words might make or man But he ^ad, say you,
and y^ not in vain. For after the words spoken our lord does by his power
create no new thing but brings there the presence of our savior. You were
so loathe to mayme your ryme that you have well most (...) your reasone For
how agreth this with that which you have sayede in the beginning? The Lord did
by his word turn the bread into his body, and the wine into his blood.
And here you say y^ after the words spoken ou^e Lord brings there the
presence of our savior. A man might here demand of you what Lord and savior
you talk of. But it is but follye to content about the moon shine in watter
(as the english proverb goes) I will therefore leave you to your wise reason^s,
till you have answered this confutation accordeing to your bragges.

The ballad
If with that scripture. Thou can not make
The least creature, How wylt thou take
On thy weak nature, Of bread to create
The Lord of bliss.
The answer.
Ye think al proved that ye only, say
And yet to say truth ye do but contend
By reason to keep your faith at a bay
Chargeinge men with that they do not defend
If we said that a making did depend
Of the priest or of god which we deny
The^ had ye some cause your time thus to spend
Christ is there but how we seek not to spy
Therefore leave of your folish blasphemy
It is against our faith catholyke and true
That ever christ should be create anewe.
The confutacion
You seem to acco^pte reasone enemy to faith and to think that the brute
beasts which are not troubled with reasone: may soonest apprehende the
perfection of fayeth. You do but contend by reaso^e to keep faith at a baye
charg (...) men with that they do not de fend (with that you can not defend,
you should have said) but if we said (say you) that the making did depend
either upon the priest or of God, which we deny (whom we deny, you should
have sayede) then had we some cause thus to spend our time. But for as much
as you neither believe, that it depends of the priest nor of God but of y^
devil as it seems for one of the^ must (bear the stroke in the mattier) you
can say no more but so it is, Christ is there, How it is w^ can not tell, nor
are desirouse to know. Yet yernestly you exhort us to leave y^ we never used
(sense it pleased god to open our eyes for it is against your catholyke and
true faith, you say, that Christ should be created a new. Here is neither
head nor tail, but only an heap of words to fill out the line and make the
^ime. You have said before, y^ the priest as a minister pronounces the
words, and god does his creature transmut, And now ye deni it. It depe^d^th
you say of neither of them. Yea you conclude before y^ our Lords dodie is there
flesh and fell, and in an other place you say body and soul and bisides y^
god and man: but here you say he is there, but how, you seek not to spy. But I
co^iecte yet an other meaneinge in your words (though in deed they sown no
less the^ I have said) you will say perchance, y^ in your saying that you
seek not to epsy how he is there, you mean y^ you seek not to know whether he
be there passible or impassible, mortal or immortal whether he be there in such
sort y^ the mose may eat him, the fire burn him, or the weat corrupt him.
Though you se al these things chance to the cake which you call consecrate
and turned into the bodi of Christ, yet you* will not seek to spy whether
Christ suffer these things or not Well then, if a man should demand of you
whether the body of Christ do suffer these things eateinge of the mouse,
burneinge an^ corruptynge: what answer would you make? You will not go from
that you have written I am sure you will not seek to spy. I will believe it, but
I will not search it. And I pray you what will you believe? That Christ is there
naturally and reallye, and that there remaneth nosubstaunce, but only the
substance of Christ God and man.

Is there none other su^staunce there? What is it then that fills the mouses
bealye, and burns in the fire changes color and putrifieth? My Lord of
Winchester says (...) dentes for substance he says there is none but
Christ, who can suffer none of all this, and you say you will not seek to
spy. Well then I leave you as one uncertain of his faith not knowing what to
believe, nor willing to learn And as you exhort us to leave that is not in us
because it is against your ^aith: eue^ so I exhort you to seek for that you
have not, that is the true understanding of Christ's sacraments For it is a
gayust our belief (which is the one only fayeth which is grounded upon the
sure foundation of the scripture) that Christ should be naturally and reallye
present in an^e other place then heaven, till he com to judge y^ world

The ballad
Having no word, of consecracion
Whereof the Lord, has mad relacion
Thou teach abroad thine own inuencion
Which is amise
The answer
Who is more blind then those that will not se
What botes it to show you any scripture
(...)
Which to your reasone is hard or obscure
But yet once again to do you pleasure
Ye shall hear if Christ made no relacion
In scripture of the consecracion
Christ to his disiples these words did say
I long to eat the pascall lamb says he
With you my disciples for now is the day
Of the sweet bread, I pray you note and se
How the truth with the figure does a gre
Christ was the true lamb which y^ prophete^ sa^
Should truly fullfyl the Moysaical law
Christ eat the lamb there as the law did will
Then to show that that law was expired
He ordaynde his law, that law, to fulfill
Which whil y^ world lasts shall not be finished
That la^be was him self which he ordained
To be offered daily in remembrance
Of his bitter death and paynfull sustraunce
Note here I pray you* one thing by the way
Christ said I long to eat with you this day
The passover, by which he did declare
What great love ever toward them he bare
Which was not only the law to fulfill
But also to show them more of his will
Which was that he would give unto the^ all
The perfect pledge of the life eternal
Performing his promise made to them before
By giving them his flesh for ever more
Among them so to be comunicate
That thereby they should be incorporate
In him than, and he in all them also
What greater love could he to his people sho
But yet with this love our lord did not ceas^
For in his most pain his love did increase
Remembering man kind said, Sitio
Not only for drink, but man's health also.
Yt was that our Lord did then so sore thruste
Se how this word both agree with the furste
I l^ng (says christ) to eat the pascal with you
On the cross, I thrust, in which I note now
That by these true words christ does signifi
The desire that he had to give his body
According to his promise saying thus.
The bread that I will give plain to discuse
Is my flesh, here lo* was his first promise
And at his maundy he fullfilled this
Under form of bread he did it there give
With spirit and life whereby al such should live
As did receive it by faith worthily
On the cross also he gave his body
To suffer painfully he was there crecte
Thus ye se that as christ did say, I thurst
So did he before that he at the furste
gave himself (said I long) which words proves
the furst body and the last both one to be
Christ at his last supper as I before say
Took bread and blessed it and brake it truly
Gave ye to his disciples and without stay
Bad them take and eat this is my body
Then to show them what body he meant, truly
He added these words to those he had spoken
Saying, which for your sins shall be broken
What body was broken for our trespass?
No sign of a body I think ye will say
But even the same body which borne was
Of the virgin mary, void this if ye may
Then took christ y^ cup, bleste it the same way^
As before saing: this is my blood truly
Which shall be shed for the sins of many
What blood did christ shed for our sakes
I think ye will say his blood natural
This against your errors very much makes
Which to a void be able ye never shall
Then christ bad them do this in his memorial
What (this) was it that he bade them do
Was it not to bless, to break, and to give to
And to speak the same words y^ he there spoke
When he the bread into his hand did take
Which words were the words of co^s^cratio^
And then bad that on the same facion
His apostles should do, now thus ye se
That the true words of consecracton be
In scripture, though you those words skan
To be but only thenuencion of man
Yet one word of Christ to mind here I call
Christ to declare that the law moisaical
He would hole fulfill for the which intent
He took the cup and said these words euidente
This is my blood in the new testament
Syggnifieng that the old law was spent
With all the blood of beasts which did figure
The blood of Christ above al blods most pure
Now mark the^, if y^ when christ did plain say
This is my blud, should mean none other way
But in figure only, what were it more
Then the figures of the old law before
Nor yet so much nether if ye mark well
For in the old law as I before tell
Uery blood to figure, christ's blood truly
They did offer, upon the which thing I
Gather that and if the wine be wine still
That Christ at supper did the law fulfill
With a figure of blood, which cannot be
For a figure is fulfilled we do se
In the verity and not in figure
Chefly in this thing ye will grant I am sure
This holy sacrament god did fore se
A great comfort for all his people to be
For which he ordained a priest and king
The same truth to figure in his offering
Christ is a priest says Paul after the order
Of Melchisedech, now note here further
Melchesedech was both a priest and king
So was christ's also as records writtinge
Melchesedeth was a king and yet truly
No mention is made of his progeny
Which does, signi^ie that christ was a king
His father unknow without beginning
Melchesedech was king as scripture says
Of Salem, which as saint paul plainly has
To the Hebrwes that, that does signifi
A king of peace, to whom he did apply
Christ our savior and ye beside this
Melchesedech of Christ a figure is
In this pristhode, for as scripture does say^
He brought forth to Abraham in the way
Bread and wine, In which act scriptture does thim call
The priest of y^ most hie god eternal
Christ likewise gave y^ forms of bread and wine
Of which Melchsedech was but asigne
Here may hap one thing ye will ask of me
Where saint Paul does note them thus to agree
For nether y^ prophet there nor S. Paul
Of bread or wine speaks not one word at all
But does Melchedechs priesthod apply
Unto christ when that he most painfully
Did offer up his flesh and blood most pure
Unto his father this is plain scripture
All this is true, I will it not deny.
Yet for my purpose again to reply
To M^lchesedech, note here that he came
Forth with bread and wine to mere Abraham
G^uing thanks to God for his victori
Which to his pristhod perteined truly
Then that being his order how can ye
Dinie christ of the sa^ie order to be
Since under the kinds of bread and wine he
Gave his body, this in scripture we se
And though s. Paul do no bread or wine name
Does he deny Christ's priesthode in the same?
Nay forsooth for as of Christ is spoken
He gave the body which is broken
For our sins at his last supper ye know
And then what though s. Paul nothing show
Of bread and wine, yet their priesthodes agree
So much the more, if this well noted be
Melchesedech did not offer with blood
And yet did he figure Christ's presthod
When he on the cross offered his body
Unto his father with his wounds bloudye
How should that be and no bread or wine there
Yesse forsooth the scripture will it well bear
Sith Christ gave his body as I before say
Under those fourmes because they should alwai
Remember his death by that sacrament.
Which death the bread and wine did represent
That Melchesedech offered, here ye se
How both their priesthodes herein do agree
For Melchesedechs order did attend
Unto Christ's offering on the cross at the end
Which offering there done was done once for all
To be offered so, again he never shall.
The confutacion
No man might worsse have complained of the blyndnes of them that will not se,
then you your self (friend Swynharde) for if you would but once open your
eyes, and read the places of scripture that you bring for your purpose and
weigh them with the circumstances: I doubt not you would be ashamed to wrest
them ^o far out of tune. And where you do now gather of Christ's longing
before his supper, and his thirstyng on the cross, that the first body, that
is (as you say) the bread, and y^ last, which died on y^ cro^^e, are al one: I
doubt not but if you would way the places with worthy judgment, you would
sone be ashamed of your writing, and of al your fond resonyng about the same
words. For the first Luke says When the hour of supper was come, he satte
down and his. xii. Luke. xxii
Apostles with him, and he said unto them. With great desire have I desired, to
eat this passover with you before I suffer. For I say unto you, from
hensfurth I will not eat it, till such time as it be fulfilled in the kingdom
of God. etc.

What spiritual eye can se any other thing in these words of our savior: then
that he desires greatly to declare unto them before his death by the eating of
that lamb which was the remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt, and
the figure of himself, being the unspotted la^be that was preordinated to take
away the sins of the world: that from thence forth they should no more use any
such sacrament or ceremony to declare his coming in the flesh, because the
time was then come where in this sacrament and all other should be fulfilled by
his death upon the cross, which was, is, and shall be our deliverance out of
the spiritual Egypt, and the sufficient ransom for our sins. This was the
fulfyllyng of the figure by the verity, and not as you fantasy the old to be
fulfilled by the new, in that you say that Christ ordained his law to fulfill
that law So that you make one law figure of another and one sacrament to be
the thing signified by an other. But you sai, that lamb was himself which he
ordained to be offered in the remembrance of his bitter death and passion.
Here might I ask you which lamb? you will sat. I am sure, the true lamb that
the prophets saw which is himself. Well then has he made himself a
remembrance of his own death. But I prai you, esteem you him so little as so?
Do you occompt his death of more, valor the^ himself? No sign or remembrance
of a thing, can be so good as the thing it self, more then the goodness of the
shadow can be equal of value with the body. If Christ therefore daily offered
up, be the remembrance of his bitter death: then is his bitter death better
then he himself. And yet you have not all done with Christ's longyng. One thing
you say, you would have noted by the way. And that is that Christ longed to
eat the passover with his disciples, not only to fulfill the law, but also
to show them more of his will, which was, that he would give the^ a perfect
pledge of eternal life, according to his promise made to them before (as is
mentioned you say in the. vi. of Ihon) geuynge his flesh to be communicate,
that they might thereby be incorporate in him and he in the^. And the^ you join
hereunto, his thrustyng on the cross. And upon this longyng and thurstyng,
well and clarkely you gather the great desire that Christ had to ful^yl his
promise that he made when he said The bread that I shall give is my flesh.

Men of learning and judgment in the scriptures, may easily perceive your
ignorance in this matter. I will not therefore go about to open it to them. But
for their sakes that be not yet fully grounded in the true understanding
hereof, I will take so^what more pains in the openyng of this ignorance of
yours, nowithstandyng that I have spoken somewhat largely of the mattier in the
confutation of the former part of your answer, where you claymed this, promise
of Christ as you do here.

Mark therefore good christian brothers, to you I speak y^ are not yet so fully
instructed in Christ, but that you savor somewhat of the Phariseis leven, and
yet would gladly be delivered from the blyndnes of error, mark I ^ay how far
wide this man is from the true meaning of Christ in this place. He has non
other occasion at al, to appl^e this piece of scripture to his purpose: but
only for that there is bread men^ioned. It fares by him even as it does by the
patrons and defe^dours of Purgatory. For whersoeuer he finds bread named in
the scripture, there he laith a straw, as a mark to (...) his common places
by: eue^ as they did when th^i found any me^cio^ of fire. Iho^ Frith has
opened their folly at large in his dispu^atio^ upon Purgatori Would God I were
able to do hal^e so much in this matter* But take it in good part (dear
brethren) that I shall writ. And if you shall find it consona^t and agreeable to
the scriptures: then embrace it, and give God the thanks, otherwise, hold it
accur^ed, and do not once open your eyes upon it. For the mo yt should embrace
my doctrine being vngodl^: the greater should my dam nation be. But being
assertained by y^ spirit of truth, that I teach nothing but that I find in the
book of truth: I am bold to bid you mark and learn the true understanding of
these words of our savior Christ: The bread that I shall give, is my flesh.
Our savior Christ, perceiving y^ the fleshlye minded Jews, ^oloed him more
for y^ they had eaten the loves which he had multipli^d, then for the miracle
or wonder y^ he had wrought: ^oke occasion at ^he questia^ which they asked him
saying, Rabbi or Master, when ca^mest thou hither? as who should say we have
sought and laid wayt to know how and when thou should pass the sea, but
we could not perceive any ship prepared for thy passage. Have thou therefore
co^ueighed thy self over by miracle as thou did multiply the five loves?
He took occacio^ I sai here a^, to declare unto them that all his words and
deeds are to be looked on with the spiritual ^ie and not with the carnal. And
even at the first he says unto them. Ye follow me not because you have seen
the wonders. But because you have eaten of the breads and are satisfied. As who
should say you pretend a wo^derous desire to se the wonders that I work* as
men that would thereby be allured to embrace and follow my doctrine: but your
intent is none other but to be fed at my hand and so to live Idly without
labor and travail more then to wander up and down after me. But I shall tell
you what you shall do if you will follow me. Work for the meat that perishes
not, but that remains into life everlasting which meat the son of man
shall give you. For this is y^ meat that god the father has appointed. Then
said they. What may we do to work the works of god? He answered unto the^
in this wise. This is* the work of God that you believe in him whom he has
sent. The^ brake they out in their own likeness, and against their wylles,
uttered their faulse dissimilacion, sayeinge. What miracle workest thou
therefore, that we may se it, and beleuethe? What works doste thou? Our
fathers eat Manna in the wilderness, as it is written. He gave the^ bread from
heaven to eat. But our savior said unto the^. Moises gave you not (...) or
very bread in deed from heaven. For y^ is the true bread y^ descended from
heaven, and gives life to the world Then said they, Lord give us this bread
always. These men's mind was altogether upon material bread. Let us never
lack this bread, say they. Well Christ makes them answer. I am the bread of
life, says he, who so comes unto me shall not honger, and he that believes
in me, shall never thirst. But I have told you, that you have both seen me,
and not believed. Here may you learn to eat the bread y^ Christ speaks of. It
needs you not to prepare tooeth and throat, another bealye nor stomach, but
believe and you shall not ^onger nor thurst. You shall have plenty of his
heavenly food. He that comes to me says Christ and he that believes in me.
To come unto Christ and to believe in Christ, is all one thing, as appears by
the words following. Every thing that my father gives me shall come unto me,
and I will not cast him out that comes unto me. For I descended from heaven,
not to do my will, but his will that sent me. And this is the will of mi father
y^ sent me: that I should not lose any thing y^ he gave me, but that I should
^ayse it again in the last day. Yea, this is the will of my father y^ sent me:
y^ every one that sees the son and believes in him, should have life
everlasting, and I will raise him at the last day He that sees the son and
believes in him. To see and to believe, to eat and come to Christ is all one
thing. The Jews therefore murmured at his words in that he said. I am the
living bread that descended from heaven and they said. Is not this the
son of Joseph whose father and mother we know.

How says he tha^ y^ he descended from heaven? Behold these carnal Jews, how
grossly the^ applied al thing^s to the flesh. They were altogether flesh, and
could perceive nothing of the spirit. Christ endeavored to teach the^ the
misteri of his incarnacion, who being the form of God thought it nor obbri to
humble him self into the form of a servant, and they would needs
understand his words to bespoke^ of y^ body which they knew to be borne of
Marie the carpe^^ers wife. Is not this Iosephes son said they whose father
and mother we know? How stands this then with his words when he says I
came from heaven? But he answered their fleshelye talk saiynge. Murmr not
among your selves. For no man can come unto me, except my Father which sent
me draw ^im and I shall raise him in the last day. It is written in the
Prophet. All shall be taught of god. Euer^e one that has heard of the father
and has learned: comes unto me.

Not y^ any man has seen the father, save only he y^ is of god. He has sen
the father. By this seeing of the father, may you easily (most dear brithern)
perceive, what seeing, what eateinge and coming unto Christ it is, that is
meant in all this Chapi Even the gostly eateing, seeing and comeing unto Christ.
For though a man be never so much of God: yet shall not his fleshely eye see
God. And to declare his meaning more plainly he says. He that believes in me
has everlasting life. All that he has spoken before of the eating, coming and
seeing, and all that he speaks afterward, is contained in those few word^s he
that beleleueth in me has everlasting life. I am the bread of life: Your
fathers did eat manna in wilderness and are dead, This bread is it y^ ca^e
from heaven, y^ if any man shall eat of it, he shall not die. I am y^ liueing
bread, which came from heaven. If any man eat of this bread he shall live for
ever. And the bread y^ I shall give: is my flesh, which I shall give for the
life of the world. Here is the whole mattier, here have we a plain promise
(say they) y^ the bread that Christ should give to his disciples at his
maundie was his flesh. Oh blind asses. How long will it be ere you pearce the
flesh and enter into the spirit? Because his outward words son flesh. You
will not once thinck upon any spirit, but even as the Jews did, stick still in
the flesh and fleshly eating. But because you will not seem to murmur and
contend as y^ Jews did saying, how ca^ this man give us his flesh to eat: You
will believe (you say) that it was a thing very easy to do. And the^ you reprove
y^ Jews of unbelieve: because they were not so gross as you, to believe that
Christ would thrust his natural bodi into a piece of bread, that they might
without grudge of stomach eat it. You declare your selves neither to savor the
spirit, nor yet to understand the phrases of the letter. The Jews could take
the phrase a right, and say how ^a^ this man g^ue us his flesh to eat? They
doubted not how he should give the^ his flesh in the fourm of bread: for they
knew, y^ after y^ phrase of the Hebrew tongue, he meant by bread food. As though
he should have said. Your fathers were fed in the wilderness, with Manna,
and yet they are dead, but the food wherewyth I shall feed you is my flesh,
not that you shall eat it as your fathers did Manna and so dye, but I will give
it for the life of the world, so that if you will believe and put your trust
herein (for that is the eating of my flesh) you shall never die the death of
the soul, for the body is mor^al and must needs dye. That this was his
meaning, is plain by the answer that he gave to their contention. Certes
(says he) I say unto you, except ye eat my flesh and drink my blood: you
shall have no life in you. Who so eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. And then he opens
the phrase of the Hebreue more plain and says. My flesh is very food, and
my blood very drink, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, tarieth
in me, and I in him. And as my living father sent me, and I live through him:
eue^ so he that eats me, lives through me* Now tell me (you fleshmongers) if
the Jews had then torn Christ in peaces with their teth, and eaten him
every morsel, should they have lived through^ him? Oh beastly blind. This is
the fode that came from heaven. Not as your fathers did eat manna and are
dead: but such as ^ate ^his tode shall never die. If this be spoken of the
sacrament how agrees it with the words of s. Paul to the Corinth? who so
^ateth this bread and drinks this cup unworthily eats and drinks his own
judgment. How chanced it y^ Judas was not saved by it? How can your
pristes that break they fast with it daily, be damned? Yea if this be spoken
of the sacrament then is that also spoken of the sacrament when he says
Except you eat my flesh and drink my blood, you shall have no life in you.
And the^ how could the thief y^ was crucified with Christ be saved? For I am
right sure he never received the sacrament. Yea in what takeinge be all the
children and yonglinges that die before they come to years of discrecion to
receive this sacrament. Thus may you se (dear brethren) how (...) these men
are from the spirit, and yet they would seem so spiritual y^ they have
captiuated all their senses and reasone also to believe the thing that was
never taught, and that after such sort, that they declare them selves therein
to be most f^eshely nothing perceyueinge the words of Christ when he says
The words that I speak, are spirit and life. It is the spirit that gives
life, y^ flesh profits nothing.

Now frinde Hoggherd. I think you be ashamed of your misreporting of this
piece of scripture, or if you be pas^e shame: yet I trust the godly minded do
so plainly perceive your slender judgment herein that they will g^ue you
leave to lie till your tongue fail you ere they will credit your words. But now
comes the hardest piece of work into hand. Yea and so clearkly handled (as
you think) that no man can be able to avoid your reasones. At his last supper
you say, Christ took bread, blessed it, brake it, and gave it to his
disciples and bade them take and eat, this is my body. And then to show them
what body it was (say you) that he meant: he added these words. Wh^ch^ for
your sins shall be broken. Then (subtyle, ly) you ask this question. What
body (say you) was it that was broken for our trespass? And then you fantasy
with your self, that we will not say a fantastical body, but even the same
body that was borne of the virgyne Marie. It seems by your words that you
think the Apostels to be of your opinion concerneing the plurality of
Christ's bodies. To show them you say, what body it was that he mente: he
said, y^ body which for our sins was broken. And still thinkeing every man
to be of your own opinion, you ask us y^ same questian. Whereunto we answer
even as you coniecte, no sign of a body, but the self same bodi yt was borne
of the virgin Marie. Uoide this if you may, say you. Alas pore fool, why
triu^phest thou before the victory? Thou think yt al is overthrown with
this one weak argument. Which in veridede is none argument but a mere
cauillacion, as shall most plainly appear to as^ many as know how to form
an argument. Your argument (or rather cauillacio^) is fourmed in this wise.
This is my body which shall be broken for you, but the body that shall be broken
for you was borne of the virgin Marie, Ergo this body was borne of the
virgin Marie. I think a man had need to have you to y^ university to teach
you to understand your error in this argume^te. For I perceive you have
persuaded your self y^ every thing yt may be brought into tourme of argument
is infalliblie true. Other wise you would not triumph upon this argument I am
sure. Consider I pray you, your mayor prosicion, if you know what a mayor or
proposicion means, and then tell me wherther it be not a doubtful proposicion,
for a man holdeinge bread in his hand or rather haueing delivered bread unto
other to say this is my body which shall be broken for you Is it not as like y^
he should by y^ proposicio^, mean y^ the bread is his body in significacion,
as in substance. Yesse verily, and more like, considering the party that
spoke the words, and the cause why that natural body of his was conceived
and borne of the virgin Mar^e: and again the hears to who^ the words were
spoken and the bread delivered. For there be in y^ bread two things which do
plainly declare these (...) by yt the bread is the principanl fode of the
body yea and in the language yt he spoke, al kinds of fode are called bread
Christ therefore being the only and universal fode of the soul: is right well
declared and signified unto us by this bread. The other thing is the making
of the bread of mani grains being but one bo^i when it, is made. And thereby is
well declared y^ unity of al faithful beleuers in Christ, who being many in
nu^bre, are in faith but one mistical body of Christ. Lo here is your mayor
proposicion, Ask your cou^salours how your conclusion follows herupon, I
pray you, and the^ tell me more of your mind. I will spend no more time with you
now about this argume^te, because I think you may say by the terms of the
art, as a certain priste in the city of London said by this term
tra^substa^ciacion, I could never know (quoth he) what this word
tra^substa^cio^ should mean. Well you labor to prove by y^ same argument, y^
the wine is y^ natural blood of christ and the^ you descant upon Christ's
(this) when he said, Do this in the membraunce of me.

What this was it y^ he bade them do, say you, was it not to bles, to break,
to give, and to speak the same words y^ he spak^? No fool no. But by those
visible signs bread and wine, to call to remembrance the heaue^li fedeing of
their souls and y^ inseparable unity of the^ selves by faith Neither be the
words y^ Christ's spoke, the words of co^secracio^, or able to ^ourne the
substance of creatures: more the^ the name Pe^tus which Christ gave unto
Simon, was able to turn Simon into a rockey or s^onye nature, when Christ
said. ^ues Petrus et Supper h^nc petram et cetera. The words therefore art
the words of Christ, but to call the words of consecracion, is a mere
inuencion of me^, As for your note in y^ magine, is so well applied to the
purpose: y^ I leave it for men to laugh at thinkinge it no need to confute y^
which fights with it self, and is ready to ^ourne again and take you by the
face in diverse places of your Answer.

Then ye call to remembrance (you say) yet one other thing, Christ taking y^
cup, you say, intended to fulfill the moysaycal law in all points that is to
say, to make the wine his blood which was prefigured by all the blud that was
offered in the old law. Wherefore (you say) if the wine remain still, he
fulfilled the law^ with the figure of blood, so that one figure was the
fulfilling of an other. Lord god, wha^ beast could be so blind as you show
your sel^ to be, were it not that the spirit of error reigns in you? It
appears by your words that follow, that you have read the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and yet you are not ashamed to say that Christ instituted the
sacrament to fulfyl^ the lawe^ Paul says the offering of hym^selfe on the
cross, was the thing that was pre-figured and you say it was the sacrament.
I^ this your fantastical opinion, be the truth: how chances it that in all
the writteinges of the Apostles: can not be found one word of any such
fulfilling of the law. Paul wryttin^ of the sacrifices of the old law even
of p^rpose, to declare the meaneing of the^, declares the^ al to be fulfiled
in the one only offering (...) of Christ on the cross. Also to the Corin.
inte^deing to declare the true meaning of the yerel^ passover lamb, he says
Christ is offered (...) our pascall lamb. Let us therefore bancke (...) not
in the leven of old malice and wickedness, but in the sweet breades of
sincerity and verity. Loo, here he applies the passover Lamb, unto Christ
offered for our sins, and the sweet breades to our godly conversation and
liueing. And yet (as one thoroughly blinded with affections) you will conclude
upon an inconvenience. If the wine be not turned into very blood (you say) it
is not so much to be esteemed as the figur^s of the old law*

For they were no fygures of blood but very blood in deed Here you declare
your self not to have captiuated your senses, for if you had, you would not
judge the wine to be a figure of blood because it is red (for other cause (...)
is none why you should so co^iect) but you would with us confess that as Paul
teach^th, the wine representeh unto us the wonderful union of all the faithful
beleuers in christ that they being infinite meanie in number, are ^et but one
body through the fayeth in Christ Jesus which knitteth them to gether even as
^he sin^es do the body. And this is declared (says Paul) by that the wine
is made of ma^ye grapes, and is yet but one cup of wine, even one body, so
compact together, that it can (...) no manes be diseuered. Thus do we se that
(...) wine is the figure, not of Christ's blood because it is red or lyquid as
blood is: but of ^he inseparable unity of Christ's mystical me^^res, his
faithful church and congregation of ^aythful beleuers, We se also that it is
the fi^ure of Christ's bloudsheding because it is one of the two principal kynds
of fode wherwyth ^ur bodies be fed, For therein it declares that ^he belyefe in
Christ's blood shed for our sin^es is one of the two principal kinds of the
fode of our souls. For other fode has the soul none, then the lively word
of god, wherein are taught these two things only. The flesh of Christ broken
and his blood shed for our sins These things only (I say) are taught in y^
scrpture. For who so lerneth not these things learneth nothing in y^ scripture.
What other thing does the old law the^ bring us to Christ? And then what does
the new testament other then teach us this lesson. We grant you therefore,
that Christ did forse this sacrament to be a great confort to his people,
after such sort as I have said. Yea we grant y^ Christ did also forse your
lyeynge miracles whereby you establishe your fleshly presence: when he said.
Beware of false proph^tes which come unto you in shepes clotheing, for inward
they are ravening woulfes. Yea he gives us warneing of your lying signs, and
of your busy demonstracions, when you say, lo here is Christ, lo^ther is
Christ. Believe the^ not, says he. Tha^ was meant of the pigrimages, say you,
but when they were used you denied it, as you do now ^ of the sacrament. So
loath you are to be driven from your startynge holes.

The^ come you out with Melchisedech. God a^^pointed him, say you, a priest and a
king, even to figure this same o^fering. And then a while (...) bustle blindly
about this kingdom and priesthod so long til you fal^e into your old flesh
again^ and thus you say. Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine unto Abraham
in the way and in (...) same act scripture, you say, calls him y^ (...) of
the high god eternal. The^ applieng the mat^tier to your purpose you say christ
did likewis^ give the form of bread and wine, of the which Melchisedech was
but asigne. Well hit maiste Hogard. melchidech brought forth bread and wine unto
Habraham to refreshe him after his great travail in the recovering of his
kinsfolk and co^trie men: and you, like a divine of the grosseste, sort, say
y^ Christ did the like thing, when he gave to his disciples, the tourmes, as
you say, of bread and wine. Thus your words sown, if a man take the^ as the
lie, but I am right sure you would say, if you were de maunded your meaneing,
y^ as Melchisedech offered up ^read and wine in sacrifice: so did christ y^
fourmes of bread and win* For you say a little before y^ sriptture acco^pteth
Melchisedech y^ priest of y^ highest in y^ he brought fourth bread and wine to
Habraha^. And in so saying you should amend the matter well. for if
Melchisedech were y^ priest of the highest in y^ deed the^ was Habraha^ y^
highest god for he offered bread and wine to none* other but Habraha^. Then do
you for se an obietion and preti^ie ye prevent y^ might be said against you.
And in soluteing y^, as you think, you say y^ in bringinge fourth bread and
wine unto Habraha^ Melchisedech gave thanks unto God for Habrahames victory.
And that, you say, was a (...) of his office. As who should say he made a
sacrifice of bread and wine, and in very deed in that he refreshed Habrahame
and his company with bread and wine, when after their great trauille their
bodies neded refreing: he offered an acceptable sacrifice unto God, and so did
Christ when with his body and blood offered one the cross, he refershed our
very souls But for the thanks that Melchsede^he gave unto God, if you*
consider the places well, were done with a thankeful heart and Godly words for
he sayede Blessed is Habrahame unto the highest God that has made heaven and
earth: and blessed be y^ high GOD by whose help the enemies are in thy hands.
But for your objection. A man might ask you^ you say) how this deed of
Melchisedeche may be thus applied, s^inge that, neither the proyhet nor Paull^
makes any mention of bread or wine, where Paul notes the^ thus to agree,
meaneinge of Melchisedech and Christ. But Paul (say you) does apply
Melchisedeches preisthod unto Christ, in that he offered up his flesh and
blood unto his father. This ye say is palayne scripture. And yet if a man
should go roundli to you: I think it would trouble both you and your
counsaylours to find it in scripture that this should be Paul's meaning. For
the place to the Hebrews that you build upon: makes rather against you therein.
First (says Paul) Melchesedech, is interpreted the king of justice, and then
the king of Salem, that is the King of peace, whose parents and kynred are
unknown, neither haueing beginning of days, nor end of life. For being
compared or likened unto the son of God, he remains a priest for ever. If
you had any little spark of the spirit of God in you: it were very easy for
you to judge wherein Paul compares Melchesedech unto Christ: Eue^ in that he
was without begynny^ge, without endeinge, desended of unknown parents, and
remained a priest, for ever But you are still in the flesh, and harp still on
one stringe, as appears by your melody. And you dream y^ because Paul makes
no me^cio^ of bread and wine we will say y^ he denies Christ's pristehode. For
your fleshely understanding will not suffer you to understand any other pristhod
(...) Christ, then that should stand in the offryng of material sacrifice, as
bread, wine, fat la^bes kiddes, gotes, and such other. And by the same
understanding you say that the bread and wine that Melchesedech offered (for so
you place your terms of the bread and wine that he gave unto Abraham) figured
Christ's flesh and blood offered on the cross Which assertion, how it agree^^
with the scriptures: is eas^^ to be seen of al (...) that are spiritual and
have the spirit of God dwelling in them. As for your pretty note y^ you ^et in
the marge: I leave it to your self, as a def^nicio^ of your own making. For
w^l I wot it is not to be found in any writter worthy of fai^^ but in such as
you are your self, besides that it is contrary to the true meaning of the
scriptures, in as many places as this sacramen^ is me^cioned.

The Bal^ad.
For Christ has said Thou can not shape
One hear of thy head, white either black.
How can thou of bread, The^ gods son make which in heaven is.
The answer.
This sta^e I have answered plainly before
For still ye be harping upon one stryng
Therefore to this I will answer no more
But pray unto god that he will you bring
Out of your errou^, but this is one thing
Except ye believe as says Esaias.
Ye cannot understand this hy^ mystery.
The confutacion
This sta^e (you say you have answered before For all is (you say) but the sown
of one string And therefore you will answer no more. And then overcome with
charity, ye, brast out in a prayer and wish that God will bring y^ author out
of his error, not much unlike to him that having a beam in his own e^e:
goes about to pull a mote out of his brothers eye. And then straight way ye
decla^e a shamful error of my Lord of Winchesters* which you use as yours
own concerning the understanding of this place of Esaias, except thou believe,
thou can not understand. For the right understanding whereof: I could ^emyt
you to the Answer that Anthony Gylbe has made to my Lords Deuelish Dete^tion
in the C.x. vii. leaf of the same. But because you should put no lack in this
confutation: you shall have it here. The words you wrest to your purpose, yea
you falcify the text which has. If you wilnot believe the cause is y^ you are
instable. So that here the prophet speaking unto the rulers of the people of
Israel, promisynge the deliverance from the force of their enemies, and
perceiving that they did not credyt his words: says, If you will not believe
this deliverance from your enemies: the cause of your unbelief, is none other
but that you are unconstant and will not be faithful. This is y^ interpretation
of them that follow the Hebrew The common translacion gives an other
interpretation, and that is this. If you peryshe or be vanquished of your
enemies: know y^ your unbelief is the cause thereof And this interpretation
(...) to follow of that which the prophet had said before, confor^yng king Achaz
against his enemies, who had conspired against him. Thus says the Lord God
(said y^ prophet) their counsayl shall not stand, their purpose shall not come to
pass. And after few words he adds If you will not believe: you shall not
endure* As who should sai. If you will not believe this mi promise: I will suffer
you to be ^o^ed out by your enemies, you shall not continue though you escap
these dangers y^ you be in now. Take it which way you will therefore, and you
shall not make it for your purpose, unless you wrest it to far out of tun^
(as you do) by the example of my lord of Winchester. But now for that you
say that you have answered this staff before* I would gladly know where. I
remember you say that never man taught or held it, and yet your own Doctors
are full of that opinion. Which you shall find if you ca^ entreat some of your
councelers to expound unto you a piece of the book called Sermones dis. In y^.
Cxi. sermon on xiiii. ^o^day after Triniti: ar these pretty words, cited out
of s. Banard, as you call him. O veneranda dignitas sacerdotsi, quorum manibus,
tan^ in vtero virginis filius dei incarnatur. That is to your lewd
understanding. Oh y^ dignite of prestes, worthi to be had in reverence, in
whose hands (eue^ as in the v^rgins wo^b) the son of God is incarnate. And
alitle before is said. Octauo deus honorauit sacerdotes in hoc quod sacerdos
aliqualiter similis est Marie beatissime virgini. Primo, sicut beatissima vir
go Maria co^cepit per quinque verba, veru^ corpus christi. Luce. i Fiat mihi
secu^du^ verbu^ t^u^) sic sacerdos co^ficit per quinque verba, veru^ corpus.
etc That is, eig^ly god has exalted priests in y^ the priest, is after some
sort lik unto Mari the most blessed virgin. First, as the most blessed
virgin Mary did by.v. words, conceive the very body of Christ (Luke. ^ Be it
unto me according as thou have said) so the priest does with.v. words make the
very body of Christ. etc What should I rehearse any more of this blasphemous
gear. But in the beginning of the same sermon in the first dignity, of
pristes, is this more then devilish affer^ion grounded upon the first of
Jeremy. Ego constitui te hodie super gentes et regna. I have ordained the above
^acions and kingdoms. The words are these Unde breuiter, deus exaltauit
sacerdotes super omnes homines and super omnes creaturas. Unde quida^^ doctor
dici^. (...) condition estis homines, dignitate estis super omnes homines.
The^ doctor. Sacerdo^ al^ior est regibus, felicror angelis, creator sui
creatoris. That is in english Brieffely therefore God has exalted priests a
bon^ al men, and above al creatures wherefore a certain docter says. If so be
y^ ye be me^: yet are ye of dignity above al men. And the same docter. A
priest is hier then kings, more happy then angels, and the creatoure of his
creatoure. The ^okes ar to be had wherein is more thereof the^ any christian
ears ca^ abide.

The ballad
A ^etter mind. The Lord grant the
That thou may find, his verite
which makes the blind, In soul to se
what his w^ll is.
The Answer.
I pray God g^ue ^yght to those that be blind
Then trust I to se your conversion
For non^ is t^er blynder that I can find
Then you (...) in your mad opinion
All other people y^ can cry upon
That to bel^ue scripture they should agree
And none farther from it the^ you your self be
The confutatio^.
The words of your, prayer, soune well for your self. What the meaning is, ye
know best your self. If god grant sight to the blind (you say) you trust to se
the authors conversion. And doubtless so shall you, for so long as you be so
blind as you be: It is not possible that you should se how y^ author was
^o^uerted from your gross opinion though you mean an other manner of conversion
for as you say your self,, there is none blinder then they that will not se, And
here you say you can find none blynder then the author is in his opinion,
which you call mad (as fools do wisdom) vmbradynge him with the criyng
upon al other people (...) the scripture, when no man is farther from it they
he is himself. Thus you have said, but such as have judgment in ^cripture,
shall easly perceive by both your writings, how falsely you belly him.

The Ballad.
God grant the, the* part, O (...) Paul to play
I mean to convert, From the Rom^she way
And with a meke heart, Gods truth to obaye
Who grant the this.
The answer.
Your prayer depends of a godly intent
Which is that ye would have al men forsake
There catholyke faith in the Sacrament
And your error in the place th^reof to take
But now for your part the better to make
Ye call the truth Romyshe as though that we
Had received it of the popyshe see
The confutacion
The authoure wysheth none other thing unto you (friend Hogharde) then that
which Paul himself exhorts al men to do, that is to be his foloers as he was
the follower of Christ But this part of Paul which he wishes them to play, in
following of him, is to convert (as he himself says) from the Romysh way even
as Paul converted from the persecuting of the christian faith, and with a meke
heart to obey* gods truth. But as for one, nothing con^ented with the thing that
he wishes for you: you stomach the matter, and deny that you receiu^d it of
the popysh see. But yet you show not whence you received it, Neither do you
bring any proves (other then your bare assersion) that you received it not of
the popysh see. I think you to be one of them, that use to affirm things,
without any argument or reason for the probation thereof. I will therefore
minister you occasion in seek up your arguments and reasones against you
make answer to this confutation And by your leave, I will prove that you had it
from the Romyshe see. I would have you therefore, first to consider, what
thing it is that we talk of.

It is not the Lords supper: but that toye of yours which you call the blessed
Sacrament of the altar. Whence that came is evident to the^ that lust to se:
for throughout the whole Bible there is not so much as one word of that popish
invention. The supper of the Lord, we have there mentioned, and so declared,
that comparyng this toye of yours thereunto: we may easily perceive y^ they be
clean contrary. The Lord at his last supper, took bread, gave thanks and
brake it Your Apes take bread and blow upon it breathinge out certain words
in the manner of enchaunters and sorcerers, to turn the substance thereof, and
they offer it up for a sacrifice. Christ distributed the bread among his
disciples, and eat none himself, but your Apes devour all the^ selves, and
give the people none. Christ celebrated his supper at the table with his
disciples, even in his common apparel: But your Apes must have goodly
garments made for the nonse, of all the colors, of the rayn^ Bow and at
sundry rymes sundry colors. Christ made no fond iestures: But your Mo^kers
must have crossyng kissynge, beckynge, douckynge, turnynge, trippynge, with
many pretye tricks, and at the last ^osse up all slouenlye, and bless the
people with the empty cup. Se you not how these two agree?

Now let us se whense all this grare of yours comes. Selestinus the pope
ordained the praie^^ y^ the priests (your Godmakers) say when they rauysh the^
selves to mass. Pope Damasus ordained Confiteor. Pope Gregory cau^ed
Kyri^eleson to be said.ix. times together, Gregory and Gelasius gathered the
Col^ctes, good gere I warrant you, if they be well weighed. The Grayle was of
the same men's doing I trow. Telesphorus, invented the Tract, Notherus the
Sequences, Anastasius, the standing up at the Gospel, Eutichianus the
Offertory, Gelacius the Preface, Sextus the Sanctus, Pope Leo the.iii. ordained
the Incense. Also y^ Secrets of the mass, are they not popes parches clouted
together to make the matter more salable. Gelasius made Te igitur, Siritius,
added Communicantes, Pope Alexander made Qui pridie. Pope Leo, Hanc igitur.
Gregorye made the peticions, Diesque nostros. The first Innocen^ius ordained
the Pax* Sargius, the Agnus dei The first Alexander ordained that the bread
should be unleavened. And the^ as you thynk, whence have we this your babble, so
tossed and tombled from this side to that, hoysed up and laid down again. You
must pardon me though I speak plain: for I take al such things as foles
delight to play wythal: for no better then bables. ^ut ^o put the weak
brothers out of doubt y^ I contemn not the Lords supper: I protest, y^ among
the things and ordinances y^ our savior christ has left with us. y^ lively
word of God only excepted, there is none more profitable, and for our souls
comfort, then it is. And that therefore we ought to frequent and use it with al
faithfulness, tre^blyng and fear of y^ lord knowing y^ if we being the
members of the d^ust, should enterprise to com to the Lords table as partakers
with him: we shall have our reward with the hypocrites, even in the utter darkness

I exhort you al therefore (that glory to be the members of Christ and called
Christians) that in no case ye presume to receive this holy communion: unless
you be inwardly the same thing that this holy misteri declares them to be,
that use it worthily.

Say not therefore (friend Hoghard) that I rail upon the blessed Sacraments of
Christ's body and blood (for I take God to witness and mine own con^ience, I
reverence them as much as Gods word wylleth them to be reverenced) but that
which I have written is against that abuse which the Romysh Ruffians have set
up and would mayntayn in the sted thereof.

The ballad
Lord grant that our head, king Edward y^ sixth
May bury that dead God which is pi^te
And get in his stead, thy supper not mixte
Wi^h abuse popish.
The answer
Lord grant that king Edward which over us has
The chief primacie under christ Jesus
Truly to defend the catholic faith
Which from the apostles did hole ensew
And all heresy and popishnesse to subdwe
That we may live under his highness so
In the catholyke faith which is most true
that to y^ honor of god al things may grow
I wonder much how ye durst be so bold
As to pray so for the kings majesty
That his highness should do as ye have told
A deed before god of grate iniquity
Which is that the dead god pixte he may bury
Ye show your self a true subicte in this
Which does point your king to such an office.
The confutacion
Here you would seem to make a prayer for the king, contrary to that which
the author ^aketh, and yet against your will (I think) it is the same, as it
is easy to be seen to al them that ca^ judge upon writtinges. But afterward
you put men out of doubt of your meaning, and say that you marvel the
autour durst be so bold as to appoynte his prince to such an office, as to
bury the dead God that is pixte. And by the same your admiracion, you declare
your self to be altogether fleshely. For what spiritual mind could think it
a thing unworthy a christian prince to bury, that is to extinguish^ and put
utterly out of memory, that most detestable Idol, which being a thing
dead and without any lively significacion: is named and taken as God? But no
marvel though you be so fleshely in this matter, for the chief of your
counsel, are not ashamed openly to affirm that the godhead is a corporal
substance, because the^ find in Genesis that man was made to the similitude
and Image of God.

The ballad
That we may epsy In that sign and token
With spiritual eye, Thy body broken
And thy blood plentious^y Shed as is spoken
To bring us to bless.
The answer
Who would think, lo but that this man meant well
Seeing that he wyshith that we may al
Se christ's death there, for so says the gospel
But yet mark him well and perceive ye shall
That under the name of this word spiritual
As his Ballad before does plain express
And here a sign and token he does it call
Tak^ (...) it for no more himself does wytnes
But the catholyke faith perfect and true.
Is, we must believe that in the sacrament
Is not only a sign where in we must vewe
The death of christ with a godly intent
But also that christ him self is present
Flesh and blood, but how that he should be
Reason cannot teach, therefore he must consent
Unto faith, and then he shall it truely^se
Now thus of this answer I make an end
Prayenge god his grea^e ^o us both to send.
FINIS. Quod miles Hogherde.
The confutacion
You have no more to say here, but that the authoure makes this sacrament no
more but a sign, where as the catholyke fayeth (you say) leads us to believe
that Christ is there present, flesh and blood. Which thing is very true but
not as you takeit (For your words de^lare* your meaneinge to be that Christ's
steshe and blood should be there after such sort that it might be eaten and
sualowed in to our bodies by the orgains of the same, poynted for y^ office of
eateing. But our belief is, and that according to the catho like faith of the
apostles and fathers of the primative church that the substance of the bread
wherein those accidents which we se do remain: is no mor but a sign (as
Paul teaches) of the wonder full couplynge together of all the members of
Christ in one mistical body, as the bread being made of many graynes is but
one body, and in like manner the wine. But the spiritual present of Christ's
body in these sacraments, we never denied, kno^nge that as many as (being
the unfeigned members of Christ) do with sure faith in the promyses of Christ
use these sacraments bread and wine accordeinge to Christ's institucion and
first ordinance are at the same supper of the Lord as certaynely made
partakers of Christ's body and blood and al y^ ever he did or deserved for us
in the flesh: as theye are partakers of that sacramenttal bread and wine To
this faith do we consent wishing y^ it would please the Lord to open the eye
of you and your councollour that you may se and consent to the same

Finis
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day and William Seres, dwelling in Sepulchers
Parish at the sign of the Resurrection a little above Holbourne Conduite.

Cum gratia and priuilegio adimprimendum sol^n.


