Friar John Frauncis of Nigeon in France.

A Replication to that lewd answer, which Friar John Frauncis (of the
Minimes Order in Nigeon nigh unto Paris in France) has made to a Letter, that
his Mother caused to be written, and sent to him out of England, in August.
1585. Whereunto is annexed an answer, to that which the same Friar has
written to his father and mother: in defense, and to the praise of that
Religion, which he does now profess: and to the disprayse and defacing of
that Religion, which is now professed in England. Whereof the Friar himself
was a Scholar and professor, until the year 1583. which was the 18. year of
his age. ()

Written by Robert Crowley. Anno. 1586.

AT LONDON. Printed by John Charlewoode, dwelling in Barbican, at the sign of
the half Eagle and the Key.

To all such Gentlemen, as being English borne, have Romysh hearts, and do
favor the Romish Catholic Religion: and especially, such amongst them as
do inhabit in the Counties of Sussex and Hampshyre, and about London.
WYshing well to the Common weal of my nature Country, and to the Church of
Christ in this our English nation. I have in my younger days taken some
pains, and have been at some charges (and yet am) in the education of some
such young Scholars, as have seemed to be likely to prove profitable
members, in this Church, or Common weal of England. Amongst whom, one
Samuel Debnam was one. His Father and Mother are yet living, and do by their
honest labor sustain their own bodies, and according to their hability, they
do help to relieve the impotent and needy. This Samuel was their eldest and
first borne Son, and their hope was that he should have been the staff of
their age. And because the mother was my servant in the time of her virginity,
my wife became Godmother to that young babe, and (as the custom of the Church
is) undertook for him at the Fountain of Regeneration: which moved both her
and me to have (together with his natural Parents) an especial care for his
good education. He prospered in learning, and was like in time, to have
proved a profitable member of the English Common weal. Yea some gifts that
he had received from God, seemed to be somewhat rare in one of his years: and
that did pus^e him up and make him proud. I did then begin to fear, that
which is now come to pass. For (as Syrach has written Chap. 10,) Initium
superbiae hominis, apostatare a Deo: quoniam ab eo qui fecit illum, recessit
cor eius. The beginning of man's pride, is to fall away from GOD: for his heart
is departed from him that has made him. This pride was it that caused him to
harken to such amongst you, as first enticed him to forsake his Parents, and
other friends, in so undutiful manner as he did, on Monday* which was the
eight day of Apryll. 1583. In aunswering Letters that his Mother caused to be
written to him the 28. day of August, 1585. He writes that he was lodged not
far from London, the same night that he stepped away from his Father and her:
and shortly after, he was (as he says) conueyghed by night, a mile of from
London, where he stayed three weeks. And on May day in the Morning, carely,
he was set on horseback, and conueighed into Suffer, and so into Hampshyre,
where he had maintenance till the Even of S. James the Apostle. etc. At his
departing from London, good Gentlemen (as he terms them) gave him money, to
the value of forty or fyftie shillinges, to bring him over the Seas. By these
things it appears manifestly, how vnfreendly you popysh Gentlemen are, to
the Crown and Common weal of England. Can you work any greater displeasure,
to the Crown and Common weal of England: then to rob them both of the
young frye, that is likely to be the continuance of this, and the beginning
of the next generation? This youth, being about the age of eighteen years,
was meet to be employed to that kind of life, wherein he might have been
most like to do best service to God, his Prince and his native Country. But
see what you have done* you have caused him to be reconciled to the Romish
Catholic Church* which is to be a sworn enemy, to the Crown and Common
weal of this his, and your native Country. You have robbed our Prince of her
Subject, and service that she might and ought to have had of him, as of one
borne with in her dominions. You have robbed a poor father and mother of their
son and only child: the staff of their age, their greatest treasure in
this world, their only hope of posterity, and of that gift of God, which by
natural Order has been most pleasant and delectable to them, and should have
been most profitable, you have robbed me, and the rest that have taken
pains, and have bestowed of our goods upon him* in the nourishing and bringing
of him up, to that estate wherein you found him: and in making him able to do
some service in the Common weal of our Country: you have (I say) robbed us of
all this, and of that hope which we had to see him a profitable member of the
Church of Christ in England. you have robbed him of that benefit, which a
natural English man, may* and ought to enjoy within the English dominions.
yea, and as much as in you may be: you have robbed him of that inheritance,
which Christ Jesus has bought for him, for you have persuaded him, that not
Christ Jesus, but the Romish Antichrist, is the way that leads into that
inheritance. you have taught him to leave the study of the scriptures, and not
to look upon. or to give credit unto those wrytinges, that men of sound
judgment have left behind them, concerning the true interpretation of the
scriptures, but to believe all that the Romysh Catholic Church believes*
holds, and teaches: although he do neither know what the belief of that
Church is, neither how it may be warrented or defended by the scriptures,
when it is known yea, although it do surpass and excel man's understanding:
yet it must be believed, only because the Romysh Catholic Church does
believe it. S^ynt Peter was of an other mind, when he wrote thus: Dominum
Christu^ sanctificate in cordibus vestris, parati semper ad satisfactionem omni
poscenti vos rationem, de ea quae in vobis est spe. Sanctisy the Lord Christ in
your hearts being always prepared, to satisfy every one that shall ask you a
reason of that hope that is in you. 1. Pet. 3.

Our savior Christ said, Scrutamini Scripturas, Search the scriptures, John.
5. yea, and talking with two of his Disciples in the way toward Emaus He
proved the necessity of his death and resurrection, by the scriptures. Luke
24. The Jews which dwelt in B^rrhaea, searched the scriptures daily, to see if
that were true that the Apostles preached. Acts. 17. But you have taught, this
proselite of yours, to believe all that the Romish Catholic Church teaches:
although the same be directly contrary to the scriptures. As to make and
worship Images, to call upon Angels and saints, to repose trust in the
worthiness of his own works, to make himself a Mediator in suffering for the
sins of his Parents and Country men, to have an opinion of holiness, in
refrayning the use of Gods good creatures, which are all holy, and to be
received with thanks to God for the use of them, to kiss and worship the
Relics of saints, to believe the real presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament of the Altar, to make that Sacrament a sacrifice propi^iatorie for
the sins of the quick and the dead. etc. To conclude, if the Romysh
Catholic Church do teach it, he must believe it, although both reason and
scripture do deny it. Into this miserable blindness* you have (by your
allurements and persuasions) brought many youths, that might, and were like to
have done, good service to God and their Prince, in their native Country. you
have caused them to shake of, all duetifull obedience to God, to their Country,
to their Prince, to their parents, and to all that have been their fosterers
and bringers up, in learning, and in religious exercises. you have plunged them
into the puddle of all popysh superstition, and counterfayted religion. you
have stolen them from our Captain Christ, and made them soldiers to fight
against Christ, under the banner of that Antichrist of Rome. Thus your
proselite has reported, in the discourse of his peregrination: that he was in
Rhemes in France, 17. months together in company with two hundredth English
men (almost) and lacked nothing: which argues, that some good portion of your
patrimony, is spent in the maintenance of such English youths, as you have
conueighed thither, and to other places beyond the Seas.

I will charge you no further. Take heed to your selves in time. Consider that
there is a God, that sees your dooinges, and knows your intents. He will not
suffer such doings unpunished for ever. If you think that the religion that is
now allowed of in this Realm, by law, be not Catholic, seek your resolution
at the hands of such as are learned in the tongues, in the liberal arts, in
the writings of ancient fathers, and in the scriptures, and are your
Countrymen, and occupied in the service of God, and this our common country.
Such are able, and will be ready to confer with you, and by their knowledge in
the scriptures, Doctors, arts and tongues, to satisfy you: and undoubtedly, if
you will humbly crave it of God, ye shall be satisfied. Remember your duetye
toward GOD, your duty toward your prince, your duty toward your Country
and Countrymen.

Repent purpose and endeavor to amend that which you have done amiss. Help
to bring home again such as by your means have been occasioned to stray from
Christ's fold in this our native soil. As you have been means to draw them
from Christ: so use what means you can, to bring the^ back again to Christ's
fold in England. If they shall perrish in that schism, whereinto you have
brought them (as undoubtedly they shall, if they shall end in it,) their blou^
shall be required at your hands. When your Seminary men tell you, that we are
the Sci^smaticks, and they the Catholics, believe them not, except they prove
it, by Scriptures and probable reasons. If we do prove, both by the
Scriptures and by probable reasons, that the Church of England is Catholic,
and the Romysh Church schisu^^ticall: why should not you believe us? Because
they do know, that if you shall read our wrytinges, you must needs yield
to the truth, which you shall see substantially proved by us: they put you in
fear of curssing or excommunication, if you shall read any thing that is
written by any of us, or if you shall give attentive heed to any Sermons made
by us, which argues that themselves do know, that the truth is on our
sides. You are Gentlemen, and by natural and civil order, you are Free men:
suffer not your selves to be led and commanded (as blind and bond men) by
these dol^ysh hypocrites, which teach you to submit your selves to the decrees,
precepts, and doctrines of men (which have but a vain show of wisdom) and
not to regard the wisdom of God, contained and taught in the holy
Scriptures Collos. 2. Your calling and estate in the Common weal of this
Realm is worshipful* and your duty is to be ayding to your Prince, in the
execution of the Laws made for the preservation of the state, and defense of
the liberty of this English nation: and will you be the ring leaders in the
violating of those good Laws, in sub^erting the state, and in turning the
liberty into thraldom and bondage? God forbid. Our good God in his good
time, used our noble King Henry the eight (as his mean) by whom he delivered
this noble and free kingdom, from the Babilo^icall bondage of Rome: and will
you bring your selves and the whole English nation, into the like bondage
again? The same our mercif^ll GOD, has by the same Noble Prince, and by his
Son Edward and Elizabeth his daughter, restored to this English nation, the
bright shyning light of the Gospel, and will you bring upon your selves and
upon us, and upon all our posterity, the palpable Egyptian darkness of
Ignorance, the mother, nursse, and continual fosterer of all error and
wiched life? God forbid. You are English men, God give you English hearts,
that may never yield to be governed by foreign power. You be christian men:
God give you christian hearts, that may never yield to profess Antichristian
Religion. Suffer not your self to be blinded by their colors of antiquity,
universality, and uniformity. For when their antiquity is compared with ours,
it is found to be but of yesterdayes hatching: where ours is proved to have
had continuance from the time of the first man. Their vniuersalitye was never
so large as the Roman Monarchy: but ours, has always been, and still is,
and ever shall be, as large as the whole world. Their uniformity, is divided,
themselves do scarsly know into how many several sects, whereof not any two
can be found that do agree in all points: but we being but one body and one
spirit* are called in one hope of our calling, one Lord, one faith, one
Baptism: One God and father of all, which is above all, throughout all
things, and in us all. ^phe. 4. I pray you vouchsafe to read with indifferent
judgment, that which I have written in my Replication and answer, to that
which Friar John Fra^ncis of Nigeon in France, has written to his Father and
Mother. And as he has admonished in the margin of his letter, no less then
seauenteene tunes, Read it thorough, or begin it not: even so have I set
at the head of every page, Read all: or read nothing. I have set down the
Friars words even as he wrote them, and as I have them to show, in that
Letter which he wrote with his own hand, not altering or leaving out, or
adding (to my knowledge) one word, syllable or letter. If any amongst the
learned Romish Catholics, shall vouchsafe to read that which I have written:
and shall think himself able to disprove that which I have done: let the
same deal with me as I have dealt with Friar John, and I hope I shall be able so
to reprove his disproofe so, yt he shall (in the end) wysh he had let my
wrytings pass without disproofe. For Friar John has so quickened mine aged
spirits, that I seem to my self, able to try this matter by writing, even
with the stoutest Champion that the Pope has. And if Friar John, or any of his
Fraternity, (yea if it be the Pope Sixtus quintus himself, which as I hear,
was a Franciscane Friar) shall be able to prove by Scriptures and probable
reasons, that the Romysh Relygion (which now is professed in Rome) is
Catholic, and that the Religion now professed in England is schismatic:
then will I creep into a Minimes weed in Nigeon, and whyppe my self with a
discipline, as Friar John does now whyppe himself there. Otherwise, if any
shall enterprise to disprooue my wrytinges, and shall not do it substantially,
to my disproofe indeed: I will do what I shall be able to do, in helping him
to some whipping cheer in our Bridewell, if ever he may be caught in
England. Fare you well, from my house without Creplegate of London, the syxt
of August. Anno Domini. 1586.

Your welwiller, Robert Crowley, Clarke.

Read all: or Read nothing.
Crovvley. WHen your mother showed me your Letters of the xvii. of March^ last
past: I did call to mind that which I had told her, more then three months
before you departed from her. Which was, that I saw in you such signs of
Arrogancy, that I thought you to be a meet stock to graffe a Papist upon.
In reading of those your Letters, I perceived that I was not deceived in that
my conjecture. This spirit of Arrogancy begins to show it self, even in
the beginning of those your Letters: for you disdain to use those duetifull
speeches, that natural children ought to use, when they write to their
natural Parents. You seem to be persuaded, that you abase your self enough
(yea and overmuch) to write thus to such Parents as they be.


The Friar. Well-beloved Father and mother, after my hearty commendations which I
have unto you, these are to certify you, that I have received your Letter,
dated the xviii. of August.


Crovvley. If you had written to the meanest amongst them that have been your
playfellowes, you must either have passed ye bounds of civil honesty, or else
have used as reverent speeches as these be. But did your Arrogant spirit suffer
you to stay here? no. For your Parents are so vile in your sight, and in
comparison of your self, that you must needs write thus.


The Friar. Were your Prayers any thing worth, I would thank you: for that
you pray unto God to bless me, and to endue me with the grace of his holy
spirit, as also to lighten my heart, to the end that I may understand the
troth. Were (as I said before) your prayers any thing worth, I would thank
you heartily for these your wishinges: but alas, they being such as they seem
to be, scarsly can I keep my self from tears.


Crovvley. If Lucifer himself (who is noted to be the father of pride) should
have written to his damme, could he have used words of greater Arrogancy? You
have forgotten (I think) that commandment of God, which you did once know,
and did acknowledge before a great congregation of Christians in my Church at
Crepiegate. Honor thy father and thy mother etc. You remember not the saying
of Syrache, in his 3. Chap. Qu^ timet dominum, honorat parents: et quasi
dominis seruiet hijs qui se genuerunt. He that fears the Lord, does honor
his Parents, and does service to them that begat him, even as though they were
his Lords. And again, Quam malae famae est, qui derelinquet Patrem: and est
maledictus a Deo, qui exasperat matr^. How evil a report has he, that
forsakes his Father? And he that vexes his mother, is accursed of God. Yea
and in the same Chapter he says, even immediately after those words that I
have cited before, In opere, et sermon, et omni patientia honora patrem tuum
etc. Honor thy father in deed and in speech, and in all patience, that
blessing from God may come upon thee etc. The Fathers blessing does establish
the houses of the Children, but the mothers curse does root out the
foundations thereof. Yea, and Solomon says in the 15. of his Proverbs Stultus
irridet disciplin^m patr^s sui. etc. The folish man does deride the discipline
of his father etc. And again: Stultus homo despicit matrem suam. The foolish
man despises his mother. These sayings written in the Scriptures, were far
out of your mind, both when you harkened to these Counselors that first
advised you, to leave your father and mother in such sort as you have done,
and ever since (as may be gathered by that which you have written in your
Letters directed to them) but I conjecture, that you will stay your self upon
the words of our Savior Christ, written by the Evangelist Math. 19. Qui
re^querit domum, vel fratres, aut sorores, aut Patrem, aut matrem* aut vxorem,
aut f^lios. aut agros propter nomen m^um: centuplum accip(...), and v^^am
aeternam possidebit. Who so shall forsake house, or brethren or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or child, or friends for my name sake, shall
receive an hundredth fold and possess life everlasting. But will you know
what Chrysostom writes upon this place? Qui perdit animam suam propter me,
inueniet eam: non vt nosmetipsos interimamus, neque vt animam nostram violenter
a corpore disiungamus: sed vt religionis pietatem, caeteris omnibus
anteferamus. It a de vxore quoque, ac fratribus intelligendum est. Who so
loses his own life for me, shall find it: not that we should kill our
selves, neither that we should violently separate our own soul from our
body, but that we should prefer the godliness of Religion before all the
rest. Even so must we understand that which is spoken of the wife and
brethren. Now, if those words of our Savior, written by S. Matthew do not
enforce you to kill your self, why should they cause you to leave your father
and your mother, in such sort as you have done, the staff of whose age you
should have been, if you had been careful to do as once you confessed in my
Church, that by Gods law you are bound to do. That is, to love, honor, and
succor your father and mother, to obey them and serve them, to fear and
reverence them, not only in word and deed, but in your heart and mind also.
To follow their precepts and examples of life, and patiently to take
correction at their hands, and to make continual and hearty prayers to God
for them. To relieve and nourish them, in case they should fall into poverty or
decay. And in all points by showing your self an obedient and good child, to
move them to be loving and good to you. All this you confessed in my Church
before many witnesses, which shall in the day of judgment be a testimony
against you, to condemn you of wilful Apostacy, and a witness to discharge
your father and mother, (and all others that have had the education of you) of
all manner negligence, in enstructing you in the knowledge of your duty, both
toward God, and toward man. So that if you perish, your blood shall be upon
your own head alone. You proceed in your answer, and thus you say.


The Friar. You write furthermore unto me, that you have made great inquiry
after me. I know it well. I was in fear great enough by reason of that
inquiry, as long as I was in England, although (that God be thanked) I have,
though hardly, escaped your hands.


Crowley. In these words you make known to as many as shall read this your
answer, both the dutiful care that your good parents had to preserve you (their
wicked son) from destruction both of body and soul: and also your own
wilful determination, to cast your self headlong into that Gulf of
perdition, that you are now fallen into. Yea, and that you are of that number
that Esaias ye Prophet bewayleth, when he writes thus in the 5. chap, V
aequidicitis malum bonum, and bonum malum: ponentes tenebras lucem, and lucem
tenebras, ponentes amarum in dulce, and dulce in amarum. Alas for them that
call evil good, and good evil. Affirming darkness to be light, and light to be
darkness, turning sower into sweet, and sweet into sower. The bright shining
light of the knowledge of ye truth, which does now shine in England, you call
the darkness of ignorance and error: and the hellike darkness of Popery,
wherein you do now wander, groping after the way of Salvation, you call
light, showing your self to be one of them that are noted by our English
Proverb. They that be in hell, do persuade themselves, that there is none
other heaven. Moreover you say thus.


The Friar. You heard that I was at Rhemes: it is very certain, I was there,
the reason also wherefore I writ not unto you, was partly the scarsitie of
messengers, and partly other things, which here I can not well rehearse.
Again, I could not write unto you conveniently, because I doubted whether you
were alive or dead.


Crovvley. The report of your being at Rhemes, you say was true, which argues
yt it was rather ye lack of good will in you, to comfort your sorrowful
parents by your duetifull Letters, then the lack of messengers that stayed
your pen. What the other lets were, which here you can not well rehearse: I
hope you will tell us at some other time more convenient, and when it shall not
be so dangerous for you, as now it is. And being by these Letters (that you
confess you have received) certifyed that your Parents are living, that doubt
that you spoke of can no longer be any let at all. Proceeding in your answer,
you say thus.


The Friar. You write again unto me, that all my friends are in good health,
to tell you the troth, I know not any one freende amongst you.


Crovvley. Bona verba queso. Good sir, be good to Watkin. What not any one
freende amongst us all? There are many yet living, yt have been your friends I
am sure of it. As your father, your mother, my self, my wife (your Godmother)
Master Moncaster, sometime your Schoolmaster, Master Field, Master Doctor
Fulke, master Paul Swallow, and many more that were your Mecaenates in
Cambridge: and how happens it, that all these be now blotted out of your
Cataloge of friends? By all likelihoode, all the benefits yt have been
bestowed upon you, have been written in duste and not in Marble. Your
Grandmother, that being your mothers mydwyfe, lapped you in the first swaddling
clow^s that ever you bepyssed, and did unto you all the office of a mydwyfe:
was she not your freende? your mother that yet lives, and during the time of
your infancy, gave you suck of her own breast, and fed you with food
meet for you, when sometimes she spared it out of her own body, was she not
then your freende? when she continued your Nursse, and did unto you all that is
to be done by a Nursse, and when by your wraling and crying you had gotten a
Rupture in the nether part of your belly, she sought and procured means to
ease and remedy the same* by trusses and otherwise, was she not then your
freende? I could put you in mind of much more freendship showed unto you, by
us a boue named, and by many more, but all is buried in oblivion so deep that
it is not possible that the same canbe dug up again, in such sort that you
can be moved to acknowledge the same. Your new Friends are so settled in your
conceyte, that all the old are blotted out of memory for ever. You regard
not the Counsel of Syrach who writes thus, Cap. 9. Ne derelinquas amicum
antiquum, nouus ^nim non erit similis illi. Forsake not an old friend, for the
new will not be like him etc. Well, you proceed in your answer, and thus you
say.


The Friar. As for my brother Aaron, I beseech our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ by the merits of his bitter death and passion, to have mercy upon his
soul, as also upon yours, and to save you all at the day of judgment.


Crovvley. I do like well of this your charitable wish: and do wish the
like salvation to you, and to all the rest of your new friends. But now you
do use a speech by the figure Apostrophe. And thus you write in the margin of
your Letters.


The Friar. Brother Aaron, leave the Religion wherein you were at my departure
from you: and if that you can by any means come on this side the seas, come
to Paris in France, and ask after the Minimes Friars at Nigeon, so shall you
find me. If that you come to me, leave your naughty Religion, and care for no
more. And counsel also my father and mother, to do as you do (or as I hope
will do.)


Crowley. This gostlie counsel that you give to your brother Aaron, and do
wish that he should give ye same to your father and mother, will not (I hope)
be followed in haste. That Religion that you call naughty, and will your
Brother Aaron to leave: shall (I hope) be proved in this my discourse, the
right Religion of Christ, and your Roman Religion, mere Antichristian. Now
to put your mother out of doubt, that you are her son Sammuell in deed, you
write thus.


The Friar. And forasmuch as you have written to me, that you will not give
credit to word of mouth, or to written Letters, except that I write your name
(being my mother) and the place of my birth, let these suffice to set your heart
at rest. I was borne (as you have told me) in Essex, brought up and nourished
(in heresye) in London, or in the suburbs. Your name is Catharine Maipeston* by
reason of marriage, you are called Catherine Debnam. I had a brother named
Nathanaell (as you told me) and he is dead being an infant. Moses and Tobias
are also dead, with both my sisters Abigael, and Christian, (upon whose souls
Christ Jesus have mercy.) Aaron was a live when I departed from you, unto whom,
as also unto you my mother and to my father John Debnam, I beseech Christ give
life everlasting. Thus much for the answer of that Letter which you sent me,
written (as I think) by Master Kings man the Scriuener.


Crowley. The careful heart of your mother, desired certain knowledge of the
case of her fugitive son: supposing it had not been possible for a nie natural
son, being a live, in any part of ye known world, to hide himself so long
from so loving a mother as she has been to you: and therefore she wished to
be certified in such sort, as now she is by these your Letters. But sir, the
consideration of duty toward your mother, should have moved you to have used
more duetifull speeches then you have done in this part of your answer. Set
your heart at rest, sauoureth of contempt of that person that you write unto
(whom God commands you to honor) and of an obstinate purpose and
determination, never to have any such regard unto her, as christian children
ought to have unto their Parents, so long as they shall be in this transitory
life. It seems to me that you have forgotten all that you learned in the
School of Christ, and have learned a new lesson in the Pharisaicall School
at Rhemes: that is (as it may be thought) to shake of all curtesye, both in
speech and behavior toward Parents, and currishly to answer Corban. Mark.
7. You were borne in Essex: but will you know by what occasion? Your father and
mother dwelt then in the suburbs of London: but the house that they then had,
was not furnished with things needful for a woman in the travel of child,
and therefore your Grandmother being a Mydwife, took your mother home to her
house at Waltam in Essex. And yt as I suppose by Gods providence, that the babe
that then was borne, might rightly be termed an Essex Calfe, and that our
English Prouerbiall speech might rightly be applied unto him (As wise as
Waltams Calfe that ran nine miles to suck a Bull*) You heard tell of the
Popes Bull that Felton fyxed to the Bishop of Londons gates, and like a Waltams
Calfe you ran to Rhemes, and (by your own confession) would have run to
Rome, if you had not been let, by I know not what mean, but by Gods
providence I am assured, that your folly might the more easily be made
known unto us out of France, and that you may in shorter space, and with
less danger return to England again when God shall open your eyes, and let
you see, how unwisely and like a Waltams Calfe you have dealt. You were
brought up and nourished you say, in Heresy, in London, or in the Suburbs
thereof. As touching this heresy, that you say you were brought up and
nourished in: I say with S. Paul Acts. 24. Confiteor autem hoc tibi, quod
secundum sectam quam dicunt haeresim, sic deseruio patrio Deo meo: credens
omnibus quae in l^ge and Prophetis scripta su^t* spem habens in Deum, quam et
by ipsi expectant, resur^ rectionem futuram, iustorum and iniquorum. In hoc and
ipse studeo, sine offendiculo, conscientiam habere ad Deum, and ad homines
semper. I confess this unto you, that according to that s^ct which men call
heresy, I do humbly serve the God of my fathers: believing all that is written
in the Law and the Prophets: having hope in God, which hope even they
themselves do look for, that a resurrection shall be, both of the just and of
the wicked. And herein I my self do endeavor, to have always a conscience,
both toward God, and toward men. This is that heresy that you were brought
up and nourished in, in London, and in the Suburbs thereof. But I pray you (good
master Friar John) was S. Paul an Heretic? Are your father and mother
Heretics? Was Robert Smith, that first taught you to know Letters (and is
now gone to God) an Heretic? Am I an Heretic that first taught you to know
the Rules of Grammar, and taught you and fed you at mine own charges, more
then seven years first and last? Are all our Rulers, and we of the English
nation Heretics, and our whole kingdom heretical, because we refuse to fall
down with you, and worship the purple whore of Rome, that rides upon the Rose
colored beast? When God shall make your green wit ryper, and your fleeting
judgment deeper, I hope you iuyll recant that rash saying of yours. I was
brought up and nourished in heresy. Your mothers Surre name before marriage,
you mistake, for she was not daughter to Maipeston but to Myllis, and is now by
marriage called Catherine Debnam. Your brethren and sisters, were as you have
written: and are all departed this life, saving only Aaron. And as many as
know you, have just cause to wysh, that as you were the first borne, so you had
been the first buried. But God has otherwise appointed it? we do therefore
refer all to his will, being well assured that the end shall be to his glory,
although (we fear) to your everlasting confusion. But what mean you to crave
mercy for the souls of your brethren and sisters departed? do you think that
God took them out of this miserable life so speedily, that he might cast them
into your holy father the Popes scalding house, which you call Purgatory? Did
you never read the words written in the 3. Chap. of Wisdom, I ustorum
animae in man^ Dei su^t: et non tanget illos tormentum mortis. The souls of
the righteous are in the hand of God, and the torment of death shall not touch
them. Again in the fourth Chap. I ustus autem si morte praeoccupatus fuerit:
in refrigerio erit. If the just person shall be prevented by death, he shall be
in a place of refreshing. And again in the same Chap* Raptus est, ne malicia
mutaret intellectu^m eius: aut ne fictio deciperet animamillius. He was taken
away violently, least malice should change his understanding, or least
counterfeited holiness should deceive his soul. If you will consider well, those
sayings of yt wise man, you shall have cause to think, that your brethren and
sisters departed, are not in such case now, that they should stand in need of
greater mercy, then Christ Jesus has already showed unto them. But more of
this: when I shall come to speak of these words of yours. You say that we are
fools to pray for the dead. Your Brother Aaron (you say) was living at that
time when you did so vnduetifullie depart from your mother (but he is now
dead) to whom as to your Father and mother, you beeseeche Christ to give life
everlasting. A good and charitable petition. I wysh the same to you, and to all
others whatsoever: knowing that none can have everlasting life, otherwise then
by Gods free gift, through Jesus Christ our Lord. But your self and men of
your sort, may not acknowledge any such free gift, for that you do (by your
often and long prayers, your holiness and austerity of life, and your continual
fastinges, and often scourging of your selves with your holy whyppes) deserve
this life everlasting, both for your selves and for others. So that you are
become saviors of your selves, and of as many as do (or will) believe as you
do, and teach others to believe. And thus you conclude your answer to the
Letter which your mother sent you, written (as you think) by Master Kings man,
the Scriuner. As touching ye writer of that Letter, your conjecture is right.
You proceed and say.


Friar. I am now to certify you, of my state, welfare, and abiding, and how I
am likely to live. First of al therefore, I beseech Jesus Christ give you the
grace of his holy spirit, unto the intent, that this which I write, may be to
his honor, to your co^uersio^, and your souls health.


Crowley. We shall now be certified of your estate, welfare etc. You
beseech Jesus Christ to give the grace of his holy spirit to your mother
etc. I hope she has already received so large a measure of that holy spirit,
yt whatsoever you have, or shall write, shall not be able to remove her from
that foundation whereon she is builded: which is the Rock Christ, and that
notwithstanding any assaults that you can make, she shall remain still settled
upon that Rock, to her souls health. And that your writings and mine
together, shall be to the honor of Christ Jesus, either in your returning again
from your Apostacy, or else in your utter confusion.

Now you enter into your discourse concerning your departing, your travel and
dangers, that you endured and escaped, before you were brought to this blessed
rest wherein you now remain: the manner and holiness of the life that you
lead there, and have vowed and so purpose to lead, so long as GOD shall give
you life upon earth. Last of all, you use an earnest, and (as you think) a
pithie Oration, to move your mother to be at destance with that Religion that
she now holds, and with all the teachers thereof: As Crowley, and the rest:
to burn her Books of Sermons, to use the English Bible no more, to go no
more to the Sermons of Protestants, but to pray to our blessed Lady, and to
hang her faith upon her son Samuels sleeue. And thus your discourse begins.


The Friar. My departure from you, was upon the Monday (as I remember) after
Low Sundaie, in the after noone. That night I was lodged, not far from
London. Two or three nights after that, I went by night a mile from London. The
Saturday before that I departed from you, I went to shrift, (as we call it in
England) or in other words, I was at confession, in a place, where I confessed
my sins to a Priest, who gave me absolution and penance. The Mondaie after
that, I departed from you, under pretense of the Hebrewe Lesson, which the
mischievous Heretic Barber taught me: The Fridaie after that, I went by night
a mile from London, where I remained in great fear, the space of two or three
weeks. There I heard the first mass that ever I heard.


Crovvley. Concerning the time of your departing from your mother, your going
to shrift the Saterdaie before, your lodging so nighe London for the space of
two or three nights after your departing, your going by night a mile of from
London, your tarrying there for the space of three weeks in great fear, and
hearing the first mass that ever you heard the Fridaie after you were gone
from your mother, I must pass over, as matter more to be mused at, then to be
entreated of in this my discourse. But this seems something strange to me,
that your ghostly father would absolve you before he had given you penance. By
like he was some unskillful penitancer, or else you being yet but a Nouice in
Popery, have used the Figure Hysteron Proteron in making the report. I perceive
that I my self, was at your age a much more skillful Papist then you be, and
was much more able to defend Popery then you are, or are like to be. In
poprie Contrition and confession go before satisfaction, and both must be
voluntary, full and unfeigned, and then the ghostly father, and the ghostly
child must agree upon penance. For no Popish ghostly father, will or may
enjoin his ghostly child* any other or greater penance, then himself will
acknowledge yt he is centented to take and to do. And this seems to me yet
more strange, that having confessed your sins, and received absolution and
penance, and being reconsiled on the Saterdaie, you could be partaker of our
Communion, on the next day, in company of your mother* whose prayers (as you
have said before) are nothing worth, because she is not of that society that
you were by that ghostly father received into.

Have Papists now such a privilege, that they may simul^re and dissimulare:
counterfeit and dissemble at their pleasure? Christ has said thus. Whosoever
shall deny me before men. I will deny him before my heavenly father, and
before all his holy Angels. You have not therefore taken up your Cross to
follow Christ (as you seem to be persuaded that you have done) but you have
dissembled with Christ and Christians, that you might with less danger of
body ^^ippe from them, and follow Antichrist. If I might talk with you mouth
to mouth, I would desire to know of you, what manner of sins they were that
you confessed to that Priest your ghostly Father. I suppose they were not the
stubburnesses and points of disobedience that you from time to time have used
in all your behavior toward your father and mother, and all other your
Governors and betters. Neither can I think, that they were the subtle
sleights that you have used, in deceiving your father and mother, me, and your
Godmother my wife, and others your Tutors, friends, and fellows, or the false
lies that you have made, and s^outlie faced out, when due proof of that which
you had done could not be made. You know what I mean. If you were present. I
would be more plain and plentiful in speeches, then in writing I do think
if meet to be. To be brief. I can not think that you confessed the
transgression of any one of the Commanndements of God. But that you had been
at the Sermons of the protestant Preachers, and had heard them, and taken the
notes of them, and had framed your self in some points to follow them,
although in very deed but very little. Yea, and that you had not holden and
defended to the utter most of your power, the Romish Catholic Religion, but
had willingly heard and read, and sometimes your self uttered, vnreuerent
speeches both by word and by writing, to the derogation of that high dignity
of your most holy Father the Popes holiness, Gods Vicar upon earth, and the
universal head of the universal Catholic Church of Christ. Yea and in
derogation of that holy Order that you your self do now profess. If I had
been with you when you made that confession of your sins. I could have put
you in mind of that English Interlude that you wrote, when you last dwelt in my
house, wherein you appointed my little kinsman to play one part in the habit
of a Friar, with this speech. Deus hic, Deus hic, and God be here, is not
this an holy speech for a Friar* You confessed I think, that you never took
ashes on Ashewensday, nor bear Palm on Palm Sondaie, nor crept to the cross
on good Fridaie, nor fasted on the Ember days, nor on any saints vigill, nor
yet on any Friday in the whole year. But I fear me you did forget that
blasphemy that in your forenamed Interlude, in that part that you appointed for
your fellow John Goughe, in these words, to be spoken in the person of the
mother of Christ, in the derogation of the Popes doings, in that he took
upon him to alter the Calender of the year. The words are these.

What means this foolish man to prate?
Now surely I marvel much.
What does him cause this wise to chat,
As though there were none such?
As he himself throughout the world,
Upon him so does take:
As though that he the heavens and earth,
And eke the sea did make.
He changes my birth day,
And will my child bed rule at his will:
Which he shall never bring to pass,
Whilst world remains still.
If you did in your shrift forget these words of blasphemy, breathed out
against your holy father, the Popes holiness: your confession that you then
made was imperfect, and so all that then was done, not worth a dry Walnut.
Yea and although you did not forget to confess it, yet if the Priest your
ghostly Father, that gave you absolution, had not a more large Commission,
then commonly your holy father uses to give to such single soled sir John's
as they be, which in these days come from Rome, he had no power to absolve
you for so horrible a sin, committed against your holy Fathers own
person, his triple crown and dignity. No remedy you must to Rome, for that
absolution that you have already received, is not worth the leanest ^owse, that
ever crawled in the cowle of a Francisean Friar. But to let these things pass,
till you and I shall meet together again, I would gladly know wherein you
can note Barber to be so mischievous an heretic. Is it because he taught you
a Lesson of the Hebrewe tongue? or was it because he did it gratis, and took
no reward of your father for his pains taken therein. Surely his meaning was
good to you wards, and that reward that you render unto him now, saueureth of
too too great ingratitude. A vice that all honest men do abhor. But let this
pass also, till Master Barber and you may come to talk together. I doubt not
but you shall then (...)de him more friendly to you, then by those words
written by you, you have deserved. I marvel how you could stay your
laughter, when you sa^e the iestures and behauiours that the priest used in the
first mass that ever you heard. Did you not laugh in your slaeue, to see an
old fool, or a young boy (for I know not of what age the Priest that said
the mass was) play with a white round cake, as a young Catte uses to play
with a Mouse that is more then half dead? Did you not smyle within your self
to see him in his Plaiers garments, and to use his turns and half turns, his
winckings, his staringes, his liftinges and his layings down, and in the end
the eating up, and his slouenly supping up of all himself, and blessing such
as were present with the empty Cup? Or if he did vouchsafe to make you
Communicants with him: did you not mark how he gave you Wine, over which he
had used no words of coniuration (or as they do term it) consecration, as he
had done over the other Wine which he had lifted over his head, and supped up
himself? If none of all these things could cause you to laugh or simyle* then
undoubtedly you had lost that accident which the Logicians call Proprium
hominis, An accident proper to man, to be apt to laugh or smyle* But let us see
now what you did on May day, next after your departing from your mother.


The Fryaer. From thence I departed upon May day, early in the morning on
hor^backe toward Sussex. I was in Sussex and Hampshire three months. Good
Gentlemen gave me, when I departed from London, forty or fyftie shillings to
come over Seas. The danger was so great, and the examinations at the Sea shore
so straight, that I knew not what to dog. Again, other letts I had, that I
could not take shipping, until the end of lulie welnere. All this while (I
thank God) I wanted nothing: neither apparel, meat nor drink, nor money.
Upon S. James even, I took shipping at mydnight, with a Gentleman, a good
Catholic, or as you would term him, a Papist, I being a Papist with him. So
we two Papists took shipping at Arundell Haven in Sussex, to go to Rome. We
were in great hazard of our lives upon the Seas, from Sunday night, until
wednesday afternoon. At what time we arrived both in France, at Diepe in
Normandy. From Diepe we came to Roane in Normand^e, where I stayed a
fortnight. After that I came to Paris, (the cheifest City in France) from
thence to Rhemes, where I stayed a tweluemonth and above. So I traveled in
France, before I came to an abiding place, welnere fourscore leagues: that is
to say, eightscore miles almost. Being at Rhemes, I went, (or at the least I
should have gone) every day to the morning mass. After which mass, our
custom was to break our fast, and after that to go study. I was in the
English College at Rhemes, where we were welnere two hundred English men. I
lived there passing well, as concerning meat, drink, and other necessities*


Crovvley. By this discourse of your peregrination, it appears, that
Antichrist has his friends amongst English men, both in, and about London,
and also abroad in other parts of ye Realm, and in France also. Good
Gentlemen you say, (you should have said, villainous Traitors) gave you money
to come over the Seas. Other, (whether Gentlemen or Yeomen, you say not) set
you on horseback on May day, early in the morning, and so like me^ that bare
more good will to Autichrist of Italy, then to Christ. and his anointed
Deputy in England: conueighed you into Sussex, and Hampshyre, where men of like
fidelity toward God, and our Prince and Country, ministered unto you all
things necessary, so that the young Romish traitor, and fugitive son, that
like a most rebellious Child, had robbed his father and mother, of that help
and comfort, that both by the Law of God and of nature, all Parents should
have at the hands of their sons and daughters, is amongst them so maintained,
that for the space almost of three months, he lacks neither meat, drink,
nor money. After all this, a Gentleman, a good Catholic, a Papist (you say)
with your self, a Papist also* (a pair of Italian Pygions) took shypping on
S. James even at midnight etc. If the Queens Majesty's Officers in Arundell,
had borne so good will to her majesty and Country as by oath and alegiance
they should have done, your good Catholic Gentleman and you should have been
brought back again to London, and not have been in such hazard of your
lives at the Sea, as you say you were, from Sunday night, till wednesday after
noone. But God will be revenged upon such brybing Officers, as can look through
their fingers, and suffer such good Catholic Gentlemen as you and your guide
were, to pass without examination, contrary to their oathe and alegiance to
their Prince and Country. Well, you escaped that hazard of your lives, and
arrived both in France, at Diepe, etc: Your travel was great, from Diepe to
Roane, from Roane to Paris, from Paris to Rhemes, where you stayed twelve month
and more etc. See how much wiser you be then Waltams Calfe, that ran nine
miles after a Bull to suck him. You say, that you ran welnere fourscore
leagues, that is almost eightscore miles. And what other cause had you, then
such as may rightly be said to be the desire to suck a Bull? At Rhemes
(you say) you were exceeding well, and lacked no necessities (you should have
said, necessaries) being accompanied with two hundredth Englishmen* welnie.
There you did go (or at the least should have gone) to the morning mass
every day. Here you give me some occasion to call to mind that saying,
Coelum non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt. They that run over the Sea,
do not change their mind but the air. You have always loved your cowche so
well, that you could not be the first that should arise in the morning. And
when you were in Cambridge, it was noted to be a great fault in you, that you
would oftentimes pretend sickness, and the grief of your Rupture, so that you
could not arise to the morning exercise, but to dinner you could come. So I
must think, that though you did in Rhemes, sleep out your morrow mass, yet
you would not be found slack at breakfast, or (at the least) at dinner* And
this might be some cause that you were not so well liked of in the College at
Rhemes, for such as were studious there, must see that your running wit could
not setle if self to any grave study. And therefore it was your best way to
depart thence, and to hide your self in a Friars Cowle. I remember a speech
that Table players do use, when such a chance rises on the dice that they
can not play to any advantage, the party, that did cast the chance uses to
say, it is naught. The other that plays with him uses to answer thus, Then
make a Friar of it. This speech was commenly used in England, when the Orders
of Friars were in as high estimation in England, as they are new in France.
It did spring up of that custom yt was then common amongst English men. as it
is new in France and other Countries where the Orders of Friars be. An idle
Lubber that will not endure any honest labor, will make shift to creep into
the habit of a Friar, wherein he may loyter, and be fed by the labor of
other men, and by the sweat of other men's faces. Of this more shall be said, when
I have occasion to write of your manner of entering into the profession of your
S. Franncis Order. You proceed in your discourse, and thus you say:


The Friar. When I had for the space of sixteen of seventeen months dwelt in
Rhemes, I longed very much to go to Rome in Italy, to the English College
that our holy father, the Popes holiness, maintained there, for the conversion
of our miserable Country. To Rome also I had gone, if God of his wonderful
grace and mercy, had not otherwise and in better sort prepared for me. In the
mean season, I went to visit Churches, to hear masses, to kiss Saints
Relics, to pray to God for you and for our Country in Fry^ies, and
Monasteries. I liked very well the Gray Friars, the Augustine Friars, the
Black Friars, otherwise called Carmelites, the white Friars, and other sorts
of Religion, as also the Charterhouse Monks, the Black Monks and others.
Whilst that I did thus take pleasure in visiting Fryeties and Abbeys, Nunneries
and such other devout places: it pleased God to touch my hard heart, and to
mollify it with the tears of devotion. To be brief, I took in mind to leave
study, and to forsake the life of a Scholar, which I led at the English
College, and to make my self a Friar or a Monk, as others did. I sought
therefore by all means possible* of mine own free will, no man constrayning
me, to leave the world or worldly things, and be a Religious man. I knew
not whether it were best for me to be a Charterhouse Monk, or a Minime Friar.
Which Fririe of Minimes, is an extreme straight kind of life, as afterward you
shall hear.


Crowley. Your sickle wit appears still more and more. You were very well
(you say) in the College at Rhemes: yet after seauenteene months aboade
there, you longed very much to go to Rome in Italy, by like ye exercise of
learning in Rhemes, was greater then your idle head could away with, and
therefore you longed so greatly to go to Rome, in hope to find a more idle
life there. To go from place to place, from Frierie to Frierie, from the
Nuns to the Munckes, to hear mass, and to kiss the Relics of Saints,
was a iollye idle life. But I pray you, are you assured that the Relics that
you kissed were the Relics of Saints? When the Relics that were in
Churches in England, came into the hands of them that could and would consider
them with indifferent eyes* I my self saw one bone, that had a Label of
parchment fastened to it, wherein was written. * Os sancti Bartholomei, A bone
of S. Bartholomew. But when this bone was well viewed, it was found to be the
shoulder bone of a young Pig, the broad and thin part thereof being pared
of with a knife, as did most plainly appear. In the Abbay of Hayles, a
Relic was kept, which was said to be the blood of Christ, but when the Pyx
(wherein it was kept) was opened, it was found to be a matter like very fine
sand, or a liquid Gum of a sanguine color. I my self (being then but
young) did see and read the History of the bringing of that supposed blood
thither, which History was written in a Table fast by the entering into that
Chapel where the Relic was kept. The history was so doubtful, that even
then I began to doubt of the truth thereof. For in the History it was not
plainly affirmed to be a portion of the blood that ishued out of the body
of Christ, but either a portion of that blood, or else of blood that ishueed out
of a crucifix that was found in the house of a Jewe in Jerusalem, and set-vp on
the Mount of Caluerie in derision, into ye side whereof, blind Longius, was
caused to thrust his Spear, whereby great plenty of blood did ishue, and was
reserved by such as were present. etc. The Nails that fastened our Savior to
the Cross, were in number but three, and they came all to the hands of
Constantine the Emperor, by his mother Helena. He caused one of them to be
wrought into the byt of his bridle, that he should use in the wars, another
in the Coone of his Helmet, to fasten his plume of Feathers in, and the third
he carried always about him, and being in danger in a storm on the Adrian
Sea, he cast it in to the Sea to stay the rage thereof. This is written by
Roman Catholics, wherefore you must not deny it to be true. Now consider
with your self, whether you have been borne in hand that you have kissed any
of those nails or not. I could say something of our Ladies milk, her gloves,
her smock, her heayre, etc. Of the bread that was left at Christ's last
supper, of the I se that was frozen in that night wherein he was borne etc.
Well, why^st you were thus occupied, your hard heart was mollified with the
tears of devotion. You should have said, of superstition, and desire to lead
a loyterers life. You determined to leave ye life of a Scholar (which in very
deed you could never delight in) because you might not be idle in that kind
of life, and sought by all means possible to obtain the habit of Religion,
and at the last you obtained a Minimes habit.


The Friar. I came (you say) from Rhemes to Paris, to ask the habit of a
Religious man, from thence I returned (say you) to Rhemes. Whether after that I
came, I was received with other two Englismen into the Frierie, in which we
stayed for the space of a month. After which term, one of us was received,
the other two, whereof I was one, being sent to the English College, there to
stay till some other occasion might fall out. Three weeks being passed, I was
sent to a City in Loraine, called Verdun, eight and forty miles distant from
Rhemes. Since which my departure from the English College. I saw no more
Rhemes. Being at Verdun, the Provincial of Lions, (or as he may be called,
after the terms of Religion, which in Catholic time were used in England)
the chief Pryor of Lions, took me with him and paid my charges, from the
foresaid City of Verdun to Lions in France, which are a hundred leagues,
that is to say, two hundred miles. Being there arrived, after a fortnights
end* I was weeded with a Friars weed. Then my sofe linen shy^ts, were turned
into rough woollen shyrts, my black Scholerlike garments, into a brown gown,
with large fleeues as the Gray Friars have. My hatte was turned into a Friars
hood. So I being changed in garments, began also to change my life. I lived so
at Lions the space of twelve month a Nouice, to see if I could abide the
hardness of life that was there necessary to be ab^dden. At the twelve month
end, I liked well of all things, and the Friars lyked well of me. So I made
my profession, the sixth day of January, in the year of our Lord. 1586. two
years and a half after I departed from you* I made as I say my profession,
that is to say, I made a solemn vow or promise unto God, to hue all the days
of my life in this world a Friar. And furthermore, I vowed chastity, nere to
have wife, pou^^tie, to be poor, to have nothing, not so much as the garments
on my back for mine own. And also obedience, to be obedient to the Pryor, and
to my superiors. The Order whereof I am, is called the Order of S. Frauncis of
Paula. It was never yet in England, but we hope it shall shortly be. We are
called Minimes, in french, bone homes, that is in English, good men, although
we be not worthy of the name, (for no man is good, except God) yet by reason of
our hardness of life, and of the virtuous behavior of our brethren we are so
called.


Crowley. See how intolerable travel this Waltams Calfe endures, in
following after that Bull whom he desires so greatly to suck. He posteth from
Rhemes to Paris, and to Rhemes again, from thence to Verdun in Loraine, from
thence to Lions in France and there he was invested or weeded as he terms it,
with a Friars weed, which he calls the habit of a Religious man. This man
has forgotten that Christian men are Religious men, and that there is no
Religion comparable to the Christian Religion. He does not consider, that the
rest which are called Religious are but superstitious, and not Religious in
deed. In that supersticious weed he continues twelve months: and then he
made his profession* He has forgotten that profession that his Godfathers and
his Godmother made in his name in ye Church of Wal^a^, and he himself
confirmed in the Parish Church of S. Gyles at Creplegate of London. He vowed
then to live a Christian, but now he has vowed to live a Friar, that is to
say, an hypecrite. He has vowed he says, wyueles chastity, but let Friar John
Frauncis, beware of buggery. O Friar John, remember the words of the Apostle,
Qui non contine^t, ^^ba^t, Let them that conteyneth not, marie, Et melius est
nubere quam vri. It is better to marye then to burn. 1. Co. 7. Consider the
meaning of the Apostles words to the Ephesians 5. Nolite communicare operibus
infructuosis tenebraru^, magis autem redarguite. Quae enim in occulto fiunt ab
ipsis, turpe est and dicere. Have nothing to do with the unprofitable works of
darkness but rather rebuke them. For it is a filthy thing, even to speak of
those things or actions, that are wrought of the^ in secret. Crave of God his
holy spirit to direct you in ye right understanding of these words, according
to the council of the Apostle S. James, Chap. 1. If any of you do lack
wisdom, let him ask it of God, which gives to all men indifferently etc.
Yea, and consider the words of the Apostle Paul to the Romans. Chap. 1.
Mutauerunt gloriam incorruptibilis Dei, in similitudinem corruptibilis hominis,
and volucrum and quadrupedum and serpentium. Propter quod tradidit illos Deus
in desideria cordis eorum, in immunditiam, vt contumelijs afficerent corpora
sua in semetipsis: qui commutauerunt veritatem Dei in mendacium, et coluerunt
et seruierunt creaturae, potius quam creatori, qui est benedictus in secula.
Amen. They have turned the glory of the incorruptible God. in to the
similitude of a corruptible man, and of flying fowls, and of fourefooted
beasts, and of creeping serpents. Wherefore God gave them over unto their own
hearts desire, into uncleanness, that they might defile their own bodies, even
in themselves: which had changed the truth of God into a lie, and had
worshipped and served the creature, more then the creator, which is blessed for
ever, Amen. Consider (I say) these words of the Apostle Paul, with the rest
that follow. Propterea tradidit illos Deus, in passiones ignominiae. Nam
faeminae eorum, immutauerunt naturalem vsum, in eum vsum quiest contra naturam.
Similiter autem and masculi, relicto naturali vsu faeminae, exarserunt in
desiderijs suis in inuicem, masculi in masculos, turpitudinem operantes, and
mercedem (quam oportuit) erroris sui, in semetipsis recipientes etc. Wherefore,
God gave them over to shameful lusts. For their women changed their natural
use into that which is contrary to nature. In like manner the men also, leaving
the natural use of the woman, burned in their lusts or filthy desires, one
toward an other, men with men wrought filthiness, receiving in themselves the
reward of their error, which (in Gods justice) was due unto them. Consider
(Samuel) I pray thee, even in the tender bowels of Christ Jesus, in whom I do
yet love thee, and do hope (by the help of his spirit) to win thee to him
again. Consider I say, these words of the Apostle. And undoubtedly thou
shall see, that, that Romish Church, which calls herself Catholic, is
herein plainly painted out. Have they not changed, and do they not still
change, the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of a
corruptible manne. When they have set forth, and do still set forth, the
majesty of God to the view of man's eye, by the Image of an old man, made of
Timber, stone, or other matter, or wrought by ye cunning of Painters or
Embrotherers? Does not Esaias the Prophet deride these doings, both in the forty
and in the four and forty Chapters of his book? And does not the Prophet
David deride the^ in ye Psalm; 115. after the Hebrews account, but after your
account 113. The ancient interpreters of the Scriptures, do with one consent
condemn the making and having of the Image of the divine majesty. And yet that
Romish Catholic Church, dare still make it, have it in their Churches, and
fall down before it. Has not God in Exo. 20. Expressly forbidden the making
and worshipping of all manner of Images? And how dare any man make, or
worshipp them, or say that, that Church is Christ's Church, that does both make
the^, worship them, and persecute those Christians that refuse to do as they
do? Way well the words of the Apostle, when he says. That for this cause,
(that is, for turning his glory into the similitude of a corruptible man) God
has given them over to their own hearts desire^ etc. Their women have turned
the natural use into yt which is contrary to nature: and the men having left
the natural use of the woman (as you say you have vowed to do) have burned in
desire one toward an other, and men have wrought filthiness with men.

When GOD opened the heart of King Henry the eight, and gave him some sight of
the truth, he caused the Monks, the Friars, and the Nuns that then were in
his Realm to be examined, and by due and politic examination, they were
found to have done, even as S. Paul writes here. And when God shall open
the eyes of that Noble Prince that now reigns in France, or the eyes of
some Noble Prince that hereafter shall have the government of that noble
Realm of France, wherein you now live, undoubtedly, your secret filthiness
will be found out, and your hypocrites visoures will be plucked of your faces,
and you coats of counterfeited holiness, will be plucked of your backs, and you
will be turned abroad into the world (as our Hypocrites were in the days of
our King Henry) that you may learn to labor, and hy your own labor to
eat your own bread, and not to be fed any longer by the labors of other
men. Thus much I have thought meet to write, concerning the first part of your
vow, which is, to live in wyneles chastity.

The second part of your vow, is poverty. To be poor, to have nothing, not
so much as the Garments on your back for your own. This part of your vow, was
altogether needeles. For since you were borne, you never gave your self to any
such exercise, that you might be able thereby to have any thing of your own.
But you have been fed and clothed, and in all points sustained, by the
labors of your poor father and mother, and other that have hoped to see a
better proof of you then now is seen, and therefore extended their friendly
liberality to you. But now you say you have not one friend in all England, or
at the least way, amongst us that bare all the burden of your education* and
bringing up, even unto that time, wherein you did very vnduetifully give us
the slip, not once bidding us farewell. They therefore that have now caught
you, do not know what a Jewel they shall have of you, for it is like enough,
that after they shall have bestowed enough and too much upon you, you will
render unto them such thanks as you have rendered unto us. It shall be good for
them therefore in time to look upon, and to follow that Rule that S. Paul
wyshed the Thessalonians to follow. 2. These. 3. Si quis non vult operari, nec
manducet. If any man will not work, let him not eat. But you will answer me
and say: We do labor, for we rise every night at midnight, and we sing
Mattins before the blessed Sacrament of the Alter, we arise again at six of
the clock in the morning, and we sing two or three high masses every day.
etc. But let me tell you what I have heard reported concerning Frauncis, of
whom the Gray Friars do hold. That Frauncis was (as the report goes) a good
man, and gave himself to sore labor, in repayring of high ways that were
decayed in the Country where he dwelt. And on a time as he was at his labor,
a company of tall fellows that had been thieves, and were condemned to be
hanged, were by the Officers brought that way toward the Gallowse to be
executed. When Frauncis saw them, he was moved with pity, and besought the
Officers to stay the execution whilst he might go to the King, (who lay then
not far off) and beg their pardon, and so it was done. When Frauncis had
obtained pardon for these men, he clothed them in such apparel as the Gray
Friars do now wear, and girded those Garments to them, with the halters
wherewyth they should have been hanged. The Garment is very commodious, for it
is long and large, and may be tucked up short, and let down to the foot, as
occasion shall serve, and require for the commodity of the wearer of it. It
has a hoode that may hang on the back, and not be any let in labor, and when
need is, it may cover and defend the head and face from the injuries of the
wether. These men being thus apparailed, fell to their labor lustily, and in
short space, brought their masters work to such forwardnes, that he thought
meet to travail into some other part of the Country, to see where other
decayed high ways were, that he might keep his new men and himself in work
still. But to be brief, he was from them so long, that they having finished
the work that he left them in, had gotten them a house in the next Town, and
had persuaded the people thereof, that by rising at midnight, and making of
continual prayers unto God for that people that should seed and maintain
them without labor, they should be much more beneficial to the Common weal,
then they could be by any sore labor of their bodies in emending the high
ways that should be decayed. But when Frauncis came, and found them thus
occupied, he utterly misliked with them, and said unto them. Thieves I found
you, and thieves I leave you. And so departing from them, he would have no more
to do with them. If this be not true, then blame them that have made this
report of Frauncis, whom the Gray Friars take for their Patron. If it be true,
then you may see what beginning the Order of the Gray Friars had, and how
acceptable that rising at midnight and singing of Mattens and masses was to
that Frauncis, of whose holiness the Gray Friars do make so great bragges. And
so by good consequence, what account good and wise men should make of the great
pains that you and your Brethren do take, in your rising and singing both by
day and by night. Whether this Frauncis were your Frauncis of Paula or not, I
leave to be discussed by your self, with the help of the chief Pryor, or
Prouintiall of your Order, at your best leisure. Thus much for the second part
of your vow.

The third part of your vow, or (as you do term it) your third vow was
obedience, to be obedient to the Pryor, and to your superiors. If you had
considered well of that triple vow that was made for you in Baptism, and your
self confirmed, when you answered me in my Church at Creplegate in London, I
think you would have thought this new triple vow, altogether unnecessary:
except you meant to revoke your first triple vow made to GOD, and in steed
thereof to make a new triple vow to man. For what have you vowed here (in
substance) that was not vowed before in your first triple vow? Except this
only, that you vow now to live without a wise, so long as you shall live:
which is not in your power to perform, neither have you the example of any
Patriarch, Prophet or Apostle that made this vow, or taught any other to make
it, nor yet any promise of assistance at Gods hand in the performance of it*
You promised in the first vow^d keep your body in temperance, sobernes and
chastity. You promised to renounce the world, which is to be in the world, not
as of ye world, as having all things, and using all, and yet possessing
nothing, not as a Lord of things here on earth, but as a steward that looks
continually to be called to his account. You promised also obedience to your
Prince, and to all in authority under your Prince etc. but that vow you have
utterly renounced, and are now shrewded under the shield of Antichrist, and
hold by an immunitie, whereby you are exempted from the power of all Princes,
and do owe obedience to none, but to that great Antichrist and your graund
Pryor, and such superiors as be of that sort. The Lord open the eyes of your
under standing, that you may see whose serui^e you have forsaken, and to whom
you have made your self a slave, and what wylbe the end, if you repent not.
Well, you proceed and you say:


The Friar. Our life is as follows. We never eat flesh, nor eggs, nor
butter nor cheese, nor milk, nor any thing else that comes of flesh, except
in great sickness. So that being in good health we eat Fysh, Oil, and fruits,
when they be given us. We eat not to fill our belly, but to sustain nature.
VVe^ also speak not one to another at dinner and supper, except there be great
necessity. We fast, eating but once a day, from the day of all Saints, to
Christmas day, except Sondayes. The like from Shrouesunday to Easter day.
Likewise every Friday in the year, and wednesday, except the Wednesdaies
between Christmas and Shrouetide, and between Easter and Whitsontide. All
other wednesdayes we fast* We touch no money. We rise every night Winter and
Somer, hot and cold at midnight, to sing Mattins, before the blessed
Sacrament of the Alter, the precious body and blood of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, which is there kept over the high Alter. We sing two or three
high Masses every day.


Crovvley. And here you have set down in the margin of your Letters, a note
to be (as it were) a caveat for your mother and Father, and all other that may
seem to mislike with your Religion, and thus you say.


Friar. You think that we be foles, because that we light wax candles at day
light, and because of other our Ceremonies. You think that we be fools, and
our Religion folly. But hear what you may read in the book of Wisdom,
Chap. 5. where it is written, that the damned in the latter day, bewayling
their foolishnes, shall speak these words. These be they, whom in times past
we have had in derysion, and in the similitude of mockery. We being fools
esteemed their ^ife to be madness, and their end without honor. But now, how
are they numbered amongst the sons of God? and amongst the Saints their Lot is
fallen. We have erred from the way of truth, and the light of justice has not
shined upon us, and so forth. Take heed I pray you, that you be not one of
them, that shall so bewail themselves in the day of ^udgment.


Crovvley. Thus far goes your merginall note.

To this note of yours, I say thus. There is good cause to move you to think,
that we do think that you are fools: for you can not but know, that we do
know, that there is no wisdom in the^ that do so waste the good creatures of
God, as you do, that wax which you do burn in the day light, when there is
no use of that artificial light, because the natural light, does then serve
the turn of every creature that needs* ye use of light. And that madness of
yours is so much the greater, for that you set those lights before stocks and
stones, that are fashioned like men and women, and have the form of eyes, but
not ye sense of sight. Yea and the Prophet D^^i^ in the Psalm. 115. Does
account you no wiser then those stocks and stones be, when he says thus. They
that make them, are like unto them, and so are all they that repose trust in
them. You say, that your other Ceremonies do cause us to think that you are
fools, and your Religion folly. In truth you conjecture right. For we know
that no wise man in the world, would use such Ceremonies as you do, nor
profess such a Religion, wherein there is (in manner) nothing but mere madness:
As I hope I shall make manifest to al wisemen, in my discourse upon the
several points thereof.

But first, we must lend you our ears a while, till you have told us what
we may read in the Book of Wisdom. Chapter. 5 Where it is written, that the
damned in the latter day, be wayling their foolishnes, shall speak these words.
etc. as above. First of all, I must say unto you, that we did know, and did
understand the meaning of those words of wisdom, before you were Friar John,
yea, and before you were Samuel Debnam. If you had asked c^unsell of Nicholaus
Lycanus, (which was a Friar Minor) h^^ would have told you another meaning of
the wisemans words, th^n that which you do gather. He writes thus. Siabi^t
iust^in magna constant^^: quia perfecti ^um Christo indicabunt. A duersos ^os
qui se angustiauerunt, inferendo eis noeumentum in personis. ^t qui a^stulerunt
lab^res little, eis nocendo in rebus possessis. The rightecus shall stand in
great constancy: for the perfect men shall sit in indgment with Christ,
against such as have distressed them, in doing them hurt in their persons.
And such as have taken from them their labors, in hurting them in those things
that they possessed. If these words of the wise man must be applied to you, so
that you should be the Just men that shouid stand forth with so great
constancy, then must you also be the damned that in the latter day shall
bewail their own foolishnes, for that none does dis^resse you in your own
persons but your self. You are they that do punish your selves, by going and
lying woolward, by abstaining from flesh, by rising at midnight, and by
whypping and scourging of your s^lues: and who does or can hurt you in those
things that you possess, ^ith you have vo^^ed, never to possess any thing, no
not so much as the garments that belong to your own bodies. And who can take
from you, any fruits of your labors, seeing that you never labor, and
therefore can not reap any fruits of any labor that is done by you, but
are fed, and have professed that you will and must still, be fed by the
labors of other? But will you know what Saint Austen writes, against the
second Epistle of Gaudentius, that was Bishop of the Donatistes? In the 27.
Chapter of that book, Tom. 7. S. Augustine writes thus. Agnoscite scelus
vestrum, and nol^te vobis vsurpare no men alienum. Scriptura dixit. Tunc
stabunt ^usti in magna constantia aduersus eos q^i se angustiauerunt, and qui
abstulerunt labores eorum. Non dixit, stabunt om^es qui ^ala passi sunt: sed
stabunt^i^sti. Sicut dominus cum dixisset: Beati qui persecut^^nem patiuntur,
^is^ addidisset prop^er iustitiam, non solos significaret, qui pro s^a in
domino patientia coronantur: sed etiam illos qui i^stis legibus puni^ntur.
Quapropter, siad vos put at is haec iustonum verba quae scripta sunt pertin^re:
prius an iusti sit^s ^stendite. Acknowledge (sath S. Auste^) your own
wickedness, and do not usurp a name that belongs not to you. The Scripture
has said: Then the just shall stand in great c^nstancie, against them that
have distressed them, and have taken away their labors. It has not said, as
many as have suffered evil shall stand: but the just shall stand. Even as when
the Lord had said: Blessed are they that suffer persecution, except he had
added for righteousness, he should have meant, not the^ alone which are crowned
for their suffering in the Lord, but them also that are punished by just laws.
Wherefore, if you do think, that these words that are written, do appertain
unto you: show first whether you be righteous, or no. And in ye same place it
follows thus. In deed you have amongst you righteousnesses yt you brag of,
great matters, as ye dividing of Christ, the cutting off, of the Sacraments of
Christ, yt for saking of the peace of Christ, war against ye members of Christ,
accusations against the spouse of Christ, and the denying of the promises of
Christ* These are your righteousnesses, for which forsooth, you shall stand in
great constancy. Thus far Augustine.

Now, if I may be so bold with you, let me see whether these latter words of
S. Austen may not be rightly applied unto you Minime Friars, and such other
Religious persons. Do you not divide Christ, when you ascribe your
salvation, part^y to faith in him, and partly to your own works, and to the
merits of Saints? and when, in the Office of mediation, you join with him his
blessed mother, and such other as lived holily in this transitory life? Do you
not cut off the Sacraments of Christ? and after a sort you abrogate them, when
you minister Baptism to belles, Churches, and Churchyardes, and ships, which
you call the hallowing of these things, and when in your con^urations, you
christen Cattes and such other creatures to deceive the devil withal, when
you have promised to give him a christened creature? And when you teach that
in the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, there remains no substance
of bread and wine, and so you make it no Sacrament. For (as you once learned,
and did openly confess in my Church) every Sacrament must consist of two
parts, that is, both of earthly and of heavenly matter, and not of the one
matter only? And when you give it that new name, calling it the Sacrament of
the Altar, and when you do reserve it, hanging it over your Altar, carrying
it abroad to show it to the people, teaching them to fail down and worship
it, and so make an Idol of it? Yea when in your mass you make a sacrifice of
it, for ye sins both of the living and of the dead? yea and in storms and
tempestious wether, you make it a bugge to fear the devil withal. And when
you teach that the peace of men's consciences, must not be stayed upon the
faith in Christ only: but upon the worthiness of the works that are wrought
by men, do ye not forsake the peace of Christ? Yea when you hold, some of
Frauncis (as you and the Gray Friars do) some of Austine, as the Augustine
Friars do, some of Dominicke, as the Dominicane Friars do: some of Marye, as
the Carmelite or white Friars do: and some of Jesus, as the new found
Jesuits do. And to be brief, all the rabble of your Religious: do ye not
all forsake that peace that GOD has given in his peace maker Christ, and seek
it in them whose Religions you profess, whose rules you follow, and whose
names you bear? Did not S. Paul blame the Corinthians, for that they
forsaking this peace of Christ, would hold one of Cephas, another of Apollo,
another of Paul, another of Christ? Were you baptized in the name of Paul?
says he. Was Paul Cru^ified for you? I fear me you be rebaptised: For what
means the changing of your name? In your first baptism, you were called
Samuel, and by your Fathers progeny Debnam, and by your profession a
Christian. But now you must be called John Frauncis. And what means this, but
that the name of Frauncis, has blotted out both the name of Debnam, and the
name Christian also.

If search shall be made in the Register that is kept in the Parrish Church of
Waltam, it will be sound there, that one Samuel Debnam was baptized there: and
not John Frauncis. So that Samuel Debnam is the Christian, and John Frauncis
is the Friar. Judge you whether of these is likely to be found in Gods
Register, which is called the book of life. If Christ be that life, then they
are written in the book of life that be Christians, If Frauncis be not that
life, then are not they written in the book of life which be Franciscans, and
so of all other your Popish Religious. Be not deceived therefore Samuel. The
Corinthians whom Paul rebuked, did undoubtedly think as you do. That is,
that holding of Cephas, Apollo, and Paul: they did not forsake ye peace of
Christ. For so (I am assured) you think, that having professed the Religion of
Frauncis, you have not forsaken the Religion of Christ. And yet Paul does
charge them as men, that in their dooinges gave occasion to him to conceive
this opinion of them, that they were become Cephasians, Apollianistes, and
Paulists, and not Christians. Take heed Samuel, our adversary the devil is
subtle, and does oftentimes show himself in the likeness of an Angel of
light. You have (I think) read the sixth Chapter of Saint John's Revelations.
And you either have or may read, the godly and learned interpretations, that
godly learned men have made, concerning the four horses therein mentioned. The
first being white, does prefigure the time that was begun, when this
Revelation was showed to John, and did continue all his days, and has
continued ever since, and shall continue even to the end: although not so
generally, and so apparantlie as at the first. This white horse is gone forth,
and is not returned again, but goes forth still whether soever his rider will
direct him. And his ryder does with his arrows strike the hearts of such as he
will conquer and make subject unto him. And thus he goes forth still
conquering, that he might overcome and conquer. The second horse being
read, does signify the time of bloody persecution (which was also begun,
when this Revelation was showed to the servant of Jesus Christ, blessed S.
John. And his ryder had power given him to take pea^e from the earth* and he
had a great sword given him also. Whereby were signified the ten bloody
persecutions that followed immediately after the white horse was gone forth and
had conquered many. And those bloody perfecutions were executed by that great
sword the Roman Monarchy. The third horse was black* whereby was signified
the time of ignorance, that began again after the persecution was stayed,
(but not ended, for it continues to this day, and so shall it continue even to
the end.) The rider that rydde on this horse, had a Balance in his hand,
wherewith he wayed Gods Laws, and men's inventions, and deemed them to be of
like weight: and hereof sprung all those horrible heresies, that ever since
have, and do still trouble the Church, and especially that Pelagian heresy,
that your sort do still maintain, and the making of men's inventions equal
with Gods law, yea rather proferring them before Gods laws: but wine and Oil
that rider might not hurt. That is, he had no power to corrupt the text, either
of the old or new Testament. The fourth horse was pale, and signified the time
that followed immediately after this time of deep ignorance, and does continue
to this day, wherein great swa^mes of pale Hypocrites (eue^ such as you have
professed to be and to continue to your lives end) have been and are* still
bredde. The ryder of this horse is death, and hell follows after him. Take
heed therefore, your way is not the way of life, but of death. They that will
follow such blind guydes, shall fall into the pyt with them. You are they that
shall say in the last day: We have ^r^ed from the truth, and the light of
righteousness has not shined upon us, neither has ye sun of understanding
risen up unto us. We have weried our selves in the way of iniquity and
destruction, and we have walked in hard ways, but the way of the Lord we
have not known. For you be they that have distressed such as God has (by the
mediation of his Son) discharged of sin, and so justified them in his
sight, you have told them, that except they shall punish themselves as you do
your selves* they can not be saved. You have taken from such their labors,
when by your persuasions, they have bestowed that which they have gotten by
their labors upon you, to maintain you in idlen^s, hoping to be saved by
your holiness, which is nothing but mere hip^crisie. And thus much concerning
your forsaking of the peace of Christ.

You make war against the members of Christ, you accuse the spouse of
Christ, and you deny the promises of Christ, as Saint Austen has said to the
Donatistes, You proclaim open war against all such as dare say yt they have
received the spirit of Christ, and that they are by that spirit certified that
GOD in mercy has made them his own children by adoption, and so consequently
members of his son Christ. You accuse as Heretics, all such as dare say
that Christ Jesus has washed them so in the fountain of his own heart blood,
that now they be in him and through him, a glorious spouse unto him, not
having spotte or wrinkle or any deformity of some. The promises of Christ you
deny, in that you say, that not every one that believes and is baptized shall
be saved, no not though they make their belief known unto men by their
obedience to Christ, in following the Rule that he has prescribed, and
endeavoring to do as their heavenly Father has commanded. But he that will
be saved, must live in obedience to your holy father, the Popes holiness. Thus
much for ye applying of those words unto you, and other Popish Religious, that
Saint Austen wrote against the Donatistes.

Now to the Rule of your Religion, which is, (as you say) never to eat flesh
etc. In his first Epistle to the Corinthians, and the 8. Chapter, S. Paul's
writes thus. Esca autem, nos non commenda^ Deo. Meat does not make us more
acceptable to God. Neither are we the better if we eat, nor the worse if we
eat not. And again, in the sixth of the same Epistle. Esca ventri* and venture
escis. Hunc and has destruet Dens. Meats is appointed for the belly, and the
belly for the meat, but God will destroy both the one and the other. By these
places and diverse other, it appears that Christians have liberty to use all
Gods good creatures, and that they are not the better or more acceptable in
Gods sight. When they do use them, nor less acceptable when they refuse the
use of them, except the refusal do proceed of an opinion of some holiness or
vnholines in the use or refusal of them. If you feed not to fill your
bellyes, but to sustain nature, with thanks to God for his creatures, you do
well. But you are i^^greater danger to exceed in eating, when you feed upon
delicate fishes and fruits, then if you did feed upon such kinds of flesh,
as the common sort of people are accustomed to feed on. It is the moderate
use of Gods creatures, and our thanks given to him for them, that do make our
eating or abstayning, acceptable unto him. Your eating but once in a day, from
the day of All saints, to Christmas day, and from Shro^^ sunday to Easter
(which you call fasting) is nothing. For you may eat as much at one meal, as
might suffice you at two or three. The like is to be thought of all your
wednesdayes fastings, for they are but a diversity in eating or feeding. Your
refrayning the touching of money, may be thought to be a toy to mock an Ape
with all. And your rising at mydnight, may be opposite to your sleeping at
noone. You say, that you do at midnight sing your Mattins before the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, the precious body and blood of our Lord and Savior
Christ which is there kept over the high Altar. What pleasure you do, or can
do to that Sacrament, by singing your Mattins before it, I can not understand:
for I think it can not hear any one word that you do either sing or say, and
so it can not be delighted with the hermonie of your music. I put you in
mind of these things, because your greatest Clerks have written, that Christ
is not in that blessed Sacrament of yours, with his dementions and liniaments
of body, neither with his Organs of senses: but meruailously, and with out the
distinction of parts. I think therefore, that in the cold wether, it were more
wisdom for you to keep your selves warm in your beds, that when you be
waking, you may sing and make melody in your hearts to God: then to rise out of
your bedds, and sit quyuering and quaking in your wide and cold Quyer, to
pleasure him with music, that has not one ear to hear your harmony. For
undoubtedly, you can not but wysh that you had done, before you have well
begun. And what thanks can you look for at the hands of that Sacrament
that you sing your Mattins before? And in the hot or warm wether, I think
it should be more profitable for you, to be in your studies (if you have any)
at a convenient hour, endeavoring to learn the meaning of ye Prophet in
those Psalms that you use to sing in your Mattins (for the most part) without
understanding. Well, you sing two or three high masses every day. I think you
mistake your terms. For in such Churches as yours, there is but one high
mass, whether it be said or song, the other (though they be song) are not
called high masses, for they are not that mass that is appointed for that day,
but of our Lady, of S. George, of S. Dionice, S. Frauncis, or some other. But
what masses soever you sing or say, the more the worsse, and the fewer the
better. For the best is but Idolatry, der^gation to the glory of Christ's
passion, and seducing of Christians* and a mere mockerye of Christ's holy
institution.

You proceed now in the declaration of the straightnes of your Order: and thus
you say.


The Friar. We lie in our clothes in bed, without sheets, and yet we keep
our selves clean. We go to bed at 8* a clock, and rise at half an hour
past a leven. We return to our bed at half an hour past 2, or most
commonly at three, and rise again at six. When we have done (or when any
one of us has done a miss) he that has offended must do penance. Our
penaunces are to fast bread and water, to sit and dine upon the earth, to kiss
our bretherens (the Friars) feet, to whyp our selves the space of half a
quarter of an hour, more or less, according as the chief father thinks
good. we dare not speak one to another in the night time, except necessity
co^straine us. We dare not strike one another, in jest or in earnest. Our whips
are made, some of whyp cord the length of mine arm, with long knots cu^ningly
wrought. Other of our whyps are made of iron chains, such as women are wont to
hang their keys upon. Other have their whips with silver pins, to the intent
that the back canker not. My whyp is made of whypcorde. I had another made of
the foresaid chains, which I have used many times. I have (be it spoken to
the honor of God) whipped my self often times: I think forty times and above. In
which whipping, as I feel often times extreme pain, so also I have heavenly
co^solations, in so much that it is an easy thing with me now, to give my self
400. stripes at once before that I leave. (God knows I lie not) when we whip
our selves, either for devotion sake, in remembrance of the bitter passion of
our Savior, or else when we whyp our selves for penance, we do put of our
garments to the reins of our back, and turn our hood aside, so that our
back, arms and shoulders are naked, being so naked, with a discipline (as we
call it) or a whip in our hand, one of the Friars begins the 50. Psalm of
David, saying: Miserere mei Deus, secundum magnam misericordiam tuam. And all
the while that he says the Psalm, the other whippeth himself. In the mean
season, whilst that one does say the foresaid psalm. I have given my self for
devotion sake (because that Christ was whipped for me) four hundred stripes.
Every Friday, from our Ladies day in Lent, to May day, I whip my self for your
sake. And I pray for you, unto the intent that it may please God to turn your
hearts, and save your souls.


Crowley. Proceeding in the declaration of the straightnes of your life* you
say that you lie in your clothes in bed without sheets* and yet you keep your
selves clean. It may be so, for you have leisure enough to knacke your
creepers, when they begin to molest you, and Sta^^sacre, is a sovereign thing
to destroy that cattle that is accustomed to breed in the beds and bosoms
of such lasye Lubbers, as do accustom themselves to lie in their clothes. If
it be a point of holiness to lie in bed without sheets, then are the common
sort of people in diverse parts in England as holy as you, for they never lie in
any, and yet they putt of their clothes when they go to bed. And I my self
having been in some of those parts of the Realm, have taken such lodging as
the Country uses, but I have not lain in my clothes as you say that you do. I
do know by that little experience that I have had therein, that after a man is
acustomed for some space to lie in blankets, he will chose rather to continue
that kind of lodging then to change it. But let this matter pass, for a Louse
bredde in blankets, is not more holy then that Louse that is bredd in sheets.
And this Epitheten lousie, has been thought meet for a Friar ever since I
could remember. You say that you got to bed at eight of the clock. etc. I
know diverse Artificers in London (and I think such may be found in Paris also)
that laboring sore all the day long, do not sleep before eleven of the
clock, and yet rise again at four or five at the furdest, so yt they sleep
not above 6* hours in one night, where as by your own confession, you do
commonly sleep 7* hours, and do no labor at all, but loyter all the day
long. The Religion therefore of those laboring Artificers, is (in that point)
straighter then yours. When you do (or when any of you does) a miss: he
that has offended must do penance. If this be true, the^ must you all do
penance every day. For as the Psalmist says. 19. Delicta quis intelligit?
Who can be able to tell how often he offends? And Solomon says, Proverb. 24.
Septies cadet iustus (And as your sort do read his words) Septies in die
cadet iustus. The righteous person shall fall seven times in a day. But I am
sure, your meaning is not of such offenses as Solomon speaks of. That is, of
deeds that are done, words that are spoken, and thoughts that are conceived
contrary to Gods commandments: but your meaning is, of offenses committed
against the Rules of your Religion. As when you lust or long after any kind of
flesh, when you be slack in arysing to sing your Mattins before your blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, when being drowsye, you singe not lustilie, when you
pass by any of your Idols, and do not dowke low enough to them, when you
lowte not low enough to your Prior, and other your ancients in Religion, when
you think not so reverently of every point of your Religion as you have been
taught to do, when you behave not your self so devoutly in singing your
Mattins and high masses as you should do, when you speak to any of your
fellow Friars, either at dinner or at supper, or in the night, and when you
think well of, or wish well, to any of those Heretics, that have had the
bringing up of you, and have been too careful for you. I conjecture that
these be the misdeedes that you must do penance for. As for the breaking of
Gods commandments, that is no offense amongst Minime Friars. Well, you say
that your penaunces are to fast bread and water. etc. By this I conjecture
that your common drink is wine. Many honest men that labor sore, have water
for their common drink. I have heard of an Abbot in England, that inioined his
horse such penance, because he felt him too lusty and sturring under him.
Syrra (said the Abbot to his horsekeeper) see that you give not this horse any
thing for the space of these ten days, but only bread and water. Was not
this great penance for the poor horse to endure think you? The quality and
quantity of your bread may be such, that it shall rather be a pleasure then a
punishment to be put to that pennaunce. But grant that your bread which you
eat when you be put to penanuce, be such as King Achab commanded to be given
to Michaeas the Prophet. 3. Reg. 22. The bread of tribulation, and the water of
sorrow: Yet what a satisfaction is this, for so heinous an offense, as the
transgression of the least of Gods commandments. Adam was enjoined much
greater penance the^ this, and much longer time then for the space of one day.
For it was said to him by God himself. In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat
thy bread, all the days of thy life, till thou shall be turned again into
the earth. etc. And yet all this penance could not satisfy for that one sin
that he committed, when he tasted of the forbidfruite. Yea although all his
posterity even unto this day, had done, and we and our posterity should do,
such penance as you speak of, continually, even to the end of the world: yet
all this long penance could not reuerse this sentence, pronounced by God
himself. Morte morier^s. Thou shall die the death. Only the death of him, in
whom there never was any sin, is sufficient to satisfy for all sin. Your
dyning upon the earth with bread and water: the kyssing of your brethren the
Friars feet, the whipping of your selves for the space of half a quarter of
an hour, more or less, at the discretion of the chief father, may be some
outward sign of inward sorrow conceived for some offense committed, and some
argument of detestation thereof inwardly in the heart* But an Hipocrite may do
as much as all this, and yet delight in his wickedness still. Read the 58.
Chapter of Esaies prophesies. Nunquid tale est ^eiunium quod elegi? per diem
affligere hominem animam suam? etc. Is this the fast that I have chosen (says
the Lord, by the Prophet) for a man to afflicte his own soul for the space of
a day? to bow down the head like a Bulrush? to lie in sackcloth? wylt thou
call this a fast and a day acceptable to the lord? etc.

But when the chief father himself shall offend, who shall moderate his
whippings. I hope you will resolve me in that doubt at your next coming into
England. etc. You dare not speak one to another in the night. etc. Your whips
are made of whipcorde. etc. Your silence is not to be misliked if it be void
of superstition. That your whyps are made, some of one matter, and some of
another, is not much material. But the lack of such a hand to use the whips
as our Bedles in Bridewell have, is the cause that you lay on so many
hundreds at one time, and feel such heavenly consolation, after you have laid
so many hundred lashes upon your own backs. If you long to be well whipped
for your sins, or in the remembrance of the bitter passion of our Savior,
make a step over the Seas into England, and come to our Bridewell, you shall
find a good fellow there, that will give you four lashes with his whypp that
shall be more worth then any four hundredth of those lashes that ever you gave
your self, with any one of those whippes that you have used. Well, I will
descant no longer upon your apyshe whypping. Whippe your self still every
Friday from our Lady day in Lent, till May day, for your self if you list,
but not for us. Christ Jesus was once whypped for us, and crucified and dead
upon the Cross for us, and as the Prophet Esaias says. Chapter. 53. Disciplina
pacis nostrae, cecidit super illum. The correction that might purchase our
peace is fallen upon him. And by his wounds and stripes we are made whole.
We need no such mediators as the Minime Friars are. And except you do in
your prayers beg a better thing for us, then turning of our hearts from the
love and belief of the Gospel of Christ, to the love and belief of
Antichristian popery, I pray you make your prayers for those friends that you
have on that side the seas, for you have said before, yt amongst us you have
not one freende.


The Friar. This is (say you) the life that I lead, and that I am likely to
lead: in fasting and praying, in penance and pain, and great travel. This
life I have chosen to serve God in, no man living compelling me: of my own
free will I took it upon me. Many there were that did what they could to
hinder me, using many means to put it out of my head, yet have I gone
forward. Peradventure you will ask me the cause, why I have taken upon me
this life. I answer you, for my sins and for yours. Why was our blessed
Savior borne in a stable of horses, without pomp and vanity? Why was he
circumcised and his blood drawn? why did he travel from place to place, from
City to City, from Village to Village, preaching, praying, fasting, healing
the sick, and working miracles? Why did he sweat his precious blood, when
he prayed in the Mountain of Olyues? Why was he betrayed by the traitor
Judas, bound with chains, mocked and scorned, spyt upon and whypped, stricken
upon the face, crowned with thorns, and hanged upon the Cross by those
merciles Jews? what was the cause why holy Saint John Baptist, eat nothing
but locustes and wyld honny, being apparaled in hair? All these pains both of
our Savior Christ and of his forerunner, were they not for our sins? Could
not our blessed Savior with his word redeem our souls that were damned to
hell fire, by the disobedience of our first father Adam, as well as he created
them by his word? Our sins then were the cause of the passion of our
Savior, for if we had not sinned, he had never died. Consider this I pray you,
if another suffer for my sins, shall not I my self suffer?


Crovvley. The life that you lead, and are likely to lead, is hypocritical,
damnable and deuillish* Hypocritical, because it consists all together in
outward shows of holiness, whereas when it is laid open, there is none other
thing to be found in it, then such as is to be found in the graves of dead
men, as our Savior saw to be in ye lives of the Phariseis. Math. 23. Damnable
it is. For that it is Antichristian. And deuillish: for that it sauoureth
nothing of that heavenly wisdom that is from above, coming down from the
father of lights, but it is earthly, and beastly, and diabolical, as blessed
James has written Epistle Chap. 3. This life you have chosen freely, and of
your own accord, and could by no means be stayed from it: that therein you
might serve (not God, but) Gods sworn enemy, the Antichrist of Rome. You
imagine that we will ask you wherefore you have made this choice: you
answer, for your own sins and ours. Oh thou child of the devil, full of
all guyle and disceite: dare thou shoulder Christ, and thrust thy self into
the office of mediation, which belongs only to Christ? can thou
(wretched Friar) satisfy to God, both for thine own sins and for ours?
This blasphemy of thine has enforced me, to use thee in speeches as S. Paul
used the Sorcerer Elymas at Paphus. Acts. 13. But to make your matter good: You
ask why Christ our Savior would be borne, circumcised etc. As though all
those actions of his, had been but examples for us to follow. Some of these
actions of his, were in some sort examples for us to follow: but if we shall
take upon us (as you do) to follow them all, or any of them, with purpose to
redeem thereby, either our own sins, or ye sins of other, either in the
whole or in part: we shall be but Apyshe, as you be, and blasphemous in that
we take upon us that which belongs to that one only mediator betwixt
God and man, even the man Jesus Christ.

Take heed least that fall upon thee (Friar John Francis) which fell upon
Elymas, read Acts. 13. And yet further to add more authority to your own
doing. You ask of us, why holy S. John Baptist did eat nothing but Locustes
and wyld honnye. etc. And your conclusion is* that all this was for our sins,
even as the sufferings of our Savior Christ were. Thus you make many
mediators, where God has made but one. 1. Tim. 2. But here you use a strange
point of Logic, concluding very strangely: upon an As strange an Assertion.
Could not our blessed Savior (say you) as well by his word redeem our damned
souls, as he did by his word create them? Which manner of speech does import
as much as if you should say, no man can or dare open his mouth to deny it, for
it is a truth confessed of all men. But what do you infer upon this?
Therefore our sins were the cause of the passion of our Savior. If you
should make this argument in the Schools in Lutecia: the Sorbonis^s would
hysse you out of their Schools. The Divines also would tell you, that the
premises are not yet granted, although your graund Pryor, and your holy
father the Popes holiness, would soothe you in it. The Divines do (by a
general consent) say, that because the burden of sin, and the damnation due
unto it, is so great and horrible in the sight of GOD, that the wrath of God
for sin, could not otherwise be appeased, nor his justice satisfied, then by
the cruel and bloody death of that man that never had sinned, neither was by
any means spotted or defiled with sin, and therefore had not any way
deserved to die. And heerevpon they conclude, that of necessity, the only
begotten son of God, in whom there could be no sin, must take man's nature
of the substance of a blessed virgin, prepared before of GOD for that
purpose, that the nature of man taken of her substance, might not have in it
any part of man's sin, and that, that son of God, being both God and man,
might die in his man's nature, that blooddie death that man's sin had deserved,
and so Gods wrath might be appeased, and his justice satisfied, which could
never have been brought to pass by any other mean. Hereof we may conclude,
that in some sort our sins were the cause of the death of our Savior Christ.
This lesson you had once learned, and did repeat it openly in my Church at
Creplegate of London, in the presence and hearing of a great multitude of
Christians, which conceived no small hope, that you being borne of such
Christian Parents (as you were) and brought up under such masters, as had so
instructed you in Christian Religion, that being but of tender years, you
were so perfect in the principles of that our Religion, would have proved an
excellent Minister in the house of God, to the great joy of such as had been
at charge in your education, and to the furthering of Christ's glory in the
Realm of England, your native Country. But see how ^athan has bewitched
you. You are now become apyssing pot in the Chamber of Antichrist. This
comes of thy pride, Samuel, GOD gave thee good gyfts, that thou should
have used them to his glory, but thou have pryded thy self in them, and have
every way abused them, and art fallen into the hands of God (which is a thing
most horrible Heb. 10.) The Lord for his mercy sake open the eyes of thine
understanding, that thou may see the greatness of thine own misery, and
acknowledge the great fault of thine Apostacy, and crave help at the hand of
our heavenly Father, whose mercy is as great as him self, and is always
ready to receive every Prodigal son that returns home again unto him, and
seeks after every sheep that is gone astray. Return therefore Samuel,
return to our heavenly Father. Be no longer called by that hypocritical name
of Friar John Frauncis. Thy name Samuel, which was given to thee in thy
Baptism, is not yet blotted out of our heavenly Fathers Register: neither
shall be before the day of thy departing out of this life. Return in time,
seek God whilst he may be found, call upon him whylst he is at hand, and
has his cares open to hear all such as call upon him faithfully. Make not so
light a matter of sin, as to think that John Baptistes feeding upon Locusts
and wild honney, etc. could be any help to take away any part of the
damnation due to our sins. Be ashamed of that fond persuasion that moved
you to say thus. Consider this (I pray you) If another suffer for my sins:
shall not I my self suffer? You seem to be persuaded, that of necessity we
must suffer for our own sins, because Christ has suffered for them
already. Whereas (in very deed) the contrary is most true. Because Christ
has already suffered for our sins, therefore we need not to suffer for
them. For his suffering for our sins is sufficient, and is a full
satisfaction for the sins of ye whole world. And there remains nothing to be
done by us, but only by faith to take the benefit of that his suffering,
and to show our selves thankful to him, for that it has pleased him to
suffer for us, and by his suffering to restore us to the favor of the heavenly
majesty again. Which thanks we render when we mortifye our fleshly
affections, and make our bodies ^ Sacrifice to God, living holy and
acceptable. For this is our reasonable serving of God, as writes S. Paul.
Romans 12. This is that sound doctrine, that in your younger days was taught
you, and you learned, and did once openly confess in my Church at Cr^plegate.
Do you therefore (I pray you) consider better of this matter: and be
persuaded, that for as much as another (which is Christ the son of the living
GOD) has suffered for your sins* you are by his suffering redeemed from your
sins, and from ever lasting damnation, due to your sins, and by his
resurrection justified, and made righteous in the sight of the heavenly
Majesty, and discharged of your sins past for ever. Romans 4. And when you
shall by the frailty of your flesh fall and commit sin: follow the counsel of
Christ's dear Disciple John, that wrote the history of the Gospel, and those
three Epistles that are called Canonical. In the second Chapter of the first
of those three Epistles, he writes thus. My little babes, I writ thus unto
you* that you should not sin: but if any man do sin, we have an Advocate
with God the Father, even Christ Jesus the righteous, he is the obtainer of
mercy for our sins. The words of John in the Latin are these Ipse est
propitiatio. I think I can not translate them better for the understanding of
the meaning by the English Reader, then as I have, that is: He is the obtayner
of mercy for our sins. We need not therefore to seek for a ghostly father,
that may hear our confession, and give us penance and absolution. Christ has
already suffered penance for our sins, and has absolved us. We need not
to run to Rome for pardon. For GOD has already pardoned all our sins past
and repented, because we believe that promise of pardon, that he has made in
the death and blood shedding of his only begotten son, our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. And when we sin by frailty, we have an open way in unto the
mercy seat of God, by and through our Savior Christ, who is the way, the
truth and the life. John. 14.

You proceed, and thus you say.


The Friar. We read in the fifth of Leuiticus: how our Lord commanded the
children of Israel to do penance, when they had committed any offense. Judge.
21. Vniuersus Israel valde doluit, egitque poenitentiam, super hoc quod fiebat.
All the Children of Israel were very sorry, and they did penance for that
which they had done. Holy Job, in the 24. Chapter of his book, says:
Dedit e^s Deus locum poenitentiae. God of his wonderful mercy gave man place
to do penance. Dissimulas (says Solomon) peccata hominum, propter
poenitentiam. Thou (O Lord) do dis^e^ble the sins and iniquities of me^,
unto the intent, that they may do penance, Eccl. 2. Si poenitentia^ no^
egeri^us, incidemus in manus domini. If we do not penance, we shall fall into
the hands of our Lord. And what is this to fall into the hands of our Lord?
Hor^endis est (says S. Paul Cap. 10. ad Hebreos) incidere etc. It is a
horrible thing to fall into the hands of our living God. Yet had I rather fall
into his hands, then into the paws of our adversary the devil. Conuertisti
me (says the Prophet Jeremy. 31. et egi poenitentiam. Thou have converted me
(O Lord) and I have done penance. But go further, and you shall hear our
Savior himself, by his own mouth, calling us to penance, in the 13. Chapter
of S. L^ke, saying: Sinon feceritis poenitentiam: omnes simul peribitis. If you
will not do penance, you shall perrish all together. O what a doleful
sentence? you shall perish altogether. Let us therefore cry with the Prophet
Jeremy 31. chapter of his prophesies. Convert me and conuertar: postquam enim
conuertisti me, egi poenitentiam. Et postquam ostendists mihi, percussi femur
meum. Conue^t and turn me (O Lord) and I shall be converted. For after thou
had converted me, I did penance. And when thou had showed me my sins,
I struck my thygh. Let this therefore suffice to show you, that in vain I
have not taken upon me this kind of life, the which I have therefore
specified, at large unto you: because you desired so earnestly, to know how
I am likely to live.


Crovvley. Here you have heaped together a number of Scriptures, to a far
other end, then they were at the first written. That is to prove that you
were moved by those Scriptures, to make choice of that Religion wherein you
live, and that otherwise you could not escape the heavy wrath of GOD, and so
consequently, that who soever will escape Gods wrath must do as you do. And
first you say, we read in the 5. Chapter of Leuiticus etc. In this place of
Leuiticus* there is not one word that may rightly be applied to your purpose,
as shall (I hope) plainly appear, even to your self, if you can with
indifferent judgment read that which here follows.

And first I must admonish you of one point of penishe superstition, that
shows it self in all that be of your sort, as often as you have occasion to
translate into English, this Latin word Dominus. For supersticiously (as I
take it) you ad unto it the English of the Latin Pronowne Noster. Yea, though
there be in the circumstance of the text, nothing to be found that might give
you any occasion so to do. As in this place of Leuiticus, you have no occasion
at al to say: Our Lord God commanded the Children of Israel. etc. For the
commandments that are written in that Chapter, are given by Moses, by whom
the Lord God of Israel did speak to the children of Israel. And Moses
speaking to them in the name of that Lord that bid him speak unto them,
does not use any speech that may be rightly translated into English, Our
Lord. For thus he says in the place that you cite. Anima quae iurauerit, and
protulerit labijs suis, vt vel male faceret, vel been: et id ipsum iuramento
and sermon firmauerit, oblitaque postea intellexerit delictum suum: agat
poenitentis am propeccato, and offerat. etc. A soul that has sworn, and has
uttered with his lips, that he will do either evil or well, and has
confirmed the same by an oath and by speech, and having forgotten the same,
shall afterward understand his falt: let him repent for his sin, and offer
a she Lamb, or a she Goal of the flocks, and the Priest shall pray for
that forgetfulness or ignorance, and for that man's sin. etc. What is here
written that might move you to say, that our Lord commanded the children of
Israel to do penance when they had committed any offense? I must admonish
you also of your fault, in translating continually penance, in steed of
repentance. For as (commonly) when the Latin word Dominus is used in the
Scriptures, it does signify that mighty Lord which is Lord of all, and is
not to be restrained by any Pronowne, from that General signification, as to
say, my Lord, our Lord, or their Lord, because he is not only, mine, ours, or
theirs, but the Lord of all: Even so the word Poenitentia is not to be drawn
to an outward show of repentance only, which may be called penance, and may
be as well in Hypocrites, as in such as be penitent in deed. The Grecians (as
you know, I think) do name it by a name, that by interpretation does
signify, Post factum sapere. To be late wise, as in English we use to term
it, (...), is, when a man remembers himself better then he did when he took
in hand an action, wherewith he begins to mislike after the deed is done.
As in your present case, it may be, and I hope it will shortly come to pass,
that you returning to your former mind, will mislike with your disobedient
manner of departing from your natural Parents, and with your disloyal leaving
of your native Country, and so repent that you have bound your self by a vow
to live a Minime Friar all the days of your life, which is to be unprofitable,
both to your Parents and Country, directly contrary to the Laws both of God
and of nature. If it shall please GOD to work this (...) in you, you must, (if
you will do well) return to that first vow which was made for you when you
were baptized, and leave the latter vow, repenting that ever you were so mad as
to make it, being (as it is) so contrary to that vow which you first made in
your Baptism, and professed afterward before so many witnesses. Follow not
the example of Herod and either, which making vows did wickedly, but more
wickedly in the persorming of those vows. Math. 14. Judge. 11. Acts. 23. We
know what your masters of Rhemes, either have taught, or can teach you
touching this matter. If you be determined, and will not hearken to better
advice, we can but wyshe you well, and sorrow to see your wilful follye.

But to return to the place of Leuiticus the fifth Chapter, which you allege:
if you will look into the Hebrew text, you shall find no such word as you
seem to take hold upon. The word that is used there, can not signify to
do penance: but does signify, that he may confess that wherein he has
sinned, or offended. This place therefore, serves nothing for your purpose.
The next place that you allege, is out of the 21. of the Judges. Vniuersus
Israel valde doluit, and poenitentiam egit, super hoc quod fiebat, say you, but
that translation, that is best allowed by men of your sort, has it thus. Super
interfectione vnius tribus ex Israel. How can you then translate it thus into
English. All the people of Israel were very sorry, and they did penance for
that which they had done? But if you will look into the Hebrewe text, you
shall find that you should have said thus. The people sorowed for the
Beniamits, because the Lord had made a breach in the tribes or kindreds of
Israel. The third place is out of Job. Chap. 24. Dedit ei Deus locum
poenitentiae. God of his wonderful mercy, gave man place to do penance. You
use a Pariphrasis in this translation, to make the place more forcible for your
purpose. But thus you should have translated it. God gave him place of
repentance. But if the Hebrewe text be of any credit with you, you will say
thus. Dabit ei fidutiam, and immitetur, and oculi eius super vias eorum. Which
may be thus Englished, out of this Hebrewe like Latin. Though God do give him
boldness, and he does trust therein, yet his eyes be upon their ways. How is
it possible to pick any matter out of this text, whereby your whypping
penance may be underpropped? But this text does rather minister matter against
you. For it says, that although you be bold, and do trust to you
hypocritical penance, yet God does still behold your ways. Your hypocrisy
that deceives men, can not deceive him. The fourth place that you allege is
(as you say) out of Salomons Sapientiae. 11. But if you will give credit to S.
Hierom, that book is Pseudepigraphus. That is (if you understand not that
word) it has a wrong title, in that it is called the Wisdom of Solomon.
Thus writes S. Hierome, In praefatione in libros Salomonis. Nonnulli
scriptorum veterum, huncesse Iudaei Philonis affirmant. Some of the ancient
writers do affryme, that this is the work of Philo the Jewe. Yea and he says
that the very style thereof does savor of the Greek eloquence. I note this,
because you Roman Catholics, do make all the Books that are found in the
Bible of like authority.

But now to the words of the place alleged. Dissimulas peccata hominum,
propter poenitentiam. Thou (O Lord) do dissemble the sins and iniquities of
men, unto the intent that they may do penance. In the Greek it is, (...),
that is, ad poenitentiam. To repentance. The circumstaunce of the text gives,
that God being merciful to all creatures, does not always make it known to
men that he knows the sins of men, for he does not punish them in haste, but
he gives them time and space to remember themselves better, and to repent,
before he take in hand to punish them. This repentance is an hearty sorrow for
the sin past, and a full purpose and earnest endeavor to walk in a new way
in the time to come. And as for penance to be done for satisfaction, is
altogether unnecessary, for Christ Jesus has discharged that matter already.
But if he had not, the penance that we could suffer could not help us. Your
fyft place is taken out of Ecclesiasticus. 2, Chapter. If the Greek text were
not out of credit with you Rhemists, and Romish Catholics, it might suffice
foraunswere to this place, to say show it in the Greek, and then we will say,
you have said somewhat. But Si poenitentiam non egerimus, is* not found in
the Greek, neither does the circumstance of the place require, nor yet well
suffer it. For thus has Sirach written there: Qui timent Dominum, custodiunt
mandata illius: et patientiam habcbunt vsque ad inspectionem illius, dicentes.
(Si poenitentiam non egerimus) I ncidemus in manus Domini, and non in manus
hominum. Secundum enim magnitudinem ipsius, sic and misericordia illius cum
ipso est. They that fear the Lord, do keep his commandments, and will
have patience till they may behold him, saying: We will fall into the hands of
the Lord, and not into the hands of men. For according to the greatness of
himself, so is his mercy with him. Here I have left out, (if we will not, or
if we shall not repent) and yet is the sentence of Syrach perfect and the sense
good. And in the Greek it is thus. They that fear the Lord, will seek to be
accepted of him. And they that love him, will be filled with the Law. They
that fear the Lord, will prepare their hearts, and will humble their souls in
his sight. We will fall into the hands of God, and not into the hands of
men. For as is the greatness of himself, so is his mercy also.

A man might ask here, what need there is of this sentence, Si poenitentiam
non egerimus: If we repent not, or as you will have it, if we do not
penance. But let it be even as you have it in your common translation, and
proceed as you do, saying: And what is this? To fall into the hands of our
Lord. You answer Horrandu^est (says S. Paul. 10. ad Hebraeos incidere. etc.
It is an horrible thing to fall into the hands of our living God. Yet had I
rather falt into his hands, then into the paws of our adversary the devil. I
think your Roman Catholics will not like well with you, for that you join
the Epitheton (living) with God, although you do quallifye it by adding the
Pronowne Noster, or Our. But let them deal with you for that. I would feign
know of you, how you can fall into the hands of the living God, in such sort
as S. Paul means of in these words to the Hebrews: and yet escape the
paws of the devil. S. Paul speaks there of such as do reproach the
spirit of Grace, as your self have done in these wrytings. And are (I fear
me) fallen into the hands of the living God, who in justice has delivered you
into ye paws of the devil, whom he makes his Executioner: and at his good
pleasure, he can, and (when you shall (...) that is, repent) undoubtedly he
will, rydde you out of those paws of the devil again. Your sixth place is
taken out of Jeremy. 31. Conuertisti me, and egi poenitentiam. Thou have
con^erted me (O Lord) and I have done penance. It is some grief to me to
consider the great blindness that you are fallen into. The Prophet Jeremy does
(in these words that you cite, and in those words that go immediately before,
and that do follow immediately after) prophecy, or she we before hand, that in
time then to come, the people of the kingdom of the ten trybes or kindreds
of Israel, (whom he calls Ephraim, because their first king Iereboam was an
Ephramite) should be converted and turned, from their Idolatrous, heathinish,
and false Religion, to embrace the true Religion of God, from which they were
fallen in the days of the wicked Kings, that had reigned in that kingdom of
Israel or Ephraim, and were for that Apostacy, conquered by the Assyrians,
and the remnant of them carried into strange lands, far off. Of this
converting or turning of the posterity of this people, the Prophet Jeremy
does write after this manner. Audiens audiui Ephraim trans^igrantem (or as it
is in the Hebrewe) plangentem. Castigastime Domine, et eruditus sum (or as it
is in the Hebrew) castigatus sum, quasi iteuencus indomitus. Convert me and
conuertar: quiatu Dominus Deus meus. Postquam enim conuertistime, egi
poenitentiaem: and postquam ostendistimihi, per cussi femur meum. Confusus sum,
and erubui quoniam sustinui opprobrium adolescentiae meae. etc. I have in very
deed (says the Lord) heard Ephraim, flytting out of his Country (or as the
Hebrewe has it) making great or pitiful lamentation. saying after this
manner) O Lord, thou have corrected me, and I am thereby instructed (or as the
Hebrewe has it) I am chastened like an untamed Bullock. Do thou turn me,
and then I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. And after thou
had turned me: I repented And after thou did she we unto me (that is
after thou did let me see the filthiness of mine own life) I did strike my
thigh. I was confounded, I was ashamed, for I did bear the reproach of mine
own youth. Is not Ephraim a son that I esteem much off? Is he not a Ladde
in whom I am delighted? For since I have spoken of him: I will still remember
him. And therefore, the bowels of my compassion are moved toward him, and in
pity I will have compassion upon him, says the Lord. The due consideration
of these words might have moved you, to do the contrary, of that which you
say, you were by them moved to do.

Ephraim had forsaken the right Religion of GOD, and he had embraced the
Religion of Baall* which was a wrong Religion, he had forsaken the precepts,
and commandments of God, and embraced the precents and commandments of men.
He had refused to hearken to the voices of the true Prophets of God: and had
given ear to the Prophets of Baal, which were false Prophets. He had left of
to walk in those right and high ways, that the Lord had taught his own
people to walk in, and he had chose^ the^ to walk in by ways, such as ye Lord
forbad his people to walk in. And have not you done ye like? You were baptized
in the right faith of Christ Jesus, which your Godfathers and your Godmother
confessed, at ye time of your baptising, and desired (for you) that you might
be baptized in that Faith, which they did then confess: And you were baptized
in that faith, and were named Samuel. But now, you are called John Frauncis
(as your self have written) and therefore, I fear you have renounced your
first Baptism, and have been rebaptized in the Romysh Catholic faith:
professing and promising to believe and to do, all that, that Antichristian
Church teaches and commands. You were brought up in the knowledge of your
duty toward God, and your duty toward man: but now you call that knowledge
heresy, and such as have been your instructors therein heretics. You have,
and do still refuse to hear the voice of the Preachers of the Gospel of
Christ, which are the true Prophets of this time: and your ears are open to
the voices of the preachers of popysh ceremonies, feigned and false miracles,
and all manner devises of men, which are the false prophets of this time. You
have left the way of truth, wherein God requires his own people to walk,
serving him in spirit and truth, that is, in true holiness and righteousness:
and you have chosen to walk in by ways, even such as the Lord has forbidden
his people to walk in. Namely the hearing of masses, and therein, gyuing divine
honor to creatures, that is, to bread and wine therein used, and holden up and
showed, that they may be worshipped by such as be present. In kyssing the
Relics of Saints, in the supersticious refrayning of the use of Gods good
creatures, wherein God has given liberty to all men, that will reverently use
them, and be thankful to him for them. In making inuocations and prayers to
Angels, and to dead men, such as be called Saints, not knowing whether they
can hear you, or whether they can help you or no. In praying for the dead,
not knowing whether they do stand in need of your prayers or no. Yea not
knowing whether your prayers, may profit them or no. In honoring God and his
Saints by Images, directly contrary to his express commandment: Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven Image. etc. In vowing, and performing the vow
of wyuelesse chastity, and yet with this causion. Si non cast, tamen caute.
If not chastely, yet warily. In performing the vow of wilful poverty: and
yet enjoy all things necessary in great plenty. In taking upon you ye yoke of
obedience to such as God has not commanded you to obey: but shaking of that
yoke of obedience, that God has laid upon all men's necks. Namely, to natural
Parents, Princes and al manner of Gouerners. In doing penance (as you term
it) by fasting bread and water, by dyuing upon the earth, by whypping your
self, with a discipline of whypcords, or chains of wyar, or with pynnes of
silver, taking upon you by these means to redeem your own sins, and the
sins of others also. And so consequently, entruding your self into the
Office of Christ, which is to be the only mediator betwixt God and man, and
the only propitiator to obtain mercy for the sins of the world. If you had
considered these words of Jeremy, aright and as you should have done,
applying them to your self (as I hope now you will do) then you would have
cried with Ephraim (as I hope you will now cry) Turn me, and I shall be
turned, for thou art the Lord my God. And when the Lord shall turn you, as I
hope he will at the last turn you, so that you shall from the bottom of your
heart repent, that ever you left the high way of righteousness, to walk in
these by ways of wickedness: you will not (as you term it) do penance, in
whypping your self with your discipline (as you call your whip wherewith you
have given your self so many hundred lasshes) but you will submit your self
under the mighty, and merciful hand of our heavenly father, to be chastined
at his hand, according to his good pleasure, that by his fatherly corrections,
you may be brought to see the greatness of your own folly, wherein you have
walked. And so with Ephraim, strike your self on the thigh, and say: I am
confounded and ashamed. I have borne the rebuke of my youth. And then
undoubtedly the Lord will say of you, as he did of Ephraim. Is not Samuel a
son that I make great account of? Is he not a ladde in whom I am delighted?
Since I have spoken of him, I will still remember him. And therefore the bowels
of my mercy are bent toward him. In pity and compassyon I will have mercy
upon him. Which God grant for his mercy sake. Amen.

If you will not receive this charitable admonition, and receive again and
love that truth, from which you have for a time been turned away, and have
loved lies more then the truth, yea and have indeed hated the truth and loved
lies: I fear me that the threatening of the Apostle. 2. These. 2. will be
fulfilled in you. Ideo mittet illis Dens. etc. God will therefore send upon
them the strength of error, that they may give credit to lies, that all they
may be condemned that have not believed the truth, but have had pleasure in
iniquity. This is ye horrible falling into the hands of the living God that
the Apostle speaks of. Heb. 10. From which the Lord for his mercy sake
deliver both you and me. Amen.

You proceed in your purpose, and thus you say. But go further, and you shall
hear our Savior himself, by his own mouth, calling us to penance, in the
13. Chapter of S. Luke, saying: Sinon feceritis poenitentiam: omnes simul
peribitis. If you will not do penance, you shall perrish altogether. And
here you use an exclamation. O what a doleful sentence: you shall perish
altogether. Let us therefore cry with the Prophet Jeremy. etc. as before. But
see how you are deceived, by giving credit to such notes as you have received
at the hands of your Rhemists, and Romish Catholics. I can not think that
your self reading the words in Luke, the 13. Chapter, would have set down
simul for similiter: as in this your writing you do, and do descant upon it,
noting the horriblenes of the sentence, and so consequently, the necessity of
doing penance, to as many as be not willing to perish together. The words
that the Evangelist writes, were spoken by our Savior himself. The occasion
was, a report made unto him, of the crueltye that Pilate used toward certain
of the Galileans. Do you think (says our Savior) that these Galileans were
greater sinners, then the rest of the Galileans were: I tell you no. But except
you have repentance, you shall all in like manner perish. And here one other
thing wherein your notes have deceived you. The text has thus. Sed nisi
poenitentiam habueritis. But except you have repentance. And you following
your notes (as I suppose, for I can hardly be persuaded, that seeing the text,
you would so mangle it) do set it down thus. Sinon feceritis poenitentiam: If
you do not penance, you shall perish altogether. I would wyshe you therefore,
to take good heed henceforth, how you trust the judgment of this Romish
Catholic Church, that makes no conscience thus to mangle the words of Christ
himself, reported by his holy Evangelists. But hitherto, you show your self
to be persuaded, that you have not without just cause taken upon you the life
of a Minime Friar. But how well you have proved this, by those Scriptures
that you have (for that purpose) alleged: I think your self do now see, and
are ashamed that ever you took this enterprise in hand.

Thus much for answer to that long discourse that you have made, concerning
your departing from your parents, and the manner thereof. Your long and
laboursome travel in France, before you could creep into the habit (or
weed as you term it) of a Minime Friar, and how you behaved your self in
all that wearysome travail. And last of all, how happy a man you think your
self to be, for that you are now weeded (as you* term it) with that weed,
and have so played the part of a Nouice* that lyking, and being well liked of
the Friars of that Order, you are now a professed Friar, and have changed your
name, and are no more called Samuel Debnam, but Friar John Frauncis, and
therefore likely so to live during your natural life.

But now we have another Crow to pull. You have made a marvelous inuectiue
against our Religion, with an earnest and pithy exhortation to your Parents, to
forsake both our Religion and us also. And last of all, a very Christian
instruction (as you seem to be persuaded) but indeed a very Antichristian
direction, how they may and ought to behave themselves, in this case wherein
they do now live, and are likely to continue. And thus you enter into this
excellent piece of work.


The Friar. Now, as concerning your Religion (whose foundation is the devil
of hell, his Ministers being, Tyndall, Fryth, Luther, Calvin, Beze,
Zuinglius, Phillip Melanthon, Bucer Phagius, Oecolampaduts, and Berengarius,
with others his Ministers, in England and else where. As Crovvley, Barber, Dove,
Chark, Novvell, Mollins, Trippe, and the rest, whose hearts God turn, or cut
short their lives, to more speedy conversion of our poor Country. These are
they of whom the holy Apostle Saint John speaks of in his first Epistle Chap.
2. Ex nobis prodierunt, sednon erant ex nobis: nam si fuissent ex nobis
permansissent vtique nobiscum. That is to say, they came from us, but they were
not of our company or society. For if so be that they had been of our company,
they had certainly stayed with us. It is evident that they came from us, as not
liking our kind of life. Some came from us by reason of pride, othersome, by
reason of deuillish suggestions. Again, others because their heads were full
of fantasies, as the head or Master Field is, Who (if the report that goes
of him be true) is able to forge, every half hour, a new Religion. Luther
was an Augustine Friar: who after that he had left his Order, began heresy.
Calvin was a Cannon Reguler, and Berengarius was an Archdeacon. Whose lives and
deaths, as also the lives and deaths of the other Captain Protestants, if
you knew thoroughly, you would (as I hope) not only wonder at their wilines, but
also leave their folly. But mine intention, is not at this present to write
their behauiours, which (God wylling) shall be published in another page. Mine
intention is only, by the grace of God, to withdraw and turn your hearts,
from the belief of those damnable heresies which you hold, which I beseech
God that I may perform for his names sake.


Crowley. I would gladly stay my pen, from blotting my paper with bitter or
opprobrious words, but (alas) I can not, for the fire of zeal toward Gods
glory, is so kindled in mine heart, that I can not hold in, such speeches as
this blasphemer deserves. The speeches shall (I hope) be such, and so uttered:
that even the blasphemer himself shall be enforced to confess, that the writer
seeks nothing less, then the private revenge of ye private wrong that is
done unto himself. The open wrong that is done to Christ, and to his
blessed name and Religion, is it that moves me to say (to this boy Friar) as
the Apostle Paul said to Elymas the Sorcerer. Acts. 13. O thou child of the
devil, full of all guyle and disceitfulnes: thou enemy of all righteousness,
do thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? Take heed (thou
blasphemer) of that which follows in that text. Dare thou say, that the
devil of hell, is the foundation of Christ's Religion? Thou call it our
Religion, because we profess it: and we acknowledge that in that meaning, it is
ours indeed, and we are not ashamed of it. But in thy meaning, we deny it to
be ours, for we are not the Authors of it. It is a reverent fear and love
toward the majesty of God, which the holy spirit of Christ has wrought in
our hearts: whereby we are moved to seek to know his will, and to serve him
according to his will. The foundation of this Religion, is the Law of God, and
the Gospel of Christ. For the Law does work in us fear, and the Gospel
works love. By the law, we are servants, but by the Gospel we are children,
that is, adoptiue sons and daughters, of God himself, and inheritors of his
kingdom, and heirs annexed with Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son. This
Law did God himself write, first in the heart of the first man, in his first
creation, and after in Tables of stone, and delivered the same to Moses, as his
especial and chosen Minister, that by his ministration, it might be made
known to his people, the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And the same
Law, is by the finger of God written in our hearts in our regeneration or new
birth, wherein we are borne from above, by water, and by the holy Ghost: having
received the spirit of Christ, which cries in our hearts to the heavenly
majesty, Abba Pater, Father, father. The Gospel also, was first preached to
the first man, and to the first woman, when God himself said thus to the
Serpent. I will p^^enmitie betwixt thee and the woman, betwixt thy seed and
her seed, her seed shall break thy head. This Gospel was a glad tidings
to the first man and his wife, and they both believed it, and by that belief,
were they discharged of the sin which they had committed, in tasting of the
forbidden fruit, which S. Paul calls Justifying. And continuing in this
belief, they had this promised seed. Christ, their continual Advocate as we
have, so that, so often as they did by f^ailty sin, they did (as we do) by
faith repare unto him, and he was the propitiation for their sins, as he is
for ours, when we repare unto him by faith. Christ Jesus therefore, is called,
and is indeed. Agnus occi^us ab origin mundi: That Lamb that has been
slain, even from the beginning of the world. Apo. 13. This Gospel was
continually preached, both before the Law written in Tables of stone, and also
under that Law, by Sacrifice, as by shadows and figures. Heb. 10* as also by
the ministry of the Prophets. But when Christ Jesus, which is this promised
seed came: he preached this Gospel in his own person first most plainly,
amongst them that were his own peculier people. And afterward he preached it
amongst the nations of the world, by the ministry of his Apostles or
messengers. And thus the knowledge here of came to al Nations of the world.
Amongst whom the Grecians thought good to call this Gospel (which in our old
English was named Gods speale, that is to say, Gods word) by the name
Euaggelion, which name does by interpretation signify, Glad tidings. This
Gospel or Glad tidings (so called because it does assure us of free pardon,
and full forgiveness of all our sins by the only mediation of our only
Mediator, Christ Jesus) is that Gospel that Christ Jesus does still preach
amongst us by the ministry of them, whom you call Heretics. How dare you now
say that the foundation of our Religion is the devil of hell? Is the devil of
hell, the Law and the Gospel? But (for your recreation, as it may seem) it
has pleased you to use the figure Parenthesis, and therein to set down a long
Register of the names of such as you call the devils ministers, to whom you
wysh, either conversion, or else speedy dispatch out of this life. This petition
may we (with greater and more Christian love, both toward you and our
Country) crave at Gods hand for you, and for all your societye. You set
down our names very disorderly, even as they came to your troubled memory, or
as some man had gathered them, and delivered them to you in some torn piece of
paper. It may be, that neither you, nor any that has given you instructions,
did at any time know many of them whom you name, nor read any thing written
by them. And yet (like a bold blind Bayarde) you promise to write and publish
their behauiours in another Page. You may (perhaps) do if: but with as small
commendation; and as great shame, as others have done before you. It is
written to our comfort, that if such as you, did call the good man of the house
Beelzebub: how much more will such call them of the household so? It is one
good sign that we be of the household of Christ, when we be for Christ's
cause, called as Christ himself was, and by such as called him so. Math* 10.
The Pharesies, (your Ancestors in hipocrisy) shamed not to say unto him, even
to his face. Do not we say well, in that we say thus. Thou art a Samaritan, and
have a devil. John. 8. And shall we think much that you backbite us, and in
your slanderous Lybels charge us, with crimes, which you are not able to
prove, more then the Pharesies could prove that Christ was a Samaritane, and
had a devil. For mine own part (sir boy Friar) make what report you dare,
(better experience you have not had of any, for you have been in my house, and
at my charges, a long seven years) but take heed that your pen scribble no
lie, in the report that you shall make of me: for if you do, I will (if GOD
give life and hability) so paynt you with my pensell, as you never painted your
naked back with your hipocrites discipline or whyp.

You apply unto us the saying of the holy Apostle S. John, the first Epistle.
Chapter. 2. Ex nobis prodierunt. etc. If you be (as you say you are) a Papist
of the society of Papists: then you apply that saying rightly to us so far
forth, as that you say that we came forth from you, and were not of you. But
if that society of which you mean, be the Catholic Church, whereof ye Church
of Rome that was in S. John's time was a principal member: then that saying of
S. John can not be rightly applied unto us, but to you. For not we, but you,
are gone out from them, and were not of them. And we are gone out from you, and
were not of you, for you are Antichristians, and we are Christians, as those
Roman were in the days of S. John. But will you see what S. John says in
the same Epistle. Cap. 4. He does there teach you how to know Antichrist,
and so consequently Antichristians. Omnis spiritus qui soluit Iesum, ex Deo non
est, and hic est Antichristus, de quo audistis quoniam venit, and iam nunc in
mundo est. Every spirit that loses or dissolueth Jesus, or the Savior, (for
so does the name Jesus signify) is not of God, and the same is Antechrist, of
whom you have heard that he comes, and he is even now in the world. Who be
they that may be said to lose or dissolve Jesus, (which is the Savior) but
they which do as you do. That is, asscribe one part of your salvation to
Jesus Christ, and another to your own works and merits? If you can find any
better interpretation of this place, let us at your leisure see it. If not,
leave your dissoluing of Jesus, and join with us in ascribing your whole
salvation to the mediation of Jesus Christ as we do. But perhaps, you will
here ^lee from your old allowed translation, and for an advantage take hold
of the Greek text, which is thus. Every spirit that denies, or does not
confess, that Jesus is come in the flesh, is not of God, etc. But what can
that help your cause? Jesus Christ came in the flesh, that he might tread
the wine press of Gods wrath, alone, and not to have any one to help him.
Esaias. 63. He came in the flesh, that he might be wounded for our iniquities,
broken for our great and wicked sins, that the correction whereby we might be
reconciled might fall upon him, that we might be made whole by the brwsing of
his stripes. Esaias. 53. Again, S. Paul. 1. Tim: 1. This is a true saying, and
meet to be received of all men, that Christ Jesus came into this world to save
sinners. And in Math. 1. He shall save his people from their sins. And in S.
John's Gospel. 1. Behold him that takes away the sins of the world. By all
these places it is plain, that whosoever ascribes any part of our salvation,
to any other then to Christ Jesus alone, denies him to be come in the flesh,
and is of that Antichrist that S. John speaks of. 1. Epistle. 4. You are
therefore Antichristians, and we are for good cause come from you, because we
were not Antichristians, and therefore not of you. We are returned to that
Romish Catholic Church that was in John's time, from whom you came out,
because you were not of them And we do now believe, as they believed then.
They believed then, that there is but one God that has made all creatures, and
him they glorified in the use of his creatures, and they gave thanks to him
alone for those creatures, and studied to serve him only, in spyrite, and and
with spiritual service, fleeing from the example of the Heathen Nations, that
presumed to counterfayte his majesty by Images. Romans 1. And so do we. They
believed and confessed that all men are sinners, and that man can not justify
himself before God, because no man can so keep the Law but that his own
conscience shall condemn him as a transgressor: and therefore, they did cleave
to the mercy of God, and so do we. They believed that they were justified
(that is, discharged of their sins) freely by faith, without the deeds of
the Law: and yet they thought themselves bound to do all that God had and
should make them able to do in observing and fulfilling the Law: and so do
we. Romans 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. They believed that God making choice of them, had in
mercy made them his own children by adoption, inheritours of his kingdom, and
heirs annexed with his only begotten son Christ Jesus, and here of they
were assured by the spirit of Christ, which was given to them, and cried in
their hearts Abba Pater, Father, Father: and so do we. They believed, that this
election and choice was made, in the fore knowledge and purpose of GOD, before
them selves were, and so consequently, before they either had or could do,
good or evil: and so do we. Romans 9. They believed, that as they were by free
mercy of God. adopted, predestined, called, justified, and acquitted of their
sins, and in Gods predestination glorified, and made like to the Image of his
only begotten son Christ Jesus. Romans 8. So their duty was to be careful to
lead a righteous life before men, and not be bold to commit sin, (because
God had in mercy discharged them of sin) but to live in awe, and a reverent
childlike fear of his justice, as they that would show themselves continually
thankful for his mercy, in making their own bodies a Sacrifice to God, living
holy and acceptable unto God, as their reasonable serving of God. Romans 10. 11.
12. And even so do we. They believed that their duty was to submytte
themselves, to all such as God had set over them in authority, and to obey
them, not only for fear of punishment, but for conscience sake also, knowing
that whosoever resists power, resists the ordinance of GOD, and does
purchase to himself damnation. And they believed that their duty was to give
every man his own, and to use loving behavior toward all men, knowing that
love is the fulfilling of the Law. And that being baptized they had put upon
themselves Christ, and ought to walk and continue their lives in honesty, not
making provision for the flesh, to satisfy the lusts thereof. Romans 13. and
even so do we. They believed, that although God had given them liberty in the
use of al his creatures: yet their duty was to have a continual regard to
the infirmity of their brethren^^ and not to use any of those creatures to the
offense of any of them. Romans 14. 15. and even so do we. They believed, that
they, together with all other Christians else where, in any part of the world,
were fellow members of one body in Christ, and under Christ alone,
acknowledging no universal head of that body but only Christ Jesus alone.
Romans 12. And even so do we.

Thus you may see, that we are not departed from the Catholic Roman Church,
which was in the time of S. John, but from you, that departed from them, more
then 1000. years before this day. You put many of Gods creatures in the place
of God, in reposing trust in them, in calling upon them and craving help at
their hands, in rendering thanks unto them, in honoring them, in and by their
Images, in serving the^, and in consecrating days, Temples and Altars to their
honor. You presume upon your own power, as they that are able, either to
fulfill the Law, or else having broken the Law, to satisfy to God for your
sin in breaking the Law, and to that end you fast from flesh, you go and
lie woolwarde, you rise at midnight, you sing mattins and masses, you whyp your
selves with your disciplines or whyps, not following therein any commandment
of God, or example of good man. For where has God commanded men to refrain
the necessary and honest use of his good creatures? And where has he commanded
men to be their own formentors? What one man or woman can you name, amongst
the Patriarks, the Prophets, or Apostles, that formented themselves, as you do
torment your selves, if your own report be true? In the Law we read, that if
a man had deserved to be chastised with strypes, and were condemned by the
Judge to be chastised: yet the number of stripes might not in any case exceed
the number of forty. Deuteronomy. 25. Chap. But you say that every Frydaie, from our
Lady day in Lent, to May day, you do whyp your self for your Parents sake,
and do give your self 400. stripes at every time (as I think) for you say
it is an easy thing with you now, so to do. Well, whyp on still, till you
shall hear me say: who. And if you shall not have whipping cheer enough at
Nigeon in France, step over the water into England, and at your request, I
will help you to some of our whypping cheer in Bridewel, where one lashe that
our whypping Bedles do give, is worth a whole hundred of yours in Nigeon.

But to return to our purpose. You say that we came from you, not lyking your
kind of life. It is very true, and so long as you lead such a kind of life
as you do, which is hypocritical, we mind never to return to you again.
But where you do charge us with pride, deuillish suggestions, and heads full
of fantasies, I must use an English prouerbiall speech, and say: Take your
self by the nose, and say fool I have caught thee. The hearts of those men
that you speak of, and are departed this life, were well known unto God, and
so are ours that do yet remain in this vale of misery. We shall be all judged
one day, by him that will judge justly. And what art thou that iudgest another
man's servant? But here (by the way) I must tell you of your ingratitude
toward M. Fyelde, whose purse, pen and hand, have been helping to you, so
that if you had regarded either christian duty or charity, yea or civil
honesty, you would not have so harkened to a false report, that you would have
noted him before all others, for coining of so many new Religions, where he
never coined any. Stay your style therefore (I advise you, yet once again)
and pester not that page that you threaten to publish, with lies, either
learned by report, or cast in your own moulde. For if you do: But having
ended your long Parenthesis, you go on with your matter, and say thus: My
intent is only. etc. A pestilent intention. To withdraw and turn the hearts
of your father and mother from the belief of the Gospel of Christ: (the word
of salvation that is graffed into us, and is sufficient to save our souls)
which you most blasphemouslie call damnable heresy. And for ability to bring
this intended mischief to pass: thou (most vile wretch) dare open thy most
blasphemous mouth, to crave help at his hand, that in justice, may (yea must)
and I doubt not, shortly will, confound thee and all such as thou art.

But now you go lustily about your business, and you give so fierce an
assault, even at the first, that you seem to be persuaded, that you are in
possession of the Forte, before you come in place where you may plant your
battery: yea and before you have, or do know how to come by, any such pieces
of Ordinance, as may be able to batter the walls and make them saltable. You
say thus (to your Parents, I trow, for your Letters are directed to them.)


The Friar. You say, that we are fools to pray for the dead you deny good
works to be meritorious of our salvation, affyrming that by faith only we are
justified. And which is most horrible, detestable, and abominable. You
unshamefastly, and most irreuerently, deny the real presence, of the most
precious body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to be in the
blessed Sacrament of the Altar. You say that there be but two Sacraments. An
heresye condemned long a go. Many other opinions, not only foolish, but also
execrable, and damnable you hold, which lead you the right way to eternal
damnation in hell fire.


Crowley. Here is a marvelous piece of Ordinance. Who could hope that a
poor Showmaker and his wife, altogether unlettered and unlearned, and
therefore naked and unarmed, and unprepared to withstand so puissaunt an
assaltant, as Friar John Frauncis is: should not at the first summons, come
forth, even with Halters about their necks, and offer the keys of their Forte
to this valiant Captain, and submit themselves to his mercy. Yea where shall
we find one amongst the learned on the Protestants part, that dare encounter
with this monstrous Golias, that has so boldly defied the whole Army of
Israel? But least Friar John should think that I write Ironice, I will stay
my style for a space, that I may see how this courageous Captain will enforce
his so sharp an assault.


The Friar. For the first, (says he) that is to say prayers for the dead:
because you admit not the words which the holy Docters of the Catholic Church
have spoken: I will turn you to the Bible it self. Which if you dare either
plainly deny, or interpret falsely: you are now no longer heretics, but
plain Infidels. Look therefore I beseech you, in the 12. Chapter of the
second book of Machabees, toward the end of the Chapter, you shall there
find, how a Captain of the Jewish Army, named Judas, made a collection of
money to be offered at Jerusalem, for the sins of those Soldiers, which for
a good and just quarrel, were slain in battle. Furdermore, if you will take
the pains to read the latter words of the same Chapter, you shall find the
conclusion of the same Chapter to be this. Sancta ergo, et salubris est
cogitatio, pro defunctis exorare, vt a peccatis soluantur. It is (says he)
therefore, a holy, and a wholesome thought, to pray for the dead, that they may
be released from their sins. Tell me not now (I pray you) a tale of a tubbe,
with a quote in the margnet, saying: That the foresaid place of holy Scripture,
was not written by the holy Ghost. For if so be that you be come to that point,
as to belie the holy. Scripture, well may it be said of you, which is written
by holy Esaias, in his book of prophecies. Chap. 6. Aure audietis, et non
intelligetis. You shall hear with your ears, but you shall not understand.
Seeing you shall see, and shall not perceive, for your hearts are hardened. With
your ears you have heard unwillingly, and you have bent downewardes your eye
sight, least you should peradventure see with your eyes, hear with your
ears, and understand with your hearts, and so being converted, God should heal
you.


Crovvley. In vewing the Forte of our faith, you seem to have determined to
batter four of the especial Bulworkes thereof. Namely, the denial of Prayers
for the dead. The denial of works to be meritorious of salvation. The denial
of the real presence of the body and blood of Christ in the blessed Sacrament
of the Altar. And the denying that there be any more Sacraments then two. To
batter these Bulworkes, you will not bring any Ordinance taken out of the
Storchouse of the holy Fathers, but you will use that great forcible
Ordinance, that is to be had in the Storehouse of the holy Bible: and
therewith you will batter and beat down the strongest parts of our Forte of
Faith. Against the first Bulworke, you plant a piece of Ordinance taken out of
the 12. Chap. of the second book of Machabees. Against the second Bulworke,
2. pieces of Ordinance, one taken out of the Epistle of S. James, and the
other out of the 25. Chapter of S. Mathewes Gospel. Against the third, you do
plant four pieces of Ordinance, one taken out of the 26. Chap. of S. Matthew,
one other taken out of the 14. Chapter of S. Mark, the third out of the 22. of
S. Luke. and the fourth you take out of the sixth Chap. of S. John's Gospel. But
against the fourth Bulworke. you bring no Ordinance at all, neither out of the
Storehouse of the Bible, nor out of the Storehouse of the holy Doctors of the
Catholic Church. Only you say, that it is an heresy condemned long ago.

But let us see, of what force these pieces of Ordinance be. The first seems
a far off, to be a double Cannon of great force. But at hand, it is found to
be but a silly Base, embossed and made great, by cunning clowting together of
Paste made of paper, in the form of a double Cannon, with the color of Brass
cunningly laid upon it. Who would not think that this were a Cannon of great
force, when he shall hear the Captain himself say. I will turn you to the
Bible it self? which if you dare either deny. etc. you shall be no longer
Heretics, but plain Infidels. Look I beseech you. etc. A Captain of the
Jewish Army made a collection etc. Yea, and the latter words of the Chapter,
are these. Sancta ergo and salubris est cogitatio. etc. And tell me not now (I
pray you) a tale of a tubbe. etc. Yea and last of all, well may it be said of
you, Aure audietis and non intelligetis etc. But let us draw nearer to this
terrible piece of Ordinance, that we may see of what force it is. First,
because Friar John does charge us, that we admit not the words which the holy
Doctors of the Catholic Church have spoken: I require him to read that which
S. Jerome has written, in his preface upon the books of Solomon, immediately
after those words that I put you in mind of when I answered to that sentence
that you alleged out of the book of Wisdom, Chap. 11. S. Jerome writes
thus. Sicut ergo Judeth, and Tobiae, and Machabeorum libros, legit quidem
Ecclesia, sed eos inter canonicas scripturas non recipit, sic and baec duo
volumina legate, ad edificationem plebis: non ad authoritatem ecclesiasticorum
dogmatum confirmandam. Even as the Church does (indeed) read the books of
Judith and Tobias, and of the Machabees, but does not receive them amongst ye
Canonical Scriptures, even so she may read these two books (meaning the
book of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus) to the edifying of the people, but not
for the confirming of Ecclesiastical doctrine. Lo (Master Friar John) one of
the holy Doctors of the Catholic Church, has told you, that this Scripture
was not written by the holy Ghost, and yet I trow you will not say that he
has told you a tale of a tubbe, nor that he has belyed the holy Ghost, or
that the saying of the holy Esaias, may be well applied unto him. But if your
self would vouchsafe to read the last lines of this second Book of
Machabees, I think you would not think this book to be of such authority as
hitherto, you have in these writings seemed to think. For in the words
written in those lines, the author or writer of this book, does show himself
to be in doubt whether he have done so well as himself wished to do: and in
case he have not done so well, he craves pardon of his Readers, and uses a
similitude to persuade him to pardon him. Which is a thing all together
unseemly to be done by the holy Ghost. Yea I suppose your self would
account it blasphemy, in him that would say, that the holy Ghost may doubt
whether ought that he does be well done or not. And if you will take the
pains to read the latter part of the 14. Chapter of this book, you shall
find there a great commendation given to one Razias, for that he murdered
himself, which commendation could not come from ye holy Ghost. For such murder
is not only contrary to the express commandment of GOD, but it is
contrary to nature also. Yea, and I do yet think, that though you do
think, that you do deserve much at Gods hand by whypping your self with
your discipline (as your self do report) yet you are not persuaded that you
should deserve more, if either by whipping your self or otherwise, you
should kill your self.

Moreover, if your self be not of that number that Esaias the Prophet speaks
of in the sixth Chapter of his book (cited by your self) then there is hope
that you will not stick to read, and weigh the circumstaunces of the place in
the 12. of this second book of the Machabees, that you do so much urge us
with. In the text that goes immediately before that, which you do beseech us
to look upon: the Historian has said, that after the Army of Gorsias was by
the mighty power of God put to flight, Judas (having gathered his Army
together) came to the City Odolla. And when the seventh day was come, and
they were purified according to the custom, they did in the same place spend
the time of the Sabaothe. And the next day following, Judas came with his
company to take up the dead bodies of them that were slain, and to bury the^
with their fathers, in the burial places that belonged to them. And they
found under the garments of them that were flayne, certain of the gifts that
had been offered to the Idolles that were at Iamnia, from which the Law
commanded the Jews to abstain. It was therefore made manifest to all men,
that this was the cause wherefore they were slain. The whole company did
therefore commend the just judgment of the Lord, which had made manifest the
deeds that had been hid and kept in secret. And so they gave themselves to
prayer, and besought God that the fault which was committed might be blotted
out of memory. But the most valiant man Judas, exhorted the people to keep
themselves without sin, having even before their eyes, those things that had
happened for the sins of those that were slain. And having ended his
Collation, he sent to Jerusalem, xii. thousand drachmas of silver, that
sacrifice might be offered for the sins of them that were dead.

Thus far goes the report of that which was done by Judas that Captain of
the Jewish Army that you speak of. I have taken this text out of the
translation that is allowed by the decree of the Tridentine Council, which
translation, you may not disalow of, for if you do: you shall be amongst them
that the fathers of that Counsel have Anathematized. Take heed therefore,
that you have not offended already, in that you have said, that the Captain
made a Collection, where your text says, facta collatione. I know that our
translators that have translated into the English, have said as you have done.
Having made a collection of monye, sent it to Jerusalem. etc. In the Greek,
the sense is uncertain, and hardly can there any perfect sense be gathered in
this place. And this one thing I must note, that where this vulgar translation
has twelve thousand Drachmas, the Greek has but two thousand Drachmas,
which together with the rest of the circumstaunces of the text, do cause me to
think, that Judas needed not to make any collection of money to be sent to
Jerusalem. For the sum being no greater, he might very well spare it out of
his own treasure (as it may be supposed.) Having therefore ended that
Collation or concion which he made to his whole company of Soldiers that then
were about him, (wherein he exhorted them, to consider of that which had
happened, and to take warning thereby, to be careful to keep themselves from
sin, least the like should fall upon them also) he sent that sum of money
to Jerusalem, that Sacrifice might be offered there for the sins of them that
were dead. Slain (as you say) for a good and a just quarrel, but the
History says, that the just judgment of the Lord was executed upon them,
for that they had stolen and hid under their Garments, things that had
been offered to those Idolles that were at Iamnia, which was by the Law
forbidden to be done. But what? would you have us to think (as it may seem
you do think) that Judas Machabeus (being a man so precise in observing ye
law of God, as in this History it appears that he was) would cause any new
kind of Sacrifice to be devised, or that he would cause any of those
Sacrifices that Moses had by Gods direction commanded to be offered, to be used
for any other purpose, then for those purposes that God himself had ordained
them for? If you will read the whole Leuiticall Law throughout, you shall not
find that ever God did command any sacrifice to be offered for sin other
then that which is called a sin offering: and was to be offered for penitent
sinners, in such sort as the Law prescribes, which was, in the presence of the
penitent sinner himself, laying his hand upon the head of the sacrificed
beast, thereby signifying that it was he that had deserved that death, which
the innocent beast^ was then and there to suffer. The Sacrifice therefore which
Judas would have to be offered at Jerusalem, must needs be of that kind which
was called a peace offering, and was to be used for the pacifying of Gods
wrath, which should at anytime, by any occ^^^^n be bent, either against the
whole people, or against any one s^^^ of the people for any offense committed
amongst them. Iuda^ therefore considering that GOD might in Justice (as
oftentimes he had done) visit the sin of the Fathers upon the children,
even to the third and fourth generation, in them that in committing wylling and
wilful sin, had showed themselves to be haters of his Majesty: feared least
this just judgment should be executed upon such as remained yet alive, and
were of the posterity of them that were already slain, for the wickedness that
they had committed. The writer of the History therefore has done great wrong
to Judas, in that which he adds to the end of this hystory, bearing his
Readers in hand, that Judas meant to redeem by Sacrifice, the ^inne that the
slain had committed, and to teach, that to pray for the dead that they may be
released of their sins, is a holy and an wholesome cogitation. You must
therefore prove by other scriptures, more authentiall then this Scripture is,
that you are wise in that you pray for the dead: otherwise we must say, as you
say we do say, that you are fools in deed. And persisting in that opinion
that you hold* concerning the making of prayers for the dead, you will prove
your selves to be wilful fools.

Thus you may (if you will) see of how small force that piece of Ordinance is,
that you have brought out of the Storehouse of the Bible, pla^ting it against
that Bulwork of the Forte of our faith, wherein we stand at defense, denying
that it is either necessary, lawful, or meet for Christians, to make any
prayers to God, for the souls of them that are departed this life. And herein
we follow the example of the Patriakes, Prophets, Christ Jesus, his Apostles,
and the continual usage of Gods people, both before the Law written, under
the Law, and under Christ, even unto this day. If you, or any of your masters,
have ought to say, out of your general Counselles, out of your School
Doctors* out of the corruption of Doctors (otherwise godly) or out of vsages
that have sprung up in the time of deep ignorance: let it be set forth at
your leisure: and you shall have answer (by the help of GOD) as other your
predicessors in Popery have had. We do not deny but you may say much, but by
the rule of the ancient Fathers, what soever shall be affirmed, and not approved
by the authority of the Canonical Scriptures, may as easily be denied, as it
is affyrmed. Yea, S. Austen would have no credit, further then he should
prove by the holy Scriptures, all that he should affirm.

The second Bulworke, wherein we stand at defense, is, that we deny good
works to be meritorious to salvation: affyrming that by faith only we are
justified. Against this, you bring two battery pieces out of the Storehouse of
the Bible. One of them is the Epistle of the holy Apostle S. James. And the
other is, the words of our Savior Jesus Christ, written by the Evangelist S.
Matthew* Chapter. 25. Both these be double Cannons of great force. But having
planted them against our Forte, and having given fire to them with purpose to
shake down our walls, they recoyle in such sort, that your self are in
greater danger to be hurt by the shooting of them off, then we (against whom
ye have bent them) are. For what have you in the Epistle of S. James* that you
do think may annoy us, or shake any part of our Forte? I suppose that you
cannot find any words in that Epistle, that are more forcible then these are.
Quid proderit fratres mei, si fidem quis dicat se habere: operra autem non
habeat? nunquid poterit fides saluare eum? What shall it avail (my brethren)
if a man should say that he has faith, and yet has no works? do ye think
that faith can save him? And again. Sic et fides, si non habeat opera, mortua
est in semetipsa. Even so faith also, if it have not works, it is dead in it
self. And again. Abraham pater noster, no^ne ex operibus iustificatus est:
offerens filium suum Isaac super altar? Abraham our Father, was he not
justified by works, when he offered Isaac his son upon the Altar? And
again. Videtis, quoniam ex operibus iustificatur homo: et non ex fide tantum.
You see, that man is made righteous by works, and not by faith only. James.
Chap. 2. I am sure that these be the places that you your self would pick out
of S. James Epistle, as sentences that in your judgment do make most against
that which we believe and confess, which is. That works be not meritorious to
salvation. Now let us consider of these sentences, that we may see whether
they be likely to make against us, or against you. For the first, we say (as S.
James does) that if a man shall say that he has faith, and yet has no deeds,
that saying shall profit him nothing at all. For although he do say that he
has faith, yet he has i^ not indeed. For faith can no more be without good
works, then a good tree can be without good fruit. The good tree is never
without good ^ruites, either Act^^ or Potentia. that is, either in act or in
power. Even so faith, is never without good works, but has them in power even
when she seems to be most barren and unfruitful, and when occasion serves,
she brings them forth, that all men may see them, and be assured that she
is the same faith that S. Paul wrote of to the Galathians. Fides qu^ per
dilexionem operatur. Faith that works by love.

To the second sentence, we say as S. James does also. That is, that faith
which has no works, is dead in it self. Men of your sort, can sometimes
take hold upon distinctions, when they hope to have any advantage thereby
against us, but in the understanding of the meaning of S. James in this place,
they can not see any distinction of faith at all. No not though the text do
give them never so great occasion to use a distinction. Your Schoolmen can
tell you, that Fides is Triplex. Faith is of three sorts. Historica, Ciuili^,
and Ecclesiastica. The Ecclesiastical Faith is that whereby we are assured of
the goodness of our Godtowards us, whereby we are made his children by Adoption
inheritours of his kingdom, and heirs annexed with the only begotten son
of God, Jesus Christ our Lord. And whereby we are assured of the continuance of
his fatherly goodness toward us, in the performance of all his promises made
unto us. Yea, and by this faith we receive good gifts from him, in such
quality, number and measure, as he knows to be meetest for us, so that thereby
we are made able to persevere and continue, in seeking to set sorth his glory,
and in some measure to set it forth in deed* even to the end of this our
transitory life.

Moreover, by this faith, we do certainly know these thing^s, to the knowledge
whereof, man's reason could never be able to attain or reach: as the mystery
of the creation of all creatures, the mystery of the incarnation of our Savior
Christ, the mystery of our redemption by him, the mystery of our R^surr^ction.
^c. This faith is it, that S. I^mes says, wrought together with Ab^al ams
works, and brought forth in him obedience to God, when he commanded him to
offe^ ^p his son Isaac upon the Altar.: so that now he was made righteous
before men, as he was before righteous before God in that he believed, and was
assured of the performance of that promise that God had made unto him. This
faith is always linked with love, and works by love, as S. Paul writes in
the fifte Chapter to the Galathians: and is therefore all in all (as S. Paul
writes there) and without it, nothing can avail us. When we therefore do say
that we are justified by Faith only, our meaning is, that only Faith is the
mean, whereby we do apprehend the righteousness of Christ, which is by the free
gift of GOD bestowed upon such as be faithful, according to that which S.
Paul writes 1. Cor. 1. Exipso autem vos estis in Christo Jesus qui factus est
nobis sapientia a Deo, and Iustitia, and sanctificatio, and redemptio. And by
him are you in Christ Jesus, whom God has made, our wisdom, our
righteousness, our sanctification and redemption. Having this righteousness,
which is in Christ, we are in him righteous before God. But lacking this
righteousness (which without this Faith, we can not have) neither Civil nor
Historical faith can help us. For by them, we can be but righteous before
men. The Civil faith can bring forth none other righteousness then that which
is Civil, and so make us such as the Philosophers were, and no better. And by
the Historical faith, we can not be better then are the devils, in whom that
faith brings forth, an horrible fear of judgment, which must needs be
joined with hatred. So that they which have none other faith but that, must
needs hate God, as the devil does. We do therefore conclude with S. James,
that man is justified by works, and not by faith only. By works was Abraham
justified before men, when his faith had brought forth her fruit, which was
obedience to the commandment (Take thy son Isaac. etc.) which obedience
sprang out of that Faith that S. Paul wrote of, Romans 4. Qui contra spem, in
spem credidit, which believed in hope, even contrary to hope. Thus was Abraham
made righteous before men (as S. Paul has written) and was declared* and made
known to men by his obedience, which was the good fruit that his good Faith
brought forth. If you list to appose your self against S. Paul you may, and
in the end have the foil. S. James does not, but means to move Christians,
not to make an account of any other faith, then that which works by love. We
will hold with Saint James, and not oppose our selves against S. Paul with you.
We do see that these two Apostles, being led by one spirit of Christ, agree
in one. Although Paul do say: Arbitramur enim, iustificari hominem per fidem,
sine operibus legis. We suppose that man is justified by Faith, without the
deeds of the Law. Rom 3. And the other says. Videtis, quoniam ex operibus
iustificatur homo, and non ex fide tantum. You see that man is justified by
works, and not by faith only. James. 2. We do rather choose to be
anathematized of your holy father, the Popes holiness, and of all those fathers
that were gathered together in the Tridentine Council, then of father Paul,
(whose holiness does surmount the holiness of your holy father, the Popes
holiness.) Father Paul has written thus in his Epistle to the Galathians. Chap.
1. Licet nos, aut Angelus de coelo euangelizet vobis praeterquam quod
euangelizauimus vobis: Anathemasit. Although I my self, or an Angel from
heaven, should preach unto you any other Gospel, then that which I have
preached unto you: hold him accursed. The Gospel that S. Paul had preached to
the Galathians and others, was (and is) the Gladtydings of free justification
or discharge of all their sins, only by the mediation of our only Mediator,
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Take heed (Friar John) that you be not
within the reach of this Anathematization, if you be, 4000. whyskes with your
whip, will not brushe it away from your naked and scuruie shoulders. I term
them scuruy, because I suppose, that whipping your self so often and so sore
(as in your Letters you have reported) the skin of your shoulders and back
can not be without skabbes.

Well, let us now consider your other piece of Ordinance, which is a part of
the xxv. Chapter of S. Mathewes Gospel. First you have said thus.


The Friar. As concerning your opinion, that by faith only we are justified:
I refer you to the Epistle of the holy Apostle S. James, as also to those
words of our Savior Jesus Christ, written in the Gospel after S. Matthew, Cap.
xxv. Where it is written, that our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, in the latter
day giving the final and everlasting sentence (as well unto the saved as unto
the damned) shall utter these words. Venite benedicti patris mei etc. That is
to say. Come ye blessed of my father, and possess the kingdom prepared for
you, from the beginning of the world. Now, having spoken these words, he
shows the cause of this joyful sentence. For (says he) when I was hungry,
you fed me, when I was a thyrst, you gave me to drink, when I was naked ye
clothed me: but what are these things if they be not good works? Therefore, and
by this place of Scripture, good works are meritorious to our Salvation. Read
likewise (I pray you) the second Chapter of the Epistle of S. Paul to the
Remains, a little way of from the beginning. You shall there find, how God
will reward all men according to their works. The same also, if you will
search, you shall find, in the xvi. Chap. of S. Matthew, and in many other
places of the Scripture. I do not conclude by these parts of the New
testament, that by good works only we are saved, but mine intention is to
prove, that neither by faith without good works, nor by good works without
faith, we are justified or saved.


Crowley. As I have explaned unto you, the meaning of the Apostle James in that
which he wrote touching the justifying of men by works, in such sort (I hope)
that your self do see that you are much deceived in your judgment, touching
the meaning of the Apostle: So I hope I shall explane the meaning of our
Savior Christ, in the words which you cite out of the xxv. Chapter of S.
Mathewes Gospel. And first, because you have said before, that we admit not
the words of ye holy Doctors of the Catholic church. I will let you see
certain words that one of them has written, even upon these very words yt
you have cited out of the xxv. Chap. of S. Mathewe. Johannes Chrysostomus,
Homelia 80. in Mat. John Chrysostom in his 80. Homely upon S. Mathewes
Gospel, has written thus. His igitur rationibus, and isti non iniur^a
puniuntur: and illi etiamsi mill talia fecerint, per gratiam tamen coronantur.
Gratiaenamque omnino illa benignitas est: vt pro rebus minimis, and vilissimis,
coeleste regnum, and tantus honor tribuatur. That is to say. For these causes
therefore, both the one sort, are without injury punished, and although the
other sort have done a thousand such works, yet it is by free mercy that they
are crowned. For that bountifulness whereby the kingdom of heaven, and so
great an honor is given, for the smallest and most vils things, is altogether
of free mercy. Thus has Chrysostom written, as the conclusion of all that he
has written before in commendation of those that feed the hungry, give drink
to the thirsty, clothe the naked. etc. and in discommendation of them that
leave those works undone. The one sort (says he) that is (they which leave
those works undone) are justly punished: And the other are crowned, and yet
not for the worthiness of the works, although they work them never so often:
but that bountiful liberality, (whereby the kingdom of heaven, and that great
honor of being crowned in that kingdom, are given, for so small and vile
matters as our works are) comes altogether of Gods free mercy, and not of
any worthiness, that either is or can be in us, or in any works that we can
work. This Chrysostom is (not only in this part of his wrytings, but in all
his works) a very earnest mayntainer of the merits of good works, and yet
see how he co(...)udeth. In this conclusion* he joins with us, and we join
with him.

We hold, that good works, such as GOD has commanded, and prepared for us
to walk in, are acceptable in the sight of God, and that God does and will
reward them both in this life, and also in the life to come. And we crave of
GOD that we may keep still in mind the words of the Apostle. Heb. 13. To do
good and to distribute, forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased. Yea, we crave of God, that we do never forget the saying of the
Apostle Paul to Timothe. 1. Chap. 4. Exerce teipsum ad pietatem, nam
corporalis exercitatio, ad modicum vtilis est: p^etas autem ad omnia vtilis
est. Promissionem habens vitae quae nunc est, and futurae. Exercise thy self
to godliness (says S. Paul) for bodily exercise, is profitable but to a small
matter, but godliness is profitable to all things. Having a promise of the life
that now is, and of the life that shall be. This we hold, this we teach, and
this we are willing to practice. And for a further explanation of the meaning
of Chrysostomes conclusion above mentioned: mark (I pray you) what he writes
in his 53. Homely, to the people of Antioche. Omnia quae f^cimus, agimus
debitum implentes: proper hoc and ipse dicebat. Cum omnia feceritis dicite,
quia inutiles serui sumus: quae enim debebamus facere, fecimus. I gitur, sieve
charitatem exhibuerimus, sieve dederimus pecun^asegenis, debitum implemus: non
tantum quoniam a beneficijs ipse cepit, verum and quoniam ipsius bona
distribuimus, si cuncta erog^mus. All that we do (says Chrysostom) we do,
as satisfying or paying our debt: wherefore he himself also (that is Christ)
did say. When you shall have done all, say thus, We are unprofitable
servant, for we have done those things that we ought to do. Therefore,
whether we shall show charity, or whether we shall give money to the needy,
we do discharge our debt, not only because he did first begin to bestow
benefits upon us, but also because we do but distribute his goods, although
we bestow all that we have. No man can write more plainly or pithily, for
confirmation of that which we hold concerning the meriting by works, then
this Chrysostom has done in these two places. Thus you may see, if you be
wylling to see, that the holy Doctors of the Catholic Church, are not so
contrary to us in judgment, as you have persuaded your self that they be: but
when their works be thoroughly read, and the scope an purpose of their
wrytings, thoroughly weighed and considered* they are found to be of a judgment
contrary to yours, and be of one judgment with us. You allege these words of
our Savior Christ, as a declaration of the cause of our salvation. For you
say, having spoken these words, Venite benedicti patris m^i. etc. Come ye
blessed of my Father etc. He shows the cause of this joyful sentence etc. If
you had said, he shows a cause your speech might have been suffered. For
our feeding of the hungry, giving of drink to the thyrsty, clothing of the
naked, our harboring of the harbourlesse. etc. are a cause of this joyful
sentence. For they are Causa sine qua non. A cause without which this joyful
sentence shall not be pronounced. To them only that have done these deeds,
it shall be said. Come ye blessed of my father etc. But since you say he shows
the cause, your meaning must be, that these works are the efficient cause of
this joyful sentence. Which meaning is contrary to the definition or
description of an efficient cause: which is* A quo primo fit motus. That is,
The thing that makes the first moving. That is to say, the thing that does
principally or cheefely work ye making of another thing. And the efficient
cause in giving of this joyful sentence, is by S. Chrysostom affirmed to be
the free mercy of God. For in his 80. Homely upon Matthew (whereof I have made
mention) he says: Per gratiam tamen coronantur: Gratiae namque omnino illa
benignitas est. Although they in whose favor this joyful sentence shall be
given, have done a thousand such works, yet they shall be crowned through free
mercy: for that bountiful liberality, is altogether of free mercy. When you
have said he shows the cause, you say, that he says thus. For when I was
hungry, you fed me, when I was thirsty ye gave me to drink, when I was naked,
you clothed me: but what are these things, if they be not good works?
Therefore, and by this place of Scripture, good works are meritorious to our
salvation. If you could prove, or if we would yield unto you, that these
good works were the efficient cause of the giving of this joyful sentence
(which neither is confessed by us, nor can be proved by you,) then might your
conclusion be allowed of, in the Schools amongst Scholars. But seeing that
all men which have knowledge to discern one cause from another, must needs
confess, that these works be but Causa sine qua non* A cause without which
that joyful sentence shall not be given: your argument is as good as this
argument is* Baculus stat in angulo. Ergo Deus non est in coelo. The staff
stands in the corner: Therefore God is not in Heaven.

From this place of S. Mathewes Gospel, you send us to the second Chapter of
S. Paul to the Romans, a little way of from the beginning of that Chapter,
where you say we shall find, how GOD will reward all men according to their
works. And you say further, that if we will search, we shall find the same
most evidently, in the xvi. of S. Mathewes Gospel, and in many other places of
holy Scripture. You might very well have spared this labor. For we knew
before you were borne, that, both in those places that you name, and in many
other places of holy scriptures, it appears evidently, that God will give
unto all men (or as you term it, reward all men) according to their works.
But what can you conclude upon this? Shall we therefore say that works are the
efficient cause of our salvation? your self do deny it. For you say thus. I
do not conclude by these parts of the New Testament, that by good works only
we are saved: but mine intention is to prove, that neither by faith without
good works, nor by good works without faith, we are justified or saved. Here
you have flatly denied, that which you have before, as flatly affyrmed. For
before you have said, that our Savior Christ shows the cause of the joyful
sentence, which he shall give when he shall say: Come ye blessed of my Father.
etc. Wherein you affirm (as before I have proved) that the good works that
our Savior makes rehearsal of, are the efficient cause of gyuing that
sentence, and so by good consequence of our justification or salvation. And
now you say that you conclude not so, but that good works and faith together,
are the efficient cause of our justification or salvation. For so men of your
sort do mean, by that manner of speech, that you do use here, when you
say, by works or by faith.

But we have another meaning of that speech, as I will (by Gods help) let you
understand. When S. Paul says thus. Romans 3. Arbitramur enim iustificars
hominem per fidem, sine operibus legis. We suppose that man is justified by
faith without the deeds of the Law. His meaning is, that faith is the
instrument yt God uses in making us righteous. Gods free mercy is the
efficient cause, and our faith is the isntrumental cause of our justification.
So that God does make us righteous, by that faith that himself has wrought
in us by the word of his Gospel, which is, Virtus Dei in salutem omni
credenti. Romans 1. The power of God, to saluatition, to every one that believes.

Thus we may see that the word of the Gospel, is the instrument that God uses
in making us faithful, and faith is the instrument whereby he makes us
righteous. Fdes ex auditu: auditus autem per verbum Christi. Romans 10. Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing comes by the word of Christ (or as the
Greek has it, of God.) So that the word that is preached, and the Preacher
that preaches, are Gods outward instruments, which he uses in working faith
in the hearts of the hearers. And in this meaning S. Paul writes thus to
Timothe. 1. Tim. 4. Attend tibi and doctrinae insta in illis. Hoc enim
faciens: et teipsum salum facies, et eos qui te audiunt. Take heed to thy
self, and unto doctrine: be instant or earnest therein: for in doing this
thing, thou shall save thy self, and them that hear thee. Here we see that
Timothe being careful in looking to his own life, and to the soundnes of his
doctrine, and being earnestly bent to teach both by good example of life, and
by sownde doctrine, is by S. Paul said to be, the savior of himself and of
them that hear him. And yet it is manifest, that he was neither the savior of
himself, nor of any other, but an instrument that God used in working
salvation, both in himself and in other. Because that by his careful
diligence in looking to his own life and sowndnes of doctrine, and by his
earnestnes in preaching the same, faith was begun, and increased in his
hearers, and continued and confirmed in himself. Which faith, both in him and
in his hearers, laid hold upon, and heldfast ye merciful promise of God, made
in the mediation of the only Mediator betwixt GOD and man, even the man Christ
Jesus our Lord. 1. Tim. 1. And so both Timothe, his hearers, and all the
rest, that have been, are, or shall be by Gods good means made faithful, are
by Gods free mercy saved: according to the saying of the Apostle to the
Ephesians. Cha. 2. Gratia enim estis saluati per fidem: et hoc non ex vobis.
Dei enim donum est: non ex operibus, vt nequis glorietur. Ipsius enim sumus
factura, creati in Christo Jesus ad opera bona, quae preparauit Deus, vt in
illis ambulemus. By Grace are you saved, through faith, and that not of your
selves, for it is Gods gift: not of works least any man should boaste. For we
are his workmanshyppe, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
prepared, that we should walk in them. And to the Romans 9. Chapter. The
Apostle says thus. Non volentis neque currentis: sed miserentis est dei. It
stands neither in man's willing, nor in man's running, but in the mercy of God.
It seems to me a strange thing, that any man (professing the Religion of
Christ) dare conclude (as you do) so directly contrary to the express words
of the Apostle Paul. You say in your conclusion, we are justified or saved, by
faith and good works together. S. Paul says. We suppose that man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the Law. Now, if you can teil us of
any deeds, yt are of more force to make us righteous before God, then the
deeds that God has commanded in his Law: then have you said somewhat,
although but a little. For those deeds must be deeds commanded of men,
whereof the Prophet Esaias writes thus. Chap. 29. Their fear toward me was
taught by the precepts of men: therefore, behold, I will take in hand to work
a strange work, that shall be a miracle, and an astonishment to this people:
For wysemen shall loose their wisdom, and understanding shall be hid from the
prudent. I would wysh you to weighe well these words of the Prophet Esaias, and
to consider whether they be not already verified in you, and in men of your
sort. Consider also what our savior Christ adds to these words. Mat. 15.
In vain do they worship me, teaching the doctrines and commandments of men.
Whereby we are admonished, that it is but lost labor, for a man to go about
to be made righteous before God, by such works, as men do or can devise and
command. S. Paul to the Ephe. 2. says: That through faith we are saved by
free mercy, and that not of our selves. For it is the gift of GOD, and comes
not of works, least any man might have any occasion to boast: and how dare any
man conclude (as you do) that faith and works coupled together, may make us
righteous before God. I do therefore conclude, according to ye true meaning of
the words of our savior Christ, the Prophet Esaias, and the Apostle Paul, that
neither the works that God has commanded, nor the works that men have
devised, or can devise and command, yea or ye faith that God has, does or
shall work in the hearts of men, either be, or can be, the efficient cause of
man's righteousness or salvation. But the free mercy of God only, is the alone
efficient cause, that has wrought, does and shall work, salvation in the
faithful only* and in none other. In whom he himself works faith, that by
that faith they may lay hold upon, and hold fast that salvation, that in free
mercy, he does, and will freely bestow upon them* And surder I conclude, that
though the works that GOD has prepared for the faithful to walk in, neither
be, nor can be, the efficient cause of salvation, yet they are Causa sine qua
non: that is, a cause that must be found in them, to whom it shall be said.
Come ye blessed of my Father etc. so that they that shall hear that joyful
sentence, must hunger and thirst after righteousness of life, all the days of
their life. And use that faith that GOD has wrought in them, in laying hold
upon, and holding fast, that righteousness that God has in free mercy bestowed
freely upon them, having a continual care to show themselves thankful to him
for the same, by walking in those good works that he has prepared for them
to walk in.

Now for the meaning of those places that you direct us unto, namely, the 2.
to the Romans, the 16. of S. Matthew, and many other, wherein we may by search
find, how God will reward al men according to their works: I say thus. I could
by ye knowledge that God has given me, answer you sufficiently. Yet because my
words be of small credit with you, I will answer you by the words of a
holy father of the Catholic Church, whose words (I hope) you will admit, and
give credit to them (although* as I conjecture, you be not much acquainted
with them) S. Augustine writes thus. Quod est ergo meritum hominis ante
gratiam, quo merito accipiat gratiam: cum omne meritum nostru^, non in nobis
faciat nisi gratia. Et cum Deus coronat merita nostra, nihil aliud coronet,
quam munera sua? What is the merit of man before, whereby he may receive
grace: seeing that nothing but grace does work in us all our merit? And when
God does crown our merits, he crowns none other thing but his own gifts?
Thus writes S. Augustine Tom. 2. Epistola. 105. And again in his 7. Tom. in
the 7. Chap*ter of his book De gratia and libero arbitrio, he writes thus. Si
ergo Dei dona sunt bona merita tua: non Deus coronat merita tua, tanqua^ merita
tua, sed tanquam dona sua. That is, If therefore thy good merits be the gyfts
of God, then does not God crown thy merits as thy merits, but as his own
gifts. And again in his eight Tome. upon the Psalm, 98. Exaltate dominum Deum
nostru^. Vere exaltate, Been exaltate. Laudemus and exaltemus, qui fecit ipsam
iustitiam quam habemus, ipse in nobis fecit. Quis enim in nobis fecit ipsam
iustitiam: nisi qui nos iustificauit? De Christo autem dictum est: qui
iustificat impium. Nos ergo impij, ille iustificator: quando et ipsam iustitiam
ipse in nobis fecit, qua illi placeamus, vt ad dextram nos ponat, et non ad
sinistram, vt dicat ad dextram positis, venite benedicti patris mei, percipite
regnum quod vobis paratum est, ab initio mundi, non autem ponat ad sinistram
inter eos quibus dicturus est. Ite in ignem aeternum, qui paratus est diabolo
and angelis eius. Qui in nobis coronaturus est, non merita nostra, sed dona
sua: quantum debet exaltari? That is to say: Give great praise to the Lord our
GOD. Give him great praises indeed. Praise him aright. Let us lawde and praise
him, which has made that righteousness that we have. He has wrought it in us.
For who has wrought in us that righteousness, but he that has justified us?
And it is said of Christ, that he justifies the ungodly* We therefore are the
ungodly, and he is the iustifier: seeing that he has wrought in us that
righteousness, whereby we might please him, so that he might place us at his
right hand and not at his left hand, that he might say unto us being placed at
his right hand: Come ye blessed of my father, receive the Kingdom that was
prepared for you, from the beginning of the world.

Not that he might set us at his left hand, amongst the^ to whom he shall
say: Go into fire everlasting, which was prepared for the devil and his
angels. How greatly ought he to be praised, that shall crown in us, not our
merits, but his own gyfts? Again, the same Austen, writes thus in the same
Tome, upon ye Psalm 102. Qui in nobis victi sumus, in illo vicimus. Ergo
coronatte, quia dona sua coronat, non merita tua. We that in our selves are
overcome, have in him gotten the victory. He crowns thee therefore, because he
crowns not thy merits, but his own gifts. But to put you out of all doubt,
concerning ye meaning of al those places yt you send us to, see what saint
Austen writes in his forenamed Epistle. 105. Stipendium, inquit peccati, mors.
Recte stipendium, quia debetur, quia digne retribuitur, quia merito redditur.
Deinde, ne iustitia de human^ se extolleret bono merito, sicut humanum meritum
malum non dubitatur esse peccatum, non a contrario retulit dicens: stipendium
iustitiae vita aeterna, sed gratia, inquit, Dei vita aeterna. Et haec ne
praeter mediatorem aliqua alia via quaereretur, adiecit, in Christo Jesus Domino
nostro. Tanquam diceret, Audito quod stipendium peccati sit mors, quid te
disponis extollere? O humana, non iustitia, sed nomine iustitiae plane
superbia, quid te disponis extollere, and contrariam morti vitam aeternam
tanquam debitum stipendium flagitare? Cui debetur vita aeterna, vera iustitia
est. Si autem vera iustitia est, ex te non est. De sursum est, descendens a
Patre luminum, et haberes eam (si tamen habes eam) profecto accepisti. Quid
enim habes quod non accepisti? Quapropter, O homo, si accepturus es vitam
aeternam: iustitiae quidem stipendum est: sed tibi gratia est, cui gratia est
and ipsa iustitia. Tibi enim tanquam debita redderetur: si ex te tibi esset
iustitia, cui debetur. That is to say: Death (says he) is the hyre that is due
for sin* It is rightly called a stipend or wages, because it is due, because
it is worthily paid, because it is paid as a thing deserved. Moreover, that
righteousness might not extol it self for the good deserving of man: he has
not showed, that as no man doubts sin to be the evil desert of man, so on
the contrary he says not, that life everlasting is the hyre or wages of
righteousness, but he says, life everlasting is ye free mercy of God. And
(least some other way beside ye Mediator should be sought for) he adds these
words. In Christ Jesus our Lord. As though he should say, why do thou
prepare to extol thy self, when thou hear that death is the reward or
wages due to sin? Oh thou humane (not justice or righteousness, but in very
deed, pride, under the name of Justice) why do thou prepare to extol thy
self, and to require or claim, as a stypende due unto thee, that everlasting
life, which is contrary to death? That righteousness whereunto life everlasting
is due, is that which is the true and right justice. And if it be the right
justice, then it comes not of thee It is from above, and comes down from
the Father of lights, that thou might have it. And yet if thou have it,
undoubtedly thou have received it. For what have thou that you have not
received? Wherefore (O you man) if thou shall receive eternal life, it is in
deed the wages or hyre of Justice, but unto thee it is free mercy, unto whom,
even justice, or righteousness it self, is free mercy. And if thou had of
thy self, righteousness, whereunto it is due, then should it be given to thee,
even as being due unto thee.

If I were not persuaded that these words of saint Austen are sufficient to
persuade any reasonable man, that life everlasting, neither is nor can be
deserved (either in whole or in part) by any works that have been, or can
be wrought by man: I could (and would cite many more sayings of this holy
Father, as effectual as these, and tending as fully to this purpose, and some
like sentences out of the wrytings of other holy fathers also. But I am
assured, that although it be a thing impossible to persuade some of your sort,
yet these, and such sentences of this holy father, shall stop the mouths of
you all, when you shall come in presence of such as do know them, and be able
to urge them, against that filthy doctrine of humayne merits, that is so
stoutly maintained by you.

But now to conclude this matter, let me move one question to you, which you
may answer at your leisure. If all were true that you have written, touching
the cause of that joyful sentence that our Savior shall give in the last day.
Come ye blessed etc. For when I was hungry you fed me, when I was a thirst
you gave me to drink, when I was naked you clothed me. etc. I pray you what
shall be said then to you that are Minime Friars, and all others that are
altogether unable either to feed or clothe others, or themselves? shall not
the contrary sentence (trow you) be given against such? Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was hungry* and
you fed me not. I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink. I was naked and
you clothed me not. etc. Believe me (Friar John) if those words that you cite
out of the 25. of saint Mathewe, should mean, as by your writing you seem to
understand the^: the case of you, and of al such, as do either by vow or
otherwise, make themselves unable to do those good works yt you speak of,
shall be very hard. Your voluntary vow will not then excuse you. In the 7. Chap.
of S. Matthew, our savior Christ says. Discedite a me omnes qui operamini
iniquitatem. Depart from me all ye yt work iniquity: and do not you work
iniquity. When you (having received from God good gifts, by the use whereof you
might be able to feed and clothe your self, and to help to feed and cloth
others) have bound your self by a vow, to lead such a kind of life, that
of necessity, you must either be fed and clad by others, or else perish by the
lack of things necessary? Do not you work iniquity, when you do not only
rob your natural Parents, your Prince and Country, of that help that both
by the Law of nature, and by the Laws of God and of your Country, all these
ought to have at your hands: but also of that relief, help and service, which
all these might and ought to have out of the labors of others, but are (by
your hypocritical means) drawn from them that you may be thereby maintained
in idleness? I know, that such as have not such gifts* or be by any means
natural, or casual (as we may term it) made unable, both to help other and
themselves, must be sustained by the labor of others: and shall not be
rejected, as they that do not feed and clothe Christ in his members, but yet
so that they have merciful hearts, and do pity the case of the needy, when
they shall see them in misery. But this is not your case. Take heed to your
self in time (Friar John) for I fear there is no place in heaven for
purgatory Friars.

And thus much for that great double Cannon, that you have brought out of the
25. of saint Mathewes Gospel, with the rest that you have told us of, and we
have viewed and seen. The recoyle of them has hurt you much more then the
shot has anoyeo us. Now let us see, what great Ordinance you have bent
against that Bulworke of ours, wherein we stand and deny the real presence
of Christ, in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar. Thus you say.


The Friar. Now, as touching that which you de^y, concerning the real
presence, in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar: Look I pray you in the xxvi.
of S. Mathewe, where these words are written. Caenantibus autem eis, accepit
Jesus panem et benedixit, ac fregit, deditque discipulis suis, and ai^.
Accipite* and commedite. Hoc est corpus meum etc. That is to say, why lest the
rest were at Supper: Jesus took bread, blessed it, and brake it, and gave it
to his Disciples and said. Take and eat, this is my body. The same altogether
we read in the 14. Chapter of the Gospel of S. Mark, saving only that he
says: Sumite hoc est corpus meum, where as the foresaid Evangelist says
Accipite and commedite. Again, in the 22. Chapter of S. Luke, we read the
same, in words as it s^emeth more plain, then the before written words are.
For he says, Accepto pane, gratias egit, et fregit, ^t dedit illis diceus.
Hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis datur: Similiter and calicem postquam
caenauit dicens. Hic est calix nouum Testamentum in sanguine meo, qui pro uobis
fundetur. The English of these Latin words is this. Jesus Christ having taken
bread, gave thanks and brake it, and gave it to his disciples saying. This is
my body. In like manner also, the chalice, after that he had s^pped, saying:
This chalice is the new Testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you. Or
as Saint Mark in his Gospel says: Accepto calice. etc. That is to say,
Having taken the chalice, he gave it to his disciples saying. This is my blood
of the New testament, which shall be shed for many. Thus you see, how that all
the three Evangelists agree in this point: how that our blessed Savior, gave
to his disciples in his last supper, his most precious body and blood. I have
not showed this unto you by the savings of holy doctors, but by the words of
our Savior himself, unto the intent that you may believe me. We read in the
6. Chapter of the Gospel after S. John, how that our Savior endeavoring to
bring the hard hearted Jews unto the knowledge of his divinity, spoke these
words. I am the bread of life, which came down from heaven. If any body eat
of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread which I will give, is my
flesh for the life of this world. Again in the same Chapter. If you eat not
the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in
you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, shall have life everlasting: and I will raise him up from death in the
latter day. You say the contrary now, you make God a liar, you say that he
gave them not his body, but only bread, which is fully contrary to the
foresaid texts of Scripture.


Crovvley. These four double Cannons, that this valiant Captain (Friar John)
has planted against ye Forte of our faith, are of exceeding great force, but
he has so ouercharged them, that when he shall put fire to them, they must of
necessity recoyle with such force, that the Captain with all his company, are
like to be in very great danger. For off, they will not go against our
Forte: and break they can not. Yea, we are in good hope, that we shall have
such aid at the hands of S. Austen and his company, that this great
Ordinance shall be turned against the whole Army of the Romish Catholics, and
shot of so freshlye, that they shall hardly escape the loss of the Roman
honor for ever. And first let us see what may be done with the first of these
Cannons, called Caena^tibus autem eis. etc. Whylst that the rest were at
supper. etc. S. Austen in that book that he wrote against Adimantus, and in
the 12. Chapter of that book, writes thus. Non enim dominus dubitauit dicere,
^^^ est corpus meum: cum signum daret corporis s^i. The Lord (says S. Austen)
did not doubt to say, this is my body: when he gave the sign of his body. If
there were no more but this one place of S. Austen: it might suffice for the
turning about of these four pieces of Ordinance, and the making of them ready
to be shot off against Friar John and his fellows. For the force of them all
consists in this one assertion. When our Savior Christ took bread, and
gave thanks (or blessed) and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying:
Take, eat, this is my body. He did deliver unto those Disciples his own
body. And when he did after supper take the Cup (or Chalice) saying, this
Chalice is the New testament in my blood. etc. He did deliver his own blo^d.
Which thing S Austen denies, when he says. The Lord doubted not to say,
this is my body, when he delivered the sign of his body. For the sign, and
the thing signified are Disparata, things separated the one from the other.
The thing therefore that is the sign of another thing, can not (by any
means) be that thing whereof it is a sign. As the Ju^e or other matter, that
is hanged out to be a sign of Wine to be sold, can in no case be said to be
that Wine that is to be sold, but a sign thereof only. Yea though wine
indeed, were setforth to be a sign of wine to be sold: or bread indeed
were set forth to be a sign of bread to be sold: yet that wine and that
bread could not rightly be said, to be the same wine or bread, that is to be
sold, whereof that wine or bread so set forth is but a sign. And yet,
neither S. Austen nor we, do deny, but that the name of the thing signified
by a Sacrament, may be given to the Sacrament, because Sacraments have a
certain similitude of those things whereof they be sacraments. S. Austen
writing to Bonifacius* Epistola. 23. says thus. Si enim Sacramenta, quandam
similitudinem earum rerum quarum sacramenta sunt, non haberent: omnino
sacramenta non essent. Ex hac autem similitudine* plerumque etiam ipsarum rerum
nomina accipiunt. Sicut ergo secundu^ quenda^ modu^, sacramentu^ corporis
Christi, corpus Christi est, et sacrame^tu^ sanguinis Christi, sanguis Christ^
est^ita sacramentu^ fidei fides est etc. If sacraments had not a certain
similitude of those things whereof they be Sacraments: they were indeed no
Sacraments. And of the same similitude, they do, for the most part take also
the names of those things, whereof they be sacraments. Therefore, as after a
certain manner, the sacrament of the body of Christ is the body of Christ, and
the Sacrament of the blood of Christ, is the blood of Christ: even so, the
sacrament of faith is faith etc. Thus you may see, and as I think, you do
see, that these words, This is my body, do not prove any other presence of
Christ in the Sacrament, then that which may be called sacramental, mystical,
heavenly, and spiritual. And to make this matter more plain unto you: I will
let you see certain places of Scripture, where the like speech is used, and
in the like meaning. Ezechiell the Prophet, is commanded to shave of the hair
of his head and beard, to divide it into three equal parts etc. As it is
written in the fi^t Chapter of his book of Prophecies: and then to say. Thus
says the Lord God. This is Jerusale^* etc. By the circumstaunce of this text,
it is manifest, that the meaning of that sentence (This is Jerusalem) was not,
that the doing of those things that there were done, was the Ci^ty Jerusalem
really, but that the miserable estate of that City was signified thereby. In
the 12. Chapter of Exodus, concerning the eating of ye Pasouer it is written
thus. After this manner ye shall eat it. Ye shall gyrde up your loins, and y^
shall have your shoes upon your ^eete, holding sta^es in your hands, and you
shall make have in eating of it, for it is Phase ^d est transi^us domini. That
is, the Lords Pas^^er, or passing by of the Lord. These words are not the
words of Moses, but of God himself, spoken by Moses at the commandment of
God. Never did any man (as I think) conceive any such opinion of these words,
as you and your sort do show your selves to have conceived, of those words
that our Savior Christ spoke at his last supper, which you would have to be
of such force, that whenever they shall be breathed out (by any of your
Priests) over bread and wine ( Cum intention conficiendi, as you have it in
the cautiles of your mass: that is with purpose or intent, to make the body
of Christ) then of necessity the substance, both of the bread and of the wine,
must be turned into the substance of the body and blood of Christ. And
whosoever shall deny this: must needs be accounted as one that makes God a
Liar. Again, in the 15. Chapter of S. John's Gospel, Ego sum vitis vera and
Pater men's agricoia est. I am the true or right vine, and my father is the
husband man, or vine tyllar. And in the same Chapter. Ego sum vitis, vo^
palmit^s. I am the vine and you are the bra^nches. And in the tenth Chapter of
the same Gospel. Ego sum ostium, I am the door, Ego sum Pastor bonus I am the
good sheephearde And in the 14. Chapter. Ego sum via* I am the way. In all
these speeches, you are contented to admit a figure, and to confess that the
speeches are figurative. But in Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body, you may
not abide to hear of any figure at all. And why? Because the admitting of a
figure there, would mar all your market. All your Cloisters of Monks, Chanons,
Friars, Nuns, Colliges of Cannons and massing Priests, Chauntries, Obbets,
Anniuersaries, Trentalles, Months minds, and masses of Requiem are builded
upon this foundation. Hoc est corpus meum. This is my body, in pla^ne speech
without any manner of figure. But if you once admit a figure in that speech,
down go all these goodly buildings, and Friar John Fraunces and his fellows,
must learn to eat their bread in the sweat of their own faces, as other
poor men do* You must stick to it therefore, and tell these ^ereticke
Protestants, that in denying the Real presence in the blessed sacrament of the
Altar, they make God a liar. We deny not, but do confess, that the bread
and the wine in the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, are the body
and blood of Christ, even as the Pascall Lamb was the passing by of the Lord,
as the Rock in the Wyldernes was Christ, ( Petraerat Christus* The Rock was
Christ, says Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 10) and as the seven stars (spoken of in
the first of the Revelations of S. John) are the seven Angels of the seven
Congregations. And as ye seven golden candlesticks are ye seven
Congregations. Yea we say with saint Paul. 1. Cor. 10. Calix benedixionis cui
benedicimus: nonne communicatio sanguinis Christi est? Panis quem frangimus:
nonne participatio corporis Domini est? The Cup (or as you call it, the
Chalice) that we bless: is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The
bread that we break is it not the partaking of the body of the Lord? Quoniam
vnus panis, and vnum corpus multi sumus. Omnes quidem de vno pane, and de vno
calice participamus. For we being many, are but one loaf of bread, and one
body. And we do all take part of one loaf of bread and of one cup. If you
therefore would deny, that the Sacramental cup is the Communion of the blood
of Christ, or that the sacramental bread is the partaking of the body of the
Lord: we would say that you do lie, and do make the Apostle Paul a liar,
and so consequently* God himself, for the speech that Paul uses, is not
his, but Gods that spoke in him. We do believe, that the body and blood of
Christ, are given, taken, eaten, and drunken of the faithful in the Lords
supper, after a heavenly and spiritual manner: but yet verily and indeed.
Yea, and that faith is ye mean whereby the body and blood of Christ are
received in the Supper. All this we believe and confess: and your self (Friar
John) had once learned this, and did confess it in my Church without
Creplegate of London, before many witnesses. You do us open wrong therefore,
in that you say that we make God a liar, and say that he gave not his body to
his disciples, but bread only, which is fully contrary to the foresaid texts
of Scripture. And as touching the sentences that you cite out of the sixth
Chapter of S. John, we acknowledge Christ to be that bread that came down from
heaven. And that whosoever shall eat of that bread shall live for ever. And he
that eate^h not the flesh of the son of man, and drinks not his blood,
shall not have life in himself. But he that eate^^ the flesh of Christ and
drinks his blood, shall have life everlasting, and Christ will raise him
up in the latter day. But here you must give us leave to sale as S. Austen
does, and we must request you to think no worse of us then you do of him, so
long as we shall show our selves to be of one mind with him For he is a
Catholic docter, and I think you do take him so to be. If we therefore,
shall show our selves to be of one mind with him: I hope you will take us for
Catholics also. First I must tell you, that in the place that you cite, the
words be thus. Ego sum panis vi^^s, and not panis v^tae. That is the living
bread, and not, the bread of life. I note this, because the meaning of our
Sa^^our Christ was (as you have said) to bring the Jews to the knowledge of
his divinity, by considering that the Manna which fell from heaven (and was
accounted to be the bread of life) was not that living bread, that lives and
has life of it self, and is the fountain of life to al living creatures: yt
they might be occasioned to see, that the Manna was to the Fathers, as our
Sacrament is to us, a visible ^^gne, representing unto the^ this living bread,
as ^ur Sacrament does represent the same unto us. Concerning this matter,
saint Austen writes thus, in his 26. treatise upon the Gospel of saint John.
Patres vestri Manna manducaueru^t, and mortui sunt: no^ quia malu^ erat Ma^na
sed quiamale ma^ducaueru^t. Hic est panis qui de coelo desce^dit. Hunc pane^
significauit manna. Hunc pane^ significauit altar Dei. Sacrame^ta illa
fueru^t, in signis diuersa sunt, sed in re que significatur paria sunt.
Apostolu^ audi. Nolo enim vos inquit, ignorare fratres, quia patres nostr^
omnes sub nube fueru^t, and omnes mare tra^sieru^t, and omnes per Mosen
baptizati sunt, in nube, and in mari: and omnes eande^ esca^ spiritu* alem
manducauerunt. Spiritualem vtique eande^, nam corporalem altera^: quia illi
Manna, nos aliud spiritualem vero^quam nos. Sed patres nostri* non patres
illorum, quibus nos similes sumus, non quibus illi similes fuerunt. Et
adiungit. Et omnes eundem potum spiritualem biberunt. Aliud illi, aliud nos,
sed specie visibiliquidem, tamen hoc idem significante virtu^e spirituali.
Quomo^o enim eundem potu^? Bibebant inquit, de spiritu^li seque^te p^tra, petra
autem erat Christus. Indepanis, inde potus. Petra Christus in signo: verus
Christus, in verbo and in carne. That is to say. Your Fathers did eat Manna
and are dead: not because Manna was an evil thing, but because they did not
eat it aright. This is the bread that came down from heaven. Manna did
signify this bread. The Lords Altar did signify this bread. Those things
were Sacraments: in signs they be diverse, but in the thing that is signified
they are alike. Give care to the Apostle. For he says, Brethren, I would not
have you ignorant, that all our Fathers were under the Cloud, and that they
did all pass through the Sea, and that they were all baptized by Moses, in the
cloud, and in the Sea, and that they did all eat one and the same spiritual
meat. The same spiritual meat indeed, for the corporal was another, for
they did eat Manna, and we an other thing: but the spiritual was the same
that we do eat. But these were our Fathers, not theirs. They to whom we are
like, not they to whom they were like. And he adds to this. And they did all
drink of one spiritual drink, but in the visible kind, they did drink one
thing and we another, and yet signifying the self same thing in spiritual
virtue. But how was it the same drink? They drank (says he) of ye spiritual
Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. Hence was the bread, and
hence was the drink. In a sign, the Rock is Christ, but Christ indeed, is
in the word and in the flesh.

Can any man write or speak more plainly on our side in this matter, then S.
Austen has done in these words that I have here ^ited? Does he not plainly
affirm, that the Manna was to the faithful Fathers in the wilder^es, even the
self same thing that the sacramental bread in the Lords supper is to us
now? And that the Rock in the Wilderness, was unto them, the same thing that
the cup in the Lords supper is unto us now? And what? will you have us to
grant you a real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Manna and in the
Rock? And how can you then require us to grant it, in the sacramental bread
and wine? S. Austen says, that they and we differ not in the thing signified,
although we differ in the signs. Their signs were Manna and the Rock, or
water that ishewed out of the Rock, and our signs are the Bread and the
Cup, or the wine used in the Lords supper. But the spiritual meat and
drink, that both they and we do eat and drink, is the very body and blood
of Christ, that innocent Lamb that has been slain for the sins of the
world, even from the beginning of the world. And to give us occasion to
consider, that not every one that receives the Sacrament, does also receive
the body and blood of Christ. S. Austen says thus. O^r Fathers, not their
Fathers. They to whom we are like, not they to whom they were like. That is to
say, the faithful* not the unfaithful, did then, and do now eat the body,
and drink ye blood of Christ our Savior.

But will you see more out of S. Austen, in the same 26. treatice upon John.
Qui ma^^ucat carnem meam, and bibit meum sanguinem: in me manet et eg^ in illo.
Hoc est ergo man^ncare illam escam, and illum bibere potum: in Christo ma^^re,
and illum manentem in se habere. Ac ^er hoc, qu^ non manet in Christo and in
quo no^ manet Christus: proculdubio, nec manducat spiritualiter carnem eius,
nec bibit etus sanguinem, licet carnaliter, and visib^liter premat dent^bus
sacramentum corporis and sanguinis Christi: sed magis tantae rei sacramentu^,
ad iuditium sibi manducat and bibit. He that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, dwells in me and I in him. To eat that meat (therefore) and to
drink that drink, is this. For a man to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ
dwelling in him. And hereby it appears, that who so dwells not in Christ,
neither has Christ dwelling in him, the same (no doubt) does neither ^ate his
flesh (spiritually) nor drink his blood, although he do, fleshly and
visibly, press with his teeth, the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ:
but rather he does eat and drink the Sacrament of so excellent a thing, to
be a condemnation unto him self.

Thus you may see (Master Friar John) how rashly you have written, in that you
have said thus. If any body eat of this bread (meaning I am sure of that
Sacrament that is kept over your high altar) he shall live for ever. And the
bread that I will give is my flesh, for the life of this world. You say, If
any body eat of this bread etc. S. Austen says. No body but such as dwell in
Christ, and have Christ dwelling in them, either do or can eat the flesh of
Christ, but do by the receiving of the Sacrament of so excellent a thing, eat
and drink to their own condemnation. Now, I leave you, to try this matter
with S. Austen. If you can entreat him to recant: so it is. If not, your best
way is, to recant your self. And yet one other sentence of S. Austen in the
same treatice upon John. Nonne buccella dominica, venenum fuit Iudae? and tamen
accepit, and cum accepit, inimicus in eum intrauit: non quia malum accepit, sed
quia bonum, male malus accepit* Was not the Lords soppe, a poysonne to Judas?
and yet he received it, and when he received it, the enemy entered into him:
not because he received an evil thing, but because he being evil, did receive
a good thing, after an evil sort. Much more might be said to this effect:
but I leave you as I said before.

As touching the other sentence that you cite out of this sixth of S. John,
which is thus. If you do not eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink
his blood, you shall not have life in you. I would wyshe you to look on that
which S. Augustine writes, in the 16. Chapter of his third book, De doctrina
christiana. Nisi manduca^eritis, inquit, carnem fi^ij hominis, and sanguinem
biberitis non habebitis vitam in vobis. Fac^nus vel ^^agitium videtur iubere*
F^gura est ergo, praecipiens passioni dominicae esse communicandum, and
suau^ter a^que vtiliter recondendum in memoria: quod pro nobis caro eius
crucifixa and vulnera^a sit. Except (says he) you shall eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. He seems
to command an heinous or horrible fact. It is therefore a figure, commanding
that we should be partakers of the Lords passion or suffering, and that we
should sweetly, and profitably, lay up in memory, that his flesh was
crucified and wounded for us. Immediately before these words, S. Augustine has
written thus, Si praeceptiua locutio est, aut flagitium aut facinus vetans, ^ut
vtilitatem, aut benefi^entiam iubens: non est figurata. Si autem flag tium aut
facinus videtur iuber^: aut vtilitatem aut beneficentiam vetare figurata est.
If the speech be a commandment, that forbids an heinous or horrible fact,
or that commands profitablenes or beneficence, then the speech is not
figurative. But if it be a speech that seems to command an heinous or
horrible fact: or to forbid profitablenes or beneficence, then it is a
figurative speech.

By this Rule, all these places that you have alleged out of the 26. of s.
Matthew. The 14. of s. Mark The 22. of s. Luke, and the 6. of S. John, are
siguratiue speeches For understanding them after the Letter, as you do: they
seem to command an heinous and horrible fact* that is. To eat the flesh,
and to drink the blood of a man. But taking them for figurative speeches (as
we do, and as they are indeed) they do command a very profitable thing,
that is, (as S. Austen has said) to be partakers of the pass^on or su^fering
of the Lord, and sweetly, and profitably to lay up in memory that his flesh
was crucified and wounded for us. If you have not vowed, never to read ought,
that either is or can be written by any of us that are Protestants: or if you
will with a duetifull reverence, read the works of this ancient and learned
Catholic Father saint Austen, I doubt not but that you will ear long time be
past, do as the Prophet Jeremy writes of Ephra^m, in the ^1. Chapter of his
prophesi^s (which place you have cited for another purpose) that is, strike
your self upon your thigh and say. I am confounded, I am ashamed, that ever I
went out of England, following the counsel of a blind ghostly father. When
that blind bu^^arde had abused my tender years, and had put into my head,
that I had been brought up in heresy: I might have imparted this with my
gray headed instructors, which had been able to instruct me, as now one of
them has done. If our merciful father shall s^e that in you, that he did then
see in Ephraim: undoubtedly this will come to pass, to the great joy of them
that yet love you in the Lord, to your endless salvation, and to the
consusion of that Antichristian swarm, amongst whom you do now live. Amen.

But to give you yet a further occasion to consider better of your real
presence, I will let you see somewhat more, out of this ancient Fathers
writing^s, and out of the wrytings of some others, more ancient, and some not
so ancient. First, S. Austen writing upon the 98. Psalm, says thus:
Spiritualiter intelligite quod locutus sum. Non hoc corpus quod videtis
manducaturi estis, et bibituri illum sanguinem, quem fusuri sunt qui me
crucifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendaui: spiritualiter intellectum
viuificabit vos. Understande spiritually, that which I have spoken. You shall
not eat that body which you do see: neither shall ye drink that blood, which
shall be shed by them that shall crucify me. I have commended unto you a
certain Sacrament, which being spirituallye understood, will quicken you.

Basilus Magnus (somewhat more ancient then Austen) does show himself to be
of this mind. That whatsoever may be reallie present, in more places at once
then one, is no creature, but is God in nature. To prove the holy Ghost to be
God, he writes thus: De spiritu sancto. Cap. 22. Angelus qui asti^it Cornelio,
non erat in eode^ tempore etiam apud Phillippu^. Neque qui ab altari Zacharia^
alloquebatur: eodem tempore, etiam in coelo, propriam sedem ac stationem
implebat. At vero spiritus, simul in Abacuc and in Daniele in Babilonia operari
creditus est. Et in Cataractae cum Hieremia esse dictus est. Et cum Ezechiele
in Chobar. The Angel that stood before Cornelius, was not at the same time
with Phillip also. Neither did he, that from the Altar spoke unto Zachary, at
the same time occupy his own place and order in heaven. But we believe, that
the holy Ghost did at one time, work in Abacuc and in Daniell, being in
Babylon. And it is said that he was with Jeremy in the dungion, and with
Ezechiell in Chobar. Basil thought this sufficient to prove the holy Ghost to
be God. And shall not we think then, that you affyrming, the body of Christ to
be really present in the sacrament, do affirm it to be God, because it is
present in so many places at once, and so deny i^ to be a creature? But see
what another Father (more ancient then Basil) does say to this matter.

Origin writing upon the 25. Chapter of S. Mathewe, says thus: Secundum hanc
diuinitatis suae naturam, non peregrinatur, sed peregrinatur secundum
dispensationem corporis quod suscepit. As touching this his divine nature, he
is not gone into a strange Country, but concerning the disposition of that
body which he has taken upon him, he is gone into a strange Country.

S. Austen, writing to Dardanus. Epistola. 57. says thus. Cauendum est enim,
ne ita diuinitatem astruamus hominis, vt veritatem corporis auferamus. For we
must take heed that we do not so set up the divinity of the manhood, that
we take away the truth of the body. These words of saint Austen are plain
enough, and yet to make them more plain, he adds. Vna persona Deus and homo
est, et vtru^que est, vnus Christus Jesus. Vbique per id quod Deus est, in
coelo autem, per id quod homo. One person, is both God and man, and both these
is one Christ Jesus. In all places in that he is GOD, but in that he is man, he
is in heaven.

In his 30. treatice upon saint John's Gospel, S. Augustine writes thus,
Corpus domini in quo resurrexit, in vno loco esse oportet: veritas eius vbique
diffusa est. The Lords body wherein he arose, must be in one place: but his
truth is spread abroad in every place.

S. Ambros also* writing upon saint Lukes Gospel, has these words, Lib. 10.
capit* 24. Quae sursum sunt sapite, non quae super terram. Ergo non supra
terram, nec in terra, nec secundum carnem te quaerere debemus, si volumus
inuenire. Sauoure those things that are above, and not those things that are
on earth. If we therefore, wyil find him, we must not seek him upon the
earth, nor in the earth, nor after the manner of flesh.

Cyrill also, who being in the days of saint Ambros Bishop of Alexandria,
writes upon the Gospel of saint John, and says thus: Lib. 6. capit. 14. Et
si Christus corporis sui praesentiam hinc sub duxit, may state tamen
diuinitatis semper adest, sicut ipse, a discipulis abiturus policetur. Ecce ego
vobiscum sum omnibus diebus, vsque ad consummationem soeculi. Although Christ
have conueighed hence the presence of his body: yet is he always present by
the majesty of his divinity, even as when he was departing from his Disciples
he promised. Behold I am with you every day, even to the end of the world.

S. Gregory also, in his 21. Homely, writes thus. Christus no^ est hic, per
praesentiam carnis: qui tamen nusquam deest, per praesentiam maiestatis. Christ
(says he) is not here, by the presence of his flesh: which notwithstanding,
is absent from no place, by the presence of his majesty.

Fulgentius also, in his second book, Ad transimundum regem writes thus.
Christus vnus, idemque homo localis ex homine, qui est deus immensus ex patre.
^nus idemque secundum humanam substantiam, absens coelo, cum esset in terra,
and derelinquens terram cum ascendisset in coelum. Christ is but one, and the
same is placible, man of man, which is of his Father GOD, that can not be
measured. One and the same as touching his humane substance, was absent from
heaven when he was on earth, and leaving the earth when he ascended into
heaven. The last of these writers hitherto cited, lived within 500. years
after Christ's ascension.

Consider, I pray you, the places that I have here set down in writing, taken
out of the most ancient, learned, and godly writings that these Fathers have
left behind them. And be no longer led by such as first seduced you, and do
still bear you in hand that all the ancient Fathers did believe and teach such
a real presence of Christ Jesus to be in the Sacrament of the Altar, as they
have taught you to believe: and that al we that do deny that there is any such
real presence of Christ in that Sacrament, do make God a liar, and do hold
an heresy, most horrible, detestable, and abominable. Where as in very deed,
we do believe and teach, the true, ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic
faith, concerning the true use of the Sacrament of the body and blood of our
Savior Christ. And that which they do hold and teach, is schismatic,
deuillish, and damnable. Come out from amongst them, hearken no more to them,
they are false Prophets, destruction hangs over their heads, and hell gapeth
for them. They rob Christ of his glory. They rob Christians of their
greatest comfort. They suppress and hold under true Religion. They set up
and maintain Idolatry and superstition. And to speak all in one word: they
uphold Antichrist and his whole kingdom.

But to return to our purpose. You say that we say, that there be but two
Sacraments, an heresy condemned long ago. But you tell us not when, where,
nor by whom. Therefore as we have said, so we do say, and so we will say (by
Gods help) til you can prove the contrary: that Christ has ordained but two
sacraments to be used by Christians. Your saying, that it is an heresy
condemned long ago, is but a flashe of false fire given to a piece of
Ordinance vncharged, and therefore can not hurt the Bulwork wherein we stand,
and do deny that Christ has ordained any more sacraments then two, namely:
Baptism and the supper of ye Lord. In his third book of Christian doctrine,
and in the 9. Chap. there of, S. Austen writes thus concerning this matter.
Hoc vero tempore posteaquam resurrectione domini nostri Jesus Christi,
manifestissimum iudicium nostrae libertatis illuxit, nec eorum quidem signorum
quae iam intelligimus, operatione graui onerati sumus: sed quaedam pauca pro
multis, cademque factu facillima, et intellectu angustissima, and obsernatione
castissima, ipse dominus and apostolica tradidit disciplina: sicuti est
Baptismi sacramentum, and celebratio corporis and sanguinis domini. Quae
vnusquisque cum percipit, quo referantur imbutus agnoscit, vt ea non carnali
seruitate, sed spirituali potius liberate veneretur. Vt enim litteram sequi,
et signa pro rebus quae ijs significantur accipere, seruilis infirmitatis est:
ita inutiliter signa interpretari, male vagantie erroris est. But in these
days, since by the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, a most manifest
sign (or show) of our liberty has appeared: we are not laden with the
heavy working of those signs that we do already understand. But in steed
of many, the Lord and the Apostolic discipline has given unto us, a certain
small number, and the same very easy to be done, and most excellent in
signification, and most pure in observation: as is the Sacrament of Baptism,
and the celebration of the body and blood of the Lord, which every man that is
instructed, does when he receives them, know to what end they are referred,
that he may reverence them, not in a carnal servitude, but rather in a
spiritual liberty. For, even as, to follow the Letter, and to take the
signs, for those things that be signified by them, is a point of servile
infirmity, even so to enterpret ye signs unprofitably, is a point of error
that wandreth evil fauouredly, or wickedly.

In these words of S. Austen, we have occasion to note two things especially.
One is, that he did not know of more Sacraments then two, instituted by our
Savior Christ, and commanded by him and his Apostles to be used in his
Church. The other is, that it is a point of fleshly servitude, and not of
Christian liberty, for a man to follow the letter, or litterall sense, in those
speeches in the Scriptures, that do concern those two Sacraments, in such
sort that he will take the signs that are spoken of, for the things
signified by them. A man may meruell, that any of your sort, that knows
these words of S. Austen: can allow him for a Catholic, and yet condemn us,
as Heretics in this point, wherein we do both affirm and deny, even as he
has done many hundrethes of years before us.

But let us see yet, one other place of S. Austen. In an Epistle that he wrote
to one Ianuarius, which is in number 118. S. Austen writes thus. Primo itaque,
tenere te volo, quod est huius disputationis caput, Dominum nostrum Iesum
Christum, sicut ipse in Euangelio loquitur, lent iugo suo nos subdidisse, and
sarcinae leui. Vnde sacramentis numero paucissimis, obseruatione facillimis,
significatione praestantissimis, societatem noui populi colligauit: sicuti est
baptismus, trinitatis nomine consecratus, communio corporis and sanguinis
ipsius, and si quid aliud in canonicis scripturis commendatur, exceptis ijs
quae seruitutem populi veteris, pro congruentia cordis illorum, and prophetici
temporis oneraba^t, quae et in quinque libris Mosis leguntur. First of all
therefore, my will is, that you should understand, what the chief point of
this disputation is. That is, that our Lord Jesus Christ, has (as himself
speaks in the Gospel) made us subject to his own easy yoke, and light
burden. Whereby he has syed together the society of the new people, with
Sacraments that are fewest in number, easiest in observing, and most excellent
in signification, as is Baptism, consecrated in the name of the Trinity, and
ye communion of his body and blood, and if there by any other sacrament that is
in the Canonical Scriptures commended, except those sacraments, which did
increase the weight of bondage of the old people, as was meet for their
hearts, and for the prophetical time, and which are read in the five Books
of Moses.

In these words of S. Austen, we have occasion to note, that his meaning was
to certify Ianuarius (to whom he wrote this Epistle) of that thing which our
Lord Jesus Christ taught, in that which stands written in the eleventh of
saint Mathewes Gospel: concerning the easines of the yoke, and the lightness of
the burden, that Christ Jesus has laid upon Christians. And for the explaning
of his meaning: he says that our Sacraments are very few in number, very
easy to be observed, and most excellent in signification. And he names only
Baptism and the supper of the Lord, which he calls (as we commonly do) the
communion of the body and blood of our Savior Christ. And further, he
refers him to the Canonical scriptures, as aduising him to receive no more
Sacraments, then he shall find to be commended in them. And least he might
take occasion by those words, to think that Christians ought to be
circumcised, and to observe the sacrifices and ceremonies of Moses Law: he
excepteth all such Sacraments, as were laid upon the people of the old Law,
by any thing that is written in any of the five books of Moses. So that, by
these words of this learned Father saint Austen, it appears (as by the other
before rehearsed) that he was not persuaded, that Christ Jesus our Lord, has
laid upon us Christians, that heavy burden of seven Sacraments, which your
holy father the Pope, lays upon you, and upon all his Antichristian flock.
Confirmation, Order, Repentance, or (as you call it) Penance, Matrimony, and
the Visitation of the sick (which you call Extreme unction) we use, as good,
profitable, and necessary vsages in the Church of Christ, but not as
Sacraments: because it appears not in any Canonical scripture, that Christ
our savior has instituted them, and commanded them to be used as sacraments.
Neither do they agree with that definition or description of a sacrament,
which is commonly allowed of amongst the learned* and is thus. A Sacrament is
an outward and visible sign, representing an inward, invisible spiritual
grace, ordained by Christ himself, to testify Gods good will and bountifulnes
toward us, through the same Christ our savior, by which Gods promises,
touching forgiveness of sins, and eternal salvation, given through Christ,
are (as it were) sealed, and the truth of them, is more certainly confirmed in
our hearts. To this definition or description only Baptism, and the Lords
supper do agree: therefore they only, are properly to be called sacraments.
Otherwise, a sign of a holy thing may be called a sacrament. But in that large
signification of the word sacrament, there be not only seven sacraments, but
seauenty times seven sacraments. And in that meaning we deny not, but that
there may be in every one of these other five, which you call sacraments, more
sacraments then one or two. But I can not meruell enough at this one thing,
that men of your sort, can esteem so highly of Matrimony, as to make it a
sacrament of such excellency, and yet bind all your holiest Catholics by a
solemn vow, never to use it, or to take any benefit by it. Yea, I meruell
that you can account matrimony so holy a thing as a sacrament, and yet married
persons so unholy, that if any of them shall come into any of your most holy
Cloisters, the walls and floores thereof must be washed, as things polluted,
by the presence of those married persons. Howesoeuer therefore, by whom soever,
or wheresoever, that which we hold concerning two sacraments only, has
been condemned for heresy: we do still hold it, and mind still to hold it
for right Religion, till Friar John, and his fraternity, can and shall by the
Cannonicall scriptures prove it heresye, and saint Augustine an Heretic.

Now you enter into your exhortatorie Oration, which you make to your Father
and Mother especially: But it may be thought that your meaning is, that this
exhortation should be made general. For your Father and Mother, must have
help in the reading and waying of those matters that are co^terned in this
exhortation. I will therefore do you this pleasure (if I can) for old
acquaintance. You shall have this excellent Oration of yours published in
print, with all the rest that you have (in these your Letters) written to your
father and mother, that all your friends on this side the Seas (if any such
be) and all your undoubted friends of the English Nation, as well in France as
in Italy, or else where in any part of the known world, may know the depth of
that divinity that dropped out of your pen, when you wrote those Letters in
Nigeon. But I will be so bold with you (mine old Scholar) as to publish this
mine answer together with these your Letters, with this admonition. Read
all: or read nothing. Hoping that you and your accomplices, will do as much
upon my admonition, as I have done upon yours: which is thus. Read it
through, or begin it not. This admonition you have set down in the margin of
your Letters seauenteene times. Persuading your self (by all likelihoode) that
we dare not read any thing written by a Papist: more then many of your sort
dare read any thing that is written by a Protestant. But you must understand,
that we are not under such vows as you are. We are encouraged by the Apostle
Paul, to try all things, and commanded by him to hold fast that which is
good. Omnia probate, quod bonum est tenete. Try all things: holdfast that
which is good. 1. These. 5. Yea, we are of that sort that our Savior Christ
spoke of Marci vltimo. In the last Chapter of saint Marks Gospel. Si
mortiferum quid biberint, non eis nocebit. If they shall drink any deadly
poison, it shall not hurt them. We have received before hand, a Treacle,
which is of such virtue, that none of your popysh poisons can hurt us. We do
therefore, (and by Gods help we will) read all your books, if we may have
them. Yea, we will so read them, and answer them, that you shall have cause
to wish that you had never written them. We do not use to condemn men's
wrytinges before we have read them, wayed and considered them, and found them
such as are meet to be condemned. If you had done so, you would never have
condemned for heretics, so many as in these your Letters you have condemned by
name: and yet it may be thought, that you never read any one line, written by
some of them. I hope you will do as much for me as I have done for you, that
is, read these my wrytings, way and consider them, and confute them if you
can, and let that which you shall do, be made public to the world. But to
return to our purpose, your Oration begins thus.


The Friar. Look to your selves (I pray you) believe our holy mother, the
Catholic Church. Roll your selves up and down in her blessed lap. Leave
your Sermons heretical: go no more unto them. Rise not so early in the
morning as you were wont to do, to damn your self body and soul. Go no
more (I say) to those Sermons of Crowley, Barber, Field and the rest. Burn
your books of Sermons, with all other your books in which are heresies. Be not
ashamed of the name of a Papist. Go to confession, confess your sins to a
Priest. Leave this world that is so disceitfull and stick unto God. etc.


Crovvley. Here is an heap of Patheticall speeches, powered out (as it were)
of a Vessel full of fervent zeal toward your poor parents and all others,
that be in such miserable case, as you seem to suppose that they are in. You
wyshe them to look to them selves, as though you saw them in present perrill
and danger of destruction. There be seven things that you require them to
do, whereby they may escape that great danger which hangs over their heads.

The first is, to believe your holy mother the Catholic Church, and to roll
themselves up and down in her blessed lapp. If that Catholic Church (that
believes, confesses, and professes, that faith and Religion that Christ
Jesus taught in his own person, and commanded to be taught Catholicklie,
throughout the whole world, by his Apostles and messengers) be that holy
mother of yours that you speak of: then will your Father and Mother, and all
other that you wyshe should be moved by your speeches, gladly do that which
you wish them to do. Yea they do it already, and have done it ever since
God gave them knowledge of that mother. And they do still beg of God, that
they may continue rolling up and down in her blessed lap, all the days that
they shall continue in this transitory life. Yea, and they do constantly
believe all that she has taught, or does teach: and they do daily crave of
God, that they may be made able to believe, and boldly confess all that she
shall teach, so long as they shall be living on this earth. If this be your
meaning, they do most heartily thank you for your freendly and christian
admonition. But it seems to me, that the holy mother that you speak of, is
another, whom men of your sort call the Romish Catholic Church. Your father
and mother, (John and Catherine Debnam) and as many as be of one mind with
them: do utterly refuse that mother, because she uses to teach many more
false lies, then true lessons. They dare not roll themselves up and down in
her lap, because she is not ye chaste spouse of Christ Jesus, but that arrant
whore of Babylon, that murdereth the children and saints of God Our mother has
told us, that our father has commanded us, to believe in one God only, which
being three in person, is but one in substance, essence and power: but your
mother teaches you to believe in many Gods. For she teaches you to call upon
Angels and saints, and what is that other, then to teach you to believe in
them? For, s. paul writes thus in his Epistle to the Romans. Cha. 10. Quomodo
inuocabunt, in que^ non crediderunt? How shall they call upon him, in whom they
have not believed? Our mother has told us, that our father has forbidden us,
to make to our selves any graven Images, or the likeness of any thing that is
in heaven above, or in the earth benethe. etc. But your mother teaches you, to
make the Images of men and of Angels, yea and of God himself (whom never man
could see) and to set them up in your Churches, to burn Incence unto them,
to set light before them, to offer gifts unto them, to fall down before them,
and to make prayers before them, all which is directly contrary to our heavenly
fathers commandment. Our mother has told us, that our father has forbidden
us to take his name in vain, and that he has commanded us to swear by him
only, and not by any other: But your mother teaches you to swear by your
idolatrous mass, by your saints, and by the Images of your saints, and to
profane the blessed name of God, in making your superstitious vows, and in all
your exorcismes, and coniurations. Our mother has told us that our fathers
will is, that we should spend the Saboth day holilie, and not to profane it in
any condition. But your mother tells you, that you may dance, dally and
sport and play, bayt Bulls and Bears, and give your selves to all other
pastimes on the Sabothe day, so that you dispatche your Idolatrous service in
your Churches, either before or after, but you must in any case take heed,
that you give not your self to any good exercise in that day. Our mother
tells us, that our fathers pleasure is, that we should show due obedience, to
such as are in any respect our fathers or mothers, and yt we ought to honor
them, and be of duetiful behavior toward them, yea, and (if need shall so
require) to aid succor and relieve them, in such measure as GOD shall make us
able. But your mother teaches you to say Corban, as the Pharesyes taught their
Scholars, when our Savior Christ was amongst them.

Let your old Father and Mother, (John and Catherine Debnam) sterue in
England, by reason that being aged and impotent, they can not by labor
procure things needful, as in youth they did, and fed both themselves and
you, with the rest of their children: Their son Samuel must (if he will
hearken to his new mother of Rome) live still in France, being fed and
sustained by the labor of others, and write to his Father and Mother (be
their case never so hard) that he must fast and pray, and whippe himself for
their sins, and observe the Rule of a bonehome all the days of his life, and
not come over into England, and lay his lasie limbs to any honest labor,
whereby he may eat his own bread, and help to feed the feeble bodies of his
decayed Father and Mother, or do any honest service in the Common weal of his
Country. Yea that mother of his tells him, that he is exempted from all
secular power, and so sequestered from the world, that he may not employ
himself, or suffer himself to be employed, in doing any good therein.

Our Mother has told us* that we may not shed any man's blood, for who so
shall do so, shall have his blood shed by man. But your mother tells you,
that if you can shed the blood even of Princes that be Protestants, you shall
thereby purchase forgiveness of all your sins, and be canonized for a saint,
and have your name written in the Popes Calender, yea and you shall be called
upon in the Letanie, amongst such as the Pope allows of for saints: Sancte
Samuele Johannes Francisce, or a pro nobis. O holy Samuel John Frauncis: pray
for us. Our mother has told us, that our fathers will is, that we should keep
our bodies undefiled by adultery or fornication, and that he will destroy them
that shall defile his Temple (which is the body of every Christian) either by
fornication or adultery, and therefore he would have all men and women that
have not chaste minds in chaste bodies, to match them selves in chaste marriage.
But your mother has taught you to vow a wiueles life, net knowing whether God
will make you able to perform that vow or not. So that although you shall
burn in concupiscence never so much, yet mary you may not, to keep your body
undefiled, for you have forsworn that remedy, which is the only remedy that
God has appointed. Our mother has told us, that our father has forbid us
to steal, or to take any thing that does not by some just title belong to us,
either by force or by fraud: But your mother teaches you to rob God of his
glory, yea, and to challenge and claim to your self, that which belongs
only to him, as the appoynting of a mediator, and the means of mediation, for
the obtaining of pardon, and forgiveness of sins: which you assign to Angels
and saints, and to massyng Priests, and to your selves, and to al other merit
mongers. Persuading the poor and simple people that will harken unto you, that
by your austeritie of life, your going and lying woolwarde, your rising at
midnight, your singing, your saying, your fasting, your praying, and by your
whypping and scourging, their sins shall be forgiven, because they feed and
mayntain you in idleness by their fore labors, and thus you rob and spoil
them of the fruit of their labors, under pretense of long prayers, and such
other hipocriticall works, as the Pharesies did, Matthew. 23. But our mother
has told us, and we believe it, that our father has made his only begotten
son Christ Jesus, our only Mediatory: yea, and the only mediator betwixt
him and all mankind. 1. Tim. 2.

Our mother has told us, that our father has forbidden us to bear false
witness against any man: But your mother teaches you to belie all such as she
calls Protestants, and to say of all such, (as you have in these your Letters
written) that they are the devils ministers, and that their life is such, that
if it were known to the simple Christians, they would not only wonder at
their wilines, but also forsake their folly. Whereas that which you call their
folly, is heavenly wisdom, and that which you call wilines in them, is simple
and true dealing.

Our mother has told us, that our heavenly father would not that we should
lust after any thing, that belongs to our neighbor: But your mother has
taught you to lust after the kingdom of England (which belongs not to you
that be fugitives and Rebels) and to have your Order of Frauncis of Paula to be
settled there. Yea, it seems that you are more then half assured that it
shall be so: For you write that you hope, that it shall shortly be in England. I
fear me therefore, that fugitive, or Rebel, is too good a name for you, since
you seem to be rank Traitors indeed. Well, I would wish you to hearke^ no
longer to your Romish mother, least she bring you at the last to preach at our
Tyburne. A meet place for such to preach in, as being English borne, have
Romish hearts. We dare not roll our selves up and down in the lap of such a
mother. We will not forsake that mother, that hitherto has taught us, and does
still teach us, to fear, honor, and love our heavenly Father, and to frame
our lives according to his will. In her lap we will roll our selves up and
down, as hitherto we have done, and crave at Gods hands that we may do so
still, and increase in love toward our heavenly father, and toward her. Her
words we do believe, and her words we do hope we shall believe, so long as we
shall live here: for they are the words of truth, and words that teach nothing
but the will of our heavenly Father, which is the God of truth.

The Sermons which you call heretical: your father and mother neither may nor
will leave. For they are the plentiful pappes of that loving mother, in whose
lap they do roll themselves. And out of those pappes they and all others that
do roll themselves, together with them, in that mothers lap, do suck that
milk that S. Peter writes of. 1. Pet. 2. which nourishes to salvation. They
will not therefore leave those dugges, but will hang still upon them. Your
mother of Rome has not so sweet, so pleasant, nor so healthsome milk in her
withered dugges. Her milk is poison to the children of God: wherefore our
mothers children will none of it, neither will they leave of going to those
Sermons, where they may suck so much good and healthful Milk as may suffice
them.

You advise your mother not to rise so earelie in the morning, as she has
been accustomed to do, to damn herself body and soul. Go no more (you
say) to those Sermons of Crowly, Barber, Field, and the rest. So that, to rise
in the morning to hear the Gospel of Christ preached, is in the judgment of
men of your sort, to damn both body and soul. But if your mothers dwelling
were in Paris, as it is in London, and she would rise at midnight, and go to
Nigeon, to hear Friar John and his fellows singing their mattins before their
blessed sacrament of the Altar: the^ she should be accounted the holiest
Matrone in all Paris. Yea her ghostlye Father would assure her, that the place
which the blessed Virgin Marie does now possess in the kingdom of heaven,
were mean enough (yea too mean) for her. But especially, if she did not use
to come empty handed, but bring with her, either a bottle of the best Wine, or
a bag of the best Nuttes, or a good quantity of the best Figs or Reysons,
or Almons, or any other fruits, as the times of the year should yield: for
Minime Friars may eat all manner of fruits, when they be given unto them, as
Friar John himself has written.

But do ye not see (Sir Friar John) how this part of your exhortation,
rebowndeth upon your self. Rise not at midnight to damn your self body and
soul. Go not, I say, to sing your Mattins before your blessed Sacrament of
the Altar, which neither does nor can hear you. Take no such daily pains as
you do, in singing your high masses, which can not profit you, but shall
condemn you to hell fire (if you repent not) for all that you do therein is
Idolatry, and false worshippyng of God. Yea, it is the setting up of an Idol
in the place of God, and the giving of Gods honor to an Idol. Return again
therefore into England, and accompany your aged mother to the places, where
she and you together, may hear the doctrine of salvation preached by Crowley,
Barber, Field, and other. In which exercise, your mother attained to the
knowledge of Christ, even in the days of her virginity* when as yet Friar John
was not Samuel Debnam. She is not builded upon sand or gravel: but upon the
firm Rock Christ Jesus, and therefore, it is not the vain blaste of your
Friarlike cloquence that can remove her.

You wish her to burn her books of Sermons, and other books that have
heresy in them. If she have any such books (as I think she has not) I would
wysh her to do as you bid her, but if her books be no worse then I do
think them to be, I hope she will make greater account of them, then you will
her to make. Your mass books, your Gradalles, your Legends, your Manualles,
your Portises, your Processioners, and your Hymnalles, your Pontificalles, and
your Decretalles, with the rest of your popish Vtensiles: are meeter matter to
be sacrificed in fire to Vulcan, then are those books of your mothers, which
you will her to burn. You say further to her* Be not ashamed of ye name of a
Papist Go to confession, confess your sins to a priest: this is as much as to
Be not ashamed of the name of a Traitor. For every one that (being an English
man, or woman) is a right Papist, such a one as you brag that your self are:
the same is a rank Traitor to the Prince and state of the Realm of England.
You have therefore a Traitors heart toward your Prince and Country, that can
wysh your mother not to be ashamed of the name of a Papist. Your mother has
learned of Jesus Syracke, not to be so lavish of speech, as to open her
secret sins, either to freende or to foe. If the Priest that you would have
to confess her sins to, be neither her friend nor her foe: then perhaps she
may be persuaded to tell him somewhat. Syracke. 19

But will you see, what opininion S. Austen has conceived of these ghostly
fathers that you speak of. Quid mihi ergo est cum hominibus, vt audiant
confessiones meas: quasi ipsi sanaturi sint omnes la^guores meos? Curiosum
genus* ad cognoscendam vitam alienam desidiosum ad corrigendam suam. Quid a me
quaerunt audire qui sim: qui nolunt a te audire qui sint? Et vnde sciunt, cum a
meipso de meipso audiunt: an verum dicam? quandoquidem nemo scit hominum, quid
agatur in homine, nisi spiritus hominis qui in ipso est? Augustinus
confessionum, libri. 10. cap. 3. What have I to do with men yt they should
hear my confessions: as though they should heal all my langors? A kind of
men curious to know the life of another man, but slack to amend their own.
Why do they seek to hear what manner of man I am: which are not wylling to
hear thee declare what manner of men themselves be. And when they do hear me
make report of my self, how do they know whether I do say true or not? For
no man does know what is done in man, but the spirit of man which is in him.
Austen, in the 10. book of his confessions, the 3. Chapter.

I hope you will not blame your mother, though she follow not your counsel,
since both S. Austen and Jesus Syracke have advised her to do the contrary. She
does confess her sins to God every day, because she is assured, that he does
know when she speaks truth. And that he is able to pardon and to forgive
her sins, and that being unfeignedly penitent for her sins, he does and will
pardon, forgive and forget her sins, according to the saying of the Prophet
Ezechiel. Chap. 18, At what time soever a sinner shall repent him of his sins
from the bottom of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my
remembrance.

Your mother, and all we Protestants, are and will be ready to do as saint James
teaches in his 5. Epistle, where he says thus: Confess your sins one to
another. When we have trespassed one against another, we acknowledge our
faults one to another. We ask forgiveness one of another. We satisfy and make
a mendes one to another, if our ability will stretch so far: if not* we know
that God will require no more of us, then he will make us able to do. And as
touching faults that are committed against us, we forgive them, as Christ has
commanded and taught us. Yea, though our brother shall trespass against us
seven times in a day, and shall say seven times in a day, it repents me:
we forgive, because we know that otherwise our heavenly father will not
forgive us. And when the horror of our sin, is so great before our eyes,
that we can not otherwise be satisfied, and assured of forgiveness at Gods
hand, but by such comfort, as some that we think to be of more knowledge,
and of better life then we know our selves to be of, can minister unto us:
then we make choice of some such one as can certify us indeed, by the
merciful promises of God contained in the holy Scriptures* made to penise^t
sinners, and not by popish penance enjoined, and popish absolution pronounced,
by virtue of any power given by that most holy Father of yours, the Romish
Antichrist. We are not so mad as you were, when you having tasted of the
sweet milk that our Mother, the true Catholic and Apostolic Church did
minister unto us, by her pappes that she offered to us, at the Spittle in
Easter week, 1583. would on the Saturday following (as your self do write)
run into a corner, like a Waltams Calfe, seeking to be satisfied with the
milk of a Bull. Giving credit to a false forsworn Traitor, that (without all
manner of proof) told you, that all the healthful milk that you had sucked
before, was poison, and that if you would find milk that might feed you to
everlasting life, you must run to Rhemes, or to Rome, for there it is to be
had, and not else where. But I hope you will remember your self better, and
return to your first faith, from which you are for a while fallen, that rising
again you may confirm others, and stay them from the like horrible fall.

You wyshe your mother to leave this world that is so disceitful, and to
stick unto God. So she did before you were borne, and does still, and so
purposes to continue all the days of her life: though she mind not to shake
of the yoke of duty toward her husband, (your father) and profess herself
a Nun, as you have professed your self a Friar, and have shaken of the yoke
of duetifull obedience to her and to your aged Father, and to the Common weal
of your Country, that has nourished you up, whereunto you do by natural
order, owe a third part of that service that GOD has made you able to do.
Your mother knew, before she did know you, that this world is disceitfull,
and therefore, she never did repose any trust in it. She has learned to live
in the world, and not to be of the world, neither to serve the world, but to
serve him that made her and the world, giving his creatures to her and others
his children in the world, for whose cause he has made all his creatures that
are in this world. And she has learned to be thankful to God, for the use of
his creatures in the world, and not to be in love with this world, or with
any thing in it, but to have her affection still fixed upon that other world,
where she is assured that she shall for ever dwell with him, that has made
both this and that world. She is not so mad as to think that there is none
other way to heaven, but through Rome gates. She knows that Christ Jesus is
the way, the truth, and the life: and not the Pope, nor your Frauncis, nor any
other father of your n^we found Religions.

Although you say that your Religions are ancient, and ours new, yet she
knows that yours are new, and ours is ancient. And although you charge us
with many Religions, yet she knows that our Religion is but one, and yours is
manifold. You have written, that your Order is called the Order of S. Frauncis
of Paula: what that Frauncis was, or in what time he lived, I can not find in
any History. Sabellicus, and other Historians have noted, that about 400.
years past, there lived in Italy, one Franciscus Asisias, a man of singular
virtue (as they report) and that this man began a new Order of Friars, whom
he named Minors. And after that, he instituted an other Order, whom* he called
Pauperes, or poor Friars. There spronge from him a third Order also, which
were called Poenitentes, or repenting Friars. By all likelihoode, your Order is
of that sort of Friars. But let it be of which you lust to make it, it can not
be of such antiquit^, that you may compare with us. We hold not of any of them
that you name Captain Protestants. We are not Caluinists, we are not
Zwynglians, we are not Lutherans, Wickliffians, nor Hussians: yea, we hold
neither of Apollo, of Peter, nor of Paul: but we hold of Christ only, and
are and wylbe called Christians. You are and will be called Minimes, Franciscans,
Dominickes, Minorites, Carmelites, Benedictines, Augustines, Barnardines, and I
know not what. And by a common name, you wylbe called Papists.

Your popish Religion began, when the Popes did first take upon them the
high dignity of universal Bishops, and heads of the universal Church of
Christ, which was about 610. years after the Ascension of our Savior Christ,
not full 1000. years before this day. At which time, Bonifacins the third of
that name, was ordained the high and universal Bishop. But our Religion
began in Adam, and continued in the posterity of Sethe, even till the
incarnation of Christ, and was by him made Catholic, to be universally
received of all Nations. And that Religion only do we hold and profess.
And in this Religion were you baptized amongst us. And this Religion did you
once profess, before many witnesses. I would therefore wysh you to leave your
new Religion, and profess your old Religion again, repenting unfeignedly
your Apostacy, and craving forgiveness at our heavenly fathers hands, who is
always more ready to grant us pardon, then we can be to crave it. So shall
you show your self to do, as you wysh your mother to do: that is, you shall
leave the world, and worldly devises, and cleave unto God alone, as your
mother and al unfeigned Protestants do. You proceed, and say thus.


The Friar. Believe me if you will: I know as well as you, the heresies of
Calvin and Luther, and could peraduentnre, have defended them, better then you
can. And therefore, knowing their opinions, and seeing that they were most
false and damnable, contrary to all wholesome doctrine, and to the Scripture it
self: I was by reason of this constrained to leave them, and to make my self
a Papist. For trust me if you will, when ye shall yield your souls to God,
your bodies returning to the earth, you will then tell me another tale. You
would then if you could, bewail your sins, but you shall not be able etc.


Crowley. If we will believe you, we may. But for my part I can hardly
believe, that either you did then, or do now, know the doctrines that Luther
and Calvin taught, which you call heresies, so well as your Father and mother
both did then and do now know them. But be it that you did: yet without
peradventure, you were never able to defend them half so well, as they both
could and can. For if you had been of such ability to defend our Religion,
as your Father and mother were then, and be now also, undoubtedly, you could
never have been so soon vanquished as you were, by so weak adversaries, as
by all likelihoode you had. But it seems that you had no outward adversary at
all, but the spirit of Arrogancy only that lurked within you, and moved you
to presume upon your self, and to take upon you to judge of the doctrine of
others, before you had any knowledge of doctrine your self. But we must
believe you (if we lust) when you say that you did know their opinions, and
did see that they were most false, and abominable, and contrary to all
wholesome doctrine, and to the Scripture it self: and by reason of this, you
were constrained to leave them, and to make your self a Papist. A marvelous
matter (more to be mused at then to be believed) that so young a man as Samuel
Debnam was, in Anno. 1583. (at which time he was not Friar John Frauncis)
should have in that little corpse of his, all wholesome learning, and such a
knowledge of Scriptures, that he was able to affirm for truth, that the
opinions that Calvin and Luther held, are contrary both to all wholesome
doctrine, and to the Scripture it self. And yet I dare affirm for truth,
that this profounde Clarke, did never (before that time, wherein he says he
was enforced to make himself a Papyst) read any one work through, that
either Calvin or Luther have written. Yea, and as I think, I may be bold to
affirm, that this prosounde Divine, had at that time, as little knowledge of
that doctrine which he calls sound: as any young Grammarian, either has or
can have of the deepest mysteries of Divinity. For I know, that before that
time he never gave himself to any grave study. neither did he give himself to
any manner of orderly reading. But his whole time (in manner) was spent in
toying and tryfling, and for ye most part in idleness, and vain playing. And
in the Scriptures, he could have none other knowledge, then such as he might
attain unto, either by hearing in the Churches (where he never used to hearken
attentively) or else by reading in my house, at the times of mine ordinary
dinners and suppers, unto which exercise I did employe him, as I did other
young boys, that I kept in my house, as I kept him. And yet see how he takes
upon him, to condemn for most false, damnable, and contrary to all wholesome
doctrine, yea and to the Scripture it self, the opinions that those two
excellent men ( John Calvin and Martine Luther) held and taught, and have
left behind them in writing to the view of all posteritye. Arroganting to
himself, the full and perfect knowledge, as well of the Scriptures, as of all
humane Doctrines, both good and bad. Yea* (by those speeches that he uses) he
would seem to have read and wayed, both the one and the other, and to have
conferred the one with the other, as one very desirous to have found them
agreeable, the one to the other. But the falshode of that which he then
favored, was so great and damnable, and the contrariety to all wholesome
doctrine, and to the Scripture it self, so manifest: that although ^ore against
his will, he was constrained to leave the doctrine and professyon of a
Protestant, and to make himself a Papyst. Yea, by the words that he adds,
he seems to be persuaded, that except he had done so, he must of necessity,
have perished everlastingly* For thus he says.

Trust me (if you will) when ye shall yield your souls to God etc. You will
tell me another tale: you would then if you could etc. But you shall not be
able. Would not a man (that reads these words) think that this young Friar,
has as much knowledge as is possible for a man to have? And yet when he is
opened, and thoroughly searched, there is not one crumme of knowledge found in
him. Undoubtedly, it was but a vision in sleep, that deceived him. He dreamed
that he knew the opinions, that he writes of: and that he compared them with
all wholesome doctrine, and with the Scripture, and found them, as he
reports. But when he shall awake out of his dream (for as yet, he lies
sno^ing and snorting, in his deep sleep of wylfull ignorance) then he shall be
that case that the poor beggar was in, which awaking out of his sleep, sought
after money, but found not one cross of Coin about him, notwithstanding,
that in his sleep he dreamed that he had more bags of Gold then he was able
to bear. He uttered certain speeches amongst his companions, whylst he was
in my house, before he took his journey into France, which words do savor
of such a Dream. What will you say (says this dreamer) when you shall see me
preach at Paul's Cross? And again. I will see Rome before I be a year
elder. These speeches agree with that desire that he had to creep into the
weed of a Minime Friar. No man could diswade him from it. By all likelihoode
he had heard that diverse Friars of S. Frauncis Order, have been made Popes of
Rome. As Sabellicus the Hystorian notes, that before his time, five
Franciscane Friars had been made Popes. Enneadis* 9. Libro. 6. And I know
the courage of Friar John Frauncis to be such: that though his person be but
little, yet his head would hold up the triple Crown. And although there have
been many bloody beasts that have worn that crown, yet I think that amongst
them all, there has not been one more bloody, then this little vermin would
be, if he might once change his Minimes hoode for a triple Crown. But to
return to our matter. He proceeds with his exhortation to his Father and
mother, and thus he says.


The Friar. I have heard my mother say, that in the old time, the people were
more devout then now they be. Now, if so be that, you be now governed by
God, and the Papists in old time were governed by the devil, you must needs
confess, that the devil is better able to make men devout then God is, for
because that by your own confession, the Papists were more devout in the old
time, then the Protestants are now.


Crowley. This is a point of deep Divinity, and of as cunning Sophistry. Friar
John's Mother did once say so, therefore of necessity it must needs be so. But
it may be, that Friars of your Order have a Privilege, whereby they may frame
arguments, that shall conclude neither in Mode nor in Figure: and yet no man
may deny, either the argument or any part thereof. I have heard it reported,
that once there was a Pope, that would seem to be a better Latinist then he
was indeed, and therefore he would now and then be talking a little Latin,
though he did oftentimes reach Priscian a blow. But on a time, there was one
present, that hearing him make default in not observing the Rules of Grammar in
his speech: thought good with due reverence to admonish him, saying: It may
please your holiness to pardon my boldness* As I take it, your holiness has
broken Priscians head. The Pope answered, and said: As I have spoken so shall
it be, in despite of Priscian, and all the Grammarians in the world. Now,
if that holy Father, or any other amongst your holy fathers of Rome, have
granted you as large a liberty in framing Arguments, as that holy Father
himself used in speaking Latin, then you may maintain your argument for good
amongst Papists, but amongst Protestants it will never be allowed for good.
The meaning of your mothers words, is as much as if she should say thus. The
people were more addicted to Religion, in the old time then they be now, but
the Religion that then was in ure, is a corrupted and vnpure Religion, and the
Religion that now is in use is more sincere and pure. The people therefore are
more addicted to embrace a corrupted Religion, then that which is more pure.
This argument has some sense in it. And this saying is according to that
saying of our Savior Christ. John. 3. Light is come into the world, and men
have loved darkness more then light. Now, if you should enforce these words
against the Apostle, and others that were the Scholars of Christ, you should
do them great wrong, for they were not of that sort of men, that loved
darkness more then light, for they were chosen out of ye world, and had their
minds renewed, and as they were renewed, they loved light and hated darkness,
that is, ignorance and wickedness of life, which is the fruit of ignorance
and darkness. Even so, you do open wrong to the Protestants, in that you
enforce your mothers speech against them, concluding that of necessity they
must confess, that either they be governed by the devil: or else that the
devil is better able to work devotion in men, the God himself is. This
conclusion follows not upon the Premises. For although men generally, have
not so great devotion to the true Religion that is now in use, as generally
they had to that Religion, that was in use in the time of ignorance: yet such
as be now unfeigned Christians, even such as men of your sort do use to call
Protestants, have now as great devotion to the right Religion, as ever the
Papysts had to their vain superstition, or as you (Master Friar John) have
now to that solery yt you have now professed in Nigeon.

The right Protestant, is the right Christian, and has received the spyrite of
Christ (as all that belong to Christ have done. Romans 8.) and is governed and
led by that spyrite, which spirit works in him* a fervent devotion to
serve God, in spyrit and in truth, that is in true holiness and righteous^es.
The right Papyst, is the right Antichristian, and has received the spirit of
Antichrist, and is governed and ledd^ by that spyrite, because he has given
over himself to be led by that spyrite, forsaking ye spirit of truth. 2.
These. 2. I conclude therefore, that your conclusion that you infer upon those
words that you have heard your mother speak, concerning the devotion of the
people in the old time, is a fond fryarlike conclusion, and touches not us
any thing at all. We know that our God is in heaven, and that he can do what
he will do, and has done what he would do, both in heaven, in earth, and
in hell, and in all deep places. As for the devil, we know him to be but a
sl^ue to our God. And that of himself, he has no power at all. For all power
belongs to God. Psalm. 62 And we know that devotion, is a good gift, and
therefore comes from GOD, who is the gyuer of all good gyfts, and that no
good gift does, or can come from the devil. That therefore, which you call
devotion, and is wrought in you Papists by ye spyrit of Antichrist (which is
the devil) is no devotion indeed, but a mere superstition, and a
superstitious zeal to false Religion. And thus much for answer to that
matter. You proceed and you say thus*


The Friar. Consider this, look to your souls health, remember the saying of
our blessed Lord and Savior. Whosoever loves Father or mother, Brother or
sister, son or daughter, lands or goods, yea or his own soul more then me,
he is not worthy to be my disciple. Think not therefore, that it is so much to
burn your books, seeing God will not have us to love our own souls more
then him.


Crovvley. We have considered that which you have wylled us to consider, as in
the words that go immediately before, you may see. Such care for our souls
health, as becomes Christians, we have had, have still, and we do not doubt
but we shall have, so long as we shall live in this transitory estate. The
saying of our blessed Lord and Savior, we forget not, We love not Father,
mother, son, daughter, lands, goods, no nor our own souls more then we
love him. Yea we love none of these otherwise then in him, and for his cause.
And yet do we not think our selves worthy to be his Scholars. But his holy
spirit which he has given us, does inwardly in our hearts assure us, yt in
mercy he has accepted of us, and made us not only his Scholars, but also
his sons and daughters by adoption, inheritours of his own kingdom, and heirs
annexed with his only begotten son, Christ Jesus. And therefore, we do not
in our dangers flee from him (as you Papists do, seeking help in creatures)
but we flee to him, as obedient children to a loving Father, and we cry
Abbapater, Father, Father, But let us see what follows in your exhortation.


The Friar. Believe me, I pray you, I am your son. Believe not them that
flatter you before your face, and behind your back laugh you to scorn. If your
heart be turned (as I beseech God it may be) if you can not find a Priest to
hear your confession, and to reconcile you, and make you a member of the holy
Church, at the least wise burn your books heretical, use not the Englysh
Bible, go no more to the Protestants Sermons, buy a pair of Beads, and pray
to our blessed Lady to help you, and wysh in your heart that you had a Priest
to confess you, and wish so as often as you can, but specially when you fall
sick, or that you are like to die. Purpose steadfastly, if you could
conveniently, to confess your sins, and to go to shryft? etc.


Crovvley. When you would persuade your Mother to burn her Books, you put
her in mind of this saying of our Savior Christ: Whosoever loves father or
mother. etc. But now, when you labor to draw her from Christ to Antichrist,
she must believe you, for you are her son. A pretty point of Rhethorike, and
very rhethoricallie applied. If your behavior had been such toward your
mother, that she might have had thereby some cause to think, that you bear a
childlike affection toward her: or if you had in these your Letters, sought
by humble and dutiful speeches, to win again that favor, which by
undutiful behavior you have lost: then it might have stand with some
reason, that you require her to give credit to you (her natural son) rather
then to any other, such as you speak of. But since you neither have nor can
purge your self of that deep dissimulation that you used, at and before you
slipped away from her, neither of that undutiful behavior that has been in
you toward her, in all the time of your absence, and is still: I can not
shinke that you were well advised, when you would use that way to persuade.
For what mother can believe any word that is spoken or written by that son,
that would hipocritically accompany her to the Sermons at Easter, and with his
pen take notes of them: and yet on the Saterdaie following, would go
secretly to a Romish ghostly Father, and be by him reconciled to the Romish
Catholic Church, promising to be an enemy, yea a mortal enemy all the rest
of his life days, to the doctrine which he had so lately heard, and in
outward show seemed to have allowed of? yea and what credit can you hope to
have at her hands, in whose company, you received (I fear me to your own
condemnation) the holy Supper of the Lord, the next day after you had been
reconciled to that Antichristian Church of Rome? And how can you hope, that
your mother will believe you, that making haste to be gone from her, on the
Monday in the after noone, pretended to go to hear that Hebrewe Lecture, that
the mischievous Heretic Ba^ber (as it pleases you to term him) did read
unto you? And do you think that you (lying so nigh London the two first
nights, after your departing from your mother, and three weeks after that,
within one mile of London, and hearing what search was made for you, by your
careful parents and other friends, would not show your self to that
sorrowful mother, but suffer her to continue still in that remediles care, not
only during the space of three months, which was the time that you continued
in England, before you could pass over the Seas: but also, even to the end
almost of three years, continuing in France, would never make your place and
case known to your mother, or any of your fre^ndes in England) can have any
such credit with this mother of yours, as in these words of yours you seem
to make account of? If your Mother will hearken to you, she may give no credit
to the^ that flatter her to her face, but laugh her to scorn behind her back.
And I pray you, can there be any that has or could deal so with her more
then you have done? Can any man think that you did not laugh in your sleeue,
when you heard that your father and mother made such inquiry and search after
you, and yet could not meet with you? and could any flatter your mother to
her face, more then you did all yt Easter time before you departed? There is no
cause there fore, why she should either give less credit to any, then to you,
or distrust any more then you. If her heart be turned from Christ to Antichrist
(as you do crave of God it may be) then she must seek for a priest, to hear
her confession and reco^cile her, and make her a member of ye holy Church, but
though she can find no such priest, yet she must (if she will follow your advice)
burn her heretical books, and use the English Bible no more, and refrain
going to ye Protestants Sermons. To pleasure your mother in this case, you
might have done very well, to have written to her, where and how she might
^inde one of these reconciling priests, and by what token she might know a
right reconciling priest, from a cosening knave, least hoping to be made a
member of ye holy Church, she might be admitted into the society and fellowship
of cosoning mates, that have no authority from your Antichrist of Rome, and so
should she be in worse case then now she is, or that you do now suppose her
to be. For having forsaken God (as you do advice her to do) she should not be
received of Antichrist, and so should she be as a masterles hownde, that
smells to every man's garment, and never finds any that will accept of his
service. And where as you wish her in any case to burn her heretical books,
you might have done well to direct her to places and persons, where, and by
whose means she might come by such books yt you do allow for Catholic.
etc. But in that which follows, it appears what your meaning is. For she
may neither use the Bible in English, nor hear the Protestants preach,
neither do you direct her which way she may take, to come where she may hear
Catholic preachers. Your meaning therefore must needs be, to bring her into
the dark dungion of ignorance, which men^ of your sort do use to call the
mother of devotion and obedience. And this your meaning is opened in these
words following. Buy a pair of Beads. etc. What man or woman, that has any
manner glimmering of Christian knowledge, can like of that manner of praying yt
they do use, which pray upon Beads? First, they persuade themselves that they
pray to our Lady. And so do you exhort your mother to do, for you say. Bie a
pair of beads, and pray our blessed Lady to help you. But can you persuade
your self, that you pray to our blessed Lady, when you say. Our Father which
art in heaven. etc. And hayle Mary full of grace. etc. And I believe in GOD the
Father. etc? There is not one petition in the Lords prayer, that may any way
be thought to be a petition made to that blessed Virgin: except you can
imagine that she is that Father which sees in secret, to whom our Savior
Christ commanded his Scholars to pray, when he taught them how they
should pray, saying: When you pray you shall say. Our Father, which art in
Heaven. etc And in that salutation which the Angel Gabriell used to the
blessed Virgin, there is not one word of petition or prayer, made either to
her or to any other. And as for the Creed, it is a confession of belief,
wherein are contained the special Articles of the Christian faith: but there
is not one word therein that can be, by any means wrested, to serve for
petition or prayer. Now, the order of your praying upon Beads is thus.

First you say one Pater noster. Then, the Aue Maria ten times, and then one
Pater noster, and again, the Aue Maria ten times: and so forth, till you have
rehearsed the Pater noster five times, and the Aue Maria fyftie times. And then
you rehearse Credo in Deum Patrem, once. And this is the order of your praying
upon Beads. And when you have gone over your Beads three times, in this
order: then you have said our Ladies Psalter (as you do term it) I marvel
yt you did not advise your Mother to forget the Lords Prayer and the Creed,
that she has learned in the English tongue, and learn the Pater noster, the
Aue Maria, and the Credo in Deum, in the Latin tongue. For our English
Prayers can not agree with your Italian Beads. Neither is it possible, for
that person to be devout, in that kind of devotion, that is not so ignorant,
that he understands not one word of ye prayers that he uses. I marvel
therefore, that you which do understand the Latin tongue, can be so blinded,
that you can allow of that manner of praying. I fear me, that you have so
provoked God to wrath, by your wylfull Apostacy, that in justice he has so
blinded your understanding, that you take darkness for light, and ignorance for
knowledge: the devil for God, and GOD for the devil. And then is your case
most miserable, as says the Prophet Esaias. V ae qui dicitis bonum malum and
malum bonum. etc. Esaias. 5. Woe is unto you, or alas for you, that do say that
good is evil, and that evil is good. If this be your case, I do not hope,
that this which I now do, or that can be done by any other, can help any
thing at all to draw you out of your dark dungion of ignorance. But hoping
better of you, and that though my labor could not profit you, yet some
other may be profited thereby. I have thought good to make this matter as
plain as I can, that the manifest truth, may (if it be possible) prevail with
you, and bring you back again to your former happy estate, wherein you were
once, and seemed to be settled therein. If that can not be, yet I hope this
labor of mine may be a mean to stay some such as you were from running
headlong after you into that pytte of destruction that you are fallen into.

You teach your mother to crave help at the hands of the blessed virgin,
that was never able to help her self. She her self says, That her spyrite
rejoiced in God her Savior: and would you that your mother should now put
that blessed virgin (whom God has saved) in the place of that God that saved
her, by craving that help at her hands, which can not be had at the hands of
any, but of God himself? Your mother had learned (before she bare you) that
it is God that draws the Infants out of their mothers womb, and that it is
he that sustaineth them whylst they hang upon their mothers dugges. Psalm. 22.
And when she traveled of Child, she called upon him, and not upon the blessed
virgin. And whence came this calling upon the blessed Virgin in that case, but
from the custom of the Heathen women, which being persuaded that the Moon
has a natural dominion in moist matters, called upon her under the name of
Juno lucina. And when Christians began to declyne from that perfection of
Christian knowledge that had been taught by the Apostles, and their immediate
successors: Christian women thought they should not do amiss, to put the
blessed mother of our Savior Christ, in ye place of this Juno, and so they fell
to calling upon her, in their peril in the travail of Childbyrth. And will you
bring your mother back again to this superstition?

If you will give any credit to saint Augustine, he will fell you, that the
blessed Virgin does neither require nor allow of any such honor to be given
unto her. In his Book entitled of true Religion, and in the last Chapter
thereof, he writes thus. Non sit ^obis Religio cultus hominu^ mortuorum: quia
si pie vixerunt, non sic habentur, vt tales quaerant honores, sed illum a nobis
coli volunt, ^uo illuminante, laetantur meriti sui nos esse consortes.
Honorandi ergo ^unt propter immitationem: non adorandi propter Religionem. Let
us not have a Religion (says S. Austen) of the worshipping of dead men and
dead women: For if they lived godly, they be not of that mind, that they
would seek to have such honor at our hands, but their desire is, that we
should worship him, by whose illumining they rejoice that we are companions
with them, of his merit.

They must therefore be honored, by immitation: not worshipped for Religion. If
you would read that Book of S. August^ne, I think you would forethinke
that ever you went about to persuade your mother to make prayers to any
creature. Although ^he blessed virgin, be amongst creatures most excellent,
yet is she not Deified. She remains still a creature. She is still a woman,
meet to be honored by immitation as S. Austen says, but not to be worshipped
for Religion. The honor that we may give to her, or to any other holy saint
of God, is to follow that good example of life, that they have left behind
them. Who so will honor her a right, must call to mind, her great humility,
her most steadfast and constant faith, and her integrity of life in all
conditions, and endeavor to follow her therein. But to make prayers to her, and
to ^raue help at her hands, as you exhort your mother to do: is to put her
in the place of God, by giving Gods honor to her, and so making an Idol of
her. If it be not lawful to believe in her, then is it not lawful to pray to
her. For the Apostle says: Quomodo inuocabu^t in quem non crediderunt. How
shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? Romans 10. The Prophet
David, in the Psalm 50. speaking in the person of GOD, says: Call upon
me in the day of thy trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify
me. The same Prophet says, Psalm, 145 The Lord is hard at hand, with
every one that calls upon him: with every one that calls upon him
faithfully. In another Psalm, the same Prophet says thus, speaking in the
person of GOD. I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

By opening the mouth, is there meant, the craving at Gods hands by prayer,
which the people of GOD are there commanded to use. Psalm. 81. Assuring
themselves to receive at his hands as much as they do or can ask.

If you would mark well the Psalms that you use to sing in your midnight
Mattins, you should find in them many such encouragements to call upon GOD,
but not one word to encourage you, to call upon any creature, be the same
never so excellent or holy. Yea, if you shall read the whole Scriptures
through, from the first word in Genesis, to the last in the Reu^lations of
John, you shall not find one word, that (being rightly understood) may
give you any manner of encouragement, to make Prayers to any creature, or
discourage you to make prayers to God. Yea, you shall not find any one example
in any holy man, that has fled from GOD, to seek help at the hands of
creatures at any time.

But you shall find that Jeremy the Prophet complayneth against them that
have done so. Jeremy* 2. His words be these. Obstupescite caeli super hoc,
and portaeeius desolamini vehementer, dicit Dominus. Duo enimmala fecit populus
meus. Me dereliquerunt, fone tem aquae vi^ae, and foderunt sibi cisternas,
cisternas discipatas, quae continere non valent aquas. O ye Heavens (says the
Lord) be astonished at this thing, and ye Gates thereof be ye greatly
abashed. For my people have committed two evils. They have forsaken me, which
am the Fountain of living water, and they have dygged Ceasternes for
themselves, Ceasternes that can not hold Water. Here the Prophet leremie
disprooueth the people of Judah for two evils. And he does it in the person
of God himself.

One of those evils is, the forsaking of him, the Fountain of living water, as
you teach your mother to do, when you will her to burn her Books, and to
leave the use of the English Bible. The other evil is, the dygging of
Ceasterns, that can not hold any water. This evil you feache your mother to
commit, when you will her to buy a pair of Beads, and to pray our blessed
Lady to help her. Although that blessed virgin be a most excellent creature,
yet she is but a creature, and therefore but a broken Ceasterne in comparison
of GOD, which is the Fountain of living Water.

They therefore that seek help at her hand, do but dygge a broken Cesterne,
for she could never help her self, as before I have most plainly proved,
much less can she help them that flee from God, and seek help at her hand.
The sentences of Scripture that I have before cited, do most manifestly prove,
that there is no cause that may give us occasion to flee from God, to seek
help at the hands of any other.

He is almighty, able to help in every need. He is merciful, and ready to
help in all distresses. He is faithful, and has promised to help such as
call upon him faithfully. He knows our case, and needs not any Memoransor
to put him in mind of our case. He has a provident and fatherly care for us,
so that he lets no occasion slyppe, but takes every occasion to do us
good. And would you wysh your mother, to forsake this so mighty, so merciful,
so faithful, and so provident a father, and to give herself to the service of
his daughter, in whom none of these things be, otherwise then by participation
from this father, in whom the fulness of all these things remains? God forbid.
Remember your self better (Samuel) and make haste home again. Tarry no
longer in that Dungeon of darkness in Nigeon. Take again that fruition of the
light of the Gospel, that once you did enjoy in England. Shake of those
chains of ignorance, wherein satan has so bywrapped you: and embrace again
with us, the freedom of knowledge, which the almighty GOD has so plentifully
bestowed upon England. But let us consider, that which is next in your
exhortation.

Your mother must wyshe in her heart, that she had a Priest to confess her:
and she must do this, as often as she can, but especially, when she shall fall
sick, and shall be like to die. And she must purpose steadfastly, to confess
her sins and to go to shryft, if she could conveniently. Of such Priests,
as you would have your mother to wyshe for, I have before written sufficiently.
I have written also enough concerning that confession of sins that God
requires at the hands of Christians. Your mother knew before you were borne,
and knows still, what sins she ought to confess, and to whom she ought to
make her confession. She myndeth not to wysh after, to seek for, or to
acquaint herself with any such Ghostly Father, as you mean^ of, although she
might, with out all bodily danger do it. She knows them to be Traitors, to
GOD, to our Prince and Country, and to all such simple Christians as do
hearken to them. Her st^dfast purpose therefore is, to confess her sins to
God every day, both in sickness and in health.

She does continually crave at Gods hand, the grace of continual and unfeigned
repentance. Of full and free pardon of all h^^ sins (by the mediation of
Christ Jesus) she craves a full and perfect assurance, With all popish
Priests, pepish shri^t, and with all manner of popery, she is, and still wylbe
at defiaunce. But you proceed with your exhortation, and thus you say.


The Friar. Believe without doubting, all that the holy Catholic Roman, and
Apostolic Church does belceue: although that they surpass and excel man's
understanding. To be brief, say every day these words. O sweet Jesus, I do
steadfastly believe, all that my Son Sa^^uell believes. And in that faith, in
which he is, I will live and die. Be merciful unto me, a most wretched
sinner, for thy names sake. Holy Marie mother of GOD pray for me, thine
unworthy handmayde, now, and in the hour of my death. Say this prayer only
every day. And if you can go to shrift, confess your sins, and receive the
body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ*


Crovvley. Your mother has just cause to mus^ what you mean by this part of
your exhortation, wherein you will her to believe all ye the holy Catholic,
Roman, and Apos^^lick Church does believe. For there is no such Church as that
in any part of the world. There is indeed a Roman Church, but that Church is
neither holy, Catholic, nor Apostolic. Holy she is not, because she
renounceth that holiness that is freely given in Christ, and cleaves to an
holiness, that she imagines to be in her own works, wherein no holiness at
all, either is or can be before God. The case of this Roman Church, is as
evil, or worse then the case of the Church of the Jews was, when they being
ignorant of the righteousness of God, sought to establish their own
right^ousnes, and so neither were, nor could be subject to the rightcousnes of
God. Romans 10 Even so these Romans, which you call the Roman Church, being
ignorant of that holiness that is freely given in Christ, and is therefore the
holiness of GOD, and not of men, do seek to set up and advance their own
holiness (which is no holiness indeed) and so are not, neither can be subject
to that holiness that God gives in Christ: and so by good consequence* there is
in them no holiness at all. Catholic that Roman Church is not: for that she
holds not that faith, which Christ in his own person taught in Jerusalem,
and in other parts of the land of Iewrie, and at the time of his Ascension
into heaven, commanded his Apostles to teach Catholickly, that is, all the
world over, according to the signification of the word Catholice. That is
Catholickly, or universally. In his own person our Savior Christ did
preach this faith, as appears in the first Chapter of S. Mark. Postqua^
autem tradi^us est Johannes. etc. After that John was imprisoned, Jesus came
into Galile, preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of GOD, and saying. The time
is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God draws nigh. Repent, and believe the
Gospel. To believe the Gospel, is that faith which is called Catholic. And
whosoever believes the Gospel, is a Catholic. And on the contrary, he that
believes not the Gospel, is no Catholic. To believe the Gospel, is to
b^leeue Gods word. For in our old English speech, Gods word was called Gods
speale: and now (corruptly) we do call it Gospel. This Gospel (or Gods
speale) is that promise that GOD made first to Adam, the first man: when he
promised that the woman's seed should break the Serpents head. Genesis 3. This
promise was renewed to Abraham, when GOD said to him: In thy seed shall all the
Nations of the earth be blessed. Genesis 22. And this Gospel, is by the Grecians
called Euangelion, which word does (by interpretation) signify a glad
tydinges. This Glad tidings did our Savior declare, first to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel, both in his own person, and by the ministry of
his Apostles. And at ye time of his ascending into heaven: he gave
commandment to those Apostles, to declare the same Catholickly, (that is to
say, generally) all the world over. For thus he said unto them then. Euntes in
mundnm vniuersum, praedicate Euangelium omni creaturae. Go into all the world,
and preach the Gospel to every creature. Understanding by creatures, all
Nations and sorts of men. By this means, this Gospel or Glad tydinges
(which at the first was made known but to few, in comparison of all) was made
known to the whole world, and was therefore called Catholic. And when in
the primitive time of the preaching of this Gospel, certain fantastical
heads began to teach doctrines contrary to this Catholic doctrine, and to
draw disciples after them: then the Fathers that held and taught this
doctrine, called themselves Catholics, and those other Schismatickes, and
Heretics.

The first Romysh Christians, were right Catholics, as appears by that
Epistle that the Apostle Paul wrote to them, and so the Christians of that
City continued many years after saint Paul's time, as appears in the
Histories of the Church. But for the space of a thousand years last past
(almost) that Church, that has been, and is in Rome, has been, and is
still, schismatic: and therefore the name Catholic is no meet name for
that Romyshe Church. They deny the free justification by faith, which S. Paul
taught the first Romysh Chrystians, and they belee^ed his doctrine. They glory
in their own wisdom, ryghteousnes, holiness, and redemption: presuming to
redeem their own sins, and the sins of others also: by their fastings,
their prayers, their whyppings, and other works that they have devised,
whereby they think (and persuade as many as they can to think) that
satisfaction may be made to God, for sin committed in breaking the
commandments of God: whereas by the Catholic faith we are taught, that as
there is but one God, so there is but one mediator betwixt God and man, which
is the man Christ Jesus* ^. Tim. 2. And this Mediator had none other mean
whereby he might work our reconciliation, but only the shedding his of own
heart blood for us. That death which our sins had deserved, was (and of
necessity must be) suffered by him yt purchased our peace with God.

I conclude therefore, that the Romish Church, taking upon it (in some sort)
the O^^yce of the Mediator: is not Catholic, but Antichristian. And
therefore your mother being a Catholic Christian indeed, may not harken to
her son Samuel, when he wylleth her to believe all that the holy
Catholic, Roman, and Apostolic Church does believe. etc.

And whereas you name the Roman Church Apostolic, you do great wrong to
that Church which is Apostolic indeed, and so do ye to the Apostles
themselves. For you father upon them all your hypocrisies and superstitions,
all your counterfayt and false Religions, all your Idolatrous abominations,
and all your inordinate and great power and usurpations: from which the
Apostolic Church, both is, and ever has been, as far scuered, as in
distance of place, heaven and earth are separated. The Apostles, and the
Apostolic Church neither does at this day, neither any time heretofore, has
received, or maintained wittingly and willingly, any manner of hypocrisies or
superstitions. It neither does nor has embraced willingly and wittingly, any
counterfayte or false Religions. It never has nor does embrace, uphold or
main taine* any Idolatrous abomination. It never has, does, or will delight it
self in any inordinate power or usurpation. The Apostles themselves, did
(according to the example of our Savior Christ) wyllingly submit themselves
to Princes, and all other Noble estates, as to such as by Gods ordinance, have
the supreme authority, over the bodies and goods of all men, of all sorts and
professions, that live within those Countries that of right do belong to their
domini^ns. Romans 13. ^. Pet. 2. The Apostolic Church, never took upon her,
to depose Kings, or to dispose of kingdoms at any time heretofore, neither
presently does, nor in time to come will.

The Apostolic Church has always, does still, and for ever will, embrace,
uphold, mainetaine, teach and preach, that doctrine, which by the
appointment of Christ Jesus (to whom all power in heaven and earth does
belong) the Apostles themselves, did whilst they lived upon earth, embrace,
uphold, maintain, teach and preach, without any manner of adding to, taking
from, or altering or changing, in any manner of respect, so far forth as
Christ Jesus, (whose spouse she is) pleases by his holy spyrite to direct her,
and to make her able to do. The Apostolic Church, does not, neither has
nor will, command or counsel men or women, to believe all that she
believes: before she has let them understand what she believes, and so
enstructed them, that they may be able to render a reason of that hope that is
in them, neither does she will them to believe any thing that does surpass
man's understanding, till she have made them understand, what moves her to
believe those things. But your Romain^ Church, which you call Apostolic,
does, and for these 1000. years last past (almost) has done, and still
pretends to do, the contrary to all these things. I conclude therefore,
that she is not Apostolic, but Apostatate: and therefore all things that
she believes, are to be suspected, and not to be received, till they shall be
thoroughly tried, and found to be Apostolic. But now you will grow to a
conclusion, and thus you say.


The Friar. To be brief. Say every day these words. O sweet Jesus. etc.


Crovvley. In your conclusion, wherein you are brief: you give me occasion, to
be longer then willingly I would. You prescribe your mother an order of
protestation and prayer, which she must use every day, if she hope to be
accepted amongst the Romish Catholics.

It begins very well, for thus she must say: O sweet Jesus. But in the next
words, you teach her to flee from Jesus, and to be at defiaunce with him. For
she must say thus: I do steadfastly believe all that my son Samuel
believes. Which is as much as if she should say thus. Farewell sweet Jesus: I
will no longer depend upon thee. For my sweet son Samuel, has commanded
me to depend upon him. I may no longer believe as thou have taught me: but I
must, and will believe all that my son Samuel believes. Thou haste taught
me to believe, that whosoever believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Mar. 16.
But my son Samuel says, that except I confess my sins to a Priest, and
be by him absolved, and reconciled to the Romysh Catholic Church, I shall
be damned both body and soul, and I am sure he would not say it, except he
did believe it. O sweet Jesus, thou haste called me, and haste said unto me
amongst other, Come unto me all ye that labor, and be heavy laden, and I
will refreshe you. Take my yoke upon you: and learn of me, for I am meek
and humble of heart, and you shall find rest unto your souls: for my yoke is
pleasant, and my burden is light. Matthew. 11.

But my son Samuel believes, that every man and woman must suffer for their
own sins: and therefore he goes and lies woolwarde, he refrayneth the
eating of flesh, and of al white meats, he rises every night at midnight, he
does scourge himself naked often times: yea, he gives himself 400. strypes
at one time. Yea, fearing to fall into the hands of the living God (which is
horrible) he has for saken the world (as he says) and the life of a
Scholar, and has made himself a Minime Friar, choosing rather that way to
fall into the hands of GOD, then (living as his Father and I do) to fall into
the paws of the devil. His ghostly father has told him, (and he does
believe it) yt though thou do call him, and offer to take the heavy burden of
sin from him: yet it is necessary that he do penance in his own person,
and by that penance he do redeem his own soul. And although thou have
bydden him bow down his neck under thy yoke, and take thy burden upon his
back, assuring him that thy yoke is easy, and thy burden light, and that in
thus doing he shall find rest to his soul: yet if he will find that rest
indeed, he must of necessitye take the yoke and burden of S. Frauncis upon
his neck and shoulders, and do penance all the days of his life, according
to the rule of S. Frauncis Order.

O sweet Jesus, bear with me, I must believe all this, for my son Samuel
does believe it, and has wylled me to say every day, that I do believe all
that he does believe. O sweet Jesus thou have said, Let such as has ears
to hear, hearken. Math. 13. And thy holy Apostle James has said: Be swyft to
hear. Iam. 1. And thine Apostle Paul says, that faith comes by hearing.
Romans 10: But my son Samuel, wylleth me to leave my early rising, and go no
more to the Lectures and Sermons of Crowly, Barber, and Field, or of any other
Protestants, for he says that they are the devils Ministers, and that the
devil of ^ell is the foundation of that Religion, that they do teach. And I
must believe that this is true, if I will believe all that my son Samuel
does believe.

But my conscience tells me (O sweet Jesus) that thou art that Rock on
which Crowley, Barber, Fyelde, and the rest that be the Protestant Preachers
do build: and I think that I do plainly see, that they do not build
upon thee, either straw or stubble, but Gold, Silver, and such other matter,
that can not be consumed by the force of the fire of Gods spirit, which in his
good time will try, all that men have builded upon thee, which art that
foundation that all the builders which will build the Temple of GOD, must
needs build upon, because there is none other foundation to build upon. 1.
Cor. 3.

O sweet Jesus, thou haste commanded me to search the Scriptures. Job. 5.
And thy holy Evangelist saint Luke reports, that in Berroaea, such as
received the doctrine of the Gospel gladly, did search the Scriptures daily.
Acts. 17. But my son Samuel forbyddeth me the use of the Bible in English.
And he knows that I understand none other language. His meaning therefore
must needs be, to forbydde that which thou has commanded. O sweet Jesus,
suffer me not to be seduced by my son Samuels flattering and hypocritical
speeches. He teaches me, to beseech thee to be merciful to me, a most
wretched sinner, for thy name sake. A better lesson then this, no man can
teach.

O sweet Lord Jesus, do thou imprint this lesson in my heart, that I do
never forgette it. And work thou in my heart by thy holy spyrite, that I may
have a ready good will, daily to use it. But alas, he believes that thy
blessed Mother Mary, is able to help such as call upon her, and therefore,
he teaches me to pray unto her to help me: But thou have taught me a lesson
contrary to that. When you pray, you shall say: O our Father which art in
heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy will be done in earth, as
it is in heaven. etc.

O sweet Jesus, let me never forgette that form of prayer. Give me grace (I
beseech thee) to use it night and day, to crave continuallye, at the hands of
thy heavenly Father, which through thee is become my heavenly Father, all
those things that in that form of Prayer thou haste taught me to crave. Let
me not so hearken to my Son Samuel, as that following his counsel, I
should do contrary to thy commandments. Blessed Lord Jesus, I do know
that thy blessed mother, is a most blessed creature. But thou, with thy Father
and the holy Ghost, art her Creator and mine, and the Creator of all
creatures. We must say of her, as the Prophette Esaias said of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob*

Abraham never knew us, Israel is ignorant of our case, but thou art our
Father, thou art our deliverer. Esaias. 63.

Think thou (oh thou blind Friar John) that thy mother that bare thee, is
so blinded with affection toward thee, that she will turn her back upon
Christ Jesus to follow thee? Thou teach her to use daily a form of prayer,
which in the first words is sweeter then honnie, to the taste of a faithful
Christian, but in all the words that follow, it is full of most pestilent and
deadlye poison. She will none of it therefore. She will pray to the heavenly
Father, in such sort as Christ Jesus the son of God has taught her, and not
to creatures as thou do exhort her. Though she could, yet she will not go
to shryft, to make confessyen of her sins to a Priest. She knows who it
is, against whom she has sinned. To him alone she will confess all her
secret sins. At his hands only she will ask forgiveness of her sins,
because she knows that he only is able to forgive them. And when she shall
sin against men, she will confess those sins to those men against whom she
shall commit them. She will do all that she shall be able to do, in
making satisfaction to them. She will crave forgiveness at their hands, and
beseech them to pray to GOD for her, that she may obtain forgiveness at his
hands also.

The blessed body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, she will
receive, as often as she may: but not after so bloody a manner as you imagine
that you do. She has learned to receive an outward Sacrament into her mouth
and stomache, and by faith, to receive spirituallie into her soul, the thing
that is signified by that outward Sacrament. She knows, that if she dwell
in Christ, and have Christ dwelling in her: she does at the Lords Table,
receive, eat, and drink, the Lords body and blood, in the Sacrament
exhibited to her, and to the rest of the faithful. But if she should
intrude herself into the company of Christians, not dwelling in Christ,
neither having Christ dwelling in her: she knows that though she should
receive the Sacramental bread, and drink the Sacramental wine never so
often, yet she should neither eat the body nor drink the blood of
Christ, but the Sacrament of so excellent a thing, to her own condemnation.
August, in sermon de Sacramentis fidelium.

Feria. 2. Paschae. This is the judgment of saint Augustine in his Sermon that
he made of the Sacraments of the faithful, the second day of Easter.

And (Friar John) I must advise you to call to remembrance that dealing of
yours, when you presumed to be partaker of the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, in company with your mother, the morrow after you had
been at shryfte, and were (as your self have in these your Letters confessed)
reconciled to the Romish Catholic Church. If Christ did then dwell in you:
undoubtedly, both Christ and Antichrist may dwell together, which is known to
be a thing impossible. You were reconciled to Antichrist, therefore he dwelt
in you, and not Christ. You presumed with Judas, to eat the Lords bread,
against ye Lord, as Judas did, when he had before bound himself by promise
(for money) to deliver the Lord into the hands of the high Priests and
Elders of the people.

Even so had you compacted with your new friends, and made promise to forsake
the Protestants Religion (as you term it) and to embrace the Romish Catholic
Religion, during the whole time of your transitory life. And how durst you
then thrust your self into our Communion the next day after you had made
this promise to your ghostly father, that had been the mean and instrument of
your reconciliation: and so dissemble both with your new and your old
friends, as a Newter, or Jack on both sides? But it may be that your ghostly
Father had some large Commission from the holy father of Rome, to disspence in
such cases: For such do account our Sacrament, to be but a piece of bread,
and a cup of wine, and that therefore, there is no danger in the receiving of
it in such manner as you did then receive it. But that dispensation can not
help you: for it was Panis Domini, the Lords bread, as well to you, as that
other was to Judas. And you received it Contra Dominum. against the Lord, as
Judas did, even to your own condemnation, because you made no difference of
the Lords body. To your mother (and to other, the faithful that did at that
time receive that Sacrament) it was Panis Dominus. The bread which is the
Lord, and it did nourishe them to everlasting life, although it were to you a
condemnation.

But hasting to an end of your exhortation, and so of the whole matter, you
thought meet to impart to your mother in these your Letters: you say thus, as
follows.


The Friar. If you be persecuted, rejoice with S. Paul in your persecutions:
remembering that sentence which our Lord has spoken, saying: Whosoever will
come after me, let him deny himself, let him take up his Cross and follow me.
Saint Paul says, that the Passions and tribulations of this world, are not
worthy of that glory, which GOD will give us. Thus I commend you to God. From
our Fryery at Nigeon, a mile from Paris, the seauenteene day of March. 1586.
Your son, careful for your souls health: Friar John Frauncis. And then you
write thus in the margin. I have changed my name. I am no more called Samuel
Debnam: but Friar John Frauncis. If you send any Letter to me, write on the
back of it. A friar Jehan Francoys Minime a Nigeon aupres de Paris, ces
Lettres soyent donnees.


Crowley. To comfort your Mother against persecution, you put her in mind of
the words of our Savior Christ, in the ninth Chapter of Luke. And of the
words of S. Paul in the 8. to the Romans. I hope she will remember these
sentences, when you shall come into England (as you say your hope is shortly
to do) and shall there set up that Order of Bone homes, which you have
professed, and be an Inquisitor there: that she may stand constantly to the
professyon of that ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic faith, which she has
by hearing learned, and by the assystaunce of Gods spirit professed and
practiced, before, and ever since she bare you: a babe of whom she hoped to
have had such joy as natural Parents do naturally hope to have in their
natural Children. But now that you are degenerated, and become an Apostata,
forsaking that right Religion, wherein you were baptized and Catechized: she
has just cause to wysh, that she had never nourished you with the milk of her
breasts (if the Lords will had been so) but rather that her womb had
been your grave. It is true as you say, that whosoever will come after Christ,
must take up their Cross and follow him. It is true also, that the passions
and tribulations of this world, are not woorthye of that glory which GOD will
give unto us. But sir, if your mother should hearken to you, and by going to
shrift and hearing of masses, and professing of Popery, pull such a Cross upon
herself, as they do bear, which willingly and wittingly do put themselves
into the danger of ye just Laws of our Country: she should bear a heavy
Cross indeed, but not after Christ. For not Christ, but Antichrist calls
men and women, from their due allegiaunce to Princes, and dispenses with the^
for their lawful oaths of faithful obedience, which they have taken to be
true to their princes. The passions and tribulations that your Seminary men,
and such as follow them do suffer, are not persecutions, but just executions,
even such as GOD commanded to be executed upon false Prophets and Idolators.
Deu. 13.

If you may have your wished hope, I doubt not but you will put both your
Father and mother, and all others that have been your fosterers, to their
trial: for yeeare become an hungry whelpe of that bloody* Butchers curre,
that rules in Rome, and thyrsteth after the blood of the English Nation. But
that God, that has the hearts of all Princes in his hand, will (I hope) work
so in the heart of that Noble Prince that now raygneth, in that noble Realm of
France, or in the heart of some of his surcessors, that all the Romysh rabble,
shall by them be rowsed out of their dens, as in the days of our noble King
Henry the eight, they that then were in England were rowsed. And then that hope
of yours will be at an end.

But sir, what mean you by this, that you say that God will give us that
glory, whereof the passions and tribulations that we suffer here are not
worthy. How stands this, with that which you have written before, by
occasion of the words of our Savior, in the xxv. of S. Mathewe, where you say
that the feeding of the hungry, etc. are the cause of that joyful sentence.
Come ye blessed of my Father. etc. For there you say, that this glory is due
to those and such like works, and now you affirm that it is Gods gift. God
will give it, say you. Mendacem memorem esse oportet. A liar must not be
forgetful. You lied before, but now you affirm the truth.

For that glory which you speak of, is indeed the free gift of GOD, through
Jesus Christ our LORD: and can not be deserved either by our working, or
by our suffering. And that was the meaning of the Apostle. Our works, though
they be never so many, neu^r so good, never so orderly done: yet can they not
be worthy of that glory. Our passions and tribulations, although they be never
so great, never so undeserved, yet they can not be worthy of that glory,
which GOD has prepared for them that love him.

And thus you commend your Parents to GOD, in as courteous manner as you
saluted them at the first. That is, even as though they had been some of your
companions and not your Parents. Such is the Arrogance of Friar John Frauncis.
But yet he is the son of those (ouermeane) Parents, and careful for their
souls health. It were well, if you had a care for your own souls health,
which you can not have, so long as you have no care to do any duty, either to
your natural Parents, or to your native Country, or to any others, to whom you
do owe duty, both by the Law of GOD and of nature.

You have renounced that obedience that GOD has commanded all natural
Children and Subjects to show toward their natural Parents and Princes: and
you have chosen a new obedience, and vowed to observe that. Your Pryor and your
Subpriors in the Minimes Religion must be obeyed. The holy Father the Pope,
must have his commandments observed. You may not do that which GOD
commands to be done, except the same be commanded by your holy Father the
Pope, the Pryor, and your Subpriors. If the Popes holiness, your father Pryor,
and your Subpriors command any thing: that you may, and must do, and you may
not move any question at all, whether God have not commanded the contrary.
Yea though you know that GOD has forbidden the doing of it: yet you must
needs do it, for you have vowed obedience. etc. You know that GOD has
forbidden the worshypping of Images, and all use of Imagry in the exercise of
Religion. Exo. 20. And yet you must needs have them and worship them, because
they to whom you have vowed obedience* do command it. Christ has said,
Patrem nolite vocare vobis super terram: vnus est enim Pater vester qui in
coelis est. Call no man your Father upon earth, for one is your Father which is
in heaven. Mat. 23. But you must have a most holy father, which is the Popes
holiness. And he must be called Papa. That is Pater p^trum. Father of Fathers.
If your eyes be not altogether blinded, your ears stopped, your understanding
doubled, and your heart hardened: you can not but see, perceive and understand
into what miserable case you have brought your self. Repent therefore betime,
receive again your first name, leave Friar John Frauncis in Nigeon. Let
Samuel Debna^ come over into England again. John and Catherine will embrace
their Prodigal and lost son. All their and your friends will rejoice
together with them, when they shall see Samuel Debnam (that was lost) found
and brought home again. Your fall has caused great grief, your rising
again shall cause greater joy. The meanest servant in your Fathers house, is
in better case, then the happyest amongst your superiors in Nigeon. You think
your self to be in the way of salvation, but in very deed, the end of your
way is destruction. Come unto Christ that calls. Math. 11. Open unto Christ
that knocks. Apoc. 3. Forsake the whore of Babylon. Defy Antichriste, and
his whole Religion. From London, the sixth of August. 1586.


()

Your instructor, every way, careful for your soul health. Robert Crowley,

Faults escaped.
FOlio. 3. B. line. 13. Read to be the right Religion. Fol. 6. A. line. ^1.
Read Papists. Fol. 7. B. line. 16. Read after. Fol. 22. A. line 4. Read,
did bid. B. line 2. (...). Fol. 23. A. line. 19. Read (...). Fol. 23. B.
line. 33. Read (...). Fol. 24. B. line. 2. Read. and had chosen to walk in.
Fol. 32. A. line. 11. Read. Gorgias. Fol. 34. A line 12. Read. dilectionem.
Fol. 52. B. line. 9. Read. have her to confess. Fol. 55. A. line. 11. Read.
Arrogating.

