DOVBTINGS DOWNFALL, First, PROVING THE COMMVNITIE of the Saints assurance.
Secondly, DISPROVING BELLARMINES and his fellows false allegations and
frivolous exceptions against that Truth. BY EDWARD DALTON, Preacher of the
Word, etc.

Aug. Pessimae matris ignorantiae pessimaeitidem duae sunt filiae, scil:
falfitas and dubietas. Nazian. de modest. in disput. Vt in Creaturis primariae
dona non aliquorum nostri sunt sedomnium, vt vnius Creaturae communis est
gratia: ita and in fide, quae saluant, non eorum tantum sunt qui magis possunt,
sed and eorum qui volunt. Aug. l. de ouib. Ille apud Deum plus habet loci, qui
plus attulit, non argenti, sed fidei. 2 PET. 1.1. To you which have obtained
like precious faith with us, etc. IVDE verse. 3. Beloved, when I gave all
diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, etc. 1 PET. 1.9. Now the
salvation of your souls is the end of your Faith. LONDON, Printed by B. A.
1624.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable JOHN Earl of Annandale, Viscount of Annand, Baron of
Lough-Mauban, etc. and one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IF that ground be truly judged barren, which, receiving seed, and partaking
of the heavens dew and the Suns reflection, affords no fruit: then much more
that man into the surrowes of whose distressed estate a religious hand casts
the seed of compassion, and upon whose disconsolate heart a charitable mind
sparkleth the rays of consolation may justly be deemed ungrateful, if he bury
in oblivion such (especially if vndeserned) favors. Ever since one beam of
your Honors bounty ministered comfort to my languishing spirits, I have desired,
and desiring endeavored, and endeavoring attempted to express my duty by
presuming to present unto your Honor this little Plant, and to transplant it
into your Honors Vineyard: little it is, yet bears it fruit already, and such
fruit, as (I hope) will yield contenting comfort and comfortable Content to
each spiritual taste for the present, and leave the relish of assured
expectation for the time to come. It strives to ouer-top the weeds of wants,
wrongs, and woes which would weaken a Christians patience, to prevent the
blasts of discontents and distrusts which would supplant a belieuers hope and
confidence, and to frustrate the storms of doubting, and conjecture which
would hinder the growth of faith and affurance. Pleases your Honor to
vouchsafe one hand, and to water it with a few drops of your favorable
approbation, it will thrive the better; and that, here, you may so flourish in
Gods Courts, that branches be never wanting to your stock, nor fruit to your
branches, and that hereafter, root, stock, branches, and fruit may flourish in
the Celestial and eternal Paradise, he shall pray, who rests ever,

Your Honors humbly devoted EDW. DALTON.

To the Gentlemen of the Innes of Court, especially of the Temples.
GENTLEMEN,
THE meanest of you may claim so much, and the greatest of you is not
disparaged by that lowest Title of Gentilitie. Without you, we must confess,
not any in our Government (which the Lord in his Mercy grant long to flourish)
continues or recouereth a certainty in his Estate Temporal, as you do and
will, I hope acknowledge, that you your selves attain to, and find comfort
in, that certainty of your future welfare by the Ministry, which as a
Conduit pipe conuaies it to you from the Sacred Word, Es. 12.3.
that Well of Salvation. The greater your care is for establishing others or
your selves in terrestrial endowments, the greater corasiue it is to the
Conscience, if it be not paralelld with an equal measure of study and
endeavor to gather assurance of your own Celestial inheritance: and the more
expense, wit, strength and time is employed about using the means to
dispossess intruders upon others or our own right, the deeper is the heart
wounded, if some expense, wit, strength and time be not set apart for the
wresting out of the hands of the truths adversaries those weapons whereby they
goare the same and in gulf the Soul. What I have done to justify the point
of the Community of the Saints assurance, and to remove an uncertain doubting
of Gods love in Jesus Christ I refer (as my self also) to the censures and
acceptations of you, among some of whom I have sometime lived, and whom I have
found always both judicious and generous: Praying, that you may all be so
frequent and expert in the Law of man, that you Day and Night meditate upon the
Law of the Lord, Psalm. 1.2.
to your internal Peace here, and eternal Consolations for ever

To. 10.4. Your Worsh: to Command in Christ who is the end of the Law, EDW.
DALTON

To the Reader desirous of Resolution.
FOr thy sake (Christian Reader) have I compiled the evidence of thy present
right to eternal happiness in a compendious manner: Neither multitude of
Leaves, nor greatness of the Bole, nor number of the Branches, but the
goodness of the Fruit is that which commends the Tree. Of thy confident hope,
which is the Anchour of thy Soul, Heb. 6.18, 19. and of the assurance of Faith
which is thy Shield, Ephesians. 9.16. the Romish Pirates, and Babilonish Fencers
would deprive thee, and in their places intrude upon thee doubting and
conjecture. In thy behalf I have entered the lists, and for thy better
satisfaction and fuller persuasion through Gods assistance, have wrested out of
their hands the chiefest weapons which they have used to wound this Truth, and
win the credit in this cause; so as I trust thy conscience (being good) will
tell thee to thy comfort, that The Truth is great and has preualled, and that,
thou may wrap thy self in the mantle of an humble assurance concerning the
salvation of thy soul as well (though not so much) as any of the Saints which
ever were or shall be. This I wish thee, and for this commending thee to God
and to the word of his grace, which is able to build further, and to give thee
an inheritance among all them that are sanctified, Act. 20.32. I rest,

Thine and the Churches devoted servant EDW. DALTON.

To the seduced Reader.
COnsideration of the uncertainty of thy case (seduced Reader) has wakened
Compassion, compassion has called up Care, and care has set on work my
thoughts, head and hands according to the measure of my spiritual strength to
attempt thy help and to recover that Hope which is unjustly (by those who
pretend to be thy Ghostly Fathers) held from thee. Thou will not build thine
house upon the sands, and shall thy holy confidence be a Castle in the Air?
This cause have I brought to the Bar. Read the pleadings on either side:
wilful ignorance is a double evil. Having read them censure indifferently:
thou thy self wilt exclaim against a preiudicious and partial Judge. Take
heed of wounding thine own Conscience in slighting the Truth, for if thy
Conscience accuse thee, God is greater, and as he can condemn thee, so he will
clear it. Thus praying that thou may be turned to the true Shepherd and
Bishop of thy Soul, 1. Pet. 2.25. thy Savior, and have that hope which is
sure and steadfast, Heb. 3.6, and never makes ashamed, Romans 5.5. I rest

Thine in any Christian duty to be commanded EDW, DALTON.

The Contents.
POpish Doctors of all have least reason to interpret the Text of a
Coniecturall persuasion, page 9. The Doctrine, is, To be assured of every grace
simply necessary to salvation, is common to every Saint, not Paul's peculiar.
page 10. And it is first proved from the Text, not withstanding Paul's Special
Revelation pa. 13. Gift of discerning page 15.
Secondly, Context from the manner of the Apostles arguing page 26. Mark
whereat he aims, i. the Saints comfort page 28. Grounds of those comforts he
here lays down p. 31.
Thirdly, from the confession of the Adversaries, where 1. The Gospel as well
as the Law is particularly to be applied. p. 32. 2. To apply general
propositions particularly is the practice of the Spirit. p. 34. the Adversaries
themselves p. 36.
3. The truth of Conversion may be known p. 38. 4. What heart it is which is
deceived p. 39. 5. Wherein Peter was deceived, wherein he was not p. 43. 6. It
is absurd to allege Paul's rageings against the Church, to prove a Saint may be
deceived p. 43. 7. According to the measure of faith is the measure of the
Saints assurance p. 44.
And it is secondly applied, therefore 1. They are reproved, who would have all
the Saints of God and members of Christ to doubt (and that out of duty) of
their Salvation, of which to doubt Papists have of all men least cause, seeing
(if we will believe themselves) they only are true believers, and are able to
keep the Law p. 45. 2. To hold doubting necessary is dangerous, making Prayer
fruitless p. 46. 3. It is no presumption to labor for assurance p. 48. 4. The
means to obtain assurance p. 50. 5. Signs of true assurance p. 50. 6.
Outward conditions should not puff up or exalt any Saint above his inferior
brethren p. 51. 7. The meanest child of God may in what estate soever he be,
by reason of his interest in this assurance be comforted p. 52. 8. How to be
comforted in sins and sufferings by this assurance p. 52.


DOVBTINGS DOVNFAL.
ROMANS 8. verse. 38. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come:

39. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.


ALL the predictions of our blessed Savior are infallible for their truth, and
for their accomplishments have their periods: one among the rest seems to be
verified in our days, Luke 21.26.
which is, That men should be at their wits end, or their hearts should fail
them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the
earth. Not that Christ would have the^ so, but that men would be so, carried
away with longing for certainties in things, rather of this then a better life:
whereas if a man in the testimony of a good Conscience be once persuaded that
in Christ Gods present love without interruption reflecteth on him, and future
joys without intermission do expect him: Ps. 146.2.
Though the earth be removed, and though the Mountains be carried into the
midst of the Sea: yet he (because his heart is wholly taken up with the Lords
Almighty power, possessed with the Almighties merciful protection, and fully
persuaded that the worst cross, Luke 21.18.
even the loosing of his head shall not produce the perishing of an hair, To.
8.28.
but all things shall turn to his good, though some through needless fears
make Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience: 1 Timothy 1.19
other upon earthly hopes embrace this present World) he I say remains as
constantly faithful in his outward profession, as he is holily resolved
through an inward persuasion. But now the Apostle, partly seeing in the Romans
in his time, partly foreseeing in all Saints in succeeding ages, that their
holy persuasion should be opposed and their heavenly profession hindered upon
the sound of that Alarm, which both present experience and future expectation
caused to be made, enters in this Chapter the lists, and begins a combat
with his enemies of all sorts, sin, and sufferings (not ending many times
till death has put an end unto them) nay death it self (of all afflictions
the worst which man can endure, and that only which he cannot resist) from the
1. verse to the 31. and least any Saint should shrink from his holy faith, or
any other be deterred from touching the very hemmes of that Religion which is
so accompanied with afflictions and encountered with oppositions, he presents
the soul victoriously triumphing from the 31. verse to the end of the Chapter,
against all doubt-causing streights and heart-daunting strength: because it
cannot possibly be destitute of any thing that is helpefull; for how shall not
he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, with him
also freely give us all things, verse 32. nor too much molested with any
enemies that are hurtful, whether severed or united in their forces. Are they
severed? It insults first over the malice of such as are spiritual, whether
sin or Satan, and a guilty conscience through sin one or all, either
accusing verse 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is
God that justifies; or condemning verse 34. Who is he that condemns? It is
Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Secondly, over the mischief
of such as are corporal, verse 35, 36, 37. Who shall separate us from the love
of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? as it is written, for thy sake we are killed,
all the day long we are counted as sheep for the slaughter; nay in all these
things we are more then conquerours, through him that loved us. Are they
united? They shall prevail no otherwise, speed no better; for the Apostles
conscience told him that Gods love to his Saints is inseparable, and so
inseparable, that Neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come; nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able (endeavor what it will, attempt what it can) to
separate us (either him or them) from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus
our (his and their) Lord. A proposition it is of comfort propounded by our
Apostle in such a manner we see, as manifests his assured and infallible
persuasion, not only of his own, but of th Saints then in Rome, and
consequently of all Saints that either then were, or after should be upon the
earth, their inseparability from the love of God in Christ. This persuasion was
assured and infallible; for howsoever the word here used be sometime taken for
a probability: yet other sometimes for a certain confidency and confident
certainty as may be gathered by the Context and circumstances of the places
where we find it. Now the Context is the only touchstone and rule to know the
true interpretation of any word that is used diversely, and if this be not duly
pondered, a man may, Toto errare Coelo, miss his mark, and loose his aim, as
by sundry instances might be made apparent in words, which in diverse places of
Scripture are taken in diverse senses, if any should, as none can, at least not
any will, show themselves of so weak a judgment, so slight acquaintance with
the Scripture, or so quarreling and exceptious a disposition. Shall we then
think that the Apostle aiming at the comfort of the Saints at Rome, and all
other Saints, against all enemies whatsoever, insulting before over great and
mighty enemies, and even modestly, yet truly and gravely boasting, that he and
others were Conquerours, yea more then Conquerours, as if the victory had been
already gotten, would now finish his consolations with uncertainties and
conjectures? What coustancy had this been in an Apostle? What comfort to any
of Gods people in their perplexities? should not he, if here in the closeing he
be doubtful, have pulled down all that heavenly fabric and spiritual
building of consolation (which before by his confidence displayed by the
banners of the Lords turning all things to the good of those that love him) of
conquering and victory, even in being killed, he had fairly raised and set up
upon the pillars of sound arguments? either his former boasting was vain, or
he now begun to bethink himself, in meeting on the sudden with some bitter
assault, that he was mistaken, or else in this argument, he is more confident
then he was. But surely, seeing he was as well instructed in all truth, as
strengthened in all trials from heaven, his triumphing was holy, and his
glorying was soundly grounded. And if he had been so unexpectedly assailed,
with such fury as to enforce him to recall himself, and repent his former
affiance, without doubt it would have clearly appeared in the face of his
style here, as well as elsewhere, in that every where (as the least Conversant
in his Epistles may perceive) his special care is, ever to prevent what may be
objected or misconceiued: because then we see no change in his countenance, nor
alteration in his words, we cannot believe he either had any such cause of
fear or occasion to distrust he was before in error: or if that will not be
yielded, yet without all contradiction, the brunt was quickly over, and the
assault did not surprise him, or was so far from the enfeebling of his faith,
hindering of his hope, and daunting of his resolved heart, that he is not only
a man still of the same mind he was before, but as David upon his good
success against the Lion and the Bear durst adventure to encounter with them,
1 Samuel 17.34, 37.
from whom all fled: So the Apostle having well perceived the greatest violence
of an adverse, both might and malice, and to his comfort knowing now, that
being covered with the shield of the Lords protection and sufficiently armed
with the love of God unto him in Christ, neither earthly nor hellish power were
able, to his eternal hurt, to prenaile against him, takes a never to be
daunted courage to him, and enters the lists a fresh as a champion standing
against all comers, and ready upon the hazard of his soul to buckle with
whomsoever or whatsoever shall call in question either the certainty of a
Saints standing or of the love of God in Christ unto him: for least he should
omit any enemy or opposite, he challenges every creature, so far is he in
his confidence from a doubtful conjecture. Popish Doctors of all have least
reason to interpret this Text of a coniecturall persuasion.
Of which they (Romes Rabbis) of all other have the least reason, and less
Religion, to conceive this place, seeing it pleases them sometimes to tell us
that the Apostle had this persuasion by special Revelation: for such things as
the Lord reuealeth in a special manner are never false, but always so
certain, Act. 1610. and 18.9, 10. 11. and 27.23, 24, 25. 34.
that a man may safely without any loss or preindice build upon them; yea and
hazard the salvation both of body and soul about the truth and infallibilite
of them. His persuasion then was assured, confident, and certain, and not
concerning the inseparabilitie of the love of God in Christ toward himself
only, but toward the Sts at Rome also: for with himself, he includes them,
shall be able (says he) to separate, not me, but us, equally interresting them
with himself in the certainty of Gods favor. Now whatsoever in this kind the
Saints then at Rome might challenge, al and every of the Saints to the Worlds
end, may as justly (every man in his proportion and measure) claim, else why
was this reserved in the Church, and propounded to every member of it, as of as
necessary use as any other part or portion of sacred Writ? In that then the
persuasion of the Apostle is certain and infallible, and yet (as the Sun by
the beams) is not bounded in the Sphere of that heart where it abides but
reflexeth indifferently upon the Saints at Rome, and interresteth all the
members of Christ, To be assured of every grace simply necessary to salvation,
is common to all gods Saints, not proper to any, no, not Paul's peculiar. Proved.
we may safely collect and conclude, that, To be assured of every Grace simply
necessary to salvation, is common to all Gods Saints, not proper to any, no,
not Paul's peculiar: for if every Saint may be assured of one, then of every,
grace simply necessary to salvation: but every Saint may be assured of his own
inseparabilitie from the love of God in Christ; and therefore it follows, as
necessarily as the Sun is accompanied with light, that every Saint may be
assured of every grace simply necessary to salvation. Now because this truth is
obscured, and this Angelical persuasion is held by some to be Satanical
presumption, it will be no less profitable then necessary to drive away all
the mists of error and misdoubting by drawing the curtain from before that
light which 1. the Text. 2. the Context. 3. The confession of the Adversaries
give unto this conclusion.

From the Text we may draw two arguments. 1. From the Text.
Of what grace soever simply necessary to salvation, the Apostle Paul as
concerning himself, is assuredly persuaded, of the same grace, may every Saint
or regenerate Christian, as concerning himself be assuredly persuaded also:
But the Apostle Paul is assuredly persuaded of his own inseparabilitie from
the love of God in Christ, and consequently of every grace simply necessary to
salvation: therefore, so may every regenerate Christian. 2. By what grace
soever simply necessary to salvation, the Apostle Paul is assuredly persuaded
belongs to, or is in, others: they may be assuredly persuaded, the same grace
belongs to, and is in themselves: But the Apostle Paul is assuredly persuaded,
that, inseparabilitie from the love of God in Christ belongs to the Saints at
Rome: therefore the Saints at Rome may be assuredly persuaded, that
inseparability from the love of God in Christ belongs to them: and if they,
then of the same, may all other Saints wheresoever for themselves be persuaded
also? Either of which two inferences, though they be as true as the Sky is
clear in the brightest day, yet a double exception, in seeming just, will at
the first glance, cast a cloud upon either of them, if not removed.

The first is thus framed: It follows not, Because the Apostle was persuaded
of his, therefore others may be persuaded of their, inseparabilitie.
Notwithstanding his 1. special Revelation.
Their reason is; He had that means which they want, namely, special
revelation.

But that cloud is dispersed if one only beam of the truth reflex upon it,
for the ground of this exception fails them being the 2. Cor. 12.4. for no
other place will yield them so much as any color of the like advantage, where
the Apostle coming to speak of his visions and revelations affirms of
himself, that, He was rapt up into the third heaven, and into Paradise, when
and where they imagine he had this and other things, concerning himself and
other Saints revealed to him, but how justly they say it, let the place it
self speak, which affirms that he heard words not lawful and not possible
to be uttered: but this his own persuasion and assurance he here utters,
which if it had been impossible, he could not if unlawful he would not have
uttered; and therefore not then in special manner revealed, if not then, I
cannot believe at all, because the word of God does not reveal it.

But be it supposed (we may suppose light to be darkness, truth to be error)
that he had it revealed; let them tell me the cause why he sets down, this
special Revelation, neither here nor elsewhere as a ground of his assurance or
as the foundation of his comforts, but only such as are common with him to
every Christian, and serve for the comfort and persuading any of the Saints of
their inseparabilitie from the love of God in Christ: will they say it was his
modesty? why, that cannot be, because Apostolic fidelity is, never severed
from, ever joined with, Apostolic modesty, which appears in this, that where
he so speaks of himself, he either implies or expresses a reason of his so
speaking: But he that has as many eyes as Argus, or is as deep sighted as
Linceus, can espy no such reason here either expressed or to be collected.
Surely then this must be the reason, seeing no better, no fitter can be given,
that he conceales that ground of assured comfort which is proper, and urges
those that are common, least he should cast a scruple into the minds of them
(whom he would comfort) and make them not dare to apply that to themselves,
which did seem to be his peculiar, and so deprive them of that consolation,
wherewith he did entend to fortify them against all assaults and oppositions;
and thus, this their exception yields them loss for gain, and confirms what
before I affirmed, namely, whereof the Apostle for himself was persuaded, every
Roman Saint and consequently every regenerate Christian for himself may be
persuaded also.

The second exception is thus produced. 2. Gift of discerning
The Apostle had the gift of discerning, of which he speaks 1. Cor. 12.10.
and affirms that to some it was given; if to any, then to the Apostles; if to
any of the Apostles, then to the Apostle Paul; 2 Cor. 12.11.
for in nothing was he inferior to the rest of the Apostles: therefore he
might know that of the Romans, which they could not know of themselves. But
this cloud with another of the truths rays is dissolved into air: for though
we will yield unto the Apostle, the preeminence for the measure by reason of
that gift, yet we affirm for the truth of the matter, that they, as well as
he, might be assuredly persuaded that, inseparabilitie from the love of God in
Christ did belong even unto them.

For what is true of the Saints at Corinth in this regard, is true also of the
Saints at Rome, and what may be said of the one, may be likewise affirmed of
the other, and of all other Saints. But the Apostle affirms, 1 Cor.
12.27.6.19.3.16.6.11.
that every one of them is a member of Christ in his particular, that the Holy
Ghost is, yea dwells, in them, that they were washed, sanctified, and
justified, and consequently had faith, that they were Christ's, 3.23.
and consequently had him in them. Would he have said thus if it had not been
so? or was it so? did he say it? and shall we not think he was assured of it?
How will this stand with their exception, his gift of Discerning? How does it
agree with the gravity, and wisdom, integrity, and sincere dealing of an
Apostle? 2 Cor. 7.14.
How else could he speak all things to them in truth, as he affirms he did?
It must needs then be granted, that seeing he said it, he certainly knew
they were so quallified: and yet notwithstanding this his knowledge and
persuasion concerning them, he presses upon them, a fearching and diueing
into their own selves, their own souls, for the finding and sensible
selfe-perceiuing of those graces wherewith he knew they were endued.

Now if they could not have found nor been assured of them in themselves, I
would know the reason, why for this he does so earnestly press them in diverse
places, whether they knew their bodies were the members of Christ? 1 Cor.
6.15.19.
If the Spirit of God was dwelling in them, 3.16. 2 Cor. 13.5.
whether they were in the faith and Christ Jesus were in them? yea with such a
phrase as does more then imply, for it affirms, nay, even assures a
necessity; for he tells them if they knew not this they were reprobates.

If they could not themselves have seen and certainly known these graces in
them, these privileges to belong unto them, then these pressing Interrogations
had been either very superfluous (which to say casts upon the Spirit of
wisdom, the Author of them, an imputation of indiscretion) or very dangerous,
used rather to enforce despair, then infer comfort, or add encouragement,
which is blasphemous, seeing it accuses the Lord as guilty of dissimulation,
as though he colourably pretended sure comfort, when he purposely intended
assured distractions.

My demand then admits no other answer then this, that the reason of his
earnest urging of them, was, to stir them up to a diligent examination of
themselves as he himself declares, that thereby they might have experionce of
these graces in themselves, which he testified, and testifying persuaded them
they had: otherwise he would never have gone about to persuade them, to whom
he wished salvation, that the want of personal knowledge of these graces in
them, and privileges belonging to them, was a sign of their reprobation. 2
Cor. 13.5.


But lest we be thought altogether to roue in another field, and range among a
strange people (though indeed and truth the condition of all the Saints in
regard of the substance and matter of all special and spiritual graces be
alike) let us see if we can aim so right, and keep home so well as to clear
this truth by any passage (besides this Text) between the Apostle and these
Romans concerning whom, he was here so well persuaded. Surely there is one
among others that adds strength to this assertion, that notwithstanding both
special revelation, and the gift of discerning every Regenerate Roman might
be assured of that grace in himself, and of that privilege belonging to him,
whereof the Apostle was assuredly persuaded in respect of him; and it is this.
The Apostle gives God thanks that they (to wit which, Romans 6.17.
among the Romans or elsewhere were effectually called, Romans 1.6. for till
then, not any other are truly capable of any grace simply necessary to
salvation) were, that is, 22.
some times, not now, the servants of sin, that they were free from sin,
and become the servants of God, 16.
and so free from death, 23.
and interested in eternal life, With what face could he have come before the
Lord (though with praise in his mouth) who is the Judge of all, who knows the
very hearts and reins, and whom hell and destruction are before, Pro. 15.11.
and therefore much more the hearts of the children of men, as Solomon truly
argues, if either he had doubted, or had not been upon good grounds persuaded
of, as well their freedom from death, as the end of their holiness, eternal
life? yet even in that sixth Chapter, he is ever and anon calling upon the
Romans, the best among them, in that manner, and with such a Phrase, Tone and
Accent, as not only imply a desire he had to excite and stir them up to a
clear and distinct knowledge of these things which were in them and did belong
unto them, but also a sharp accusation for their, ignorance of them in
themselves, and not discerning their good estates in which he knew they were,
and for which he powered forth the sacrifice of thanksgiving to the Lord; for in
the 3. v. of the 6. Chapter, his words are these, Know ye not that so many of
us (including them with himself) as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death? In the 16. v. these, Know ye not that to who^ you
yield your selves scruants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey,
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness? The best we can
make of his thus Catechizing them, and the least we can gather from these
cutting questions, is an earnest calling upon them to have in themselves
experience of the benefits of Christ's death and resurrection, which through the
whole Chapter are to die unto sin, and to live unto righteousness, and the end
of all eternal life, which he knew did belong unto them, so as of whatsoever
grace the Apostle is assured to be in, or to appertain unto, another; of the
same may that other be assuredly persuaded is in, or appertains unto,
himself. For whether they be Saints at Corinth or Rome or wheresoever
concerning whom the Apostle is well persuaded, he grounds that his good
persuasion always, not upon either special Revelation or his gift of
discerning, but upon such signs as they themselves might see, and upon such
tokens as they themselves might know and well perceive in themselves: for how
knew he that the Romans were, before time, not then when he writ unto them,
the servants of sin, that is, had yielded themselves once wholly to the
commanding power of sin, but now had cast off his yoke? He himself can best
acquaint us with the means whereby he attained to that knowledge concerning
them: let us ask him, our question shall not be so ready as his resolution,
for in the very next words, he discovers them, To. 6. verse. 17.
to be, their obeying of the truth; ye have, says he, obeyed from the very
heart that form of doctrine which was delivered unto you, as if he had said,
would you understand what moved me to give thanks to God for your present
estate, and how I know you are freemen in respect of sins bondage; I will tell
you, thus it is, I saw and see and rejoice at it, that you with all the powers
of your souls have yielded obedience to that truth which has been taught
you. How knew he that the fruit they should reap was the fruit of holiness,
verse. 22.
and that the end they should attain to was eternal life? Then himself none
is better able to reveal upon what grounds he was moved to hope so well for
their future happiness; and before we demand he answers, there were certain
marks (Gods good tokens) upon them which they might as well, if not better
then he, perceive in themselves, and they were these, that they were made free
from sin, verse. 22:
the yoke and burden whereof any Saint too much feels, after he by his
corruption is subjected to it, and to his hearts joy well discernes, when by
the Lords mercy in his Saviors merits he is eased of it, and then, verse. 22.
that they were become the servants of God, that is, with all submissiue
reverence, and renerent diligence did resign themselves over unto God in
mind, and soul, and spirit, and the whole man to do his will, of which
change, no child of God can be less ignorant, then usually is a servant of
his own removing from a tedious painful, and no way contenting, to a
joyful, easy, and every way peace-bringing, service, seeing the serving of
sin and Satan is bondage, and the service of the Lord is perfect freedom.

As for the Corinthian Saints, 1 Cor. 3.16.
He did in a mannet chide them, because they took no better notice that they
were the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwelt in them: and had he
any reason for it? God and his Spirit are invisible, how then can mortal eyes
discover their habitation. Though we do not see the King, yet we can tell
where the Court is, by the Writs that proceed from him, and the Retinue that
belong unto him. They could not but feel the impression of the Spirit sealing
upon their hearts, the eternal peace of their consciences, the never expiring
patents of Celestial promises in Christ, neither could they be ignorant of God
and his Spirits presence within them, seeing he could discern that a
spiritual sanctity and godly graces did without adorn them. 17.
Again, It was an excellent privilege to be in the faith, 2 Cor. ^3.5.
but an unparalleled preeminence to have Christ in them, and a blessing which in
the end brings happiness without compare, to be free from the state of
reprobation. In all these regards he had affirmed the^ in their measure to be
happy, and withal these prerogatives to be honored with himself: 2 Cor 1.20,
22.
for (as well as he) they were by God established in Christ, anointed, sealed,
and received the earnest of the Spirit in their hearts. Neither was this a bare
affirmation, but an assured persuasion concerning them; 2 Cor. 1.7.
for it was accompanied with such an hope of them for the time to come (hope is
not of things seen) which was not fleeting but firm, Romans 8.24, 25.
it had not a sandy but sound foundation, and what was that? could they also
see it, to build their own assured persuasion and steadfast hope upon it? See
it? clearey see it, palpably perceive it, and sensibly feel it. First, 2 Cor.
1.5, 7. and 13.5.
their partaking of the sufferings of Christ, and then Christ's powerfulness in
them. Such marks as are not only to be discerned, to be, where they be (for
who can suffer and not know it, Mat. 3.11. Luke 24.4.
or have a fire in his breast and not perceive the heat of it?) bur common to
all the Saints, to all the members of Christ, and to all that look to enter
into the Kingdom of heaven, for they that believe not in him will be so far
from suffering for him, that they will not so much as once take to heart either
his or his Saints sufferings, and if Christ shall not be mighty in them, they
will not endure sufferings of any kind for him. Thus from the Text the double
collection (that every regenerate Christian may be assured of whatsoever grace
for himself, whereof the Apostle is persuaded for himself, or in the behalf
of any other, notwithstanding either special Revelation, or his gift of
discerning) remains undeniable.

No less, The Context proves assurance to be common from.
but rather more transparent light will the Context give to this truth, That to
be assured of inseparabilitie from the love of God in Christ, and so of all
other graces simply necessary to salvation is not proper to the Apostle nor any
Saint, but common to every one of the Sts, as appears by, 1. the Manner. 2.
the Mark. 3. the ground of Paul's arguing in this Chap.

For the 1. 1. The manner of the Apostles arguing.
the Manner. It is necessarily granted, that Freedom from condemnation. To be
the child of God, Salvation, Intercession of the holy Ghost, and of Jesus
Christ. To have all things work together for the best, Victory in
Tribulations, and the like. Inseparabilitie from the love of Christ and God in
Christ, are things simply necessary. Now the Apostle using these as arguments
of comfort, he does not appropriate them, nor any one of them to himself, but
applies them, to himself indeed, for he is included, yet, so as the rest of
the faithful also may include themselves. This he would not, nay could not,
have done without deluding of them, if they might only have seen the Comb,
and might not have tasted of the Honey, but to delude them was as far from his
intention as it should be from our imagination, seeing he sought to approve
himself in the consciences of all, which he could not have done though he had
used never so great endeavor, nor truly have endeavored, if he in these
privileges mentioned, might only have challenged a property and the rest of the
faithful could at all have claymed no interest.

But he says not; There is no condemnation to me but to them, be what they
will be, so they be in Crrist Jesus, and walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit. He says not that he only is the child of God, but as many as are led
by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. He says not he is, but we are
saved by hope. He says not all things work together for good to me, but to
them that love God, to them who are called according to his purpose. He says
not, either the spirit or Christ makes intercession for me, but for us. He
says not, in all these things I am more then a Conqueror, but we are more
then Conquerours through him that loved not me but us, He says not who shall
separate me but us from the love of Christ? nor, I am persuaded, that neither
death nor life etc. shall be able to separate me but us from the love God etc.
as freely interressing and fully inuesting the Regenerate Saints then in Rome
and all others, who had or shall have the conditions which are added, in those
privileges and graces, as he was fully and certainly persuaded they belonged
to himself.

For the second, 2. That at which the Apostle aims, i. the comforts of all
the Sts.
The mark or end where at the Apostle in this place aims, what is it? It is
the comfort and consolation not of himself alone, but of every regenerate
Roman, and consequently of every truly believing Christian which was then, is
now, or hereafter shall be in Christ Jesus, against all and singular enemies
and opposites whatsoever which might any way lessen, or by any means cause them
to leave their confidence in Gods love through Christ, else he might better
have concealed these comforts in the closet of his own breast then revealed
them. And further to say these comforts here recorded either all or some of
them do belong unto him alone, is erroneous: for to say, they all are his in
peculiar, is to gainesay his purpose here, because the blessed Spirits purpose,
and his own speech elsewhere, where he who was no changeling in his assertions
affirms that Whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our
learning, Romans 15.4.
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: which
things (patience and comfort) by them (the Scriptures) are the Spirits aim,
their (the Scriptures) end not only in the Apostles time, but to the worlds
end. Now how can we be armed with patience, sustained with comfort, and
transported to the haven of happiness, with hope by this Scripture an only
place of comfort, yea even of all places fullest of the spiritual Balm of
Gilead if it wholly belongs to Paul? If it it wholly belongs to Paul how ca^ it
otherwise be thought, but that, he sought only himself and his own glory,
neither the Saints then, nor us now?

To affirm that some of them belonged to him, presupposes this particular
comfort laid down in this Text, the inseparability from the love of God in
Christ, which is the greatest, and comprehends the rest, and therefore if any,
then this; if this, how is not the Apostle (as was every one of the three
friends of Job) a miserable comforter of a distressed conscience? Job. 13.4.
and 16.2. and 2.12, 13.
for as they cast dust upon their heads, and sat by him seven days and
seven nights together sorrowful, yet at last failed in applying comfort: So
he having animated a fainting soul, refreshed a wearied spirit, and suppled a
wounded heart with sundry spiritual Cordials against the rigor of the law,
the frailty of the flesh, the greatness and grieuousnesse of afflictions a
long time, should leave that soul so languishing, that spirit so weary, that
heart so wounded in danger of the last enemy, and in doubt of none of the
least mercies: for not one but every faithful soul perceiving it must, though
it have foiled many adversaries, fail in the end wholly, and faint under the
burden of one or other opposition, and not obtain the end of its hope and
expectation, the love of God in Christ is plunged deep in the gulf of
desperation; and so would Paul become the savor of life to none, the savor of
death to all even those which are coheires with him in Christ, which must not
so much as once into our thoughts be admitted or in our minds conceited, much
less with our mouths be uttered, seeing the holy Ghost affirms, 2 Cor. 2.15,
16.
that he was the effectual savor of life to the Fathers chosen, and to the
Sons redeemed.

For the 3. 3. The ground of his co^forts.
thing considered in the Context, the Ground of Paul's arguing and of his
comforts here laid down, are of two sorts, the one working, Gods love and
mercy, Christ's merits and efficacy; the other witnessing, Gods spirit and our
spirit, or a renewed conscience. Now all and every of these cannot but be
affirmed, must necessarily be confessed, to be common to all, not only proper
to any of the faithful: for to deny these, one or any of them to one or any
belieuer, is to deny him, to be elected which proceeds from Gods love, to be
redeemed which is of Christ's merit, to be sanctified which is the work of the
spirit, seeing therefore the ground, of this his inseparability from Gods love
in Christ, and of the other privileges is common, I conclude that, To be
persuaded of, and assured in, these, is also common with the Apostle to every
truly regenerated Christian.

Thus the Text and Context clear our conclusion, Adversaries confession.
but that wherein we may justly triumph, and which is not of the least force
both to confound the persons and confute their opinions, is, their own
Confession. For (say they) if there were either a word, Bellar. l. 3. de
Iustof. c. 8.
saying to every particular person, as our Savior to the sick of the palsy,
Son thy sins be forgiven thee: Math. 9.2.
or we could certainly know the truth of our conversion, we might freely
conclude and concluding assure our selves, that we should never be separated
from the love of God in Christ, but (which is all one) be saved, that our sins
are pardoned, we are justified and shall be glorified: But there is (say the
adversaries of this truth) no such particular promise revealed now, by name or
in that manner to any particular Saint in or by the word: nor any such assurance
of our conversion can be apprehended: therefore we cannot be assured either our
sins are pardoned, or we never shall be severed from the love of God in
Christ, or at last shall be saved.

The first is frivolous, General propositions particularly to be applied.
the second false.

The first is frivolous: for let them tell me, is not the Gospel the same for
comfort that the Law is for terror, to the soul? must the soul apprehend, and
apprehending apply in particular to it self, the general precepts
prohibitions and threatenings of the Law, and may it not in like manner apprehend
and apply, The Gospel as well as the (...).
in particular to it self the general promises and privileges of the
Gospel? how is the Lords mercy over all his works? is his hand of favor
shorter then his hand of fury? Psalm. 77.7, etc.
Has the Lord forgotten to be merciful, and does he thus shut up his loving
kindness in displeasure. Is his Mercy thus smothered by Justice? and has his
Justice got the start so far of Mercy? Must I swallow the poison, and may I not
taste the Antidote? must I lay to my sore the Corafiue only, and may I in no
case apply the Plaster? Shall an heir into whose hands the entaile of his
Ancestors inheritance comes, reading the evidence (knowing there is none
other to debar him of it, though he cannot find his own name in particular,
and his dead Ancestors being so tong-tied that they cannot speak) not conclude
I am of the same lineage, and therefore this inheritance does belong unto me?
and may not every Saint and member of Christ in particular, knowing himself to
be a spiritual heir of Abraham, Acts 3.25, 26.
reading the Letters Patents of the King of Heaven, seeing the Kings Seal, and
having all committed to his own use, conclude that the benefit of this blelongs
unto him, seeing his father could not cancel it, his Sovereign would not,
neither can any pretend title to his prejudice? for though there be many, yet
his interest is as good, though perhaps not so great, why should not he then
apprehend it as his own right in particular? Be the words never so general he
may safely infer the particular, for this is the practice of the holy Ghost,
nay; and the adversaries themselves make the like conclusion.

It is the practice of the blessed spirit sometime to apply a particular to a
general use, To apply particularly general propofitions, is the practice of
the Spirit.
sometime casting that cover (which will serve a multitude) upon a few; and
again healing the wounded heart of one with those plasters which had bin
applied unto many. The Apostle applies and challenges to himself and others
the same which the Prophet David alleges of himself, Seeing the^, says he,
that we have the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed,
Ps. 116.10. 2 Cor. 4.13. Ios. 1.3, 4, 5, 6.
and therefore have I spoken, we also believe and therefore speak; by the
same reason whereby the Lord encouraged Iosuah in particular against all
enemies, every member of Christ as well one as another, all as any one, in his
judgment, must be moved in all their wants to eschew covetousness, Heb. 13.5.
and be content with such things as they have, because he, that is the Lord,
has said it, I will in no case fail thee, neither forsake thee, Ps. 56.4,
11.13. Heb. 13:6.
and seeing that kingly Prophet upon the persuasion, that the Lord was his
helper, did not fear what man might do unto him, both he and other may not
only account the Lord as their helper also, but upon that hope take heart
against the fear of all wrongs. And is it not clear in that great question,
how a man stands righteous in the sight of God, that he concludes, Gal. 3.6.
because Abraham in particular was justified by Faith, therefore all belieuers
that either have been, are, or shall be justified; have been, are, and shall
be justified by faith likewise? Ask the Apostle Peter why he persuaded every
particular person (to whom he spoke) to repent and to be baptized (now every
particular convert was to be baptized) in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remissiou of sins, Acts 2.38, 39.
and assured them they should receive the gift of the Holy Ghost? was it not
this? because the promise was made to them and to their children and to all a
far off. Plainly insinuating that by how much more large the promise was, by
so much more might every one of the^ in particular be bold, by observing the
co^ditio^ and suffering the seal to be fixed, to interest, and establish
themselves, in the covenant. David in his perplexity almost despaired of the
Lords goodness toward him, as appears in that he so earnestly expostulateth
the case concerning Gods dealing with him, when he says; Will the Lord absent
himself for ever, Psalm. 77.7, etc.
and will he be no more entreated? is his mercy clean gone for ever, and is
his promise come utterly to an end for ever more? has God for gotten to be
gracious, and will he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? But why does
he correct his infirmity? because he forgot the years of the right hand of
themost high: and how does he recollect his spirits? by remembering the works
of the Lord, and calling to mind his wonders of old time, even those (for the^
he mentions) which he had done for that whole multitude of his ancient people
the Israelites when he delivered them from the thraldom of Egypt, applying to
himself that power which was made apparent for, and that Mercy, which was
manifested to, a great number, even a whole Nation, for his personal comfort.

Now they themselves make the like conclusion: And even of the Aduerseries
themselves.
For demand of one of their Priests why this or that particular man or woman
must believe and be persuaded his or her sins are pardoned upon the pronouncing
of absolution, he will surely, otherwise he cannot answer, Christ has left
that power unto him. But demand again where finds he that power confirmed on
him? He must answer Christ said unto Peter and the rest of the Disciples,
Whosoever sins thou or ye remit, they are remitted. And now inferres he from
hence, that he may remit sins, and that he whom he absolues may be persuaded
of the pardon of his sins seeing neither his nor the others name is there
particularly expressed? He cannot but answer, it is because he is in the place
of one of the Disciples, and what was said to Peter and the other Apostles is
derived to him: does not he now from a general infer a particular, or if
they will from one particular, the Apostle Peter, interest another, the Pope?
if this be lawful for them and not for us, let them produce their charter and
privilege thus to conclude, or if it may be done in this case and not in any
other, let them show their Prouiso, or else we may safely hold, that, What the
Holy Ghost in this kind uses and they practice, we may lawfully use the
same, and they have no reason to except against it, namely, that from the
general promises and comforts of the Gospel we may draw particular
conclusions for the assuring and establishing of our hearts in any necessary
saving grace. Truth of conversion may be known.
Thus is the first frivolous.

The second is as false: for if a Saint might not evidently perceive his own
conversion to be true, I would know the reason why in the Scriptures we have
the notes of repentance together with the proper effects of the same declared,
if it be not this, that, every Christian looking in this glass which yields
the fullest and truest resemblance of the heart might behold by due examination
the co^formitie of his soul to the will of God, thereby to receive comfort and
confidence in assurance of the pardon of his sins, future happiness, and at
all times inseparabilitie from the love of God in Christ, and the like: for can
the fire be certainly known by the heat, Math. 7.6.
the tree by the fruit (in our Saviors judgment not a doubtful and
coniecturall sign, but a sure and infallible note) and shall not a man by the
effects manifestly see his faith unfeigned, his repentance sound? yes surely:
for is true repentance a sorrow for sins past, a striving with sins present, a
watching to prevent sins to come, an hearty desire, full purpose and constant
endeavor to avoid evil and prosecute that which is good? and shall not a man
know that he is endued with it? Is it possible that a man should grieve and not
take notice of it, strive and not feel it, watch and not perceive it, desire
and not discern it, purpose and not discover it, endeavor and not find it,
and do all these heartily, fully and constantly, and not evidently know it? It
is not possible.

Besides every regenerate man has a a new heart, a renewed spirit, which is a
faithful witness, giving testimony not to God, for that it needs not, nor to
others, for that it cannot, but to the man who has it, for that it must, of
the truth of those things, which it knows to be in him concerning Gods will, and
his own eternal welfare; Pro. 14.5.
seeing the^ a faithful witness will not lie, and the spirit of the penitent
testifies the truth of his repentance may not he be as firmly persuaded, as
his heart faithfully witnesses the sincerity of his conversion.

But the heart of man, say they, Ier. 17 9. What heart it is which is deceived.
Is deceitful above measure, who can know it? It cannot be denied that the
unregenerate heart (of which the Prophets speech is to be conceived) is like a
filthy puddle, at the bottom whereof through the thickness and impurity of the
water, neither one thing nor other can distinctly, if at all, be seen: but the
regenerate heart, which only is the harbor of true repentance, may fitly be
compared to a clear fountain at whose bottom every thing as it is sand from
mud, base from better metals, being cast into it, may be discerned: and
howsoever the vessels which are in an house, are not in the night season
through darkness by the eye distinguished; yet at the approach of either
Sun or candle, a man may take notice of, and put a difference between, those
vessels which are appointed to honor, and these which are destinated to
dishonorable uses: so that heart which is full of Spiritual darkness admits
noe exact knowledge of either vice or virtue, but mistakes the one for the
other in it self, yet the beams of the Sun of tighteousnesse by his blessed
Spirit entering into that heart which is become the Temple of the Holy Ghost,
nay, even the dwelling and abiding place of the ever to be admired Trinity,
enlighten every crany and corner of it, and so lay unto open view the sins
and sanctities of the same, as they are indeed. How else could a Saint sorrow
for the one, or rejoice in the testimony of a good conscience, be solaced and
give praise unto God, for the other?

And was not (so they do object) Peter, after he was called to his
Apostleship, and endued with saving grace, much deceived when he boasted:
Though all men should be offended, because of Christ, Mat. 25.33, 35.
yet would he never be offended, and though he should dye with him, yet he
would not deny him? That Peter said so, may not be gainesaid, and that he was
deceived, must needs be granted: but that, they infer hence more then we
affirm, may thus be plainly manifested: for that wherein Peter failed, was as
they surmise, his constant confessing of Christ; but it is only their surmise:
for in every grace, in every duty, there are two things to be considered, the
grace or duty it self, and the circumstances of it, now these circumstances
are either simply and absolutely necessary, or only respectively and
conditionally requisite to salvation.

Be it now granted, that the grace or duty whereof Peter made so fair a show,
was a resolute purpose, not to be offended with, but to be a confessor of,
Christ his Master, they cannot deny, but must confess, that those
circumstances of it which were primary, were, that he would not do the one, and
that he would do the other, with all willingness, constantly, truly and
sincerely, without all by-respect: those which were secondary were, the
continuing in either of the^ at this or that moment of time, at this or that
time of Christ's prosperity or adversity, happy or miserable estate, and, as it
is from his own mouth at Christ's death, in this or that manner or gesture,
suppose praying with Steven (not simply praying, Act. 7.59, 61.
or praying fervently but praying) for himself standing, for his persecutours
kneeling, and will not they now confess that these latter are things which God
(who has put the times and seasons in his own power, and 1.7. Romans 14.17
and whose kingdom consists not in outward but inward things) has never
promised; and therefore no marvel if he failed, seeing prevailing and
presuming are seldom or never met walking in the same path, or possessed by
the same person at the same time.

But now his willingness, truth, sincerity and the like (conditions, without
which a grace is no grace, a duty no duty promised to, and through the presence
of Gods gracious Spirit always in some measure resident, in, the Saints) in
that his resolute promise, Psalm. 1.3.
were, as the fruits of a good tree, though not at altimes without
intermission, and so not at that time, to be seen hanging on the boughs; yet
always in the root in that season, which God had determined as most due and
convenient, ready to be made apparent.

As therefore we will not affirm that Peter was never offended because of
Christ, Wherein Peter in that Protestation was not deceived.
so they in their consciences must needs grant that, as David has taught us
to distinguish, he was not offended with him for ever; Psalm. 55.25.
and though he died not with him as he pretended, yet he died seized of the
grace of confessing him as his heart then persuaded, nay, he died for him as he
then purposed, and as the event it self after declared, that I may turn the
point of Bellarmines own weapon against himself, who had received sure by the
hand of God, seeing him argue against the light of his own conscience, some
great stroke on his head, which did much confound his memory and besot his
judgment when he thought upon the deceitfuleesse of Paul's (rather Saul's) heart
raging against the Church, seeing he was then an vnbelieuer, Absurd to allege
Paul's rage against the Church to prove a St. may be deceived.
and could not possibly then be acquainted with that certainty of faith which
is the elects peculiar: and howsoever as he infers truly (having a little as
it seems recovered his senses) so far as ignorance, and inclination or
affection to sin prevails, so far is doubting powerful, yet he
proclaims his, either ignorance, blindness, or wilful delight in error, in
in that he labors wholly to deprive the sons of God of that measure of
assurance concerning their eternal privileges which is answerable to that
degree of saving faith, According to the measure of faith is the measure of the
Saints assurance. 1 Cor. 13.3.
wherewith, be it less or more, they are vndenyably enriched: and though some
may give alms out of vainglory to be seen of men, and other suffer their
bodies to be burned for heresy wanting, in doing both and either, true
Charity, thinking notwithstanding they do men and God good service, yet this
doing is so far from any measure of, that it has no affinity with, true
conversion, which causes a man if he fails in the one, not to let God rest
till it be pardoned, and in fear of the other, to pierce the clouds with
fervent cries that, it may be prevented, whose humble breathings issuing from
such a breast, draw in the comforts of Gods Spirit, and are refreshed with a
perusasion grounded upon Gods promises, that, in Christ, his suit shall either
be granted or his desire for the deed freely accepted.

What shall we say then to those who would have all the Sts to remain in a
wavering doubt, and that of duty, concerning their eternal safety? Deal they
not like watermen in their opinions, and are they not enemies, dangerous
enemies, to men's souls in the maintaining of the^? Of all, Papists have least
reason to doubt of salvation.
Watermen they are, for while they labor for Guess and conjecture, taking in
their hands the two oars of the Law and the Gospel, do they not look another,
even the quite contrary way? for how ca^ they want the help of the Law for
their certain assurance of life eternal, seeing they teach, and would have no
man to doubt that they may yield to it full obedience, yea, and perform more
then it lies upon them toward the supplying of the wants of other? and how is
it possible that they should be destitute of the Gospels furtherance for the
settling of their confidence when as they of all the men in the world, and none
but they, if we shall believe themselves, are the true belieuers? Me thinks
they being persuaded resolutely of either of these severally, should not be in
suspicion to be damned, but being assured of both these jointly together, how
is it possible, that they should only be in a coiecture to be saved? unless it be
just with God, to mingle their means of assurance with doubting to attain the
aim and end of their obedience and pluck down the plumes of their faith with
a fear of failing in their hopes, seeing they ioyn with Christ's all-sufficient,
their own al-deficient merits, and will be justified by their works, which God
will not.

But to leave them to their strong delusions, To hold doubting necessary is
dangerous.
how dangerous are they to the souls of men, while they press upon the people
this continuing in doubt of future joys, and of present good estate, as
necessary? Do they not paue before them the path which will without any
hinderance lead them so, Such a doubting as admits no assurance makes prayer
fruitless.
as they shall undoubtedly miss of what God has promised? for has God in his
revealed will made known his good and unalterable purpose for conferring upon
his chosen the glory of the life to come? and must his children expect, and in
expectation pray for, the accomplishing of their hope and his promise? must
prayer be powered out with feruency? and can there be feruency where there is an
uncertain faith? or if their faith be doubting, can their prayer prevail?
Surely Saint James thought verily, whatsoever these Romish Sophisters imagine,
that asking and believing, nay such a believing, as ought to be severed from
every doubting, are to be inseparably joined together, James 1.6.
when he bids every Saint Ask in faith nothing doubting, and takes it for
undeniable, howsoever they conceit it, that the more doubting there is in
asking, the less hope there is of speeding, nay, if there be nothing but
doubting, there cannot be any expectation of enjoying when he positiuely
affirms that, verse. 7.
That man must not so much as thinkee that he shall receive any thing of the
Lord. To have then a memer of Christ, be the assault what it will be, to
continue necessarily in only a coniecturall and uncertain guess, that He
shall be well, is it not to draw on the soul from uncertain doubting to
certain despairing? and to move the Lord not only to a denying of his prayer,
but even a distaste of both prayer and person? for is it not a calling of Gods
promises into question, as if they were either only pretended or impertinent,
as if man by no means could be capable of them? Is not the truth of God hereby
impeached, peace of conscience unsettled, hope disheartened, patience deceived,
our love to God diminished, and the best man discouraged in the course of
grace? what difference betwixt him that lives by, Pro. 26.13. and 15.19.
and him that has no hope in the time of trial? Shall not both pretend a Lion
in the way (which to both is an hedge of thorns) and either shun the combat
or be discomfited in the conflict? Ps. 14.5. Pro. 28.1.
Shall they not fear where no fear is, and fly when none pursues, and
beholding the fury of an angry Judge, Reu. 6.16.
wish in despair the Mountains might fall upon them?

But, blessed be God, every one of the righteous is so far from having cause to
be discouraged in his trials that he has, through an holy confidenc, Pro.
14.32.
hope even in his death; for it is the nature of true faith to be confident,
Genesis 32.26.
and to wrestle as Jacob even with God himself, and not to cease till it be
partaker of the blessing. It brings the promises of God and presents them to
the eye of the mind, not suffering them to depart till it from them has
sucked some comfortable solace. No presumption to labor for assurance.
Let not us then contemn that as presumptuous which the Lord has commended,
yea, commanded as precious: for that which he has appointed to be found, is
ingratitude in us not to seek that which he has advised us to have is
negligence in us to want, and that which he has enjoined us to have in high
regard, is disobedience to neglect seeing we may safely sail between the gulf
of presumption and co^te^pt and without damage fly between the scorching
Sun of security and the cooling sea of despair; so as neither the wings of
our souls in our passage to heaven shall melt by the one, not become stiff by
the other: for keeping within the compass of our holy confidence, we shall
continue safely in a Christian motion till we rest upon the battlements of our
Celestial mansion.

How is it then that we seek such certainety in earthly things? In them we will
do nothing without mature advise and great consideration; for to inuest us
furely in our temporal inheritance, the Evidence must be carefully drawn,
what is superfluous razed out, what is wanting supplied, and if any thing may
only be suspected to over throw our tenure, the covenant is renewed, other
conditions are concluded, and if about these any doubt arise a new course is
devised. Thus we make that sure we are sure to loose, careful to have things
temporal, clods of clay for our bodies which are houses of earth. And shall we
not aspire unto certainty in our spiritual and eternal endowments without
which we faint in miseries, fail of Gods mercies, and have no interest in
Christ's merits? Shall we not endeavor resolution in and against our doubtings
concerning our heavenly inheritance, through which the soul in sufferings is
comforted, the conscience in tentations is quieted, and the whole man in all
oppositions is secured.

Assurance is a gift of the Spirit, Means to obraine assurance.
now the Spirit it self is given to those that in faith and feruency ask it:
the word is the Lords mouth which promises it and the Sacraments are his hands
which seal it to us, Motions to assurace are raised in the heart by the
Spirit, and these must not be quenched. Nourish the hatred, extinguish the
delight, of every sin, and daily increase and continue our desires and
endeavors for the reforming of every evil, if the flax of affiance only
smoke, we must blow it with serious meditating upon Gods Covenant, and
an-humble applying of his promises, inflame it with observing the truth of the^
toward others, but especially by finding experience of the spirits power in
our selves, and cause it to burn with the true acquaintnance of that blessed,
holy, and ever happy union which is betwixt God and us, and by being abundant
in good works: for that has a secret blessing.

Now this fire will be known if we find in other, Signs of ssurance.
and perceive in our selves the fruits of the Spirit, if we be continually
armed in every part, if we be confident in all proiects that are good, and rest
contented in occurrences that are cross, and depend upon the Lord for things
even of this life (a duty which Christ insinuated when he taught us to pray for
our daily bread, Math. 6.11, 12.
before our sins forgiveness) if we can scorn and hold all things in this
life, nay life it self, contemptible in comparison of Christ and his cross,
bear the brunt of the greatest oppositio^s patiently and courageously for his
truth, and that to the end, stand upon God only his power and providence in all
our trials: if it suppress all natural fears, subdue all Diabolical
assaults, proceed from an apprehension of Gods promises after repentance, and
if that apprehension be seconded with the secret testimony of Gods spirit,
rhere is no doubt of this sound assurance which is common to all the Saints.

Common to all the Saints? Outward conditions should not exalt a Sr. too much
above his inferior brother.
why should then any outward condition cause any to exalt himself above his
brethren, or to swell against those that are endued with the same at least
some if not greater measure of spiritual graces? should not even this move
them to make themselves equal with those of the lower sort: and may not even
the meanest among Christ's members solace themselves in this that they are not
excluded from assurance of their interest in life eternal, The meanest Saint
to be solaced hereby.
but may, in some measure, many times in a greater measure, the^ other of eue^
the children of God, that in the eyes of the world are more esteemed, be
confident of their state? should not the meditation of this moderate all their
mourning and become a medicine for all their maladies which arise from worldly
wants or wrongs? Be they never so much distressed or despised they may securely
repose themselves in their holy confidence, How to be comforted by assurance in
sint and sufferings.
for being renewed in their minds and bodies the deadly arrows of sin and
sufferings are dipped in the blood of Christ, who like a good Physician will take
care to heal their wounds with his own hands, and either take away from the^
maladies as from Hezekiah, Esaias 37. and 38.
or free them from the mischief of them, by ministering an Antidote to their
poison, 2 Cor. 1, 4, 5 and 12.9. Luke 16.
as in Paul; or in his appointed time, by removing them, as he did Lazarus to
glory. To which the Lord in his mercy bring us for his Christ's merits, To whom
with the blessed spirit, One God in Essence, three in Persons, be ascribed all
honor, praise, and power, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

