A SERMON PREACHED before His Majesty, On Sunday the fifth of August last, at
Holdenbie, By the Bishop of Elie, His Majesty's Almoner.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1610

1. CHRO. 16. 22. Nolite tangere Christos meos.
Touch not mine Anointed.

HEre is a Speech: but we know not Whose, nor to Whom, nor yet (well)
concerning only concerning His Anointed. It behooves us, to know these three,
who they be.

The person, whose the speech is, Persona loquens, He that says Meos, Him we
find at the 14. verse. Ipse est Dominus Deus noster, He is the Lord our God:
God it is, that speaks here, He that challenges them for His, by calling
them, Mine.

The persons, to whom* in the verse before, Non reliquit hominem: He leaves
not a man. So, it is, to all in general: but specially to some, more quick of
touch then the rest, whose fingers are never well, till some way or other, they
be touching, whom God would not have touched.

The persons, concerning whom, (whom, He styles, His Anointed) will fall out
to prove, the Princes of the earth. We must not say it, but prove it, (say it
now, prove it anon.)

Now, as if some body were about to offer them some wrong; here comes a voice
from heaven, staying their hands, and saying, See you touch them not. Quos
Deus vnxit, homo ne tangat. Whom God has Anointed, Let no man presume to touch.

Of which, it may well be said, as the Psalmist says to us, every day, Hodie si
vocem: Today, if ye will hear this voice, harden not your hearts, and ye may:
For, as this day (now ten years,) from the same Person, and the same place, a
like voice there came, concerning His Anointed, in whose presence we stand.
That GOD would not have His Anointed touched, this Text is a witness, and this
day is a witness: The Text, dixit, The day, factum est.

TOuching the same point, Referred unto the ^ext next before, 1. Sam. 26. 19
when time was, in this place you heard, Ne perdas: you shall hear it again
now, but, from an higher person, under a straiter charge, and with a larger
compass.

The person higher; for, that was David* but behold, a greater then David is
here. This, is no voice on earth (neither of Prophet nor Apostle) we now hear:
Audiui vocem de caelo, We hear a voice from heaven: And thence, neither of
Saint, nor Angel, but of God himself. To show his care of them ( His
Anointed) he would have none give the charge about them, but himself;
himself in person, Non ali^nae vocis ^rgano, sed oraculo suae: from none
other, but from his own mouth.

The charge straiter: for, there it was, Destroy not, the worst that could be:
Here it is, Touch not, the least that may be; and so, even that way, amended
much.

The compass larger: That, was to Abishai, but one man; and it was, concerning
Saul, one King only; and therefore it was in the singular, Ne perdas: This is,
Nolite, and Christos: the number altered, of a larger extent far, even to All
men, concerning All his Anointed. Nolite, in the plural, that is, None of you:
Christos in the plural, that is, None of them. Them, not touched, not Any of
them; You, not touch* not Any of you. Non reliquit hominem: He leaves not a
man, but forbids All. Now, out of this plural, you may deduce any singular;
Out of Christos, any King: Out of Nolite, any party: Out of Tangere, any hurt:
and so, not any man, to do any hurt to any his Anointed.

A Commandment it is, This Text, the first and great Commandment concerning
this point.
and I may safely say, Primum, and magnum mandatum, The first and great
Commandment, touching the safeguard of Princes.

The first: For, (as the verses before show) it was the first given, in this
kind, and that before all other, in the Patriarchs time, long before Moses,
under the Law of Nature.

The greatest, not only because it is of the greatest in heaven, and
concerning the greatest in earth: but for that it is the original maine
precept, touching Princes and their safety, or (as the phrase is) the
fundamental law, upon the which all the rest are grounded, unto the which all
the rest reduced, and from the which all the rest derived. David's Destroy not,
is but an abstract of this Touch not. Ask him what Text he had for his Ne
perdas: hither he must come, this must be it, and none other. This Nolite
tangere is the maine wing of protection: Ne perdas, or any other particular, is
but a feather of it.

TO see the parts of it. A Precept it is, The Division.
and negative, and the negative precept is of the nature of a fence, and the
fence leads us to the thing fenced. First of all then, we take it in ^under,
and make two parts of it: and set Christ^^ (...) in the midst, whose the fence
is* and then, (...), as it were a circle or fence round about them.

Christos meos has in it, two things: not only the parties, whom they should
not: but the reason why they* should not touch them. Not touch? Whom not
touch? His Anointed. And why not touch? Even because, His Anointed.

In Christos meos taken together, are the parties non tangendae: Again, in
Christos meos taken in sunder and weighed apart, are two reasons couched, de
non tangendo.

Why not touched? first, they be His: And secondly, what of His? His Anointed.
These two, be two several: His anointed, is more then His: for all that be
His, be not Anointed.

His, alone, were enough; that they be His, they pertain to him, and so, he
to see them safe.

But then besides, they be the very choice and chief of his, His anointed, and
so, a more special care of them, then the rest.

And then (from the nature of the word) not only his anointed, Vnctieius: but
Christieius, His Christ's, which is the highest degree of his anointed: for
higher then that, ye cannot go.

And last, what that is, that makes them thus, his anointed: to know whether
they may be stripped of it, o^no.

Then come we to the Circle or Fence, and that we may divide too: for, Nolite
tangere, is a double fence, from the act and from the will. Touch not, (so we
read) where the touch, the act, is forbidden. Nolite tangere, (so read the
Fathers) where the will to touch is forbidden likewise. Nolite, that is, Have
ye not the will nor so much as an inclination to do it. So, both the act and
will of touching is restrained* the act, in tangere: the will, in Nolite.

In the former, we are to take the extent of Tangere, and Christos: 1. To what
matters Tangere will reach: 2. In how many points to Christos: And in the
latter, to what persons in Nolite.

And so, see we the sum of the Text, which is sufficient enough to keep
Kings from touching, if it self might be kept untouched: but as the times are,
the Text it self is touched, there needs a second Nolite tangere for it. To
that end then, to see the Text safe and well kept, the three persons in it, all
to join together: Kings, touching whom^ and Subjects, to whom; and GOD
himself, by whom it is given in charge. And if the two former do their parts,
God will not fail in his.

LEt me add one thing more. That this Text, besides that it is a Commandment,
it is also a Thanksgiving; But both have but one (...) and, the Kings safety?

A Commandment it is from God: the very style, the mood Nolite, gives it for
no less.

And a Thanksgiving it is to God: for it is a verse of a Psalm, of a
Halleluia Psalm, of the first Halleluia Psalm: (There be twenty of them in
all, this is the first of them all.)

A Commandment it is; for it is proclaimed with sound of Trumpet, and that by
Banaiah and his company. And a Thanksgiving it is; for it is sung with solemn
music by Asaph, and the Q^^ere, at the six and seven verses before. It is
both, and both ways we to have use of it.

First, as of a Commandment from God, Anointed. I trust, we will perform
better duties to them then this: but whatsoever we do besides, what good we
do them, Ne noceat, not to touch them, to do them no hurt.

And, never so much need of this doctrine, as now, when by a late heavy
accident, we see, wretches there are, dare attempt it: And other, (and they
the more wretches of the twain) that did dare to a^ow it: Did (I say) for, now
they would seem to disauow it; but so poorly, and faintly, as all they say,
may hold, and yet an other like act, be done to morrow.

And then secondly, as a Thanksgiving touching, and more then touching, the
Lords Anointed.

And, never were we so much bound to do it, as this year: For that, this
year, upon this fresh occasion, truly we may say, He that dealt thus with
us, Psalm. 147. 20.
Non taliter fecit omni Nationi, He has not so dealt with all Nations, nor
has every King found him so gracious. Others, have not in theirs; I speak it
with compassion: we have in ours; I speak it to our comfort, and to the
praise of GOD. Both these ways.

Christos meos.
AN honorable Christos meos, who they be.
Title to begin with: and begin with it we must: the very Grammar Rules lead
us to it. Anointed, is but an Adjective, we are to seek the Substantive for
it. But besides, we are to find who they be, whom we are not to touch, lest
we touch them unawares: And as well, that we may know the right, and do them
their right; as, that we may discern them from the wrong: for wrong there be,
that call themselves Christos Domini, whom the holy Ghost never christened by
that name.

As, of Christ himself, many come and say, Ecce, Mark 13. 21.
hic est Christus, ecce illic: Here is Christ, and there is Christ, and deceive
many: So, of these Christ's here likewise; See, here is Christus Domini, and
there he is, and no such matter. Our first point then is to know, who they be.

These in the Text here, Patriarchs, Christi D^mini.
were the Patriarchs, it cannot be denied. They be set down by their names,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, touching whom, prima intention, this charge is given,
that they be not touched.

And let not this seem strange: For in the first world, the Patriarchs were
principal persons, and (as I may safely say) Princes in their generations; and
for such, holden and reputed by those, with whom they lived. I may safely say
it: for of Abraham it is in express terms said by the Hethites, Audi Domine,
Princeps Dei es inter nos, Genes. 23. 6.
Thou art a Prince of God, that is, a mighty prince, here among us: As indeed
a Prince he showed himself, when he gave battle and overthrow to four Kings
at once. Of Isaac no less may be said, Genes. 26. ^6.
who grew so mighty, as the king of Palestine was glad to entreat him to
remove further off, and not dwell so near him: and then, to go after him in
person, Verse 28.
and sue to him, there might be a league of amity between them. And the like
of Jacob, who by his sword and bow* Genes. 48. 22.
conquered from the Amori^e (the mightiest of all the nations in Canaan) that
Country which by Will he gave to Joseph for his possession. It was near to
Sichar, well known; you have mention of it, Ioh. 4. 5.

Greatmen they were certainly, greater then most conceive: but be their
greatness what it will, this is sure, they were all the Rulers the people of
God then had, and besides them, Rulers had they none, And that is it we seek;
Pater was in them, and (...) too, fatherhood, and government: and th^^^ two
made them Patriarchs, and vnctos ante vnctionem (says S. Augustine) Anointed,
In Psalm. 104.
before there was any material Anointing at all.

In them then this term began, and (...) them it held so long, as they had the
government in them: But Patriarchs were not always to govern Gods people,
but Kings, Princes, Christi Domini.
in ages following, were to succeed in their places. And so did succ^ed them;
succeed them in the word Pater, and in the word (...) both, both in the right
of their fatherhood, and the rule of their government, as Fathers of their
Countries, and Governors of their Commonwealths. Where the Patriarchall rule
expired, the Regal was to take place, being both one in effect: For, Abraham
the Patriarch, is termed a Prince, Genesis 23. 6. and to make even, David the
Prince is termed a Patriarch; Let me speak boldly unto you of the Patriarch
David, says S. Peter, Acts 2. 29. So that two things we gain here: 1. That
ius Regium comes out of ius Patrium, The Kings right from the Fathers, and
both hold by one Commandment. Then 2. that this Text binds, as a Law of
Nature, being given for such, to the old world, long before the Law came in any
Tables.

Now, that as in other things, so in this term of Christi Domini, Kings do
succeed the Patriarchs, we have first, our warrant from the holy Ghost,
applying this term here after, to 1. Sam. 12. 3, 4
Saul, to 2. Sam. 19. 21.
David, to 2. Chron. 6. 42.
Solomon, to Abac. 3. 13.
Ezekias, to Lam. 4. ^0.
Ios^as, to Esai. 45. 1.
Cyrus, Kings all* Secondly, from the Councels* The third general Council of
Ephesus, Append. ad Tom. 4. page 1097. can 74. Page 649. Editio Venet.
The great Council of Toledo the fourth. The great Western Council of
Francford. Thirdly, from the consent of Fathers. To dispatch them at once, so
says the Council of Francford, B. Hieronymus and caeteri S. Scripturae
tractatores, etc. S. Hierom and the rest of the writers on Scripture, all,
understand it not of others, but of Kings. Yea* lastly from their own Writers,
Caietan, and Geneb^ard, who themselves so apply it, upon this very place.

Nay, Princes only in Scripture have the title of Christi Domini.
Kings they will grant, (they can neither will, not choose;) But then they
would hemme in others like wise, to entercommon in the Title, as the Pope, as
the Cardinals, and as any else, save them that be indeed. But that, they must
do then without book: For, in this Book warrant have they none. For this
term [ Christi Domini] here, originally ascribed to the Patriarchs, is ever
afterward, without variation, continually appropriate to Kings, and to Kings
only, all the Bible through. The question is, whether we will speak, as the
holy Ghost does, or no? If we will, then upon a just survey taken of all the
places, where the word Christus Domini is to be found in Scripture, three and
thirty they be in number. Of which, one only is in the New, Luc. 2. 26.
and that is of our Savior himself: The rest, all in the Old. Four times by
GOD, Mine Anointed; Six times to GOD, Thine anointed: Ten times of GOD, His
Anointed: Twelve times in terms terminant, GODS Anointed. Of which, twice it
is said of the Patriarchs; Verse 15.
Here, and in the 105. Psalm (which two places are indeed but one.) All the
rest are said either of Christ, or of Kings, all* and never applied to any
other, but to them only. And here we join issue: If to any other the
Scripture apply Christos Domini, we yield: If to none but them, we carry it.
For, what reason have we, if the Scripture appropriate it to them, and none
but them; to take it from them, and give it to others, to whom the holy Ghost
never gave it?

Yet have I no meaning to deny, Though other persons anointed, yet none called
the Lords anointed.
but that others, not only persons, but (if they will) even things too, were
anointed under the Law. Persons, as Priests and Prophets: Things, as the
Tabernacle, and all the vessels of it, even to the very fireforkes, ashpans and
snuffers. But though they were so, yet none of the things, nay nor any of the
persons, have ever the name given them, of Christus Domini. No Prophet, of all
the fellowship of the Prophets, no Priest, no not the high Priest himself,
ever so called. It may be, Anointed, but not the Lords Anointed: it may be
vncti, but not Christi: or, in a corner of one Chapter of the Maccab. [
Christi] once, but not with his full Christendom, not Christi Domini. Still
they fall short: and Christus Domini follows the King, and him only.

Yea, this ye shall observe in their own old Translator: that the same word
in Hebrewe and Greek, when he speaks of the Priest, he ever turns it
vnctus; when of the King, Christus ever: as if of purpose he meant by this
word, to make a partition between them. Any will think there was surely meant
them some special prerogative more then the rest: that from the rest it is
given them, and ever to them, and to none of the rest.

We may well conclude this point then with the Apostle: Heb. 1. 4, 5.
They are made so much the more excellent then the rest, by how much they have
obtained a more excellent name then the rest. For unto which of all the rest at
any time said he, Thou are mine Anointed? Enough, to settle this term upon
Kings. The Holy Ghost attributes it to them, and none but them. We to
understand it of them, and none but them. It is, and so let it be, their own
due style, their proper denomination. Touch not mine Anointed. Who be they? If
we go by the book, Princes: why then, Touch not Princes.

Christos meos, who they be, we see. Meo^, the claim whose they be.
But in these words (we said) there are not only the parties, whom they should
not: but the reason why they should not touch them. And not one reason, but two
at the least. Now then, let us take the words in sunder, and weigh either by it
self, seeing either word is a reason de non tangendo. First, whose they be:
His, Meos. Then what of His: His anointed. And His anointed, is Christiei^s:
Which (it may be) will amount to two reasons more. Meos is his claim:
Christos his character, or special mark.

Meos, his claim: which word is not ^lightly to be passed by. It is to the
purpose. To claim, is to touch. He that says, Meos, he that claims them,
touches them: touches their freehold (as we say.) He that says, Touch them
not, Lay no title to them.
says, Claim them not. Some question there is grown whose they be. Two
claims there are put in, and laid to them, besides. Meos, says the Pope: and
Meos, say some for the people: but neither say true: God, he says Christos
meos, and He only has the right so to say.

Meos, says the Pope. For he, or some by his Commission, Meos, the Popes
claim.
used to anoint the Emperors, and because he was master of the Ceremony, he
would be master of the substance too: and his they were. The Pope, he was Gods,
and they were his anointed, and of him had their dependence, and he to depose
them and to dispose of them, and to do with his own what he list. And this
claim, is not yet given over. For he that shall mark the Popes faintness,
when some Kings are sought to be touched, Nay, are touched indeed; out of his
Meos, will easily think he is well enough content they be touched, though
they be GODS Anointed, if they be not His too: Touch not his: Not His: as for
others, it skilleth not, touch them, who will.

But this claim by the Ceremony, is clean marred, by this Text: for when
these words here were spoken, there was no such Ceremony instituted, it was
Nonens, no such thing then in rerum natura. That came not up, till Moses: Now
these here in the Text, were in their graves long before Moses was borne; No
Meos then; no claim by the Ceremony.

And after it came up, no Priest went out Jury to Persia to carry the Ceremony
to Cyrus: yet, Esai 45. 1.
of him, says Esaias, Haec dicit Dominus, Cyro Christo meo, Thus says the Lord,
to Cyrus mine Anointed, and yet never came there any oil upon his head. So
that even after it was taken up, yet the Ceremony, and the claim by it, would
not hold. The truth is, the Ceremony does not any thing; only declares what
is done. The party was before, as much as he is after it; only by it is
declared to be, that he was before, and that which he should have been still,
though he had never so been declared. The truth may and does subsist, as
with the Ceremony, so without it. It may be retained, as with some it is, and
with us it is; and it may be spared, as it is with others: Spared, or retained,
all is one, no claim grows that way.

Samuel to Saul, by Sadoc to Solomon: yet they claimed nothing in the parties
they anointed, but called them still Gods, and never their own Anointed. They
knew no claim lay by it: Nay, if it had been a Sacrament, as it was but a
Ceremony; he that ministers the Sacrament, has no interest in the party by
it, but God alone; and then much less he that performs but a Ceremony, is
to plead any Meos. So that every way, this claim vanishes, of
Christi^Pontificis.

Now then, a second claim, an other Meos, Meos the peoples claim.
has of late begun to be buzzed of, as if they were Christi populi, and held
of them. And whatsoever the matter is, the Cardinal himself waxes very
earnest for Bellarmine.
It; (I think, because he sees the Popes arm grows short, and loath he
is, but that there should be still some hands to touch them;) He will not so
much, as give God leave to appoint Saul or David of himself, but he takes
upon him to suspend them both, until the people with their suffrage come in,
and ratify Gods doing.

But this claim likewise falls to the ground, even by this Verse: then must
we go mend our Text here. For if so: God was properly to have said, Nolite
tangere Christos vestros, Touch not your Anointed; for to the people he
speaks. And seeing it is to them he speaks; of all others Meos cannot be
theirs, unless we will gloss it thus, Meos (id est) non meos; Mine (that is)
none of mine, but your own. And then sure he should have done them some
wrong, to have forbid them to touch that, which was their own. The Pope says,
He can make Christum Dominum, Christ the Lord himself: if he could so do
indeed, it were not altogether unlike, he might make Christum Domini. But God
help, if the people fall to make Gods, or to make Christ's, i^ they shall take
Gods verse from him, Psalm. 82. 6.
and say, Nos diximus Dijestis, We have said, ye are Gods: yea, and Christ's
too, and change it, Thou should have no power unless it were, John 19. 11.
Data desuper, Given from above, says He, They, unless it were data desubter,
unless it were given you hence from beneath: then, must we go change all our
Texts that sound that way. Enough to let you see, they both ^laime that is none
of theirs, but Gods.

Gods right; That his Meos is the only true claim, Meos Gods claim.
that His only they be. Three times over, it is told us by Daniel in one
Chapter, Chap. 4. 14.
that the Kingdoms be Gods, Verse 22.
and that He gives them, Verse 29.
to whom He will, as having the sole property of them. And it is said there,
that This is, Verse 14.
Sententia vigilum, and Sermo Sanctorum. And, if it be Sententia vigilum, they
are scarce well awake, that think otherwise; And if it be Sermo Sanctorum,
they talk profanely, that speak otherwise. And this verily was the divinity
of the Primitive Church concerning Kings, which, of all, had least cause to
favor them, Cuius iussu nascuntur homines, ei^s iussu constituuntur Principes;
By whose appointment they be borne men; (and that is, neither by peoples, nor
by Popes) by his appointment, and no other, are they made Princes, Lib. 5.
says old Irenaeus. Inde illis potestas, vnde spiritus; Thence have they their
power, whence they have their breath, says Tertullian. Apol. page 675.
And that is from neither (I am sure) but from God alone.

His they be: for, His their Crown, Diadema Regis in manu Dei, Verse 3.
Esai 62. And, as if he saw a hand come from heaven with a Crown in it, so
speaks he in the 21. Psalm. Tu posuisti, Verse 4.
Thou have set a crown of pure gold upon his head. His, their scepter, or
rod: Virga Dei in manibus eius, Verse 9.
Gods rod in his hand, Verse 21.
Exodus 17. of Moses. His their throne, Sedebat Salomo^ in throno Dei, Solomon
sat upon Gods throne, 1. Chron. 29. Nay, long before, in the Law of Nature,
says Job, Reges in solio collocat in perpetuum: Job 36. 7.
He takes them by the hand, and places them in the Throne, and that in
perpetuum, there to sit, in themselves, and their succession for ever. His,
Psalm. 89. 21.
their Anointing: Oleo sancto meo, with mine holy oil: The anointing His,
therefore the Anointed. And if all these, Their Crown, their Scepter, their
Throne, their Anointing His; then His they be, Christi Domini. And of Christi
Domini, we shall show twelve fair evidences, in express terms, Gods
Anointed.. And ten more, we shall bring forth, with an Eius, a plain
reference to Him, His anointed. Christi Pontificis, Samuels or Sadocs
anointed: Christi populi, Judas or Isreal's anointed, non legitur, we shall not
find. His they be then.

Now infer. His, therefore hand off, what have you to do with that is none
of yours? what to claim or to touch, that is His? Nolite tangere m^os: This
only, and no more but this, in very equity were enough, Touch not mine. This
for Meos: Now to Vnctos.

His then: but, Anointed. Vncti.
not as All are, by a general tenure; but His, as his Anointed, by a more
special and particular kind of interest. His Anointed, is more then His, for
all His are not anointed: for if all were anointed, there should be none left
to touch them: we might strike out this verse, the charge were in vain, there
were none to receive it. If all be Vncti, where should be Tangentes? We must
then, needs leave a difference between Christiani and Christi* For, holding,
all that are Christians, all Gods people Anointed and holy alike; it will
follow, why should Moses then, Number. 16. 3.
or any take upon him to be their Superior? and so we fall into the old
contradiction of Core: which is all one with the new paritie, and confusion of
the Anabaptists, Jude 11.
or those that prick fast toward them.

But the very Ceremony it self serves to show, somewhat is added to them,
by which they be His, after a more peculiar manner then the rest, to whom that
is not added. Oil it self designeth Souereigntie: power together water, wine,
vinegar, what liquor you will, oil will be uppermost: And that is added by
their anointing. Besides then, this general claim Mine, here is his special
signature, Anointed, whereby they are severed from the rest. His hand has
touched them with his anointing, that no other hand might touch them. Things
anointed, of our selves we forbear to touch; but specially, if the anointing
have the nature of a mark, that we wrong it not: And this has so, these are
so marked, that we might forbear them. And yet more specially, if we have a
Ca^eat, not to do it, as here we have. Nolite tangere vnctos, Touch not them
that I have anointed.

This were all, if it were but, Anointed: Anointed, yet not Vncti, but Christi,
which is more.
but, there is yet a further matter then all this: For it is not Vnctos, but
Christos meos: We read it, Mine Anointed, In the Hebrew, Greek and Latin,
it is more full. In Hebrew, my Messiah's; in Greek and Latin, Christos mios,
that is, my Christ's, which is far more forcible. Somewhat, we may be sure
was in it, that all the old writers uniformly forbore to turn it Vnctos,
which is enough for Anointed, and all have agreed to turn it Christos, that
is, Christ's, which is a great deal more. It seems, they meant not to take a
grain from this charge but to give it his full weight. And it cannot but weigh
much, with all that shall weigh this one point well, that Princes are taken
into the society of Gods Name, in the Psalm before, Psalm. 82. 6.
and here now, into the society of Christ's name, in this: and so made
Synonymi, both with God, and with Christ, specially since God himself it is,
that so styles them: for he flatters not (we are sure.) God himself is a
King, Psalm. 47. 8.
King of all the earth, and Christ is his heir of all, as appears by his
many Crowns on his head, Apoca. 19. 22. Those whom God and Christ vouchsafe to
take into the charge of any their kingdoms, them, they vouchsafe their own
names, of God and of Christ. They two, the first Kings, to these other the
after Kings ruling under them, and in their names.

A third graduall reason then there rises here. Anointed not with every
ointment, but with holy, and so, Sacri.
All Anointed are not Christi: for all Anointing is not Chrisme. Chrisme is not
every common, but an holy Anointing, a sacred signature. Psalm. 89. 21.
Oleo sancto meo, with mine Holy oil have I Anointed them. Meo, to make them
His: Sancto, to make them sacred. He might have taken this oil out of the
Apothecaries shop, or the merchants warehouse: He did not, but from the
Sanctuary it self, to show their calling is sacred, sacred as any, even the
best of them all. From whence the Priests have theirs, thence, and from no
other place the King has his; from the Sanctuary both. The anointing, is one
and the same. All, to show that sacred is the office, whereunto they designed,
sacred the power wherewith they endued, sacred the persons whereto it applied.
And for such were they held all the Primitive Church through. Their writ, Sacri
apices: Their word, Diualis iussio: Their presence, Sacra vestigia: (the usual
style of the Councels, when they spoke of them.) And when they ceased to know
themselves for his, (that here says Meos) and to hold of Him, then lost they
their holiness. He that took from them the one, took to himself the other.
Now then, will ye infer? Holy they be, their Anointing hallowed: therefore
Nolite tangere sacros, Exodus 19. 12.
Touch not mine holy ones. Heb. 12. 20.
No more touch Moses then the holy Mount, which neither man nor beast might
touch upon pain of death: No more touch David, then the holy Arc. It is not
good touching of holy things. In the 13. chap. before, Vzza so found it. Verse
10.


And yet still me thinks we fall short: Anointed not with every holy oil, but
with a special above the rest, and so Christi.
for it is not Sanctos neither, it is more then Sanctos, it is Christos: In
which word, there is more then in Commune Sanctorum. Omnes Sancti non sunt
Christi; at Reges, Christi. We cannot say of all Saints they be Christ's, Of
Kings we may; Verily, every degree of holiness, will not make a Synonymie with
Christ. He was Anointed, says the Psalm, Oleo exultationis supra socios,
Psalm. 45. 8.
with an holy oil, or chrisme above his fellows. To hold this name then of
Christos Domini, it is not every ordinary holiness will serve, but a special,
and extraordinary degree of it above the rest, which they are to participate,
and so do, from Christ whose name they bear, eminent above others, that carry
not that name; as if they did in some kind of measure partake Chrisma Christi,
even such chrisme as wherewith Christ is Anointed. And, the inference of this
point, and the meaning of this style of Dij and Christi is, as if he would have
us, with a kind of analogy, as careful in a manner to forbear touching
them, as we would be to touch GOD, or the Son of GOD Christ himself. It is
not then Meos, nor vnctos meos, nor Sanctos meos only; but it is Christos
meos, Mine, and that Anointed, Anointed with holy Oil: So Anointed, and with
Oil so holy, as it raises them to the honor of the denomination of the Holy
of holies, Christ himself. These four degrees, and from them these four
several reasons, are in Christos meos.

One thing more of Christos meos: What this Anointing is.
For I should do you wrong certainly, if I should slip by it, and not tell you
what this Anointing is, and leave a point loose, that needs most of all to be
touched. Upon misconceiuing of this point, some have fallen into a fancy, His
Anointed may forfeit their tenure, and so cease to be His, and their anointing
dry up, or be wiped off, and so kings be vnchristed, and cease to be Christi
Domini, and then, who that will, may touch them.

They that have been scribbling about Kings matters of late, and touching them
with their pens, have been foully mistaken in this point. Because,
anointing in Scripture does otherwhile betoken, some Spiritual grace; they
pick upon that, upon that taking of the word, and then, anointing it must
needs be some grace, some gratia gratum faciens, making them religious and good
Catholics, or some gratia gratis data, making them able or apt for to
govern. So that, if he will not hear a Mass, no Catholic, no Anointed. If
after he is anointed, he grow defective, (to speak their own language)
prove a Tyrant, fall to favor Heretics, his anointing may be wiped off, or
scraped off; and then, you may write a book De iusta abdicatione, make a holy
league, touch him, or blow him up as ye list. This has cost Christendom
dear: It is a dangerous sore, a Noli me tangere; take heed of it, touch it not.

Before I tell you what it is, I may safely tell you, that this it is not. It
is not religion, nor virtue, It is no spiritual grace.
nor any Spiritual grace, this Royal Anointing Christus Domini is said not
only of Josias, a King truly religious, by Jeremy; Lam. 4. 20.
but of Cyrus a mere Heathen, by Esai; Esai. 45. 1.
not only of David a good King, but of Saul a tyrant, 2. Sam. 19. 21.
eue^ then when he was at the worst. 1. Sam. 26. 9.
Religion then is not it, for then Cyrus had not been; nor Virtue is not it,
(especially the virtue of clemency) for then Saul had not been Gods Anointed.
If it were Religion, if, that, made Kings; then had there been of old no Kings,
but those of Judah: and now, no Kings but those that be Christen. But by Cyrus
case we see, one may be Christus Domini, and yet no Christian.

Among Christen, if the orthodox truth were it; Constantius, Valens,
Valentinian the younger, Anastatius, Justinian, Heraclius, I know not how many,
had been no Emperors; yet all so acknowledged, by the Christians of their
times.

The^ if Religion make them not, Heresy will not unmake them. What speak I of
Heresy? Harder is the case of Apostasy, yea hardest of all: yet, when Julian
from a Christian, fell away to be a flat Pag^n, his anointing held, no
Christian ever sought, no Bishop ever taught to touch him. And it was not quia
deera ^t vires, that their hand was too short; it is well known, far the
greater part of his Army were Christians, and could have done it, as appeared
instantly upon his death, by their acclamations to Iouian his Successor,
Christiani sumus.

Will ye see it in the Patriarchs? These i^ the Psalme^heere, were holy and
good men. But, twelve Patriarchs there were presently after, of whom, Genesis 49.
5, 6, 7 and 35. 22. and 38. 16. and 49. 14.
Simeon and Leui, were two very Tyrants; Reuben, scarce honest; nor Judah no
better then he should; Iss^char by his blessing, should seem none of the
wisest, (as it might be Roboam:) yet were they numbered with the twelve, and
were Patriarchs still, no less then the other.

And after the Patriarchs, Saul the first king (that there might be no
mistaking) with his anointing, there came no grace to him. The Spirit of God
came indeed upon him, but he was anointed, and gone from Samuel first: 1. Sam.
10. 9, 10.
And the same Spirit as it came, so it went, and left him afterward: 1. Sam.
16. 14.
and Gods Anointed he was before it came, and Gods Anointed he remained after
it was gone again, and that no less then before, and is so termed by David
ten times at the least.

Vnxit in Regem, Royal unction gives no grace, It is I^s regnandi.
but a just title only, in Regem, to be King: that is all, and no more. It is
the administration to govern, not the gift to govern well: the right of
ruling, not the ruling right. It includes nothing but a due title, it excludes
nothing but usurpation. Who is Anointed? On whom the right rests. Who is
inunctus? He that has it not. Genesis 10. 9.
Suppose Nimrod, who cared for no anointing, thrust himself in, and by
violence usurped the Throne, came in rather like one steeped in vinegar, then
anointed with oil, rather as a Ranger over a Forest, then a Father over a
family. He was no anointed, nor any that so comes in. But on the other side,
David, or he that first begins a royal race, is as the head; on him is that
right of ruling first shed; from him it runs down to the next; and so still,
even to the lowest borders of his lawful issue. Remember Job, Reges in solio
collocat in perpetuum. It is for ever. Job 36. 7.
Gods claim never forfeits: His character never to be wiped out, or scraped
out, nor Kings loose their right, no more then Patriarchs did their fatherhood.

Not, but that it were to be wished, both Anointings might go together, and
that there might go, as there does, a fragrant odor from the precious
ointment which is shed upon them, at their Crowning: so a like sent from their
Virtues: and they no less venerable for their qualities, then for their
callings; and happy the people, qui currunt in odore vnguentorum Principis sui,
Cant. 1. 4.
that can trace their Prince by such a savor; This we are to wish for, and
pray for daily, and use all good means it may be. But, if it be not, ever hold
this, Allegiance is not due to him, because he is virtuous, religious or wise,
but, because he is Christus Domini. Let this be still in your mind; GOD says
not, Touch him not, He is a good Catholic, or, endued with this virtue, or
that: Touch him not, He deserves well, or at least does no harm. No, these
would ^aile he saw, or be said to fail, though they failed not; We should
never then have done, never have been quiet. But, this he says, He is mine
Anointed. Mark that well, GOD gives no other reason here, nor David after, in
as evil a Prince as might be. That is the true reason then, and we to rest in
it, and let other fancies go.

NOw, by whose appointment they be set, by his Commandment they be ^enced;
Tangere, the Act forbidden.
Fenced from touching, and that is the lightest, and l^ast; consequently from
whatsoever is greater or worse. What talk you of Non occides, or Ne perdas? I
tell you, Ne tangas, Touch them not.

Yet, are we not so sillily to understand it, as if one might not touch them at
all, not for their good: For how can they be Anointed, but they must be
touched? No, the Verse before tells us, it is for their hurt, this touch is
forbidden. Non permi^it nocere. He suffered no man to do them hurt, to that
end saying, Touch them not. Yea, the very word it self, without any gloss,
gives as much, which is (...) properly plaga, and that is, tactus noxius, a
hurtful touch, that leaves a mark behind it, Qui tangit and angit, as the
Verse is. For, it is good ye understand, this phrase is taken from the Devil:
and good reason: for whosesoeuer the fingers be, his the touch is, when GODS
Anointed are touched. Job. 1. 11. and 2. 5.
He calls it but touching Job, but touching, when he did him all the
mischief he could devise. And his nature, and the nature of hurtful things,
is well set out by it. Few things are so good, vt in tran^itu prosint, as they
only touch, and do good: Evil is far more operative, if it but touch and
away, if it but blow, or breathe upon any, it is found to do mischief enough.

To speak then of this touching, The extent of Tangere, how many ways touch.
and the extent of it. Where the Scripture distinguishes not, neither do we:
but let the word have his full latitude. Nolite tangere is general, no kind is
limited: then, not to touch any manner of way.

touch, but that with the fingers end, immediate. The mediate, with a knife or
with a Pistol, that is a touch: if we touch that whereby they are touched, it
is all one.

Again, be the touch so as we feel it, or be it by means insensible, as of
poison, or ^orcerie, it is a touch still, and these no less guilty: no less?
nay a great deal more, as the more dangerous of the twain. One shall be
touched and know not how, when, or by whom Deuteronomy. 27. 24.
Cursed be he, that smites his neighbor secretly, says the Law. His
neighbor? much more his Prince, between which two there is as great a
distance, as between Non occides, and Non tanges. In a word, as it is the
lightest, so it is the largest term he could choose. For non est actio nisi
per contactum, says the Philosopher. Nothing can be done, but a touch there
is, some touch, superficial, or vertual, immediate or mediate, cominus or
eminus, open or privy, and all come under tangere. For it is not Nolite sic
tangere, touch not this way or that: but, Nolite tangere, touch not any way at
all, let nothing be done at all, to do them hurt.

And is there no touch, but that of the violent The virulent tongue, does not
that touch too? and the pestilent pen as ill as both? Venite, percutiamus eum
lingua, Ier. I8. I8.
sa^ they in Jeremy, Come, let us smite him with the tongue. If smite him,
then touch him (I am sure.) There is (says Solomon) Prou. I2. I8.
that speaks (and is there not also that writes?) words, like the pricking
of a sword. Et qui, quos Deus vngit, eos pungit, comes not he, within the
compass of this charge? Yes, they be Satan's weapons both tongues and pens,
have their points and their edges: their points, and prick like a sword; their
edges, and cut like a razor; both touch, and with the worst touch that is,
tactus dolor cordis: therefore the worst, because of the best part. These, it
is Gods meaning to restrain* You may see it by the verse before: Non dimisit
hominem calumniari, saying, Nolite tangere. So that even calumnia, is a touch.
You may see it exemplarily, in the Patriarchs: One of Gods Nolite tangere's was
to Laban touching Jacob, and this it was: Genesis 31. ^4.
Vide ne quid loquare duriu^: See you give him no ill language, no foul
words, for they touch too: Touch him not so. As well to Shimeis tongue, as to
^acobs hand, is this Nolite tangere spoken.

touch with the foot? the foot of pride upon the necks or Crowns of Emperors
(though no cricke or bodily pain ensued?) Will not Nolite tangere, reach to
Nolite calcare? Yes certainly; This Nolite tangere, was a stronger Text
against it, then Super aspidem and Basiliscum, was a Text for it.

touch, void of the reverence, that is due to them, laeditur pietas, duty
takes hurt, and wrong is offered to his Anointed. Mary Magdalen was not about
to have done our Savior any harm, when after his resurrection she offered to
touch him; only because she did it as to one mortal (where the case was
altered now) and not with the high reverence pertaining to his glorified
estate, she heard, and heard justly, Noli me tangere. The touch which any way
impeacheth the high honor of their Anointing, Nolite tangere, takes hold of
that too.

Touch them not, Not them. And when Not them, The extent of Christos, how many
ways they touched.
mean we their persons only, and not their States? Are not they touched,
when those are wronged? They that touch their Crown and dignity, their
Regalia, shall we say they touch them not? Yes, no less, nay rather more.
For, then the Anointed are properly touched, when their Anointing is, and that
is their State and Crown, as dear every way, and as precious to them, as
their life. Indeed touch one, and touch both. If their State hold not holy, no
more will their persons. It has ever been found, if their Crown once go,
their life tarrieth not long after. And even i^ this point also, it may safely
be said, that the loose and licencious touching their State, with Mary
Magdalens touch, without the regard due to it, as if it were a light matter,
that might be lifted with every finger, falls within the reach of this
Nolite; I list not dilate it, it would be looked to. These light and loose
touchings, are but the beginnings of greater evils.

Not them. Satan's motion was twofold: One, that he might touch that was Jobs:
The other, that touch himself: and in either of these, he reckoned that he
should touch him home. They are touched, when that is touched that is theirs.
It was so here directly: Pharaoh, one of them, to whom originally, nay the very
first of all, to whom this Nolite was spoken, touched not Abraham himself; it
was Sara was wronged: In Sara, was Abraham touched. So God esteemed it, and
gave his first Nolite tangere in that point. So, even unto Her wrong, does
this touch extend, takes in Her too, as being the one half, yea, one and the
same person with the Lords Anointed.

Not them. One more yet: For two kinds Anointed I find in Scripture: Saul, and
David: the one in esse, the other in fore: one in being, the other to be. If
David had been touched, (Saul yet living) though but Anointed to succeed, I
make no doubt, this Commandment had been broken: For we are bound by it, to
preserve the anointing, not only upon the head, but even in the streams,
running down from it: that with the King himself, the whole race Royal is
folded up in this word, every one of them in their order, that not one of them
is to be touched neither.

This bar then, is set to the touch every way, and to the touch of them, and
every of theirs, every way. But, there is a further matter yet: For, (if we
mark it well) it is not, Ne tangite, but Nolite tangere: Nolite, (that is)
have not so much as the will, once to go about it. So that, not only tactus,
the touch is forbidden, Nolite: The will forbidden.
but voluntas tangendi, the very will to do it: For that will is tactus
animae, the souls touch, the soul can touch no way but that. And Gods meaning
is absolute: neither body nor soul should touch, neither the body by deed,
nor the soul by will.

And Nolite stands first, begins the Text: for indeed with that, is the
right beginning: The Devil touches the will, before the hand ever touch Gods
Anointed: He does mittere in cor, put a will in the heart, before any do
mittere manum, put forth their hand to do it. Therefore, even velle tangere
was to be made a crime, and that a capital crime. And so it is: for, in the
attainder of the two Eunuchs, Verse 21.
E^th. 2. there was no more in the Indictment, but voluerunt, they would have
done it, they would have touched Ahashuerus: that being proved was enough, they
died, and died justly for the will, though no touch followed. Pity it should
be otherwise. He touches not always, that has a will to touch; has a will
to touch the throat, touches but a tooth: what though? To break Nolite,
voluit is enough; and voluit, he would have touched, at another place.

They that laid the Powder ready, and lighted the match, it was but voluerunt,
(as God would) it touched not any: but righteous and just was their execution,
to teach them, or others by them, Ne tangite, is not it: Nolite tangere is the
charge* and, if you break Nolite only, it is enough, though Tangere and i^,
never hap to meet.

Of which Nol^te, I hold it very pertinent to touch the extent also, as I did
even now of tangere, the touch it self, and of the persons, to whom i^ may
reach; The extent of Nolite to whom it reaches.
that we may see, it is true in the verse before, Non reliquit hominem, he
leaves not out a man, he exempts not any from it. I will not once speak
subjects, no question of them: over whom they are Anointed, them it touches
nearest, and binds them fast. But this I say, that forreiners, borne out of
their Allegiance, are within it. 2. Sam. 1. 9, 13.
The Amalekite was a stranger, none of Saul's lieges, borne out of his
dominions; yet died for saying he had touched Saul, and that shows that even
Aliens here, sortiuntur forum ratione delicti* and that they are i^tended,
within this Nolite.

Aliens as are in open hostility, even at that time, they are in Camp and in
Arms against a King, they are barred by this Nolite, and are to spare him. So
says David in his mourning song for Saul's death: 2. Sam. 1. 21.
He blames there the Philistims, as if they had done more then they might, in
so touching Saul, considering he was a King, with holy oil anointed, as if
they ought, even in that respect, to have spared him. So that this Nolite is a
Law of Nations, making their persons so sacred, as even in the battle they are
to be forborne, and their lives saved.

Touch not. The parties were Pharao King of Egypt, and the two Abimelechs kings
of Gerar, and even they in particular charged: Not to touch (for Pharao did
touch) not to will to touch, for Abimelech went no further. Kings not to touch
them, none but God to touch them: As if it were another law of nations, not one
King to touch another, but, by virtue of this Nolite, each to spare, and to
save the others life.

And the difference in religion makes to touch them though. Which is ad
erubescentiam nostram, 1. Cor. 6. 5.
to our shame, that heathen men, and Idolaters were kept from it by this
charge, and now (I will not say) Christians, but holy religious men, Friars,
and Priests, yea, and martyrs forsooth, will not be held in by it, but they
will be touching.

And last of all, this restraint of will and deed, it is not in the singular,
Noli, to this or that private man; it is in the plural, Nolite, and so
reaches to whole multitudes. Nolite, will serve even people and Countries, to
restrain them also. I wonder at it, It is Gods manner, to give his precepts in
the singular. Witness the whole Law, and all the ten Commandments in it. How
happens it, the number is here changed? Somewhat there is in that. He saw
multitudes might assay it as well as single men, and take liberty to
themselves, thinking to be privileged by their number. To make sure, he
puts it in a number that encloseth them too. For, be they many, or be they
few, Nolite will take them in all. So, neither Subject, nor Alien, nor Enemy,
nor King, nor People; nor one religion, nor other; nor one, nor many, Non
reliquit hominem, None left, none exempt, not any to touch them, not any, to
will to touch them. For with Nolite God touches the heart, and so many as God
touches their hearts, will have idem velle, and nolle, make His will, their
will, and will obey it. This is the sum of the Charge; Here is the Double
Fence, I spoke of. Touch not, By which he raises, as it were, an high wall
about them, that none may reach over to them. And then, with Nolite, diggeth
deep even in profundum cordis, the very depth of the heart, and casts a
trench there, and so they be double ^enced. Or you may (if you will) call them
the Cherubims two wings spread over His Anointed, to protect them. Touch not,
one wing; Nolite, the other, reaching as the Cherubims wings did, from one wall
to the other, covering them from all, that none may come any way to do them
hurt. And by this we see the full of this Text; We see it, but we are to feel
it also; and see whether the Text be whole, whether it be well kept, and have
taken no hurt.

The Charge is short, ye see; a Hemistichion, How this text is observed.
but half a verse; Touch not mine Anointed: four words only, and but six
syllables: One would think, it might well be carried away, and well be kept:
But, as short as it is, we see it is not though; For, the very Text is touched
and broken. And, I speak not of inferior touchings, that every tongue is
walking, and every pen busy, to touch them and their rights, which they are
to have, and their duties which they are to do; And if they do not, then I
know not what, nor themsel^es neither. This is too much, but I would it were
but this.

Hands have been busy of late, and that in another more dangerous manner. Two
fearful examples we have in two great Kings: one, no very long time since;
the other, very lately made away: not so far from us, but that they may, and
(I trust) do touch us. What shall I say? I would this were the worst.

Yea, I would this were the worst: for, this has happened in former times too.
This Psalm, he that indicted and set it, ( David) he living, Ishbosheth his
neighbor king was slain upon his bed. The like has happened then, broken it
has been, in former ages. But then, upon revenge, or ambition, or hope of
reward, or some other sinister respect; never, upon conscience, and religion,
till now. Nolite tangere, was still good Divinity, till now. The Text it self
never touched, The Text it self touched, and a Nolite given to it.
never taken by the throat before, and the contradictorie of it given in
charge, [ Touched they may be, Touch them notwithstanding:] Never books
written, to make men willing, to Gods Nolite before. Baanah, he upon hope of
reward, slew Ishbosheth: Bigthan, upon revenge, would have done the like to his
liege Lord. Zimri, upon ambition, slew his master. But, Religion came never
forth with the knife in her hand till now: a Kings life was never a Sacrifice
to expiate sin, before.

And will ye but consider the great odds betwixt those Touchers, and these of
la^e? multis (you know the Book) it finds many to justify, nay to praise
it, Mariana page 54.
and immortalitate dignum iudicantibus, and think them worthy immortality,
for their worthy Act. Yea, write they not further? P^aeclare cum rebus humanis
ageretur, si multi; It were a merry world, Page 60.
if there would many ^o exercise their fingers, to keep them in ure. Anointed)
dare they not to say? Page 61.
This is salutaris c^gitatio, an wholesome meditation for them next their heart
to think, se ea condition vi^ere, they hue in that case and condition, vt non
solum iure, that they may not only be slain lawfully, sed cum laud, and
gloria perimi possunt; but to the praise and glory of them that shall do it.
How now! What is become of our Text? of Nolite tangere with these? Are we not
fallen into strange times, that men dare thus print, and publish, yea even
praedicare peccatum suum, preach and proclaim their sins, even these
sinful, and shameful positions, to the eyes and ears of the whole world?
whereby, Gods Anointed are endangered, men's souls are poisoned, Ch^istian
Religion is blasphemed, as a murderer of her own Kings, God in his Charge is
openly contradicted, and men made believe, they shall go to heaven, for breaking
Gods Commandments.

But now we have all great cause to rejoice. The Censure upon Mariana idle.
The book is condemned, if we may believe it. Whether condemned or no, that
we know not: this is too sure, eleven years ago, set out it was, and that
authorized, and so went eight whole years, by their own confession, and even
the whole eleven, for ought that we know. How went it forth so allowed at the
first? How went it so long uncontrolled? without an Index expurgatorius at
least.

But, now lately we have news, that some few years since, it was censured in
a privy Provincial Council. But, that was as strange a Censure, as ever was
heard of, a Censure sub silentio, kept close, and none knew of it but
themselves: fast or loose; Censure, or no Censure, as they pleased. If any such
censure were, why made they it not as public as their Approbation? The
Approbation the world sees: Their Censure we but hear of, and peradventure it
is but a tale, neither. Why came it never to light, till the deed was done, and
it was too late? Why heard we not Jacobs voice, till we had felt Esaus hands?
But, this is all they have to say for themselves: after so great a loss, this
we must be feign to take for payment.

But, I ask, is it condemned? Indeed no; but the matter so faintly carried, as
all they say, standing for good, he that will give the like attempt again, may.
For, what say they? An Usurper may be deposed; so they all agree. And is it not
in the power of Rome, to make an Vsurpe^* when it will? If he have no right, he
is an usurper: if he be lawfully deposed, his right is gone. If he but favor
Heretics, nay, though he favor them not, the Pope may depose him, Non ^oc
tempore, sed cum iudicabit expedire: and that done, he has no right, then is
he an usurper, and ye may touch him, or do with him what ye will.

What say they then further? A private man may not do it, by his own
authority. Not by his own, but may he by some other? Belike, some other then
there is, whereby he may. Authority then there is, and it may be given, and
when it is given him, he may do it. And so we are, where we were before. And
this is their condemning: indeed the condemnation of the world, if they love
darkness so well, as to be deluded by it.

First they will do it: will do it? have done it, touched, touched in the
highest degree, against Tangere. It may be against their wills; nay,
voluntary, have done it wittingly, and willingly, against Nolite. But, it may
be, repent themselves: Nor that; For, they give a charge, against this Charge,
willing men, and making men willing, to do flat against it, to touch* even the
Text, and break it, and spare not: by holding* They may be touched for all it.

What is then to be done of us? The Text if self to be preserved and kept
untouched.
The more bu^ie they, to suggest the devils motion, Mitte manum, and tange; The
more earnest we, to call on GODS Charge here, Nolite tangere Christos eius.
The more resolute they, to be touching; The more careful we, to look to
their fingers. The more they endeavor to break down this double Fence; the
more we to labor to strengthen it. How will that be? Our ^elues not to touch
them? I will not speak of that, for shame. I trust, GOD has so touched all
our hearts, as we detest the least thought that way. Never was any, truly
partaker of the inward Anointing of a Christian man, but he was ever fast and
firm to the royal Anointing. That, we will do: and that is not all; (I
trust) we will do more then so, even provide a Nolite tangere for the Text
too, keep that from touching, and that will keep GODS Anointed untouched:
Keep one, and keep both.

Three persons there be in the Text, By the three persons in the Text.
1. Gods Anointed themselves, touching whom it is given. 2. We all, Non
reliquit hominem, not leaving a man of us out, to whom it is given. and 3. He
that says, Meos, God that gives it. The two first, to do their parts toward
it, we to look to ours; and God will come in at his turn, and not fail with
his part, we may be sure.

Christos Domini, whom it touches: Gods Anointed.
that they would be touched with it, and not lay themselves open to this
touch, nor carelessly go where they may be within the reach, or fall into such
fingers, as tickle to be touching them: Not to put it upon, What shall be,
shall be. Non est bonae, and solidae fidei, sic omnia ad voluntatem Dei
refer, and ita adulari, ad vnumquemque dicendo, Nihil fieri fine iussione
eius, vt non intelligamus aliquid esse in nobis ipsis. It is Tertullian: and
most true it is, That it is neither good, nor sound divinity, in these cases,
to put all upon the will of God, and every one to flatter himself or others,
saying, Nothing can be done without God will, but to conceive aright, that
withal there is somewhat belongs to our part. Therefore subordinately to serve
Gods providence, with our own circumspect foresight and care, knowing, that
his providence does not always work by miracle. This day it did: every day
it will not do so. That He gives his Angels charge over them that tempt him
not, Psalm. 91. 11. matt. 4. 6.
that do not mittere se deorsum, cast themselves wilfully into danger. That
Baltazars days were numbered, Dan. 5. 26.
when he forgot his duty, not before. That he has indeed promised to save
his Anointed: Psalm. 20. 6.
but he promised S. Paul also his life, Acts 27. 30* 31
and all theirs with him in the ship, and that by an Angel: for all that, Paul
would not let the mariners go away with the boat, but cut the rope, and said,
If these tarry not in the ship, we cannot be saved, for all the Angels
promise. Let his Anointed say and do the like: keep your mariners about you in
the name of God, keep your selves with that state and guard, that is meet for
the Majesty of Princes: and think God says to you, Christi mei, nolite
tangi, Be you willing to keep your selves from being touched, and I for my
part, will not be behind.

This way only is now left them. Another way there was, that Gods Anointed
might not be touched; Exodus 19. 12.
To set li^ts about them, as about the holy Mount, that is, Laws, whereby,
(that desperate wretches might not touch Gods Anointed) Gods Anointed might
touch them first. Genesis 26. 11.
I find, Abimelech made a law to strengthen this Law of God, made a list about
this very Nolite, a law upon pain of Morte morietur. And this was wont to
keep them from approaching. But, if that which should give strength to the
law, and make it a law to the conscience, Divinity, if that be corrupted, if
it be a matter of the will, as appears by Nolite, and the will be made
wilful, (an horrible sin, being now become an heroical and holy act:)
these listes will not hold them, the law comes too late. For, if men grow
wilful, it is well known, Vitae alienae Dominus est, quisquis contemptor est
suae. And who would not be Contemptor suae, if he may be sure to be
Comprehensor aet^rnae? Then do but once persuade them, that for their touching
they shall straight go to heaven, and no Anointed shall ever stand before
them, Nolite is gone then: take order for Tangere how we can.

Our part then is, (and to us it is spoken, Nolite belong.) The Subject.
Every man in his place to do his best. They that are his Priests, by bowing
their knees daily, and lifting up their hands to God: They that in the place
of Counsel, by all the ways of wisdom: They that in the Seat of Justice,
by just and due execution: All, by all the means they can, hanc talem terris
auertere pestem, to devise and procure (if it may be) ne velint, that evil
disposed hands would not: but howsoever, ne possint, that they may not be able,
if they would to touch, His Anointed. It must be in part, by carrying a
continual eye, and keeping a continual watch over them; or a shorter way, by
remoouing them far enough off, that are in any likelihood to do it; and
those be such, as hold, Gods Anointed be tangibiles, and may be; nay in some
case, be tangendi, and ought to be touched.

God himself in Cores case and Dathans (who went about to touch Moses and
Aaron, Number. 16. 21, 24.
not in their persons, but estates only) shows us the best way: He gave
order, that a general Nolite tangere went out against them and theirs, that no
man should come near them, but all shun them and their company, as having them
in a general detestation. Gods course would be followed; that seeing their
consciences are ^eared, and they fear not Gods voice here from heaven, they
might feel the full measure of his vengeance upon earth, and might assure
themselves, upon the least discovery, of but a will to touch, but a will to
do that execrable Act, to incur an vniuer^all detestatison, to have all
rise against them, to have all the hatred of earth powered upon them and theirs,
to be the outcasts of the Commonwealth, and the Maranathas of the Church* yea,
they and their names for ever to be an abhorring to all flesh. Nothing in this
kind is too much: this way, if no way else, to keep them from it: which is less
then they should suffer; but all that we can do.

The best is, if we fail not in our duty* Anointed, God himself will join
with them.
can take perfect order against them; the Anointer can, can and will, as this
day he did. And the rather he will do it, in the time to come, if we turn to
him, to thank him for that is past. To him then let us turn, that he may take
the matter into his own hand. If his Nolite tangere will not prevail, his Nolo
tangi, will: and if he say, Nolo tangi, have they never so bent a will, do
what they can, they shall not (for their lives) be able to do them hurt.

Two points there be in this Charge, both expressed in the verse next before.
Non permisit, He suffered none to attempt it; sed corripuit, but them that did,
he put them to rebuke. Put to rebuke, we turn Corripuit; it is properly to
take up short, and that is, by a touch, or rather b^ a twitch. And so he has
ever done, and so he will ever do* Tangentes tangentur, or rather Tangentes
corripientur, if they touch, they shall be twitched, be taken short, and cut
short for it, (all the sort of them) Have been (I am sure.)

I begin with Corrip^it: By Corrip^it.
for that never fails: for sure God will not suffer His anointed; nor Christ,
His Synonymos, those of his name, to be touching for naught: if not his name
it self to be taken, neither those that bear it, to be touched in vain. And
there is nothing more kindly, then for them that will be touching, to be
touched themselves, and to be touched, home, in the same kind, themselves
thought to have touched others. You may see it in the first, in Ph^raoh, the
very first that touched the Patriarch Abr^ham. It is said, God touched him for
it, (and it is the very same word which God ^seth here in willing not to touch)
God touched him, and touched him tactibus maximis, with many a grievous touch:
were read, Genesis 12. 17.
plagued him with many plagues. And indeed he touches them so, that he
plagueth them that have been busy in this kind. Grievous are the touches
they are to^ched with here on earth; of Pincers red hot, and boiling Lead:
but, who knows the touches of the place, whither (being unrepentant) they
must needs go? which, besides that they are maximi, (in another manner of
(...) these here) are ^terni withal, and not ended in an hour or two, as
these are. Tactibus maximis tangentur, they shall be touched indeed thoroughly,
as the first was.

And look, as he began in the Patriarchs, so has he ever held on in His
Anointed, the kings that ensued. The first that ever touched his kings, 2. Sam.
4. 12.
Baana and Rechab, were touched for it: and cut shorter, both by the hands,
wherewith they touched, and the feet, wherewith they went about it. Ask the
rest, 1. Reg. 2. 46.
if it were good touching. Shimei touched but with the tongue; his neck was
touched with the swo^d. Ester 2. 23.
^igthan and Th^^ez said nothing, did nothing, but only with their will: their
necks were touched with the ha^^er, tactibus maximis, the greatest touch or
twitch that is here. And so (to make short) were all the rest, even to those two
that were this day put to a foul rebuke, and ^ut short in their going about
it. Besides the Cherubims wings then, to protect kings, here you have, in
Corripuit, the blade of a sword shaken, to keep the way to them.

But what comfort is it, if Corripuit come of the male factor, if he be cut
short, and if the King miscarie withal? Ba^^na and R^shab, they that killed
Ishbosheth, were cut short, shorter by the heads; but Ishbosheth, he died for
it. I confess, there is small comfort in Corripuit, unless Non permisit By
Non per^isit.
nocere, go withal; in shortening them, without saving His Anointed. And that
is our comfort, the comfort of this day, which we meet to give thanks for,
that both these went together, Non permisit nocere, and Corripuit, both.

YOu know, at the beginning I told you, besides that it is a Commandment, it
is also a Thanksgiving. The thanksgiving.
It is so, in that it is a verse of a Psalm, a Psalm of Halleluia, the first
Psalm, of Halleluia, of all the twenty.

Now in that he has placed this duty, Psalm. 119. 54.
his will is, men should come to it with pleasure, cheerfully, and as it
were singing. When we speak of it, we do it speculatiuely; when we sing
it, that would be with affection.

In that it is in the first Halleluia of all, it Anointed are the persons,
which (says the Apostle) Ante omnia, before all, we are to pray for: 1. Tim.
2. 1.
which (says the Prophet here) before all, we are to praise God for; for them,
and their keeping out of evil hands. Their safety we are to put in our first
Halleluia.

This Halleluia is a Psalm purposely for shows, Verse 1.
his Arc, and His Anointed are allied, and that no sooner is the Arc well
come home, but this Commandment goes forth straight from it, first of all,
before all other: That all may know, what account they were to make of this
duty, how high regard to have His Anointed in, in that the Arkes welfare and
theirs, are so in separably knit together. And indeed, experience has taught
it; They well settling of the Arc, depends much upon the safety of the Prince.

Verse 5. 42.
and of voice, to show, the preservation of Kings is a benefit extraordinary,
that requires so solemn a Thanksgiving:

iugiter coram Arca (that is) to be the ordinary Antheme of their daily
service; Verse 37.
to show, it is a duty perpetual, that needs so daily a remembrance, to
wit, the care of their preservation.

Nolite, that all the psalm was set to come to this verse; it is plain.
There be 29. verses more in the psalm it self, (it is the 105. Psalm.) But
as soon as ever they once come to this verse, all the rest, all the verses
following, are cut off; they go no further in the psalm, then till they come
to it; and then break off all those behind, and straight go to another
Psalm, (for this is all of the 105. and the next verse is the first of the 96.
psalm.) So that this verse, plainly was the end and vpshot of all the Psalm
besides.

OF this Verse then, of His Nolite tangere, and of His Nolo tangi, besides of a
^amous Non permisit nocere in this kind; this Day is a memorial to us; and to
all our posterity, even to the children yet unborn: In GODS Anointed, not
touched I cannot say, for touched he was, and more then touched: But, in the
touch, there is no great matter (we said,) but for the hurt; so that in the
end, not hurt, is as good, as not touched. As good, nay better, for a
Halleliuia. For, to be touched, as he was, and to take no hurt, is a greater
delivery far, then at all not to be touched. To go through the Red sea, and
not wet a thread: To have been in the furnace, and no sent of the fire; that is
the miracle. So, to have been touched, and taken by the throat, (that the mark
was to be seen, many days after;) To be thrust at and thrown down, as He
was, and yet no harm, ( Hic est potentia,) Here was the power, and here was
the mercy of GOD; Here it was certainly, and that so sensible, ye might even
touch it.

Halleluia first: and we to praise him, that when Nolite tangere, would not
serve in word, made Non permisit nocere to serve in deed: Came forth, first,
with non permisit nocere, as with his shield, and so shielded him, that He
suffered him not to take any hurt at all; Anointed the shield, made it
slippery, their hands slid off, their touch did him no harm. Non permisit, was
as His shield, that he brought forth to save Him. Corripuit eos, was his
sword, touched them with it, and twitched them for touching his Anointed,
touched them with Pharao's tactus maximi, that the marks of it will be seen
upon them and theirs, for ever.

For either of these severally, a several Halleluia: but especially, for not
seuering them, but letting them meet and go together, Eripuit, and Corripuit,
both jointly arm in arm. Not either alone, this, or that, Not, permisit
nocere, sed corripuit, suffered them to do hurt, but rebuked them: No, but Non
permisit, and corripuit, both, suffered them not to do any hurt; and rebuked
them, and cut them short too besides.

And this happy conjunction of these both, is it, which makes the special
increase of our thanks this year, more then the last, or any before. For
that, since, and very lately, GOD, that suffered not Him, has suffered some
other King, to be touched, as far as his life. True. He that did that
execrable act, Corripuit ^um, GOD touched him, touched him as he did the
Mountains, Tange montes, and fumigabunt, Psalm. I44. 5.
touched him, till he smoked again. What of that? In the mean time a great
Prince is fallen. But permisit nocere* He suffered the King to take hurt: And
as for non permisit nocere, GOD did not Him that ^auour.

Ours He did: And did it, for the manner, not without miracle, if we compare the
cases. For, He was then sitting in the midst of diverse his Nobles, No
likelihood, that any would come near Him, to offer but to touch Him: If he
did, there was odds, there would have been many a Non permisit, he should never
^aue been suffered to do it. One man, for all that, one, and no more, did it;
Diverse were near him; None of them, All of them kept Him not from his harm.
But Ours was all alone shut up, and so le^t as one forsaken; not many, nay not
any, no help at all, near him. And not one alone* and no more, but three
there were to touch Him: yet even then, even in that case, GOD non permisit
nocere, suffered not, not any of them, nor all of them, to touch Him, so as
they did him any hurt.

Non permisit, God showed himself more then marvelous: for, it was not, God
only suffered him not to be hurt; but miraculously he made, that of them that
came to break his Nolite, even of them, one, that was set, that was ready
armed to have touched, and to have hurt him; he, even that party, non
permisit, would not, did not suffer the other to do Him any hurt* sed
corripuit, but rebuked him, gave the noli tangere to the other, spoke this very
Text, and stayed his hand, that would have d^ne it. This was a Non permisit
indeed, worth a Halleluia, and after it, c^^me there at the least three other
Non permisits more. But I have presumed too much already: I will not enter
into them, but end.

The more they were, the more are we bound to magnify God, and to bless his
holy n^me, yearly, yea weekly, yea daily to sing our Halleluia of praise, and
thanks to him for this days Non permisit, and for this days Corripuit, ^or
them both. That, what he speaks in this Text, he made good upon this day:
Showed, He would not have His Anointed touched: Showed, He was displeased with
them, that did touch him: kept Him without hurt, and cut them short: shortened
their arms, they could do Him no harm, shortened their lives for attempting
to do it: scattered them first, in the imaginations of their hearts; and then
after, made them perish in that their wicked E^terprise: And has made this
Nolite, this Precept, to us, Psalm. 119. 54.
Praeceptum cantabile, a Precept P^alme-wise, that we may sing it to him.
There is another, in another place, of another dittie and tune, wherein, he
takes up a doleful complaint, Psalm. 89. 38, 44, 45.
thus: But thou have cast off thine Anointed, and art displeased with him. The
days of his life have thou shortened, and cast his Crown down to the ground.
With them indeed it is, Praeceptum flebile, but with us, Cantabile. Praise we
him for it.

And withal, pray we also, that as this day he did not, nor hitherto he has
not; so henceforth malignus ne tangat ^um, 1. John 5. 18.
the malignant wicked one may never touch Him: never may any have the will; or
if have the will, never have the power to do Him hurt: Suffer Him not to be
touched; or, if suffer Him to be touched, suffer not their touch to do him any
harm, no more then this day it did: Make all Nolentes, with His Nolite; if
not, come with his Non permisit, that he may ever be safe: and straight after,
with his Corripuit, that they may ever be taken short, that offer it. This day
he suffered them not: nor let him ever suffer any. This day he cut those
short; so may he ever do them all: And ever make this Statute, our Song, all
the days of our Pilgrimage. This is now the tenth year, and so these the
Decennalia of it: That as this day it is, so it may still be celebrated, from
ten years to ten years, many ten years more. Which God grant, etc.


