A Dialogue of Witches in foretime named Lot-tellers, and now commonly called
Sorcerers.

Wherein is declared breefely and effectually, what soever may be required,
touching that argument.

A treatise very profitable, by reason of the diverse and sundry opinions of
men in this question, and right necessary for Judges to understand, which sit
upon life and death.

Written in Latin by Lambertus Danaeus. And now translated into English.
Printed by R. W. 1575.

The chief Chapters of this whole disputation are these.
1 WHat this word Sorcerer signifies, and from whence it is derived. 2
Whether there be any Sorcerers, that is to say, of the kind of Satanicall,
or Devilish witches. 3 Upon what kind of things Sorcerers can exercise
their poisoning, to hurt them. 4 By what means, and after what sort Sorcerers
do intoxicate. 5 What punishment Sorcerers are worthy of. 6 Whether it be
lawful for a Christian man, to use the help of Sorcerers. 7 How a man may
beware of the hurting, and poisoning of Sorcerers.
TO THE READER greeting.
WHat, and how great the profit of this argument is, shall sufficiently
appear in the disputation. But that no man may think that I have written it
rather to please the fancy of curious wits, then of discreet persons: I may
truly protest this much (loving Reader) that but upon earnest entreaty of my
friends, and continual solicitation of diverse, I took this kind of writing
in hand. It contains no old wives tales, which if I had gathered together,
this treatise would have increased from a small to a great volome of fourtene
Books. Wherefore, it contains but only such matter as most credible
hystories do report, and the opinions of godly and learned writers: and
finally, what may be determined in this controversy, out of the express word
of God. They that shall read it, will confess with me, that this argument is
but new, and this place utterly left untouched by those that have written of
the illusions of Diuelles. In the mean while, gentle Reader, receive this
traueile in good part, which is written in thy behalf, and enjoy it to thy
commodity.

Farewell. Dated at Orleans upon Loyr, the Calendes of July. 1575.
A DIALOGVE OF Witches, whom commonly they call Sorcerers.
The Speakers. Anthony, and Theophilus. Anthony. THe news are strange,
Theophilus, which certain of late coming from Paris have told, how that
about three months since, there was almost an infinite number of Witches
taken in France, on whose offense the high Senate of Paris has already
pronounced judgment, and does daily sit upon that matter, as the sundry
malefactors apprehended are continually brought out of al provinces before
them. And that which is more strange, there is no order nor degree of men,
whereof there are not some noted for this crime, first of nobility, both men
and women, some also learned, and such as are famous, and in credit for their
knowledge. But what shall I speak of the unskillful common sort of people, as
husbandmen, Uyneyard keepers, sheapheards, ploughmen, artificers, and such
other like? of every age both young and old, amongst whom most certain it is,
that there are found witches, and Sorcerers well near innumera^le.


Theophil. It is something in deed that you say, Anthony, but it is not all,
forasmuch as certain men of credit have affirmed, that some also both lame and
impotent, as the blind, are found in this number: among whom one Honoratus, a
notorious f^llowe above the rest, was by sentence of the Senate of Paris
executed, of whom are wonderful matters reported, who also was one of the
fyftene score, or one of the College of the three hundred blind men. And
verily for my part, there is no need to confyrme me in this opinion, whereof
many do doubt, that there are Witches and Sorcerers, whereof I am sufficiently
persuaded, and now the rather with so substanciall and firm reasons (as I
hope) that who so shall understand the same, he will doubt thereof with him
self no longer, and moreover, am I fully satisfied herein, that there are
witches found in sundry parts of the world. For whosoever have trauayled not
only through this our country of France, but also other principal parts and
people of the world, have seen sundry accused, convicted, and condemned for
this offense. And that I may not run over all, the only Duchy of Sauoy has
so many swarms, felowships, and whole companyes of them, in so great number,
that by no means they can be rooted out, notwithstanding the severity of the
judges in that place in punishing, and their diligence in seeking, insomuch
that in one city, within one years space, fourscore are reported to have bin
put to death for the same fault.


Anthony. Surely, this is very strange which you tell.


Theophil. Nay, I will tell you another thing, and that more wonderful, how
there are certain of them grown unto such boldness and frenzy, that they dar^
profess plainly and openly, that if they could get any notable famous man to
their captain, they are so many in number, and of such power, that they durst
give open battle to any one king, against who^, by means of their art, they
hope as well to obtain the victory, as heretofore the Hunnes, by magical
incantations obtained the conquest over Sigisbertus ye French King, like as
Gregory bishop of Toures, and the French Historiographer, in his fourth book,
and 29. Chapter, reports it to have come to pass.


Anthony. But many do suppose it to be very fables, that any be termed
Witches or Sorcerers, and cannot persuade themselves that they can hurt any.
Wherefore they laugh at this your opinion, as not seeming to lean upon any
certain ground and reason.


Theophil. I am not ignorant thereof Anthony, and truly I remember when I
soiourned in Orleans upon Loire, that there was a man Witch, not only taken and
accused, but also after sufficient inquiry and lawful conviction of the
fault, by the magistrates of that city, was condemned, and appealed from
thence unto the high court of Paris. Which accusation the Senate would not
admit, but laughed at, and lightly regarded the crime, and in the end sent him
home as accused of a frivolous matter. Who continuing still his accustomed
wickedness, and having made away many with his poisonous sorceries, at length
by commandment of the magistrates of Orleans he was hanged.


Anthony. How then Theophilus, do you think there be any of the company of
witches which are called Sorcerers, and that they can intoxicate or poison men
or beasts, and that by any such devilish art and means as they confess, and
vaunt of?


Theoph. Truly Anthony I do think so, and if I thought that they were false or
feigned, I would not avouch the^ unto you: And perhaps, after that you have
heard with what arguments I am moved to believe them, you will easyly yield unto
my opinion.


Anthony. Are you at leisure to show me the same?


Theophil. Yea verily, and fully to resolve and satisfy you herein: I am also
ready to answer you unto any other questions that you shall demand.


Anthony. I much rejoice with my self that I find you so friendly toward me,
and I much desire, Theophilus, to hear these things of you. Howbeit yield
this much to the slownesse of my understanding, not to prevent me, but gently
and orderly to answer unto all things, as I shall require them.


Theophil. I will do so.


Anthony. And I am the more gladder that I have found the occasion to hear
and learn sumwhat of you, touching so necessary a matter, since this question
now a days is very much disputed upon: being almost no sort of men by whom it
is not tos^ed, but so diuers^y that almost they agree nothing together, while
some follow this and some that opinion, peremptorely determining of the same,
more often upon rashness of wit, then w^ight of reason. Moreover, the matter
being of no small account, I am aff^arde least if I should err in it, I might
be deceived through lack of skill in so profitable a question.


Theoph. I hold with your judgment, since I have seen sundry so doubtful and
uncertain in this behalf, that they have twice changed their opinion in one
day, and in the afternoon have bin of contrary judgment to that, which
themselves thought true in the morning. And I have seen some so ernest in
denying it, and so hard of belief for want of knowledge, that neither
sufficient witnesses, neither constant confessing of their own crime, and
acknowledging and detesting of the same by those that have bin convicted
thereof, could bring them from their erroneous mind, and in fine induce them
to believe that there are sorcerous witches. Wherefore I think it very
necessary to determine what is to be followed therein.


Anthony. I long therefore to hear your opinion. Howbeit such as came from
Paris and reported these tidinges unto us, showed us moreover yt a certain
Spanish Jesuit, named Maledonatus, a man as you perceive of evil name and as
bad luck, had disputed and entreated so curiously of all this whole argument,
that he had weried his hearers, were they never so desirous of these matters,
proposyng this theme openly, and publishing a Book, wherein he professes that
he will entreat of Deuilles.


Theophil. For my part, my friend Anthony, I first protest, that I will not at
all in this, though it be a profitable question, lay, as it were, forth unto
you the way unto these vain babbling proofs, and curious disputations: For
curiosity aryseth of vanity, and is the mother of debate and fruitless
toil, study, and business, and always worthyly condemned by good men, even as
it is written in the 18. Chapter, and the second verse of the Proverbs, A fool
shall not please him self in his understanding, but when his heart shall be
opened. But for this purpose I have entered into this matter, to the end I might
draw, if it were possible, this opinion out of the minds of many, whereby they
stand in denial, how that there are no Sorcerers at all, or that they can hurt
or destroy nothing. Wherefore such men do favor them, and are afraid if happily
they shall come into their hands, to condemn and punish them, although they be
manifestly co^uicted to be witches, and are proved by diabolical and
sorcerous arts to have done much mischief. Wherefore unless very necessity at
this present moved and urged me thereto* I would not utter one word touching
that point. For it behooves us to imitate the ancient Christians, who utterly
banished all kind of curious knowledge out of their scooles and assembles, and
threw their unprofitable books into the fire, which was done in s. Paul's
time in the lesser Asia, as it is mentioned by Saint Luke in the Acts, the
ix. Chapter, and xix. verse. And surely if we will confess the truth, there
be many far more profitable questions, and those more beseeming a Christian
man, howbeit peradventure not so plausible to the vain conceit of our
judgment, since we be al of this greedy desire, that we would reach above the
heavens, and search out all things that are beneath the bottom of hell.


Anthony. I perceive what it is that you mistrust, and with what fear you
begin to handle this matter, doubting least they which shall hear or read the
same, shall seem hereafter rather thereby to find or take occasion of farther
folly, then godliness: such I mean as they be which desire to hear these
things, not thereby the more to confirm themselves in the fear of God, and
submit themselves under his mighty hand, and with humble thanks and great
admiration of mind in respect of so good and gracious a God, to advance the
goodness of our heavenly father toward mankind, in that he preserves us
from the most dangerous and secret subtelties of the Devil and his members
the Sorcerers: but rather that there is a most large field thereby opened unto
them, wherein they may run and wander freely, far without ye true bounds
of faith, who well deserve to be accoumpted in the number of those, which
always seek, and never learn, always doubting, but never determining. The
second Epistle to Timothe, the third Chapter, and seventh verse.


Theoph. You say truth, friend Anthony, for there is nothing more dangerous
nor hurtful, then to give a fool occasion to continue in his folly, or a
curious fellow in curious quiddities. In this point therefore, friend
Anthony, I crave pardon of you, in that I declare perticularly, how many, and
what sorts of Devils there be, how they differ, what is their state, what
be their coolours, and of what humors they consist, finally, what dealinges
they have among themselves, and many such other trif^ing matters, which by them
is most exquisitely and diligently handled, which would be accounted of the
more subtle sort among the scholastical Doctors. For my part, surely I am not
accustomed willingly to dispute of devils, and their ministers the sorcerers,
whom I abhor and detest, notwithstanding, as most loathsome monsters, and
sauadge beasts. Neither will I have any society or league with them, and I
acknowledge, that through the benefit of almighty God, their arts and
practizes are so far known unto me, as we may only have understanding thereof
by the most holy word of god: That if any heathen man, or ye philosopher
Iamblicus with his monstrous religion, if Proclus, or if the could christian
Psellus, have waded any thing deeper into ye knowledge of these things, and
with more diligence sought out the secrets of devils, and written thereof, then
I do intend, I envy not at it, and I easyly yield unto them the knowledge of
such ugly matters, so that I may keep the knowledge of true godliness, and
daily increase therein, which is the only salvation of mankind, by which, as
Saint John says, in the seuententh Chapter, and third verse, we do know the
true God, and him whom he sent, Jesus Christ.


Anthony. Truly Theophilus, I do not wish to have ye knowledge of any such
things but after a modest sort, nether have I bin desirous of it otherwise: and
unless the present time, and the daily beating and handling of this question,
moved occasion to be something inquisitiue thereof, I would not at all meddle
with that kind of matter. For the earnest and greedy desire to hear of these
things, what else does it signify, but that they which inquire so much
thereafter, would feign also become witches and sorcerers them selves? Wherefore,
answer I pray you to such things as I shall demand, and so far as may be
understood, and decided by thauctoritie of that most excellent book, wherein
the word of God is contained.


Theoph. First I beseech almighty god* that he will give strength to my
understanding toward the accomplishing of the same, and that it may please him
to keep me within the precinct of his word, that I may not wander therefro.
For what other is our disputation like to be if we depart from that, then old
wives tales (which in this argument many men do follow) or out of Scylla to
fall into Charibdis, as the proverb says, that is to wit, in the end to fall
into mere mazes and labyrinthes of confusion and darkness? Sufficient proof
whereof let the writings be of the scoolemen and Doctors, and of others which
have written of that matter. For how diverse and variable are the schoolmen in
this only one question, namely, Whether the devil can work miracles, and create
new bodies, thereby to deceive men, forasmuch as we read how Scotus
disagreeth from Thomas therein, and Occanus from them both, and many mo one from
another, who notwithstanding proceeded all forth of one school? But go on
hardely, and demand of me what you please.


Anthony. First I would know of you what this word Sortiarius, a Sorcerer,
signifies, and from whence it is derived, seeing you term them also witches.


The first Chapter. What this word Sortiarius, a Sorcerer, signifies, and
from whence it first took beginning.
Theophilus. THis word Sortiarius, a sorcerer, doubtless is derived from the
more frequented Latin word Sortilegus, which the latins also confirmed unto
the imitation of the Greeks: for as these termed them (...), so likewise do
ye latins call them Sortilegi, that is to say, casters of lots, or tellers of
fortunes. But ye (...) be those who through devilish arts foretell things to
come, and Sortilegi also, be they who by revelation and conference with the
same Satan, by casting certain lottes, such as in the old time were huckle
bones or dyce, and now a days by an hearen bag, which will turn round at
the mumbling of certain superstitious words. The Frenchmen following the
accustomable propriety of their toongue, and by clipping shorter the word, out
of the latin Sortilegus, have made it Sorcier. The Hebrews in this deduction
of words have no affinity nor agreement either with the Gretians or Latins,
or with us Frenchmen: For those whom we term Sortiarij, Sorcerers, those
they call Chobarim, for that they put their mischeeuous practices in ure,
through sinister and secret craft. And it is not to be doubted, but that the
word Sortiarius is deryued of the more ancient word Sortilegus. Which by
what means it comes to pass, I will now declare. First it is evident, that
among the manifold causes whereupon men join and bind themselves to the
devil, this has bin the chiefest and most ancient, namely (such being the
vanity and curiosity of us al, eue^ of nature,) to knew things to come, and
to foretell them also to other. For there is none of us contented with his own
estate, but we strive al to reach unto the mysteries of God, supposing our
selves to have attained to the top of the most high predestination, if we get
any understanding in things to come, which are hid from other. This foolish
vanity when Satan perceived in all ages to reign in the hearts of me^, and that
they much desired to foreknowe what was to come, he omitted no diligence in
taking this occasion, thereby to curry favor with the^ to win their hearts, to
make them beholding unto him. Thus made he promise unto the^ that he would
perform that which they required, and that he would give them understanding
of things to come, if they would obey and harken unto him: which these vain,
mad, and curious men refused not to do. So that in conclusion, there was made
a most firm league and covenant between Satan and these greedy desirers to
know things to come, that he would tell them what should ensue, and they
should hereafter continue in bondage and slavery unto him. Thus first of al
sprang up these deuiners and sorcerers, which were the first men of all that
had any dealinges or frindship with the Devil, whereby afterward it came to
pass, ye whosoever were seruisable or addicted to Satan, were called by the
name which is well known and commune, that is* Sorcerers. Neither was there yet
ever any age yt wa^ted this wicked kind of Devilish deuiners, these practizes
and arts being reported to be of very ancient continuance found out, and
frequented almost ever since the first foundation of the world, and the
creation of man.


Anthony. How prove you that?


Theophil. First, by the express authority of Gods word, reciting this kind
of wickedness among the most ancient crimes of the world. For how ancient was
the art and devilish deuination of the Aegiptian Magicians, whereof mention is
made in the forty, and one and forty chapters of Genesis? Also Marcus
Varro, a man generally learned, and a most diligent searcher out of al
antiquities, shows how that these four kinds of deuinations have remained
since the first age of the world, continuing still in use, even unto his time.
For out of the four Element^ (...) this world, by which men were taught by
Satan, to pronounce of things to come, sprang forth the four kinds of
deuination, namely, Pyromantia, which is done by Fire, Aeromantia by the Air,
Hydromantia, by Water, and last of all Geomantia, whereby they gessed
foreknowledge of things to come, by the Earth, or out of the Earth. Other also
which came after, found out five kinds of deuination, or rather devised them.
But the holy scripture being far more certain and ancient then all these,
reckneth up sundry other kinds of devilish predictions, specially making
rehearsal of eight, howbeit therein it has not comprised them all. For it is
not possible to name any kind of creature, which men through suggestion of the
Devil have not abused to that purpose.


Anthony. Which be those eight kinds whereof, as you say, the holy Scripture
makes mention?


Theophil. I ad no more then truth is. For in Deuter. the.18. Chapter, the.10.
and.11. verse. Likewise in the.23. Chap^^^ of Leuiticus the.23. verse, There
are so many evidently distinguished and recited, in reciting whereof unto you,
I purpose not to ^ns^e the same order as they be there named, but to declare
them unto you as breefly and as plainly as I can.


Anthony. I pray you say on then.


Theophil. The first kind of day nable deuination, which may be gathered out
of the forenames places, takes name of those, which of the Hebrews are c^lled
Cosemim, and of the Latins Diui^^, deuinours. Those are they which by secret
and privy conference with the Di^ell* do divine and prophecy of things that
(...) happen, being of all others the most craftiest and s^btellest. For in any
ca^e they will not be des^ryed or known, ^isse^bling as though the^ came to
knowledge thereof by some wise coni^^ture, or by inspiration from God, and not
foret^lling what shall ^appen by any damnable doctrine, (...) covering their
secret enter^ourse which they have with the Devil. Whereupon it comes to
pass, that this word ^osemim, is taken in the Scripture in the better part,
for wise and skillful men, as it appears in the third Chapter of Esai. The
second kind of Deuinours, are called of y^ Hebrews Aobot, of the Latins or
rather Gretians, Lythomei, we Frenchmen suppose those men to be of that sort
which are thought to have of their own some domestical or familiar devil. The
same openly and without dissimulation do talk and confer with the Devil,
using him as it were a servant in fulfilling their commandments, so that
they be altogether conversant with him: And they were called Aobot, for yt
through instinct and motion of their Devil, they divine what shall follow,
yielding forth of their belly, as it were out of a pot or bottle, an obscure
confused voice, like as the Lhythomissa did out of the place of the Oracle at
Delphos, very lothsomely and horribly. The other six sorts of Deuination, do
in this point differ from the residue, that albeit they be accomplished by the
help and means of Satan, yet in these following Satan himself in person,
neither deals nor talks with them which do divine (as we said he does, in
the first twain) but by the mediation of some other thing, or else by using
certain signs and tokens, which notwithstanding he commands to be done,
and shows how to do them. The third kind of Deuinours, are they whom the
Latins term^ Necromantici, Necromancers, who by the dead by help and means of
the Devil, do desire to know things to come. Which kind, although most absurd
and impossible, was frequented in Homers time, whereof he makes mention in the
xi. book of his Odis^ea* Wherein although Satan bear all the stroke, yet
colors he his own name, therein working his feats under pretense, and by
means of some other person. The fourth kind, are those which of the Hebrews
are called Megonin, (from wh^^^^ perhaps the Magi or Magicians man seem to
have taken their name, howbeit those whom we call Magi are o^ another sort) and
of the latins Astrologians and Mathematicians. The same suppose that they can
foretell things to come, by observation of certain signs, places, and stars,
and by their position and aspectes, as they call them: Like as in foretyme the
Augures or Soothsayers of Room describing and dividing the air into certain
quarters and regions, gathered their profecies thereof, even as the Iudiciarie
Astrologians do at this day. The first kind, ye Hebricia^s name Menachesim,
and the Latins Magi, Magicians, who have also learned their deuination of the
Devil by certain figures, charecters, and lines d^awen, and by mumbling certain
superstitious words, touching the matter they enquire of. Thus practice they
their A^te, by certain secret signs and privy words, which their wicked
master the Devil has taught them. Such are the Hydromantij, or water
sorcerers, and of this sort was that deuination by a cup or pot, whereof
there is made mention in the.v. verse, of the xliiii. Chapter of Genesis. The
sixth kind, the Hebricians term Idegonim, and in Latin are called Ariolj,
which tell men what good fortune shall betide them. These promise to foretell
out of things that happen by chance, not sought or feigned by their own
industry, which nevertheless proceeds out of the same school of Satan.
Such are at this day dream readers, palmesters, taking upon them to tell
whatsoever shall chance by the deliniamen^s and lines of the hand: Such in
old time were the interpretours of lightning and Thunder, and such as
profesied by the intrayles of beasts offered in Sacrifice, or else of the
singing or feeding of Birds, who were also termed Extispues, intraill pri^rs,
and Osciues, that is, telling what shall come by ^^nging of byrds. These all
would seem to lean unto a probable conjecture, and not to depend upon any
vain superstition. The.vii. kind, ye Hebricia^s name Mecasephin, and the
latins call the^ Prestigiatores et Fascinat^^^s, yt is, iuglers and witches.
Th^se work by enchau^tme^ts and mere ligierd^main, deceuing ye eiesight, and
bewitch men, sem^ng to repr^se^t and show unto them such things as they
promise, and yet deceui^g the^: such were Pharaos enchau^ters, which are also
called by ye same name in the.vii. chap. and.xi. verse of Exodus. Finally,
ye.viii. and last kind of deuinours, are those which ye Hebrews call Chobarim.
Deuteron. the.18 chap. the.11. verse: the latins call the^ Sortilegi,
fortunetellers, which sometime in certain places meet with Satan, and work much
wickedness. Thus you see how ancient all these kinds of diuilish diuinors be,
and whence those which we call now Sortiarij sorcerers, proceeded, and were
first so named.


Anthony. But Theophilus, who so lists examine it to the uttermost, shall
perceive that there is very great difference between Sortilegi,
fortunetellers, and Sortiarij, sorcerers, even in their very usual and proper
significations. For I remember very well, when I was yet a child and went to
scoole, I learned of my master that they were called in Latin Sortilegi,
which did not hurt with any poison, but rather by casting certain lottes
gathered the event of future things, as namely with Beans, Dice, or square
sticks marked, or by some verse of a Poet not turned unto, but offering it self,
and read by chance, which as he wonted to report, happened once to ^eptimius
Seuerus Emperor of the Romans. For being in hand to usurp the Empire, and
desirous to know what should be the event of his attempt, he sought his lot out
of Virgil, where by chance he lighted upon this verse, which is in the sixth
book of Aeneidos, Remember Roman thou, thy Realms to rule with empire just:
as Lampridius writes in his life. But those whom we call Sorcerers, for the
more part do not divine, but only intoxicate and privily s^ea with poison,
being thereto instructed by Satanical arts: Yet if sometime they chance to
foretell things to come, they do it not by lottes, as they did in old time,
but only by the Devils revealing.


Theophil. These things which you tell Anthony, are most true, and in deed if
we will say the very truth, those whom we call Sorcerers, cannot be called
lottellers, but rather devilish witches, and enchaunters. But forasmuch as,
when they do any harm after such manner, they learn of the Devil to do it,
and have made a league and agreement with the devil, as the above named
Lottellers, and to be short, have wholly addicted them selves to Satan, like as
those Lottellers have* it is so come to pass, that the common sort of people,
not being very scrupulous or precise in words, do term al such, Lottellers
and Sorcerers, which by lots do tell things to come through instruc^ion of the
Devil, or such as kill men or beasts with poison or sorceries which the Devil
delivers unto them, because both sorts have given themselves over to Satan,
and use his help. Thus, of one part the whole kind took his name, and of one
word well known, the other was derived: So that the whole nation and rablement
of witches, that they might beecome more odious among m^n (as it is worthy)
were chiefly called by the name of Sorcerers. For so were they termed, after
that the gospel began to be known to the world, at which time the whole rabble
of Satanicall deuinours became very odious, (as it deserved,) among all men, as
it is declared the first of Sam. y^ xv. chapter, and xxiii. verse. Moreover in
the applying of this name, there is no purity or propriety of the latin
tongue to be looked for. For these witches began first at that time to be
called by the names of Sortilegi or Sortiarij, when the Goths invaded Italy,
and the propriety of the Latin tongue was wholly grown out of use. So that it
is thought that the Italians frequented this word first before all other in
that signification, when as Italy became barbarous, and not using more the
Latin tongue, which by the title De Sortilegis, in the Decretals, appears:
albeit S. Augustine seems to use it in some place, following the custom of
his time, and the signification known to the Christians. The same may also be
gathered out of the last Canon, three and th^^tie, the first question, where
though barbarously, yet plainly they be called Sortia^i^, ^orcerers: Otherwise
no man doubts that it is one thing to intoxicate a man, another thing to
inchaunte, another thing which the Grecians call (...), another (...), although
both be done by the craft of Devil. Through all the region of Sauoy and
Daulphin, witches are called Eryges, either of ye greek word Erynius which
signifies madness of mind, and a greedy desire to slay men: or rather as some
suppose of this word (...), which in the Poet ^heocritus, signifies certain
deadly, and unlucky birds.


Anthony. By what names then I pray you, did the ancient auctours of the pure
latin toongue, term these witches?


Theoph^l. They called men witches Maleficos, and the women that were given to
such arts, they termed Veneficas, Sagas, ^hessalas, Magas, ^amias, and
Striges, al which words may be observed out of the good and pure writer of
the Latin tongue, Horatius Flaccus in the first book of verses the xxvii.
Ode, in his ^podes the xvii. Ode, the first book of Sermons, the viii. satyr.
Such an one in his time was one ( Canidia: such an one was Circe, of whom Homer
writes in the tenth book of Odissea: such an one was Medea, of who^ Ovid
speaks in the seventh book of Metamorphosis. To be short, such an one was
she of whom Lucane writes in the sixth book of Pharsalidos, with many mo, of
whom mention is made in sundry histories: which writers last before cited,
although they be Poets, yet in this point feigned they or devised nothing
beside the truth, but such things as they saw were known, and frequented in
their time. But to pass over Poets, Caesar in the first book of the
commentaries of the French wars, makes mention of ye Germane Uirgines, and
Cornelius Tacitus in the second book of Chronacles mencioneth one Martinae,
which killed the Emperor Germanicus by such kind of witchcraft, and
intoxication.


Anth. Now do I understand, Theophilus, who are called sorcerers, and why they
so be called, and by what name they be properly termed, if we will speak true
latin. But forasmuch as we must follow the custom of the multitude, let us
call these devilish witches, Sorcerers, and their witchcraft, let us call
enchauntment, and them which by them are hurt, let us call enchaunted, that our
disputation may be understood of all men: concerning all which things, I
demand of you whether this sort of men were before ye nativity of Christ, or
whether they first began and came to knowledge since the passion of Christ?


Theophil. The word Sorcerer, was first found and invented since the birth of
Christ, but the thing it self, and those kind of witches, were known long
before the birth of Christ. Neither may you think, friend Anthony, that Christ
that came to destroy the works of the Devil, gave unto him more power over
men then he had before, or that these kinds of most detestable witchcraft were
before that time unknown, or else since that time were first brought into the
world: Such things can not be thought, much less spoken, without horrible
blasphemy against Christ. And if it should chance, that any were of that
opinion, he might be refuted with an argument more clear the^ noone light. For
both Moises, and also the whole old testament, (which was before the birth of
Christ) does bear most evident record, that there were witches, as in the
xviii. of Deuteronomy. and the xii. chapter of the book of wisdom. For Satan has
always bin like himself, and as we find him at this day, so all ages have
seen and fealt him, who inflamed, and enforced, the children of unbelief, to
revenge their private injuries, and one brother to commit unjust slaughter upon
another, because as S. John writes in the viii. chapter, and xliiii. verse, He
was a murderer from the beginning. And thus much touching the origina^l, and
understanding of this word Sortiarius, Sorcerer.


The second Chapter. Whether there be any Sorcerers, that is to say, of this
sort of satanicall witches.
Anthony. BUt you promised, Theophilus, that you would prove by sure and firm
reasons, that there are Sorcerers in the world, that is to say, of the order
and kind of devilish witches.


Theo. I promised in deed so to do, and I am ready, if it please you, to
perform the same.


Anthony. Do so then, for I could never think it to be so unto this present,
neither yet can believe it, unless you persuade me.


Theophil. I will do mine endeavor, for the foundacio^ whereof, this I say.
There are three only means and places to prove any thing, yea although it
seem altogether incredible, which three things be these: Authority of men,
experience of the thing, and reason founded upon upright judgment of mind,
which places will all confirm our opinion, not one only, although one were
sufficient. And first as touching authority, there are plain and evident
testimonies to be gathered out of holy scriptures, and also out of other
aucthours, most evidently co^firming, yt there are such kinds of witches in ye
world, which we call devilish sorcerers. Answer me, Anthony, do you agree
with the most holy word of God?


Anthony. God forbid, Theophilus, that I should disagree from the same.


Theop. Therein do you well: for as we are taught in the second Epistle of S.
Peter the first Chapter and xix. verse. The scripture, wherein the word of God
is contained, is the most sure light and truth, which is also inspired from
above, as witnesses S. Paul in the second Epistle to Timothe the third chapter
and xvi. verse, which notwithstanding the Atheistes of our age do despise, and
contemn.


Anthony. From those do I utterly disagree, Theophilus, and through the grace
of God, do I thoroughly believe and yield to that holy word.


Theophil. The same word of God (which you acknowledge and confess to be most
certain and most true) has confirmed, yt of ancient time there have bin of
this kind of Satanicall witches and Sorcerers, which declares sufficiently
that there are certain such witches. Look in the old testament in the xviii.
chapter of Deuteronomie, look in the xxvii. Chapter and ix. verse, of Jeremy,
upon which place Saint Jerome thus writes, And Malefici, which we may call
Witches, or such as obey the illusions of the devil, which are called in
the Hebrew tongue Cassaphim. Read^ Micheas the.v Chapter and.xii. verse, where
as such witches are joined with deuinours and Magicians. Read the.lviii.
Psalm, and the.viii. verse. Read Nahum the Prophet the.iii. Chapter and.iiii.
verse, and such other like plac^s. And if also you would have the same proved
unto you out of the new testament (which is the second part of holy Scripture.)
Read the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Galathians, the third Chapter, and
first verse. Likewise the.v. Chapter and.xx. verse, whereby the most approved
and best learned Interpretours, both old and new, do as it were by one
consent, agree, yt there be certain sorcerers, which by devilish means and
practizes, do hurt the minds, bodies, and lives of men.


Anthony. You have recited unto me very many places, which at leisure I will
read at home, and confer together.


Theophil. As touching other aucthours as well ecclesiastical as profane
writers, who so would recite them all, shall see they be infinite, proouing and
affirming, notwithstanding all of them, that there are certain sorcerers, of
which I think it not necessary to recite all, but only certain of them.


Anthony. You must study to be brief, and for my part I will be content with a
few.


Theophil. Of ecclesiastical writers, in number of whom I comprehend those
books of holy Scripture, which are called Apocryphi, I must first bring forth
for witness the book of Wisdom, the.xij. chap. and.iiij. verse. Because they
used fortune telling and vvitchcraft (says he, speaking of the Cananites) and
wicked sacrifices. Secondly, the counsel of Carthage, also the second of
Constantinople which was in Trullu^, the.lx. article: Whereas namely and plainly
mention is made of these kind of witches, and their wickedness is termed,
deadly witchcraft. Thirdly, I will bring forth Aurelius Augustine to witness,
chiefly in his CC. and.vij. sermon, of ye time which he makes, with great
affection against such kind of men, whom also he calls enchaunters: showing
how they work their f^ates by aid of the Devil, making some yt are in
health to be sick, and some that are sick to be whole. Moreover, ye same
August. in the.7 treatise upon ye gospel of s. John, does plainly accurse al
such which work by encha^tme^tz, bindings, and other strange means of our
enemy, which is the Devil, thereby hurting both men and other things. And
fourthly to conclude, Trithemius Abbot of Spanhem, has written and set forth
an whole book of ye same argument, wherein he answers unto those questions
which were propounded unto him by Maximilia^, emperor of ye Germans, great
grau^dfather unto him which lives at this present. What? besides this will you
hear Anthony, other testimonies of other men, yea laws themselves? There is an
au^cie^t and well known law of ye.12. tables, which punishid these witches, who
as was said could remove corn from one field into another, of which law Plynie
writes in ye 28. book of ye natural history, the.2. chap. Is there not also
another Roman law of less antiquity the^ ye laws of y^ 12. tables, called
Lex Cornelia, Vide ma nut. de leg. 237.
which co^de^neth and grievously punishes the same kind of people? Among ye
Emperors of Constantinople, Leo, in a certain co^stitution of his, which is ye
6^. does ye same. Finally Virgil, a man well seen in all kind of knowledge, both
in ye.3. Eclogue, and also in ye.8. testifies yt there are such: yt I may
ouerpas Troilus de Malueto, a great Lawier, and Martin Arlaeus a Divine, with
me, and those welnigh innumerable, which lived in later time, then the above
named, testifying al for a truth, that there are some of this kind of
detestable devilish witches. These be witnesses sufficient, or else I know not
what is sufficient.


Anthony, Yea surely, they be more witnesses then I would well de^ier. But gentle
Theophilus, I pray you put me out of this one doubt, which much troubles me.


Theophilus. What is that?


Anthony. This forsooth, for that S. Jerome, a man of no small account, in his
Commentaries upon ye Epistle of S. Paul to ye Galathians, the.iii. Chap. and
first verse, (which place you alleged erewhile, for confirmation of your
opinion) seems flatly to deny that Paul ever meant yt there were any
Sorcerers, notwithstanding that he writes thus: O ye foolish Galathians, who
has bewitched you? But therein S. Paul speaks according to the common
custom of men and vulgar opinion, not that he believed or knew that there
were any such at all.


Theophil. Truly Anthony you have perfectly recited without book ye m^aning
of S. Jerome, and surely at the first Jerome in deed seems to be of the same
opinion, but afterward upon the same he adds a another thing, and
straightwayes chau^geth his opinion, which that you may the better perceive, I
have here copied forth ye whole place. Bewitching (says saint Jerome) is
said properly to hurt infantes, and such as are but of tender years, and not
perfectly able to go alone. Whereupon a certain heathen writer has said, I
know not sure what eye bewitched has my tender Lambs. This whether it were
truly spoken or not, God knows. For it may be, that Diuell^ may be ready to
accomplish this wickedness, turning the^ away from their good workes^ whom
soever they see to beegin or to proceed in fulfilling the work of god. So that
this may be the cause that we suppose this example to have been taken, upon the
opinion of the common people. By which words it appears how doubtful and
uncertain that man was in this point, being also in some other places of the
same commentaries, very sharply and justly blamed: as namely by Augustine of s.
Paul's lie, yt no man may think it strange, if in this place he either did
amiss, or forgot himself. But admit y^ Jerome were of y^ opinion,
notwithstanding other no less grave and learned interpretours of ye place, do
write otherwise, and gather out of this place of S. Paul, yt there be
sorcerers. Of which opinion was Chrysostom, an approved writer, with others also
of later years. As for August. who in no respect is inferior to Iero^e, what
he has written, we have showed before.


Anthony. These do satisfy me, Theoph. neither require I any more men's
testimonies, but perform ye whch you promised, which is ye second proof of
your opinion. Teach me, I say, that it is found out by experience, yt there
are Sorcerers.


Theophil. You require of me but y^ which is due, and you remember every thing
in order, wherefore I will briefly comprise all in a word or two.


Anthony. Proceed then.


Theophil. Now, as concerning experience, and that most certain and true, thus
much I say, yt in all ages it has bin observed and found, y^ there has been
always some which have used this devilish art and means to entoxicate men.
For else, why should there have been laws written against the^, if there had
never bin any such at al? why should their punishments have been appointed? For
there are no laws set forth to repres any crimes yt are not. and there is one
selfsame judgment to be given by ye civil law, on things yt are not: as on
things yt appear not, as ye lawiers do teach. When ye question was demanded
of ye most wisest lawmaker of ye Athenia^s, Solon, why he wrote no laws
against such as slew their fathers: answered, that he thought yt there would
never be any such. So verily, both before ye birth of Christ, and also
sithence, has this kind of witches bin commonly abroad in ye world. And yt
they were before Christ, sufficiently and most faithfully y^ most holy man of
God Moses witnesses, who by co^maundment of God makes mention of the^ and
conde^neth the^, namely in Exodus ye.22. chap and.9. verse. In Leuit. the 19.
chap. and.31. verse: and likewise in the.20. chap. and.27. verse: In the book
of Nu^b. the.23. cha. the.28. verse: In Deu. ye.18 cha.. and.11. verse. Some
write y^ Zoroastes, a man of ye cu^try of Persia, a great Magicia^, and expert
in the iudiciarie Astrology, first of all men found and practiced witchcraft,
and afterward taught it to other, who were al of the^ Idolaters, as he was.
Now that there were also some of the same sort since ye incarnation of Christ,
infinite histories bear record, and the sundry reports of men in writing
touching the same, the sentences also of Judges given upon them are witnesses,
laws likewise and punishments published against the^ do bear record,
established as well by the Civil law as ye Canon, being at this day, both
whole Titles, and Rubrikes found written against that kind of crime, like as
appears in Gratianes Decree, causa.xxvi. quest. i.ii.iii.iiii. and. v.
Moreover, these sorts of witches have always been well known in our country
of France, which to be true, the innumerable acts of Parliament against the^
do testify, which many learned m^n have gathered together of ye mat^er. But
chiefly a certain famous and solemn co^demnatio^ of articles and opinions, made
by a Sorbonist of Paris, under Charles the.6. king of France, in the year of
our Lord.1398. makes much to the proof of our opinion: which opinions, the
scholars of ye university commonly professed in Paris. Yea, and has not this
our age seen many witches condemned of witchcraft?


Anthony. Can you show me the cause Theophil. why it should so be in our time?


Theophil. Truly it is the terrible judgment of God against us, the cause
whereof is unknown unto us: For the judgments of God, although they be hid
from us, yet are they just and holy, as it appears in the xxv. Psalm and x.
verse, most truly and godly in the like argument, and as S. Augustine says,
in his work of Deuinacion of Devils.


Anthony. How the^, has God any iuster cause to punish men in this our age,
the^ he had in foretime, three hundred years ago*


Theophil. Yea surely Anthony, greater then heretofore, how much the more the
world at this present does more shamefully, and obstinately reject the word
of God, and the revealed light thereof: For how much the more men do now a
days show themselves unthankful toward God: the more just cause God takes
to forsake them, and give them over unto Satan, to revenge the contempt of his
name. So that in these days, wherein is seen a most grievous and pitiefull
rebellion of men against Gods true doctrine, Satan has received ye power from
God to allure the^ unto him, and to sifte them, and there is given unto him the
very effect and force of error to deceive, intrappe, and lead away many, as
the spirit of God has long since witnessed it should be, in the second to
the Thessalonians, the second Chapter and tenth verse, and that God would give
him the power and gift to deceive, that men should give credence to Satan, and
to lies, and such should be damned as believed not the truth, but have
yielded to unrighteousness, because they have not embraced the love of the
truth that they might be saved.


Anthony. But some there be that hold opinion, that al these things which are
reported of Sorcerers, are but devised, and feyned: and if any such thing do
chance, they come only by some sickness of the mind, or by reason of some
melancholicke humor these appearances and fancies trouble them, not being any
tokens or signs of the just judgment of God against men.


Theophil. But truly they be very much deceived friend Anthony, and no less
then those which supposed that the mad men and possessed with devils, which
lived in the time of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, and were by him healed,
were none other then men sick and troubled with melancholic, and chollerick
diseases: whose opinion is altogether blasphemous, for they take away ye
certentie of the christian faith, and deny the divine nature of our Lord Jesus
Christ, repugning and lying against ye truth of ye thing: for how could ye
devils have spoken with in their bodies, or with so great force have gone out of ye
possessed persons, and have torn ye members and parts of their bodies, if
these things were but mere dreemes of troubled minds, and fancies, and only
fits of mela^cholick diseases? So are sorcerers plainly miserable slaves unto
Satan, and in subjection unto him, him do they worship, to him do they commit
themselves, yea and offer unto him ca^dles of wax in token of honor. Yet some
of the^ do seem far more abiecte and filthily seruisable. For when Satan
shows himself unto them in ye likeness of a man, ye which is to shamful to
speak, they kiss his buttocks, which thing certain of the^ afterward have
fra^ckli confessed themselves to have don. And therefore it happens unto them,
that they be deliuerd over into so reprobate sense of mind, that God punishes
them most justly, who, as I have declared, do most obstinately and
unthankfully, either despise Christ's gospel which is offered unto them, or when
they have received it, and understood it, they taste thereof very coldly and
lightly. In which two points the most greatest, and grievous contempt of God
is perceived. Howbeit, friend Anthony, me thinks I may truly say this much,
ye like as our Lord God purposed to ennoble and celebrate the first coming of
his only begotten son Jesus Christ, and minding to make the same famous and
renowned throughout all the world, would have that there should be at that
present many possessed with Devils, limatick persons, blind, dumb, and deaf,
whom Christ should restore to health, and whom the father did in such wise
prepare for the sun therehence, for him to reap glory: so in this our age,
wherein by his great and incomprehensible benefits toward mankind, as a
special gift, he has restored unto us the light of his holy gospel, of very
justice he will have it, that more despisers of this revealed light, rather at
this day, then before, fall into the snares of Satan, and become Sorcerers,
that is to say, addicted unto Satan, and that they which despise God may be the
more terrefied by example of these wretches: and the Godly which with true
faith embrace the gospel, may more earnestly praise god, and in consideration
of so great a benefit bestowed upon them, yield unto god the greater thanks,
judging their own state to be blessed, since by the singular benefit of God,
they are delivered from so great a mischief, and so great power of the Devil.
Do you now understand, friend Anthony, why there be now a days more witches,
and Sorcerers, then were heretofore?


Anthony. Yea verily Theophilus, and I give you thanks for telling it unto me.
But now to the intent I may be thoroughly confirmed in your opinion, add hereunto
your third argument, which as you said* consists in the reason of upright
judgment.


Theophil. You put me well in mind thereof, for I had almost let that pass:
But now I will take it in hand. Reason of upright and sincere judgment,
wills us to believe yt there be Sorcerers. The same is this, wheresoever is
the true and efficient cause of any thing, there is it necessary also that ye
effect do follow. For example sake, wheresoever the Sun is, there is both
light and day, because the Sun is true and efficient cause of both.
Wheresoever the Northern wind blows, there it is cold, because ye wind is
ingenderer of coldness. And to apply this general assumption to our present
argument: thus do the Philosophers teach us, which are conversant in searching
and declaring ye causes of things: such causes as are endued with soul and
will, if will and power do there meet together to do any thing, necessarily
and immediately thereon ensues the effect. For example. If a man be hungry,
and have bread lying by him, he will eat: if he be a thirst, and have drink
nere, he will drink: if he be a cold, and he be brought to a fire, he will
warm himself. For by this means he has both a will and ability: wherefore
we must necessarely conclude yt he will do it. Doubtless Satan is the cause
of these witches, and intoxicatio^s. He has both a desire and ability ioinct
to do that mischief, to draw men unto him, and to lincke them unto him, (this
power being given unto him by the just judgment of God over rebellious men)
wherefore it is not to be doubted, but that he would win and enforce them to
that kind of wickedness. On which point, that I may the more largely discourse,
this much I think you will grant me, Anthony, yt there have always bin
unbelieving men in the world, that is to wit, not knowing God out of his word,
or not regarding him when they knew him.


Anthony. You may well presume so much, seeing we see to many of that sort.


Theophil. Neither will you also deny this, that Satan since the time he
renounced his first original, and was made a Devil, always applied this, and
as much as in him lay, endeavored to pluck away men from knowledge of the true
god, and from their assured hope of salvation, finally, to make the^ co^te^ne
and refuse ye promises of god, persuading the^ to yield and give over
themselves unto him, who^ he saw to be cold in the worshipping of god, and
necligent in embracing his promises.


Anthony. You say truth, for Satan is like a roaring Lion, who always runs
about seking whom he may devour, and pull from God, as says S. Peter. The
first of Peter, the v. chapter, and viii. verse.


Theophil. You well remember the place, Anthony, and the same is the cause why
he is also in the Revelation called the old Serpent, in the xx. chapter, and
second verse, which is to say, the common and sworn enemy of mankind, as our
savior Christ says, in the xiii. chapter of Matthew, the xxviii. verse,
working and bringing to effect, chiefly in the children of unbelief,
whatsoever he will or lifts, as says S. Paul, the second chapter to the
Ephesians, the ii. verse. For ye wrath of God comes upon stubburne men. Now
therefore, since by all these places it is evident that Satan has a will and
desire to draw men away from the fear and faith of God: it remains now that
we see whether he have power also to pull them away.


Anthony. Then shall your whole reason be concluded and ended. But I pray you,
Theophilus, has Satan so great power over men that he can pluck them from
God, and pull them to himself, being the creatures of God, made according to
his Image, and specially serving unto his only glory?


Theophilus. Truly Anthony, I confess, that Satan could never have had that
power, unless it were given unto him by almighty God, which by this most just
means does punish them, which most unthankfully and wickedly do forsake
him. Howbeit, we are not able to show the reason why God delivers this man
more then that man unto Satan, and will have him be myslead, more then to say
that this is the just will of God, which has so determined: Notwithstanding,
there was never yet any Sorcerer, but he was lead amiss through his own
fault, and unless wittingly and willingly he had renounced God his creator,
and maker, the aucthour of his life, and geuer of all good things whom he
forsakes, and most impudently and most traitorously refuses to take him for
his God, if he betake himself to Satan, and become a Sorcerer.


Anthony. Is this credible which you say, Theophilus, that any man would
renounce his God, and not only give ear and become obedient unto Satan, whom
he knows surely to be Satan, but also become his servant and bondslaue?


Theophil. This is to true, for so do they al of the^, whosoever become
sorcerers. For after ye Satan has once talken with them, whom he goes about to
win and overthrow: he then afterward openly confesses yt he is Satan, and the
very Devil: of whom the scripture makes mention. Wherefore he commands
them to forswere God their creator and al his power, promising perpetually to
obey and worship him, who there stands in their presence, that they shall
acknowledge him for their god, call upon him, pray to him, and trust in him.
Then bids he the^ that they fall down and worship him, after what manner and
gesture of body he pleases, and best likes of. Thus some of them fall down
at his knees, some offer unto him black burning ca^dles, other kiss him in
some part of his body where he appears visibly, other after others fashio^s,
as he commands to be done.


Anthony. O how justly and deservedly are these wretched and detestable men
thus punished of god, whom they do so wickedly, fals^y, and wittingly
renounce, being their creator, father, and savior? wherefore now I marvel
no more at it.


Theophil. For this cause which I have recited, God gives Satan so great power
over them, as I have showed: First of the Kings.22. chap. the.22. verse. And
unless God did give it, surely Satan should have no power at all.


Anthony. In all this your discourse, I have perceived nothing to be so far
from truth, as some suppose. And truly I much marvel, why they cannot
persuade themselves that there be witches, and Sorcerers.


Theophil. I will yet ad one thing, that I may at length conclude this whol^
matter, namely, how men do become such kind of people, upon diverse and
sundry causes. Some through great distrust in ye promises and love of God
toward them, other moved with exceeding and horrible vanity of mind, and
overmuch curiosity, do fall into the same vice, toto loftily despising the
measure and degree of humane nature. This, how true in deed it is, you may
behold: for some are made sorcerers through hope of sufficiency to sustain
their poverty, to whom Satan promises whole mountains of Gold, as ye
proverb says. Such of lykelihoode lacked money to supply the ordinary charges
of their household, or else were far in debt, so that they gave themselves up
willingly to the Devil, in hope of money. Others seeing themselves oppressed by
some of more power, and not having ability to defend themselves, and not able
to abide or put up the injuries done unto them, have desiered help of Satan,
(who is very ready to revenge and do murder) and with willing minds have
submitted themselves unto him, and become his slaves. Which two sorts of men,
hau^ fallen only unto such wickedness through great distrust ye god does not
love the^, nor will help them, as though God had forsaken the^, and would not
help the^ in their adversity. By these means many are carried away by satan,
specially country men, ignorant, and poor people, and such as are iniuried,
being willing to be made Sorcerers. Other some there be, who being borne away
with fond vanity of a proud mind, while they are not able to contain
themselves within the compass of man's understanding and capacity, do yield
themselves vassals to Satan, being desierous to know things to come, and to
foretell them to other: or else ambitiously desiering easily and with small
travail to do those things which other cannot. By which means, many both
of the honorable, and learned sort, are seduced by satan, as certain noble men
and women of worship and honor, and many scholars: Whom all, God justly has
punished, for that they have refused him, and wittingly vowed themselves to the
Devil.


Anthony. Now verily Theophil. I do fully persuade my self, yt there are
devilish witches, and Sorcerers, and that there are certain intoxications by
the^ committed* But I beseech you resolve me also in this one thing: In what
kind of things can they exercise and power forth their satanical poiso^s?


Theophil. I am willing so to do, but so far and no farther then I have
learned out of true histories. For I like not of their trauayl, who in handling
of this argument, falling into discourse of old wives tales, have painefully
reported them in their great volumes.


The.iij. Chapter. In what kinds of things Sorcerers can cast their poisons,
to hurt them.
Anthony. THat shall be sufficient for me, for I am not delighted with those
childish toys. How the^ Theophilus, can this kind of people cast their
devilish poisons and intoxications upon men, or brute beasts? What, can they
infect with their Sorceries the Air, Water, Herbs, and make havoc upon all
things, as themselves do plainly confess, that they have corrupted the Air
of certain cities, and the whole soil about, by their Arts?


Theophil. This may stand with good reason, friend Anthony, like as you see,
that he that can cast down an huge Giant, he may well overthrow a young child,
that is weak and feeble: Even so, he that can hurt a man with poison, can much
more hurt any other thing For man is a prudent creature, wise, provident,
foreseeing dangers, created to the Image and likeness of God. He that can
deceive and hurt him, will confess yt he can much more easily intoxicate a
brute beast without understanding: as is a Horse, a Sheep, an Ox, a Cow,
which cannot so diligently provide and look to themselves in dangers, as can
a man. And he ye can infect a brute beast, can much more bewitch an Herb, a
Tree, Corn, the bolt of a door, the scales of a ladder, Wine, Water, and the
Air. All which things we touch and handle when we list. And over all these
things Sorcerers have power so far as it pleases God, through them to
revenge the contempt of himself upon men, and to punish our offenses.


Anthony. Then have they power over every thing, neither is there any thing, so
far as I can perceive, that can escape their poisoning, and witchcraft.


Theophil. Forasmuch as these witches be devilish and very crafty, truly they
are able to infect with their poison whatsoever is in ye earth that is
corruptible and mortal, unless it be preserved by God. And there is nothing
in this inferior world which is not of that sort, that is to wit, mortal and
corruptible. Wherefore we must needs confess, that their Art has power over
all these inferior things.


Anthony. Show me some examples of these things, gentle Theophilus.


Theophil. I will do so. And first it is most certain they have power over men,
for that we daily behold, whilst some they kill with their poisons, and some
they make sick and past recovery. I have seen them, who with only laying
their hands upon a nurses breasts, have drawn forth all the milk, and
dried them up. I have seen, that have caused unto some most grievous pain of
the Cholick, wringinges in the belly, the Gout, the Palsy, the Apoplexy,
that have also made men lame and feeble, and cast them into other diseases,
which neither themselves afterward, neither yet most excellent learned
Physicians could know, or cure. And these sorcerers do cruelly rage upon all
men, of all genders, ages, and orders, without choice or exception. What shall
I say more? The servants and plouwmen if they be angry, will intoxicate
their masters. And as for beasts and cattle, they poison them to death
sundry ways: and if they be disposed, they will not kill them forthwith, but
make them swell, or make them lean and pine away, in such wise that there is
nothing worse or more hurtful then their wickedness. Moreover, they will
enchaunt wild beasts, and make them stand still that you may take them in
your hand, as it is written in ye lviii. psalm, the v. verse: as the
Serpents, and Aspes. Although S. Augustine in the xi. book of Gene. upon the
letter, the xxviii. chapter, writes that it may be done by Satan most easily
upon a Serpent or Snake, because that by his conference and familiarity with
the Serpent, at the beginning mankind was seduced, as if this were the
serpents punishment, in recompense of his service, to be more subject and
bound at the call and commandment of Satan: Howbeit, experience it self
teaches, that that which is done in him, may likewise be done by sorcerers in
all other living things. For the holy scripture in the third of Genesis does
not set down unto us, that the serpent is more addicted or subject to Satan,
then the other beasts. In fine, all this reason and disputation of S.
Augustine, in my judgment, is over subtle. And as for Herbs, Trees, with
their berries and fruits, and all such like things, truly they may be by
them intoxicated, which that notable saying of Virgil, proceeding from daily
experience, shows in the viii. Ecloge. These herbs, and once in Pontus which
did
grow, these poisons vile,
To me did Maeris give: for many
grow in Pontus soil.
Likewise.
And Corn fields into other place I saw them to remove. Upon which place
Seruius Honoratus, a very well learned interpretour, as also Pliny in ye place
which I have before alleged, do show what punishment was appointed by law of
the xii. tables against them that had enchaunted corn fields. And as touching
Air, and water, what may be more easily corrupted the^ they? so yt those
elements shall neither be wholesome nor profitable to any, yea, rather
pestiferous and hurtful. For sufficient proof whereof, may be that only some
pestilent smell or vapor does in such wise infect an whole regio^ through
which it breaths, ye most grievous and infectious diseases are thereby
engendered. Did you never I pray you, here talk what has chanced in Campania
a part of Italy, and how the whole regio^ in which ye place called Auernus
(which is a hollow cave under ground, from which a loathsome and hot stinking
savor issues forth) sends abroad his exhalation, is so noisome, yt the
birds which fly near to it do fall down dead, with the only stinck of the
place? what shall I say of Mare mortuum or the dead sea (which is so called in
Iudaea,) whose breath is so pestilent and hurtful, yt all the coast near about
lies waste and forlorn, the trees are scorched, the ground is barren and
unfruitful by reason of ye savor?


Anthony. I remember I have read al these things: but tell me if there were
ever any mention made in any history, that the Air was corrupted by this kind
of people?


Theophil. Yea mary, and first in the history of Calisthus Nicephorus the
ecclesiastical writer, who in the xiiii. book ye xviii. chapter, tells how
the Percian Magicians, to the intent they would make the Christian religion
odious unto their King, caused a rotten stinking and pestilent smell to rise
out of that place, in which Maruthas bishop of the Christian Church, and the
other christian Percians, met together to make their prayers unto God.


Anthony. Why the air moves continually, and is always through blown and
driven about with the wind, that it cannot foister nor stand still: which
moving causes that such infection can never breed in the air.


Theophil. The water likewise runs continually, which notwithstanding, you
will grant, may be corrupted. And look by what means the water may be
corrupted: by the same also may be ye air, because that filthy savor is
dispersed and spread abroad through them both, which natural elements are
thin, and unable to resist. For both of them are easily corrupted, by reason
that they do soon admit and yield to the external quality. As for example,
the self same water will be soon hot, and soon cold: the air in one day is
hot, in the same warm, and cold, which thing we do most evidently perceive in
the spring, and Autumpne: For the selfsame air is then found in the morning
cold, at noone hot, and at evening warm. And the air being more thin and
liquide then the water, and more unable to resist, is sooner and more easily
affected by external and agent qualities.


Anthony. Surely there are some that cannot believe that these can do such
things, but rather that through great folly and ostentation of their art and
ability, they craftily make bragges thereof, to make men afraid of them: or
else that through madness they boast of it, for that some of them being
troubled with Melancholicke diseases, have some times imagined that they could
do the like.


Theophil. In deed I confess Anthony, that God first wrought the same, who by
this means, and by these men as his instruments, punishes the sins of men:
but notwtstanding I deny yt which they affirm, that these things are always
false dreams of diseased minds, when Sorcerers say they infect the air:
which in deed they do so often, and truly, which may thus be proved: First
that no cogitation or imagination of another man, can be fealt and perceived of
us, neither can actually as they say, hurt our body. Imagine that you had
killed me, and suppose it in your mind as earnestly as you can, shall my good
health therefore be altered, or in any point diminished? Surely not at all. For
no man's false or vain imagination is able to infect, or bring diseases upon
any other man's body. But we feel how sorcerers effectually bring diseases, we
see also how they have caused plagues, and those most grievous, with other
such like effects, which cannot be denied. Moreover in the midst of their
pains and torments, they confess they have done such things, specially when
they be lead to execution for such crimes. Finally, the consent and agreement
which is found among the^ al, confirms our opinion. For in vain cogitations
and fancies of ye mind, there cannot be one selfsame voice, but one man may
imagine a diverse thing from another. For every mind has his own proper
action, neither is it possible yt among so many m^n, and dispersed abroad in so
many places, one whole conformity and consent of vain cogitations, not
agreeing in place, time, nor manner of doing, could concord, agree, or be
correspondent, unless these things chanced so, and were in deed as they do
report. Yea moreover, they do this which I will tell, a thing passing
marvelous, they will tie a knot upon a point, as our cuntreymen speak, that is
to say, they can hinder and bind married couples that they shall not pay their
due one to the other, or at leastwise that one of them shall not.


Anthony. What is yt you say, Theophil?


Theoph. It is even as I tell you Anthony. For if they be able with their poisons
to impair ye good health of men, to diminish ye strength and force of ye body,
weake^ ye sins, dull ye senses, and to distemper ye inward humors: what
merueile is it if they can hinder ye virtue and act of generation, which is
contained wtin ye body in certain vessels of seed, either by casting in by
their venim an over coldness of the vessels, or else raising a certain hatred or
misliking one of ye other between man and wife* whom in suchwise they do
trouble, which I do easily grant ye they do by Satanicall arts, yet do
they it, to the intent they may sow discord and contencion between them,
between whom ought to be sound and great agreement. Thus these wicked men
revenge themselves, because they hate them whom they do so molest, although
undeservedly and without cause, but to the imitacion and example of Satan their
master, they rejoice to sow cockle among men. Matthew the xiii. Chapter.xxxix.
verse. John the third Chapter, and x. verse.


Anthony. Have you any examples, or arguments to confirm your saying?


Theophil. Yea, I have both. And as for examples, they are almost infinite,
daily happening, and conversant before our eyes. And as touching testimonies and
arguments, I have that are most sure. First S. Augustine, among the sundry
means of hurting, which he attributes unto Sorcerers, in the vii. treatise
upon S. John, recites bindinges, whereof this binding is a kind, of which we
now speak. Moreover yt which Virgil, prince of Poets, and best learned of all
the learned of his time, in the eight Ecloge proves the same. For this is
taken from daily experience which he says: Knit collers three, and in three
knots them,
Amaryllis fit.
Knit Amaryllis, and say thus: I Venus knots do knit.
The same also is confirmed by the Canon, Si. Per. which is the last.xxxiij.j.
question in the Decree. And if Sorcerers can let and hinder the nourishing
faculty of the soul, as Thomas Aquinas, in the.i. Sum. the.iij. quest. and
iiij. article, largely disputes, and proves: by the same means also they may
corrupt and hinder the engendring faculty.


Anthony. You drive me to that exigent, that I know not what to say, or
whyther to turn my self.


Theophilus. What if I should also ad that, which will seem much more
marvelous, which notwithstanding S. Augustine and Apuleus do credibly write,
yet am I of opinion that it can not be so.


Anthony, What is that?


Theophil. Forsooth, that Sorcerers can change men into other forms and
shapes, yt is to wit, into wolves, Bears, and Asses.


Anthony. I pray you does S. Augustin^ write so?


Theophil. Yea truly Anthony, read ye 17. and 18. Chapter of his work De
Ciuitate dei, where S. Augustine reports, that many both heathen men and
Christians have said, that they were so transfourmed, specially one
Daniaenetus, and Praestans, with many other more.


Anthony. Surely that can not be, that an evil spirit or Devil can change
our nature or being, as they call it. For this is ye only property and power
of God, that as he has created the natures of things, so is he able to
change them: which Satan cannot do by any means, neither by himself, neither
by his servants the Sorcerers.


Theophil. You say truth, and so saint Augustine also writes in another
place. Howbeit they that say they were so transfourmed, they do but suppose
that sometime they lived so, yet they are deceived, and those be none other
then false fancies and imaginations, which by means of some strong illusion,
or great sickness, are imprinted in their minds. But I do not likewise deny,
but that Satan brings some into that persuasion, which that he may bring to
pass, he brings a sleep and blyndeth their outward senses, then brings
he into their imagination sundry fourmes of things, which he imprinteth so
effectually within their troubled minds and humors, that they think
themselves in deed to be at that present and to have bin such things. So
likewise, phisitio^s teach us yt there are certain diseases of the body,
wherein a man shall seem to himself to be a Woulfe, an Hog, an Ox, a Mule,
likewise that they be all made of glass, or of Wax, and such other like
thing. I have also seen one that would affirm and swear, that he was a
Cock: wherefore the true and undoubted cause of such illusions, and
deceiptions of mind, which may be done by Sorcerers art, depends upon this,
that the humors and temperament of the body being distempered, the parties
themselves seem after a sort to be changed, and alienated from themselves, by
working of the Devil, that they shall not know any other things that are
represented unto them: So that those that be so vexed, do easily persuade
themselves that they are such as they report, which notwitstanding are but
mere illusions of the Devil.


Anthony. But Nabucadnezar King of Assyrians, was transfourmed into a brute
beast, and eat grass the space of seven years, as it is read in Daniel, the
fourth chapter.


Theophil. So it is. But that is thus to be understood of Nabucadnezer, that
we must not think that his humane nature was converted into the essencie or
being of a brute beast. But his conversation was changed, and his mind and
affection, which was wont to be desirous of ma^s company. Moreover that we must
grant that all this befell unto him by the power of almighty God our
creator, and not by Satan's means (by which only Sorcerers do work) to have
been brought to pass: For God is able to take away or change the esse^cies or
natures of things, but Satan is not able. Wherefore those things which are
reported, how some men are converted into wolves, are to be judged most false.
Howbeit there be some yt affirm such things to be done among the far
Northern people, nigh to the rivers Borysthenes, and Tanais. But whereas Varro
writes, that there is a Lake in Arcadia, over which those that do pass,
become Wolves: I think it must thus be understood, yt by reason of the fear
which men conceive in passing over ye most perilous Lake, they think
themselves to be wolves: otherwise I would say that all that history is but
mere tryfles, and oulde wives tales.


Anthony. Hitherto you have sufficiently declared over what kind of things
sorcerers have power. Show me also this one thing, why these wicked men are
able to intoxicate and poison good and godly Christian men, which thing most
certain and daily experience proves to be true.


Theophil. The solution of this your demand is easy, freende Anthony. First,
God that is most just, by that means does punish the sins of his children.
For those whom we term godly and true Christians, they are many times not
only not without their infirmities and imperfections, but subject also unto
grievous sins and offenses, as Saint John teaches in the first Epistle, the
first Chapter, the ix. and x. verse. If we say that we have no sin, we
make God a liar. Wherefore these are justly by God punished, besides that by
this kind of cross and affliction, God tries the patience of his chosen: For
like as he proved his servant Job by the injuries of the most ungodly men
the Caldes: so does he also prove his beloved people by the witchcraft and
poisoning of Sorcerers, which redoundeth unto the profit and commodity of the
faithful. For as Saint Paul says to the Romans the fifth Chapter, and third
verse. Affliction brings patience, patience brings probation, probation
brings hope, which never confounds, for the love of God is sown in our
hearts through the holy Ghost. So that the godly ought patiently to abide these
afflictions, so to submit themselves to God, and confirm themselves wholly unto
his will and pleasure.


Anthony. I stuck fast in the water, as the Proverb says, and I made a
doubt where was none, or which as I perceive, is easily resolved. And since you
have aptly answered me unto those three poinctes which I demanded: namely,
what this word Sortiarius signifies, whither there be in deed any such,
finally, over what kinds of things these Sorcerers have power, and can
exercise their arts: I beseech you Theophilus, that you will hereto add the
fourth point, and declare unto me after what manner sort and means they can
intoxicate, and put in practice their poisons.


The fourth Chapter. After what sort and means Sorcerers do intoxicate, and
poison things.
Theophilus. WHat Anthony, do you think that I am so expert and conuersaunt
in their art, that I can tell you all that belongs thereto? you remember what
protestation I made at the enteraunce and beginning of our discourse, that I
never was acquainted with Satan or any of these sorcerers, nor never mind to
be: neither look I for any praise, for ye knowledge of these matters. Howbeit
so far as mine ability shall extend, I will satisfy your honest request.
This therefore is that which you require of me, by what means Sorcerers do
work, and infect things with their poison: wherein I will answer that which
is most true, that they do all these things by means, instinct, and craft of
the most miserable and wicked Satan the Devil. For this much I dare affirm
unto you, that there is no sorcerer but he makes a league and covenant with
the Devil, and voweth himself unto him. In confirmation of which vowing, he
receaueth in his body some note or mark made and imprinted by Satan in some
part, which he always bears about him, some under their eye liddes, others
between their buttockes, some in the roof of their mouth, and in other places
where it may be hid and co^cealed from us. Although some be of opinion, that
all Sorcerers are not privily pricked and marked by Satan, but those only of
whose constancy toward him he stands in doubt, and those of whom he
do^bteth not, are left unmarked: yet may I say thus more certainly and truly,
that there is none of them upon whom he has not set some note or token of his
power and prerogative over them: which to the intent the judges and such as are
set in authority of life and death, and to enquire of such matters, may the
better perceive, let them specially provide, that when any of these shall be
conuented before them, to poulle and shave them where occasion shall serve, all the body over, least happily the mark may lurk under the hear in any place.
For they have made a covenant with Satan, and themselves for their part again
have made him such a promise. Satan in this wise: that they shall acknowledge
and worship him for their God: and they on the other side, that Satan shall
help and defend them. So according to covenant satan helps them, and
according to their prayers so works and does he for them: and they again
obey his precepts, and commandments.


Anthony. Yea, but forasmuch as Satan of his own nature is a great liar, yea
the father of lies, will he keep touch and fulfill his promise, as you have
said?


Theoph. Satan is not always a liar, though he be always a deceyuer. For
oftentimes he speaks truth, that he may deceive those that hear him: and
oftentimes he perfourmeth his promise, because he will not seem to be a
deceyuer, but rather a teller of truth. When Satan said of our Savior Christ,
in Mark the.ij. Chapter, the.xxiiij. verse. Thou art that holy one of God: He
said true, and lied not. But what was his mind then? Forsoothe that they
which heard that, should afterward be deceived. And when he said as much of
Paul and Sillas in the.xvj. chapter of Acts, the.xvij. verse, in these words,
These men are the servants of the great God, which show unto you the way of
salvation: he said true, yet notwithstanding he was a deceyuer, and by that
means he sought a way to deceive men. So, when Satan keeps promise, and
performs those things which he has couena^ted with ye Sorcerers, he does it
to ye intent that afterward he may more easily and readely seduce the^, and
also the more assure^ly bind and allye them unto him.


Antho. Proceed then I pray you, and declare the means whereby they do work.


Theo. This is almost the manner of making their covenant. First Satan requires
of the^ that they do wholly and fully renounce the true God, creator of al
things, the lord of heaven and hell, and that henceforward they serve him, who
there professes him self without dissimulation to be Satan, and that
hereafter they depend at his beck and commandment, seeking al their help of
him. Which renouncing and denying of the true God, with the most abominable
forswering of him, is the first step and entrance to make friendship and
agreement between these wicked men and Satan, and the first bargain of all this
business. Unto these in this detestable manner being received into service and
slavery to Satan, he then gives a mark either with his teeth or hand, and then
wills every one to demand of him what they would have him do for the^,
teaching them the safest and priuiest ways to revenge themselves upon those
who^ they hate. Then gives he pouders, roots, and poisons unto the^, either by
himself or by others yt are there in a redines, yt they may freely and safely
intoxicate who^ they list. Then this ungracious and new servant of satan, every
day afterward something of his goods to his patron, some his dog, some his
hen, and some his cat. In which doing, there is a greater ratifying of their
deed, and denial of the true God, then in their first contract. And to
conclude, this is the sum of al their wickedness. But Satan distrusting the
constancy of his servants, shortly after calls them together into a
Devilish Sinagoge, and that he may also understand of them how well and
diligently they have fulfilled their office of intoxicating committed unto
them, and who^ they have slain: wherefore they meet together in certain
appointed places, not al of them together, nor at once, but certain of them whom
he pleases to call, so that he apointeth where they shall meet, and at what
hour of the day, or of the night: wherein they have no surenes, nor certentie.
For these meetinges are not weekly, nor monthly, nor yearly, but when and how
often it shall seem good to this their master. And many times himself warns
them to meet, sometimes he apoynteth others to warn them in his steed. But
when he does it himself, he appears unto them in likeness of a man, or in
some other form whereby they may know him, in so much that it happens many
times, that among a great company of men, the Sorcerer only knows Satan, that
is present, when other do not know him, although they see another man, but who
or what he is, they know not. But when he cites them to appear by any of his
other disciples and Sorcerers, unto which appearance both time and place is
appointed, in which they must resort to their miserable meetinges, and impious
Synagoges, which they call Satanicall Sabbathes: then do they meet. And if
any chance to pretend, that the iourny is long, or themselves weak and feeble,
and that they stand in fear and dread of men, he answeareth them sufficiently
to all their excusations. For he promises that himself will convey them
thither, that are so weak that they cannot travail of themselves: which many
times he does by means of a staff or rod, which he delivers unto the^, or
promises to do it by force of a certain ointment which he will give them: and
sometimes he offreth them an horse to ride upon. But if they be yet afraid, he
shows them a means how they shall go and not be seen during all the time
of the journey, and come safely thither. In the end he cutteth away all
pretenses and excuses of absence, and he shows the^ these means, because he
would seem to be more loving and careful over them, thereby to make them
more bound and beholding unto him. Thus when they meet together he appears
visibly unto them in sundry fourmes, as the head and chief of that
congregation. Sometime he talks with them in shape of a man, sometime like a
most filthy bucke goat, and sometime in other licknesses. Then do they all
repeat the oath which they have given unto him, in acknowledging him to be
their God, the^ fall they to dancing, wherein he leads the dance, or else they
hoppe and dance merely about him, singing most filthy songs made in his
praise. Which being all finished, then he demands again of them what they
would require of him, and what poisons they lack to intoxicate any man. And
as any of them utters the cankred request of their poisoned stomach against
any man: so does he show them a means to revenge. For unto some he gives
poisons ready made, and others he teaches how to make and mingle new. Unto
others he gives certay^^ tokens, and charecters, and words, or ointments, by
virtue whereof he promises them they shall foreknowe most surely things to
come, and bring to effect whatsoever they would work. Finally, if in any thing
they need his presence and help, by covenant he promises to be present with
them. So that the means whereby Sorcerers do intoxicate, are partly manifest
and stark poisons, whose ingredience, as they term them, are deadly and
mortiferous, and condemned by the learned Physicians, for things that kill
presently: partly they are without poison, that we or the Sorcerers themselves
can understand of, howbeit they mingle some with them: partly also they put no
visible poison to hurt into them, which is much more marvelous tha^ any of ye
other twain above specified. Wherefore, if they have mingled any of ye manifest
and known poisons, they are sone perceived of ye Physicians, and are found to
be such, after that they understand by their confession of what stuff they
consist, and are made. And those which they give, not themselves knowing what
they be, or of what things they be compounded, notwithstanding they
contineue in hurting. Like as although they seem not to have myngled any
hurtful poison, yet cease they not to intoxicate, doing it either only with
ye air or breath of their mouth, or else holding a certain root within their
teeth which Satan delivers unto them, which they chawe, and so do kill and
destroy men with only talking with them. And whereas many times they intoxicate
them whom they touch not, it may not seem strange unto us: For then the
intoxication is done by Satan himself, privily casting forth or blowing ye
powder or root upon them, at the Sorcerers request: which Satan does according
to covenant, as I have said, by reason whereof in certain things he is their
servant, and supplyeth unto them his wicked and cruel attendaunce.


Anthony. Truly Theophilus, I was al in a quaking cold, when you told even
now those horrible and devilish things. So God help me, I trembled and
shook, they were so woundrous strange. These then be Satan's arts, whereby he
binds the Sorcerers unto him.


Theophil. They are so, Anthony.


Anthony. But I pray you sir, where have you learned them?


Theophil. Out of their confessions almost infinite, and very like to be true,
out of judgments pronounced against them innumerable, out of which a man may
commonly gather them.


Anthony. Howbeit there be three points which in your former discourse seemed
unto me very obsurde and impossible, which no man will grant you lightly.


Theophil. What be they?


Anthony. First I agree with you in this, that Satan can appear unto men in
the shape of a man, which if we should say can not be done: then must we deny
the meeting and talking together of Christ with the Devil, whereof the
Scripture makes mention in the.iiii. of Matthew, where it is written, how Satan
appeared visibly, and in the shape of a man, unto Christ. Secondly, I will
easily grant you that Sorcerers can learn no good thing of Satan, but such
counsels and precepts as proceed from a vile and naughty disposition, such
as is, to revenge himself, to intoxicate strangers, to slay men at unawares,
and to minister all these things priuelie, none knowing or witting of it. Some
also there be that revenge them selves, either such as hate their brothers,
being the children of the Devil, as says Saint John, the first of John, the
third chapter, and tenth verse, as we are on the other side commanded all by
the express commandment of God, to love all men. Matthew the.v.
chapter.xliiij. verse. Wherefore I suppose these two points to be true.


Theophilus, Wherein then do you disagree from me, Anthony?


Antho. Forsooth in these three things. First in this, that the Sorcerers say,
and you likewise following the truth of their confession do affirm the same,
that verily and corporally they be present in those assemblies which are
called by Satan. Secondly, where you say that they be carried by Satan unto
those places. Thirdly, in that which you said last, that they can intoxicate
men without any mingling of poison. For I can not persuade my self that any
thing can possibly be by mere voices, words, figures, or charecters, hurt,
helped, poisoned, or intoxicated.


Theophilus. I will answer you orderly to these three points. And as touching
the first: Do you not think, Anthony, that Sorcerers do meet together, and
be present in those their diuelishe conuenticles and Synagogues,
notwithstanding that they vaunt themselves thereof? How I pray you then do you
think it is?


Anthony. Only in cogitation of mind, and illusion of the Devil, like as in
our sleep we think that we have seen many things, and to have been in
such places where we never were: and many times that we have talken with those
that are very far of from us, yea perhaps more than two hundred miles. The
like whereof happens to Sorcerers through craft of the Devil, who sundry
times also deludeth us in other matters, in so much that oftentimes we think
that we see, touch, and feel things, which in deed we neither see, nor
feel. And that you shall not think that I am of this opinion without
sufficient reason, I have many excellent learned and ancient men, of mine
opinion. Throughout all the discourse of this question, you have often
commended Saint Augustine. But he in place where he entreats of the changed
shapes of men, as in the.xviii. book de Ciuitate Dei, teaches, how things
that are believed and supposed do so come to pass in deed, for as much as
therein that power of the mind which is one of the chief five, and is termed
the Fantasy, and rests in the foremost part of the brain, I mean the
fantasy, is hurt and disturbed by Satan's means, and the outward senses
buried, and by him maruelously troubled. Why then should we not so think of
the meeting and presence of Sorcerers? And if drunken men, when hot vapors
ascend out of their stomachs into their brain, suppose they see such things
as be absent: and if the sickness of melancholy do persuade many things to
those that are sick of that disease, which they neither do see, nor are
present: we may think and define that these things happen to Sorcerers by
illusion of Satan, who is of greater force than any of the above named causes,
to trouble the virtues and powers of the mind, and not to think that in deed
such things be present, or that them selves be in place where they suppose.
For Satan is able to hurt and bind the powers of the mind, and strength of
the body, as Thomas Aquinas teaches, and as before him S. Augustine in
the.vii. book of Genesis upon the letter the.xi. Chapter has written. Besides
this, the same S. Augustine in a certain Epistle of his unto his familiar
friend Nebridius, which is the.lxxii. in number, distinguishes the three kinds
of our fantastical sightes and appearances. The first kind is of them which
our fantasy or imagination conceaueth of things which we have seen. The
second kind is of things which our fantasy it self has found out, the
like whereof it never see, nor heard of before. The third kind is of things
which our imagination conceaueth and deuiseth upon the words and report of
other. And these ^oyes and imaginations of Sorcerers are of the second kind,
namely when our fantasy of herself deuiseth and imagines many things. Which
that I may more substantially confirm unto you out of the same Author, the
same S. Augustine in the hundred and one Epistle to Euodius of strange
sightes, writes, that when those sightes are so lively and effectually
represented unto us, that we think verily we have seen them, for all that
our souls do not wander out of our bodies, neither go abroad in those
places wherein we thought our selves conuersaunt, but they remain within our
bodies, even in the same moment wherein they beheld those things so
evidently: so that it happens by means of the obiectes that we see them. In
the mean season our bodily senses are asleep within us, so that they can by
no means be awaked, while we be occupied in this sight: whereby it
happens, that afterward we being awaked, suppose that we talked, and
drank, and eat, and saw all those things. The reason is, because the lively
and effectual form of all those things was represented unto our mind,
wherewith we were then busied. And examples hereof are commonly to be found^
in the same Saint Augustine. For in the hundred Epistle, he makes mention of
a certain Physician of Carthage, called Gennadius, who doubting whether after
this life there were another to be hoped for, saw the companies of Angels,
and heard the^^ singing so plainly in his sleep, that he thought he was
in heaven, whose body notwithstanding lay all the while in the bed, and
remained in the Chamber, as he him self afterward confessed. Likewise in
the.xviij. book De Ciuitate Dei, the.xviij. Chapter, he tells of another,
who affirmed for a truth, that he conferred with a certain Platonicall
Philosopher in his sleep, concerning Platoes writings, of whom he learned
the Authors meaning in a certain place, which before he understood not. In
the book which is entitled, Vitae Patrum, the life of ye Fathers, it is
written of a certain father, who not in the night, nor in a dream, but at
midde day, and broad light, when he beheld with his eyes his own daughter,
it seemed to him that he saw a Cow, which notwithstanding others, and
especially Macharius, acknowledged and testified that it was a humane creature,
and a Uirgin. What Theophilus, have not you your selfsomtime read in ye xvj.
book De Diebus Genialibus, which are written by Alexander Neopolitanus,
the.xxi. Chapter, of a certain accused person, who thought that he went down
to hell, whereof he reported to the Judge most evident testimonies? For he
discovered and opened a certain secret of his, which was known to no man.
What, in the xxvi. Canon of Bishop, the.v. question, which was copied forth
of the Counsel of Aquilea, is it not there openly pronounced, that all these
voices and imaginations of Sorcerers are but vain shows, mere toys, and
illusions of the mind, which Satan, chyefe workman of such trumperie,
represents unto them, their bodies notwithstanding remaining still in the
same place? In conclusion, that I may at length shut up all this place, these
be the words either of S. Augustine, or whosoever else was aucthour of that
book, which is entitled De spiritu and litera, where in ye 28. chapter he
writes thus. Wherefore they foretell certain things to come, and work
strange wonders, whereby they allure and seduce men: By means whereof certain
foolish women turning after Satan, being seduced by fantasies and illusions of
Devils, do believe and profess, how in the night time they ride abroad with
Diana the Goddess of the Pagans, or else with Herodias and Minerua, and other
multitudes of women innumerable, and that they obey their commandments. For
Satan himself, who transfigureth himself into an Angel ^flight, when he has
possessed the mind of any of those foolish women, and through their
infidelity brought them in subjection unto him, immediately transfourmeth
himself into similitudes and representations of sundry persons, and deluding
the mind in sleep which he holds captive, and representing unto them
sometime merry things, sometime sad things, sometime known persons, sometime
unknown persons, leads the^ about through many strange places. And when
only the unbelieving spirit ^uffreth these things, supposing that they happen
neither to the mind alone, nor to the body alone, is therefore over foolish and
gross, thinking that to happen to the body, which is but only done in spirit,
seeing Ezechiel and the other prophets, John also the Evangelist, and the
Apostles, saw visions in the spirit, and not in the body. What may be said
more firmly and plainly on my side, Theophilus, and that is more repugnant and
contrary to your opinion? wherein if you do sufficiently satisfy me, I will
yield then unto your judgment, wherein you affirm that Sorcerers be bodily
present at their assemblies.


Theophil. I deny not but that this matter has bin in great controversy,
Anthony, seeming unto some altogether incredible: and I grant you this also,
that many things are by them reported which were never done, and that many
times yt they are of opinion, but falsely, yt they be talking and conuersaunt
with those, which are far distant from them. Al these things I grant not
unwillingly. Howbeit I deny, that you can gather hereof, that which you
conclude, that therefore they never be present at any assembly, or Synagoge.
And therefore they which diffine so peremptorely, yt the bodies of the
Sorcerers are at home, whilst they think th^selues to be conversant in the
midst of ye stocks of their fellows: truly they speak over boldly, for why?
experience it self teaches otherwise. Have there not bin many seen, who being
pricked forward with to much vain curiosity of mind, have gone unto those
asse^blies, and were bodily present in those places where ye sorcerers have met
together, from whence they have returned home pas^ing weery of travail, their
neighbors understanding of it, and seeing it? It is told also of a certain man
in ye fro^tiers of ye Ambarrj, which at this present is called the Duchy of
Niuerse, who came thither being constrained by his own ploughman. Likewise
report goes in this our age, of another which dwelt in ye country of Po^^ters,
who being wonderfully enamoured on a certain noble woman (who resorted thither
to ye asse^bly among th^^, and was her self a Sorceresse) came thither also to
see her, and to speak with her. Moreover, how could it come to pass, that the
Sorcerers could note the places, know the persons again by their faces,
remember the number, the trees that grow nigh the hedges, rivers, and
distinguish the houses: if we say that these were but vain shows and
representations of mind, and that in very deed they were not present at those
meetinges: why should they depart out of their own houses, and out of their
towns late in the night to meet there? why should they be weery of their
journey, how should they return personally and visibly from those places,
unless personally and presently they had bin there, and not by only dreaming
or imagination of mind? Thus Anthony the constant co^fessions of Sorcerers
themselves, with other infinite testimonies are against you, and your opinion.
But you will say, these be their boastinges, and doting dreams: Yea, but
surely they be very dangerous dreams Anthony: For they confess this when
they are near their death, and when they are condemned and lead to execution
for that offense, and when they be tormented, when such talk can help them
no longer: Finally, it is thus in every place. Moreover, as the most godly
Father Athanasius writes in his book of the Humanity of Christ, the
cogitations and thoughts of our mind, how strong and deep soever they be,
yet can they not carry our bodies from place to place, neither can they affect
or touch those that be absent. But sorcerers bodies are conveyed away:
wherefore we must think that this chances not alonly by cogitation of mind.
And as concerning your arguments, I say, that they must be distinguished. There
be certain things whereof they falsely vaunt, which can not possibly be done by
course of nature, which notwithstanding they affirm that they do them. These
things happen unto them through vain illusion of mind. But I beseech you,
what cause, what reason, what course or order of nature, does stop or hinder
that they should not be there present? specially since corporally and visibly
they return from thence, that is to say, in very deed, and during all that time
were absent from those places, in which they were before. For the same accused
person, whereof you made mention erewhyle, which went down unto hell, was two
days absent, and when he was diligently sought for throughout all the prison,
yet could he not be found: wherefore, such things as are repugnant to the
natures of our bodies, if they say yt they do any such thing, they be false,
and worthily to be reputed mere illusions of the Devil. Such as be those
whereof the counsel of Aquilea makes mencio^, as to ride in ye Moon, to
talk with Herodias, with Diana, and with Minerua, which are called the gods of
ye Paganes: and to speak with a man that is dead, and to see any of them whom
they call the xij. worthies, that is to say, Hector, Achilles, Rouland and such
like, with many other like mere fantasies and vain devises of Satan, which by
him are represented unto the eyes or minds of men. Of this sort also are they
which you have alleged both out of s. Augustine, and also out of the book De
spiritu et anima, which in deed ca^ not be so, because the accomplishing and
truth thereof, plainly repugneth against the course of nature. But this which
we affirm concerning the assembling and meeting together of sorcerers, and the
manner of their cumming together, what has it in it contrary to the course of
nature, or disagreeing from the force and essencie of our bodies? To conclude,
they that do so certainly define, that in those extraordinary visions, and
rauishinges, and traunces of the mind, always our bodies are altogether absent
from the sightes which we then behold: truly they speak more boldly then the
holy servant and Apostle of Christ Saint Paul, who speaking of his own
rauishing, and taking up (albeit, it was far unlike to this kind whereof we
now speak, for it was done by the hand and power of GOD, and not by Satan) in
the second Epistle to the Corinthians, the xij. Chapter and third verse, says
thus: And I know the same man, (whether in the body, or out of the body, I
can not tell, God knows) was taken up into Paradise, and there heard
unspeakable words, which are not lawful for a man to utter. These as I
suppose, Anthony, will satisfy your doubts, and I hope, declare them
sufficiently unto you.


Anthony. Yea, ye bodies of such are found to abide and remain in the selfsame
chamber and bed, from which they must have bin far distant, if they should
personally and bodily have met in an other place.


Theophil. You continue still in your opinion Anthony, which that I may plainly
refute, I deny that which you say, and take unto you for a granted verity:
namely, that their true bodies were found to be in the same chamber and bed,
at what time they said yt they were away. There were rather certain counterfeit
bodies placed in their steed by Satan, and represented lykenesses: then the
true bodies of the Sorcerers. Do you not remember I pray you, what Michol
David's wife did, and what devise she practiced when she concealed the flight of
her husband from her father Saul and his servants, which sought to sley him?
Have you not read that which is written in the first of Samuel, the xix.
chapter, how she by craft and colorable means, but not by any Devilish art,
nor after the manner of Sorcerers, in steed of David's body placed an image,
laying pillowes under his head, and trimming him with garments so finely and
cunningly, that they thought surely David was there, beholding the counterfeite
so lively set forth before their eyes. So likewise Satan, to the intent he
may keep from us the absence of his Pupilles, in steed of their true body,
which is away, places there a false body, when we chance to enquire.
Whereby it comes to pass, that many men suppose that Sorcerers are not
bodily present at their assemblies, which themselves contend that they were
at, and that because they perceyu^ and find false and counterfeite bodies like
unto them laid in their Chambers, and beds, by Satan, in steed of their
true bodies: But surely they that judge so, are very much abused.


Anthony. I understand what you say. But I pray you resolve me in that which I
proposed secondly unto you: for it seems unto me impossible that Sorcerers
should sometime be conveyed unto those places by Satan, which nevertheless you
have avouched to be true.


Theophilus. Why? Do not you think that to be true which is written of
Christ, both in the.iiij. Chapter of Math. the.viij. verse, and also the
fourth Chapter of Luke, the ninth verse, how he was carried by Satan out of the
desert unto a pynacle of Jerusalem Temple?


Anthony. Yea it is very true. But that was done by the will of God. And all
that matter was extraordinary.


Theophilus. I easily grant you that. And so likewise I say, yt by the same
will of God and his just judgment, it comes to pass, that the Devil can
touch, carry, and convey Sorcerers, that it may so appear that they be
altogether in his power. And if Satan durst touch so holy and undefiled a body
as Christ's was, over which he could have no power by reason of any sin: If he
could take ye same Christ up, and carry him in the Air, the saucie presumer
will not be afraid to handle and carry ye bodies of Sorcerers, knowing that
before they have given them selves unto him, both body and soul. And if God
have given power unto Satan over the souls of Sorcerers, to the intent they
should be lead away from the faith: he will much more give him power over their
bodies, to handle them, and carry them: For God will not so soon give unto
Satan power over the souls of men, as over their bodies, which is confirmed by
the example of Job. Job, the second Chapter, the sixth verse. Finally, Satan
will not always take upon him the travail of carrying and recarrying
Sorcerers, but only at some times, and when he will take from them all excuses
of not meeting together, at their assemblyes.


Anthony. Me thinckes he should cast them into an horrible fear, when he
touches, or handles them.


Theophilus. You say truth, if he appeared or met with them in his form of a
Devil, which doubtless is most horrible and dreadful, but he appears unto
them in another shape, and similitude. For in respect that he is an evil
Angel, he cannot be seen. But like as when first he assayeth them and talks
with them, he does it in the resemblance of a man, or in some other tolerable
and accustomed form: so likewise when he means to carry the^, he
transfigureth himself into ye lykenes of an horse, or a mule, or a bird, or
some other living thing: Yea, sometime he caryeth the^ forth, and yet they see
him not. For he gives them a staff, which they must put between their
legs, and at the saying of certain prayers in his name (which he teaches and
commands them to do) they think straight that the staff carries them
thither as they would go, and so he persuades them that they be borne by the
staff, while he himself does carry them. For being of the nature of
Angels, yea the Prince of the air, as says S. Paul to the Ephesians,
the.vj. chapter, and.xij. verse, it is no marvel if he do that which we by
no means can do, and do it also with more agilitie and quickness than we
can.


Anthony. I have heard report of a certain Abbot named Bruno, who in a minute
of an hour was carried by the Devil from Millayn to Rome: also of one
Theophilus, of whom the like is reported. But what think you hereof,
Theophilus, do you suppose these examples to be true?


Theophilus. Whether the report which goes on these twain, be true, or not,
I neither know, neither do much force: but I confirm my self in mine own
opinion with this reason, that if Satan through Gods sufferaunce can hurt and
slay our bodies, as is gathered out of the story of Job, and others: much
more by his sufferaunce can he lift them up, carry them, handle them, and use
them in all points, as a wolf can a sheep which he has stolen. Neither
must we therefore suppose that Satan is an horse, or a mule, or a beast, as he
then appears unto our eyes. But if, as S. Paul says, the.ij, to the
Corinthians, the.xij. chapter, and.xiiij. verse, he can transfourme him self
into an Angel of light, he can much sooner, and with more facility put on
the shape of these things, because he can not so easily counterfeite the man
of God, as he can resemble the shape of a Mule. Also Alexander Neopolitanus,
whom while ere you commended for a substantial witness, in the fourth book,
and xix. chapter of his work De Diebus Genialibus, writes of a certain Monk
called Thomas, commonly accounted a credible person, who was wo^t to tell, that
if it had happened him to be much offended with any of his brother Monks, and in
that heat of mind had withdrawn himself into the desert, that then Satan
would appear unto him in the likeness of a man, and would go forth talking
with him a great way, persuading him to do many things. And at length when
they were come unto a great streams side, in the same desert, he told how
Satan would take him up upon his shoulders, and carry him over to the further
side of the water. Whereby it appears that it is no new thing, if Satan do
carry any, to the intent to win them, or to bind them more firmly unto him.


Anthony. But it seems scarce possible, that he can carry a man so soon,
specially the place being so far distant, where as they say they do meet.


Theophil. I have told you before what is plainly written of Christ in
the.iiij. of Luke, the fifth verse, that he was in a moment brought vy Satan to
Jerusalem, and all the kingdoms in the world shown unto him. Wherefore,
Anthony, I see no cause at all why you should so long doubt of this matter,
since the celeritie and quickness of this carryar satan, is so great, and his
power and force in workeing so nimble: For none of all those things can let
him, which hinder us when we make speed about any thing. Neither is it so hard
or paynefull to him to pearce the air when he runs, as it is unto us. For
he is of a most fine and subtle nature, after the manner of Angels, and not of
a bodily substance, for that he is a spirit. And therefore Saint Augustine in
his book, De Diuinatione Daemonum, the third Chapter, writes of him, that he
surpasses the most swiftest men in runninge, or any other beast, yea the
birds themselves. Whose opinion Thomas Aquinas following, in the Sum of
quest. C.x. the third question writes, that these gross bodies do give place
unto Satan, through which therefore he conueyeth himself with more expedition,
because they shall not let or hinder him. And that you may be no longer in
doubt of this matter, Anthony, nor varyable in your mind, I will bring forth
unto you also, both sayings, and examples of profane writers, that you may not
suppose yt this has been of later times received and believed only of
Christians. For is there any thing, I pray you, more notorious in all histories
of the Romans, than the sudden taking away of Romulus, first author and
founder of the City of Rome? Who in sight of many witnesses was taken away by
Satan, for the horrible deuinations, superstitions, theftes, and stealing of
women, which he had instituted and commanded. And albeit others write
otherwise of his death, yet Plutarche an author of great credit, and amongst
all Greek and Latin writers ever accounted the most diligent and trustiest,
reports thus of him: namely, that for a truth upon a day he was by Satan
taken up into the air, and carried away, all the people of Rome being
present, and beholding it. Which that it was done by Satan, the sundry
circumstances of the matter, which by him are there recited, do sufficiently
declare. For before this was done, there arose a great storm and tempest in
the air, with darkness as it had been night, and also horrible thunder, in
so much that all the people which was assembled, being amazed in these
terrible accidences, most fearfully ran thence away: which is a most evident
example of the carrying away of a man's body by Satan, which that it may be
done, the same Plutarch sets forth and confirms by two examples, namely
by Aristeus Proconesiensis, and Cleomedes Astipaleensis. For Aristeus was taken
away by a Devil out of a fullers shop, and in a moment carried into a city
in Italy called Crotona, standing in Calabria, where he talked with many men.
And Cleomedes, being of body as huge and big as a Giaunt, and a fierce man,
who having miserably and cruelly slain certain children, and being therefore
narrowly and diligently pursued after by their fathers, was driven to such
extremity, that with much a do he shut himself up in a cheast, which cheast
being found and broken up by the angry fathers of the children,
notwithstanding Cleomedes was not found there: for he was immediately carried
away from thence by a devil. I would here bring forth the carrying away of
Alexander, surnamed Sextus, Pope of Rome, which is in every man's mouth, and is
constantly reported to have bin done by Satan. But I am affeard least you
should think that I do it in hatred of the Popes, unto who^ truly I bear
little good will: wherefore, upon all these things it may be concluded, that
it is an easy matter unto Satan, who is of his own nature an Angel, to take
up our bodies and to carry them elsewhere, and that in a moment. In confirmation
whereof, I can recite unto you that which is written in the story of Susan, the
xxxv. verse, of Habacuc: for it is written there, how he was carried in a
moment forth of Iudaea, into Babylon by an Angel. But I suppose now that you
are wholly become of mine opinion.


Anthony. In deed Theophilus, you have brought my mind now something in
suspense, but you have not yet thoroughly persuaded me, which you shall do, if
you will also satisfy this my last demand. Tell me I pray you, if it be true
which you have said, why Satan wills the^ whom he will carry to use certain
oyntmentes and oils, when there is no need of them?


Theoph. I perceive you are an earnest defender of your opinion, since you
stick thus upon every question: howbeit, I will declare unto you that which you
require. And first, you must not think yt Satan wills all sorcerers to use
those ointments. For he commands but certain of the^ to do that, who^ he
perceives to be either fearful to venture, or more deintie then yt they can
abide his horrible touching of the^, like as are women, and certain men also.
For by those confections wherewith he wills them to be oynted, he benu^meth
their senses, that they shall feel no pain while they are carried, or stand
in horror of his hands, or of his bearing of them. For those oyntmentes or
oils, are of no effect, nor any thing appertayning to ye moving of the^ or to
their journey, but he commands it to be done, either by ye means to detayne
or keep them from thinking how he handles them: or surely if they avail any
thing, they avail in this respect, yt by means thereof the bodily senses are
laid a sleep, and in ye mean while Satan him self carries them. Howbeit,
Satan also therein shoots at another mark, namely to imitate and falsely to
cou^terfeit the holy sacraments of ye church, ordained by god, whereby the
miserable sorcerers may learn and accustom themselves to trust in him, and
wonder at him, and worship him in respect of his great power, when as in deed
it is he that caryeth them, and bears them on his shoulders whither as they
should go.


Anthony. But let him that list Theophilus, get him such a servant, for my part
surely I refuse him, and with all my heart I renounce him.


Theophil. And so do I also, Anthony, but are you persuaded in that which I
have told you?


Anthony. Almost truly. But I pray you answer me to my third objection, and
this doubt, which troubles my mind.


Theophil. What is that?


Anthony. It seems unto me, that Sorcerers can not intoxicate any, unless
they cast in, and minister poison unto them. For it seems unto me incredible
that they ca^ hurt only by mere enchau^tments, figures, words, hallowinges,
curfinges, or charecters, unless they mingle poison therewith. But if Satan
give them the poison which they mingle, or teach them how to mingle it: then
do I not doubt but that they may easily intoxicate. And I do not deny, but
that Satan is passing skillful in such kind of witchcraft and Sorcery. For he
knows excellent well the nature and properties of all things created, which
S. Augustine witnesses in the third book De Diuinatione Daemonum. But surely
I can not persuade my self, that he can intoxicate or hurt any man without
poison, powder, or root. For as for words, numbers, figures, a certain form
of words, with certain peculiar mumblinges of prayers in prescribed order of
words, with charecters: were not devised to inuenim men, but plainly unto
other manner purposes, like as father Irenaeus plainly proves in the second
book, the xl. and xliij. chapters, which vain opinion of some, not only that
good Christian father, but also Aristotle an Ethnic writer, in some place
laugheth at, much less ought we Christians allow it. Moreover, this matter is
ruled over by most certain demonstrations of natural Philosophy, namely that
there can no action be done without a mean coming between, and applied to
the extreme and outward parts of the thing suffering. As for example. If you
shoue me, your hand touches me: when I wax warm against the fire, first
the fire warmeth the air, then the air warmeth me, which comes not to
pass, that any mean comes between, when there is any intoxication or
inchaunting committed by words, or charecters, or figures, or any form or
order of words. And therefore Pliny, a writer well seen in all kind of
learning, in the xxviij. book and ij. chapter, of the history of nature,
plainly denies with me, that there can no such thing be done.


Theophil. You seem unto me Anthony, to be now a great deal better learned
then before, in the beginning of our communicatio^, where you made mention only
of your knowledge which you gathered out of ye grammar school: but now you
declare your self to be a profound natural Philosopher, by reason whereof I have
ye harder conflict with you, yet will I answer unto your question: will you deny
yt Anthony which is written in ye 58. Psalm, ye v. and vi verse, of the
Serpent, which is thus expressed.

In them the poison and the breath,
of Serpents do appear:
Yea like the Adder that is deaf,
and fast does stop her ear.
Because she will not hear the voice,
of one that charmeth well:
No, though he were the chief of choice,
and did therein excel.

Anthony. No not so.


Theophil. Then can you not deny but that Magitians and Sorcerers do work
their feats, and do hurt by soundes, words, and enchauntmentes.


Anthony. But they can not do so, but by some mean.


Theophil. That is true which you say. For there comes between some mean
and middle, apt and agreeable to the execution of these bewitchinges, which
mean is only known unto Satan, not unto us, nor unto the Sorcerers
themselves. So that in the end, Satan brings yt to pass which I prove unto
you, either by mingling poiso^, or some otherway, wonderful, and not able to be
perceived by us, whatsoever it is, which unto us seems to be wrought only by
those figures, fourmes of words, and charecters.


Anthony After what sort is it done so, I pray you?


Theophil. First by virtue of their league and covenant, Satan comes unto
them when they conjure and call him, accomplishing their requests, and
perfourming whatsoever he promised should be done, by virtue and force of
those figures, words, or charecters, to the end he may seem true and
mighty, and to bear them in hand that the things which he has showed them
are of great power and effect: By which means, he both makes these vain
people more beholding unto him, and enforces them to worship him with more
devotion. And thus he manifestly transporteth unto creatures, the office and
duty of the majesty and power of God, whereby men may more willingly forsake
God, and amazedly cleave unto creatures, that is to say, become perfect
Idolaters. Moreover he endeuoreth by this means, after the manner of an Ape,
to counterfeit and imitate the true sacraments which God has given to his
church, and to bring them in contempt, and to make his counterfeites match unto
them, finally, he turns the force and effect of the things which are
signified, unto the signs which do signify them.


Anthony. These things then are not wrought by words alone, or by certain
fourmes of Charecters only, but by mediation of certain poisons privily and
secretly used by Satan him self, after an unknown manner, which he has not
taught the Sorcerers.


Theophil. You say well Anthony: For there is in Satan great craft and cunning
to cover his wickedness, and mischief, wherefore the covenant which he makes
with them, seems unto me to be like the bargain which two thieves make,
when they go forth into ye woddes to the intent to rob, for that they may the
better hide themselves, and the more easily and warely lay wait for such as
travail by the way. Thus do they, and thus agree they, that one of them shall
evermore be seen in the way, the other lie hid in the woods, who
notwithstanding at a certain whistle* and watchword, whereupon they have agreed,
starteth forth and murthereth the traueiler, howbeit the other his fellow who
is also privy of the fact, for ye most part, neither sees, ne knows with
what weapon the other does the deed. The same also may be declared unto you by
another example. Noble men which bear any great hatred or malice against
other, are wont to retain bold and desperate Ruffians into service, and to
have them always attending upon them, unto whom when they shall give a sign
by some privy means, which none know but themselves, then do they sodeinly
fly upon those whom their Master and Lord is fallen out withal, yea many
times though their Masters be absent, or not seeing them, who notwithstanding
willed the^ to do so. In like manner, at the signs and tokens appointed, Satan
is immediately present, fulfilling whatsoever the Sorcerers will him to do,
that he may always have the^ more and more obedient unto him. Yea, I will
moreover say thus much, yt these figures, and charecters are of themselves but
mere toys, and colorable trifles to bleare men's eyes, which being laid
before the^ by their most wicked schoolemaister, do keep unto him those his
wretched scholars, who seek for no other, nor truer cause of that event,
although in deed they be of no force to bring the thing to effect which they
go about, neither do the Sorcerers understand how much they do avail. But
like as certain iuglers which would seem to do many strange feats in the
midst of a circle or ring of people, by sundry gestures and casting of the
hands, and with much babbling and prittle prattle of words, do fill and weery
the ears and eyes of the lookers on, that they shall not perceive how in ye
place of one little bal, they lay down three or four, which they kept covertly
between their fingers, (which notwithstanding is all done by nimblenes of
their hands:) so likewise Satan represents these vain, and frivolous
colors and shows of figures, and words; unto the eyes of his accomplises,
whom he is willing to keep from the diligent inquiry of such matters y^,
being amoped with the^ only, they may be stay^d unto him, and not search with
any greater care or diligence what should be the ground and cause of the
matter: which notwithstanding are of no such kind or nature of causes as may
bring forth any such effect.


Anthony. Tell me then Theophilus, by what means works Satan in deed,
whilst he would seem to work by enchauntmentes, or superstitious describing
of Charecters, or certain fourmes of prayers.


Theophil. I am about to do so. And to begin with all, I am certain and well
assured of this, that Satan can do nothing but by natural means, and causes.
For whatsoever he does either by him self, or by his ye Magicians and
Sorcerers: it is altogether either illusion of their minds and eyes, or only
the true effect of natural causes. As for any other thing, or that is of more
force, he can not do it.


Anthony. Can he not also work miracles, as Saint Paul says in the second
to the Thessalonians, the second chapter the ix. verse. And Saint John in the
revelation the sixtene Chapter, and fourtenth verse.


Theophilus. What call you a miracle, Anthony?


Anthony. I call a miracle, a certain work which is done in a natural body,
contrary to the natural course and disposition thereof created by God. As for
example: when iron swimmeth upon the water, as is reported in the story of
Elias in the second book of kings, the vi. Chapter and vj. verse, when a
stone flitteth upon the water, when water is truly turned into wine, when the
dead are unfeignedly restored unto life.


Theophil. Truly you have properly defined a miracle. For as Saint Augustine
writes, y^ must only be called a miracle, which surmounteth the power of all
things created, neither can be wrought by them. So that a miracle is only the
work of Gods power, being most worthily and properly to be termed by that
name. But Saint Paul, and the Revelation in those places which you have
commended, use not this word so strictly and precisely, but rather more at
large, for any kind of work which may seem strange and marvelous unto men,
although it proceed from natural means and causes. So that this word
Miracle, is oftentimes used for that which may more rightly be called a
wonder. For as touching a Miracle, Satan truly is able to work none, as you
have most properly described a Miracle.


Anthony. Is there then any diversity between a wonder and a Miracle?


Theoph. Yea very large, whether you have respect to the name, or to ye thing.
And as touching ye word Miru^ a wonder, which is also called of Grecia^s (...)
and (...), is one thing: and Miraculu^, a Miracle, called also (...), another.
S. Augustine so distinguishes these words, in ye third book De Trinitate. So
yt a wonder is a work which is not vulgar or common* yet yt is wrought by
natural causes: Howbeit they be many times unknown unto us, or known to few
only, or else are done by such means as we men cannot use, or are not wont, or
have not learned to do in ye same or ye like matter. As for example sake: when
yt great and cunning workman, and also famous Philosopher Archytas Tarentinus,
showed openly to ye people a dove of wood which flue in the air, it was a
wonderful thing, but it was no miracle. For this motion was caused in the
wooden body, through certain equallitie of weight, and by means of certain
lines and workmanship, and by so near and narrow joining of them, yt one drew
foreward another: so all that work was but natural. Likewise when the same
Archytas caused, as it is written by Plutarch in the life of Mercellus, y^
whilst Syracu^e in Sicilia was beseeged, one lad drew after him and plucked on
land by an hook a ship, for burden of monstrous weight and bigness: it was a
wonderful piece of work, but no miracle. For it was done by natural means
and by devises of rowles, and turning worms gathered out of the Mathematical
rules. So likewise, learned Physicians work many wonders, and so do
handicraftes men, but no miracles. Therefore as touching wonders, that be so
called, Satan can easily and with small traueile work many, and those far more
excellent the^ we men ca^, in respect yt his strength and wit is much better
the^ ours: yet for all this, he can work no miracles.


Anthony. Why so?


Theophil. For sundry causes, and chiefly for three. And first in respect of
the excellency of his nature above ours. For he is of an Angelical and
Spiritual nature, and we are earthly and carnal, by reason whereof he can
do many things which we can not. Secondly, for his moving, and the great
quicknes of doing his actions. For in a moment he can come so long a journey:
as we that are heavy and slow, can not do the like in six days. So that in
a minute he can pass from one place to another, be it never so far a sunder,
for ye air does not stay nor let him. Thirdly, for his manifold skill in the
natures of things, and long experience which he has gotten, to whose if
ours were compared, it is but ignorance: whereby it comes to pass, that he
has the knowledge, and can work in such sort, as we are not able to attain
to the like.


Anthony. How chances it then, that as you say, Satan can work no miracles?


Theophilus. First, because that in woorking of miracles it behooves to
destroy and take away the nature from things which God has given them, which
Satan can not do: for it belongs to god only, yt as he can create and make
the nature of things: so can he also overthrow, and destroy it. Secondly, that
in a miracle it is needful to give unto the thing, new virtues and
properties, which he can by no means do. For the true God is only aucthour
and creator of the properties which are in things. Thirdly, that a true
miracle is such a work which surpasses the virtue and power of all things
created, be they never so excellent. Wherefore Saint Peter the Apostle, in the
third of the Acts, the.xij. verse, when he had healed the lame man, and had
wrought a true miracle, said thus: Ye men of Israel, why do you wonder at
this, or why do you look upon us so earnestly, as though we had wrought it
by our own power or godliness, that this man should walk? The God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac. etc. By which words it is signified, as you see,
that the power to work miracles, is proper unto God only.


Anthony. But the blessed Angels, Apostles, and many other holy men, have
wrought miracles.


Theoph. Truly they have wrought miracles, by the working of God in them. For
the power which works them, is in God only, and in him only resident, and
never transported to any creature, for as it is written in Esaias, God will never
give away his peculiar glory, to another. Wherefore, they whom you have last
recyted, Good Angels, Apostles, Prophets, and holy men, in woorking of those
miracles which they are reported to have done, were only gods instruments in
working of them, and that mere passive, not active, as they term them: and
yet notwithstanding it follows not, that if God used the ministry of those
his servants, he does also use Satan likewise, woorking miracles by him also.
For God of his justice will not communicate his glory in such measure unto
Satan and Devils, as he gives it unto the blessed Angels, and holy men:
Which is evidently confirmed by this only example, in as much as Moses and
Aaron, the servants of God, wrought true miracles, which Pharaos Magicians,
although they were scholars very well practiced in the arts of Satan, and his
most excellent mynisters, could never do the like, acknowledging the true
effect thereof to be wrought by the finger of God only, and confessing that
the things which they did, far surmounted the course of nature, as it is
written in the eight Chapter of Exodus, the eightenth verse. And the cause of
this diversity between Satan and the true servants of God, and the
diversity of his counsel and providence, is this, in that Satan in woorking
of miracles, seeks not the glory of God: but the good Angels, and holy men,
have only regard and respect to that. So that many times these men are the
instruments of God, but he never is. And although this be true, that Satan of
himself can do nothing, but how much, and when it pleases God to give him
leave: so likewise neither can he destroy nor change the order of things
determined by God, neither has God given him such power, neither that he may
work by any other things then natural, although sometimes they be hid from
us, finally he enforces them with such celeritie, that the whole work
seems unto us to be a miracle. For he quickly gathers ye means and causes
whereby he works. As for example, he soon gathers clouds together, to
cause rain: he soon drives together and thickneth the Air, that thereby he
may represent unto our sight some shape, or thickened visible body: and in a
moment he can compound poisons to do hurt withal, and immediately he can
resemble, or drive away whatsoever is of him required, or demanded. Moreover,
he works all these things with such swiftnes, that the expedition thereof
seems strange unto us, which notwithstanding he works al by natural
causes. Wherefore, as I have said before, figures, drawing of lines and
circles, noyses, enchauntments, breefly, superstitious mumbling of certain
prayers, are not the causes of such things as the Sorcerers do work, but
rather pleadges and tokens only of Satan's promises unto them. So then Satan
himself works those things, which they think the^ selves to have done, by
virtue of those means. For he has instituted these tokens, which he will not
have seem either unprofitable, either impossible, or frivolous. Wherefore all
those things are done by means of Satan only. Wherein the opinion of Saint
Jerome only, who doubts thereof, ought not to move us. For he wauereth
therein, and John Chrysostom is flatly against him, in his homilies upon the
Epistle of Saint Paul to the Galathians, the iii. Chapter, and second verse,
and others also of no less authority. And among later writers, what Peter
Martyr, an excellent well learned Divine, writes upon the.xxviij. Chapter, of
the first book of Samuel, all men do well know. Wherefore to conclude in
few words, Satan woorketh all those things upon covenant. By the same
means it comes to pass, that Sorcerers do conjure and exorcize, as they
call it, the Devil: or call him forth, or call him up, or speak with him
face to face, having appointed and agreeed upon such couenauntes, that at
sometimes he should appear, and at other times depart away* After this manner,
Numa Pompilius the second king of the Romans, a great Magician and Sorcerer,
if ever there were any, communed and talked oftentimes with Devils, as Plutarch,
a grave author, writes in his life. And now Anthony, that I have answered
unto your three questions, what remains there more?


Anthony. I ask you this question, whether all the poisons which Sorcerers do
use, be mortal, and bring men into peril of death?


Theophilus. Why would you learn this of me, which they them selves do not
know? God only knows that, in whose hand lies our death and life, not in
the power of the Sorcerer, no not of the Devil him self, as it is written in
the eight Chapter, and ninth Uerse, of ^cclesiasticus. For the mind and desyer
of the Sorcerer is varyable in that poinct: many times to do hurt, only for a
time, they cast their poisons upon men, and oftentimes their poisons be
mortal and deadly. And therefore when they be threatened, they seek means to
vndooe and take away their poisons from those whom they have bewitched and
poisoned, and therein they require healpe of the Devil, howbeit sometimes they
cannot vndooe it, whatsoever they attempt, forasmuch as God has otherwise
determined of us. For he has appointed the term of our life, which we can
not pass, as it is written in Job, the fouretenth Chapter, and fifth verse.


Anthony. Over and besides this, Theophilus, after they be come intoo the
Judges hands, and cast intoo Prison, can they then use those their poisons,
and do any harm?


Theophilus. If I shall say what I think, I will answer, that they can, if
so be they have any conference with their master Satan. But if you ask me
what the common people think thereof: surely, that they can not. So that if
they can by any means, freely and commodiously come by those their Diuellishe
poisons, and confer with Satan, as otherwise they might if they were at home:
I suppose they can intoxicate and poison men when they are in prison. Neither
does the judges authority of it self, nor the place, bring any impediment
thereto. For proof of which mine opinion, I may bring this, in that Satan
himself has strangled many sorcerers in prison, or beaten them to death with
his fistes, and also when they have been condemned by the Judges, and laid up
fast in prison, he has brought them to death, and hanging: Whereof I could
recite unto you almost infinite examples. Howbeit it seems unto me, that
Sorcerers when they be in prison can no^ intoxicate, for two causes. The first
is, for that they cannot commodiously come by their poisons, when they be in
prison. The second, for that they dare not confer boldly with Satan their
instructor, and master, for they fear that they are watched: besides, they are
bound and tied, and they cannot have their poisons, but they must have a
witness thereof, that is, the keeper of the prison, to pry and see what they
do. And that is the thing that they fear most, that they may not be espied of
the judges. So that for the most part sorcerers while they be in prison, hurt
no body. Wherefore, wise and diligent Judges have herein a special regard, to
come upon them suddenly, before they be looked for, to search and try them.
Finally, Sorcerers are affearde to use their poisons when they be bound and in
hold, least they should be convicted thereof, which might be easily done. For
Sorcerers are a most fearful and cowardly kind of people, having renounced
God, wherefore they be wary, and look very circumspectly to themselves.


Anthony. Uerely, Theophilus, you have brought me wholly into your opinion.
Wherefore now I believe that there be sorcerers, and that they can intoxicate,
and work those infinite mischefes, which you have recited. But now in the
end, I pray you declare unto me, what punishment these wicked and false men
to God, deserve to have?


The.v. Chapter. What punishment Sorcerers deserve to have.
Theophilus. IT is not my duty, Anthony, to make or set forth Laws, which
Kings and Princes in every City may do only. Moreover, the trade and
custom of men have so prevailed now a days, that the punishments for
wickedness, are almost now all at will and pleasure. This much therefore I
can answer you, that Sorcerers are worthy of the common and open hatred of
all men, of what sort soever they be, in that they be the open enemies of
mankind, and of God that created them. For they be most wicked runnagates from
the faith, false forswearers of Gods power, traitors to the majesty of God,
most vile starters a side, most foully unfaithful to God, most filthy drudges
to the Devil: finally, most horrible diuellishe witches, and deceauers.
Wherefore the Magistrate may very well punish the Sorcerer, both as a witch,
and as a runnagate from the faith, because both he has forsaken GOD his
creator, and openly gone into the feelde and taken part with Satan. Whereby it
comes to pass, that by the Law of God, a Sorcerer is condemned to dye,
Deuteronomy. the eightenth Chapter, and tenth verse: and in another place, Sorcery is
accounted among the greatest and most grievous crimes, the first of Samuel, the
fiftenth Chapter, and xxv. verse. Likewise the holy Ecclesiastical counsels
of Fathers, do detest and condemn them, as in the.lx.lxj. and.lxvj. article,
the first, second, and third question, of the second counsel of
Constantinople, which are provisions in the Canon Law. And by the Civil Law
of the Romans, such kind of people were most grievously punished. For in
the Law called Lex Iulia, concerning witches, that offense was made death.
But Leo the Emperor not being therewith satisfied, in his authentike Nouel, in
the lxv. constitution, has there provided against them a more grievous
punishment. Finally, there was never yet any man of ancient or late times,
being of any good mind and persuasion, which confessed not, that these were
the worst men that lived, and therefore judged them worthy of most severe
punishment.


Anthony. I marvel therefore, that at this present there be some Judges so
parciall, or rather vnfreendly to all mankind, that they be affearde, or
rather will not ryd away out of the world, such horrible cruel beasts, as
Sorcerers be, and punish them when they come into their hands.


Theophilus. Surely I marvel also thereat, Anthony, for they declare by this
fondenesse of their own mind, how much they contemn God, and are great and
manifest despisers of his honor and glory, whose mortal and sworn enemies
when they have found, and taken: yet do they let them go, and suffer them to
live. But what remains there, Anthony* which you would more know of me?


The.vj. Chapter. Whether it be lawful for a Christian to use the help of
Sorcerers, in sicknesses, or other affairs.
Anthony. WHether a Christian with safe conscience and his duty toward God,
may use their help in curing a disease, either which they themselves or some
of their fellows have caused, or the cure whereof they profess themselves to
know. Finally, whether we may lawfully use their aid, to do us good, either
in our public or private affairs, as in time of war.


Theophilus. Now in the end, Anthony, you have drawn me farther wide, then I
purposed to wade at the bebeginning: But forasmuch as I am entered into this
argument, and you, to whom I may deny nothing, require the same, I will declare
willingly.

And first, all men's opinions in this beehalfe, were not a like, nor yet the
laws them selves. For some have brought in this damnable distinction, saying,
that of Sorcerers, some be good, and some be ^uyll. And as for the laws they
do not all agree, among which nevertheless, the Law of GOD has been
always one, and agreeinge with it self. For it condemns, and punishes them
every where. Thou shall not, says the Law, suffer a vvitch to live. Exodus
the two and twentieth Chapter, and eightenth Uerse. There are extant also many
positive Laws of men, and those many times repugnant one to another. For so
long as Kings, and those that were in authority, worshipped Idols, they
used the aid and help of Magicians and Sorcerers, without making doubt or
danger of the matter: whose example, she subjects commonly following, had
those men, although they were impure and ungodly, in great honor and
estimation, daily res^rting unto them, which order is also at this day
frequented among barbarous and Idolatrous nations, such as be they that dwell
far toward the North and East parts of the world, and in the kingdom
called Cambalu, where the great Chane, and king of Tartarians dwells.
Through the whole Empire also of Persia, the arts and practizes of such men
are well allowed, and frequented. And in foretime it has been accounted among
the Ethnickes for a great commendation of learning, if any had been named to be
skillful in Magic. And among the Egiptians doubtless it was highly
commended, as it appears in the scripture, in the third Chapter of Exodus At
Rome also, certain Emperors gave them selves to the study of Magic, and used
the help of Sorcerers. The Emperor Nero, as Suetonius writes in his life,
was accounted one of the cheifest among the professors of Magic, howbeit
afterward perceauinge the vanity of that Art: he forsook and mislyked of
that study, as C. Plinius writes. Adrian also the Emperor, which was after
Nero, as Dion the historician writes in his life, applied the same study, and
used the aid of Sorcerers, against the Dropsy, whereinto he was fallen. The
whole nation of Hunnes, as I have before alleged, out of Gregorius Turonensis,
when they went to batteyll, used their help, thereby to get the victory.
Saint Cypriane himself, who afterward became a Christian, and was Bishop of
Carthage, before that he was converted to the faith of Christ, it is read of
him how earnestly and diligently he was addicted to that study, which
afterward, through the great goodness of god, he forsook and renounced.
Which examples do all of them sufficiently declare, what great account the
heathen people, and such as knew not the true God, made of the faculties and
knowledge of these men, or rather in what price and estimacion their damnable
and wicked deceptfulnesse was had, being of all men commonly used.

But after that by means and reason of this art, there were found many vain,
absurd, and horrible things to be committed, very grievous to be seen, both
for the invocation of Devils, and for the sundry strange gestures, and
superstitions of these men: the Christian faith, increasing by little and
little, it came to pass, that afterward it was not lawful by laws set forth
to the contrary, by the Emperors of Rome, for men commonly to use the help of
Sorcerers, unless some public or private commodity enforced them thertoo.
Wherefore, in Justinians Code, the ix. book, xviii. title, iiii. law, it is
thus written, which law is set forth by Constantine the great. Their science
is to be punished, and worthily to be restrained by most severe laws, who
using the art of Magic, are found to have practiced any thing against the
health of men, or to move chaste minds unto lechery. As for such remedies as
are found to be auaylable to the health of man's body, are not restrained or
forbidden, or godly prayers which are made in the fields, that men may not be
affeard of showers falling upon their ripe Grapes, or that they be shaken with
wind, or beaten with Hayle, or else such: whereby no man's health or estimation
be impaired, but rather their dooinges furthered, that the gifts of God, and
labors of men, be not destroyed. Dated the x. of the Kalend. of June, at
Aquileia, Crispus and Constantinus being Consuls.


Anthony. This is a strange law, Theophilus, wicked, and little Christian
like, if Constantine the Christian Emperor, were the first that made and
published the same.


Theophil. Uerely, Anthony, I suppose ye Constantine was not fully established
in the Christian faith, when he wrote it. For see how much he ascribes to
Magicians and Sorcerers: he wills that it shall be lawful for men to use
their art, so that it may be to their commodity, which surely he would not
have done, if he had bin a perfect christian: wherefore that law was not only
afterward amended by Leo, but altogether disanulled. For he forbids us to
use them upon any occasion, and all the help and work of Sorcerers he calls
disceite, and dissimulatio^. Which latter law, all opinions and judgments of
men, have afterward commended for the better, and hollier. Augustine, whose
words are written in the Canon Admoueant.xxvi. the vij. question, shows that
their helps are mere deceits and crafts of the Devil. To conclude, in the
second Chapter, in the title De Sortilegis, in the Decretals, the same is
condemned, the cause and reason of all which judgments, surely, is most just
and righteous.


Anthony. What is that?


Theoph. That we ought to have no fellowship with Satan, whether it be directly
and mediately, or else indirectly and immediately, as they term it: Neither
ought we to seek any relief by his help, aid, or counsel. For it is our true
and only God, unto whom we must make recourse in all our afflictions: For why
do we seek help and succor of Beelzebub, since there is a god in Israel, as
ye prophet Elias worthyly grieved and repined at, in ye second book of kings,
the.j. chapter, and iij. verse? Wherefore, we ought to cleave unto God, and to
depend only upon him, yt by no means we allow, like of, or seek to Satan him
self, or to his ministers (as ye Sorcerers be) as we be warned in the lxxxi.
Psalm, and xi. verse. For we can not serve two Masters, namely God and the
Devil, whom we must utterly forsake: yt we may entirely cleave unto God.


Anthony. But their helps have many times had happy, and prosperous success.


Theophil. That therefore they are to be used, your argument is very weak and
feeble: we must have regard, rather to the commandment of God, which
forbids us in any wise to seek unto Sorcerers, as appears in the xviii.
of Deuteronomy. the x. verse. For what does Satan work other by that means, then to
lead us away from the fear of the true God, and to pull us unto him? For
look whatsoever help we requir^ of him to cure our bodies, it redoundeth to
the hurt and destruction of our souls. For by this means, men separate them
selves from God, which is the true death of the ^oule. Whereby it follows,
that all the help and aid that comes by Satan and Sorcerers, is deadly
poison to the soul, which above all things we ought to eschew, yea more
then we would a Dog, or a Snake. But whereas it is sometime alleged, that
their means have done some men ease and pleasure: how much I pray you is it,
or how seldom has it chanced? since among ten yt fly to them for succor,
there is scarce one, or not one, that is relieved, or finds help. And again,
the effects are not to be weighed upon the success, but upon the
commandment of God. For he that has stolen, oftentimes lives in wealthier
state: is theft therefore to be allowed? Admit then that all which seek such
remedy, do always escape and well recover, and if we grant so much: yet
forasmuch as the express word of God commands the contrary, we ought not
accept it, when it is offered, much less voluntarely go seek it. For
whenever we run to any other for help, saving God only, therein we utter
the most shameful distrust and infidelity of our minds, our rebellion
against God, and most wicked contempt of his power. By which wickedness of ours,
we provoke his wrath against us, and chiefly heap upon us eternal damnation.


Anthony. How then I pray you? may we not by any means use the help and aid
of Sorcerers, thereby to seek any releife or ease in our afflictions?


Theophil. Some use therein a distinction. They suppose that if the Magistrate
will and command us so to do, then may we with safe conscience use their
helps, and remedies: Otherwise they hold opinion, that it is not granted to
us, nor lawful for us. So that when the Magistrate bids us seek their
help, and we our selves of our own accord do not seek unto them, therein
they say, if we admit their helps, we do not offend at all: But if we our
selves of our own accord, do run unto them, then they say, we desire
their help: we flatter them, curry with them, and friendly require them to come
help us: and therein we offend grievously. But if we not seeking it, the
Magistrate notwithstanding commands us to do it, the^ find we their help
almost against our will, and in so doing, we are without fault or grudge of
conscience: for ye Magistrate puts in his foot, as it were the authority
of god, who^ we must obey, because he has his power from god. This is the
foundation and ground of this distinction. But how weak, yea rather how vain
and false it is, I pray you consider and judge, Anthony. First Saint Paul
generally forbids in ye iii. to ye Romans, the viii. verse, that we shall
never do evil, that good thereby may ensue unto us, by whose soever
authority we are so commanded, either Judges, Magistrates, or what ever else
he be. Moreover, I think, we may also reason thus, a Pari, by the like. If
the Judge, and Magistrate bid us woorship Idols, if he bid us steal, commit
adultery, embrace Satan: may we therefore do so with safe conscience, because
the Magistrate bids us? There is no man I think, will grant this, that is
well in his wits. Yea, that more is, if the same Magistrate command the
Sorcerer to help us by his Satanicall art, and also will us to suffer our
selves to be cured by that art, commanding us fully to yield our selves unto
his means, and we do so: we both commit, and consent unto evil. And if we
should otherwise all the days of our life lie sick in our bed, yet ought we not
run to any such means and arts of Satan, no, although the chief magistrate
do will and command the same: For it can not be otherwise chosen, but that
therein we acknowledge Satan's power, whose help we use and stay us upon, whom
notwithstanding in our Baptime, we have before wholly renounced and forsaken.
Neither lies it in the power of Satan, to make us live, or die, but in Gods
hand only. But in this poinct a man may both give counsel, and this may also
be granted: If he that is called a sorcerer, can by no superstitious means,
and no dealing with the Devil, but only by rules and precepts of Phisicions,
and by ordinary and alowable medicines, restore us to health: then may we use
his hand, help, and means, with safe conscience, and due obedience to God.
For when the medicines which are ministered unto us, have nothing in them that
is reproved as naught, or defiled with arts of the Devil, but are grounded
upon true and natural causes, that are evident unto us: then may we accept
them, not regarding whether it were a man or a woman, a citizen or a country
man, that teaches, or applies them. For all that are accounted commonly
witches and Sorcerers, are not so in deed, and many there are that have bin
suspected thereof undeservedly. Wherefore, now at the length, let us thus
conclude, out of the premises, that we may not, nor ought not, to use the help
of Sorcerers, unless we our selves will be of the number of them, and forsake
our true God and savior, which they do, as often as they have any dealinges
with Satan, or require or receive of him knowledge of remedy.


The vij. Chapter. By what means a man may take heed and beware of the arts,
and bewitchinges of Sorcerers.
Anthony. HOw the^ Theophilus, by what means shall a man take heed of them,
or how shall a man be restored to health again, if he be once intoxicated?


Theophil. As concerning the cure of intoxications, Anthony, I will not doubt to
affirm this much, after S. Augustine, that the most learned Physicians, are,
for the more part to seek in such kind of diseases, not knowing what remedies
to minister, they are so strange, new, and privy. For they come forth of
Satan's shop, and they are wrought by his arts, which for the most part are
unknown unto us mortal men. Howbeit, the help of Physic is not to be
contemned in them, but rather diligently to be sought and applied, and all
ways and means are to be proved which that faculty shows, and the
counsel thereof to be insued, that if it shall please God, we may recover
our former health. For he can bless those good and wholesome medicines, and
restore us to as perfect health as we were before. For Physic is a most
excellent gift of GOD unto men, as it is read in the xxxviij. Chapter, and
second verse of Ecclesiasticus, whose effects are great: which has many
times before, and may now also at this present, if it please God, restore many
that are intoxicate and bewitched. But when we have proved all lawful
means, and notwithstanding are able to do no good, yet must we by no means
run to Sorcerers, nor seek to drive one mischief away with another, or
rather with a worse, and not loose the soul in seeking to heal the body:
although to to many wicked and ungodly men do so now a days. What must we
then do? we must patiently abide and look for ye help of God, and depend
only upon his providence. Therefore let us commit our selves wholly unto him,
let us earnestly call upon him, and make our moan unto him, and come unto him
with true conuertion of mind, and he will help us, so far as he shall think
meet for his glory, and profitable to the health of our souls* Finally, let
us thus persuade our selves, that it is he only in whose hand lies the
beginning and ending of our life, as the scripture speaks, which that we may
most certainly believe; it is very often repeated by the spirit of God, in the
xxxvij. Psalm, the fifth verse, the xxvij. the fourteen verse: the.l. the
fifteen verse: also in Ecclesiasticus the viij. Chap. and viij. verse* the
lxviij. Psalm, and xxj. verse. For he knows how he would be glorified in
us, what, and how long he has appointed the term of our life, how also
and after what manner we must be chastized in ye mean^ season: Wherefore let us
wholly submit our selves unto his most wise providence. As for temptation, we
shall not be tempted above the strength of a man, like as he has promised, the
first to the Corinth. the x. Chapter, and xiij. verse. For when we strive with
such diseases and euilles, which are almost incurable and desperate, then ought
we chiefly to look for comfortes out of the word of God, and lay them before
us.


Anthony. But I pray you tell me, how shall a man in the end, escape the fury
and mischief of these men?


Theophil. Surely Anthony, there is no medicine against them, no drink, no
peculiar and certain precept, touching the matter that you demand of me,
saving this only, that most earnestly we commit our selves, and our life,
every day, and every moment unto God our father, commending our selves unto him
in most ^artie prayer, both in the morning when we rise, and when we go to
bed. And forasmuch, as those wicked and devilish people, do privily, and
craftily, intoxicate and poison us, while we eat, while we drink, and while
we go abroad: we must do all those things, first calling upon the name of
God, as Saint Paul wills us, and not to assay or begin any thing, leaving
that out. For if we commit our selves to the tuition of GOD, who is a mighty
king, a most provident father, and who restrayneth and bridleth Satan him self,
and his power, placing an whole army of Angels about us, to keep us: if, as
I say, he be on our side, who shall hurt us? The scripture testifying the same:
If God be on our side, who is then against v^? Romans the viij. Chapter, the
thirty verse. Wherefore, that most sweet and excellent promise of God made
unto us through our Lord Jesus Christ, is most especially and diligently to be
thought upon, which is plainly set forth in the four score and eleven Psalm.

1
HE that within the secret place,
Of God most hie does dwell:
In shadow of the mightiest grace,
At rest shall keep him well.
2
Thou art my hope, and my strong hold
I to the Lord will say:
My God on hye, in him will I,
My whole affiance stay.
3
He shall defend thee from the snare,
The which the hunter laid:
And from that deadly plague and care,
VVherof thou art afraid.
4
And with his wings shall cover thee,
And keep thee safely there:
His faith and truth thy fence shall be,
As sure as shield and spear.
5
So that thou shall not need, I say,
To fear or be affright:
Of all the shaftes that fly by day,
Nor terrors of the night.
6
Nor of the plague that privily,
Does walk in dark so fast:
Nor yet of that which does destroy,
And at noone days does wast.
7
Yea, at thy side as thou do stand,
A thousand dead shall be:
Ten thousand eke at thy right hand,
And yet shall thou be free.
8
But thou shall see it for thy part,
Thine eyes shall well regard:
That even like to their desert,
The wicked have reward.
9
For why (O Lord) I only lust,
To stay mine hope on thee:
And in the highest I put my trust,
My sure defense is he.
10
Thou shall not need none ill to fear,
With thee it shall not mell:
Nor yet the plague shall once come near,
Thy house where thou do dwell.
11
For why unto his Angels all,
With charge commands he:
That still in all thy ways they shall,
Preserve and prosper thee.
12
And in their hands shall thee bear up,
Still waiting thee upon:
So that thy foot shall never chance,
To spurn at any stone.
13
Upon the Lion shall thou tread,
The Adder fell and long:
And walk upon the Lion whealpes,
With Dragons stout and strong. etc.
ANd this is the truest and surest way, in my opinion, whereby we may keep our
selves safe from the^. Howbeit also, yt means stands with good reason, which
some counsel us to use, that they may not hurt us, namely, that we have no
familiar conversation with them, neither admit them into our company, although
they seek upon us, and flatter us never so much. For this kind of people, is
of al other, most full of flattery and dissimulation, who following the nature
and property of their master the Devil, do flatter those most sweetly,
whom they endeavor and study to ^ley most traytrously. Moreover, I would wish
that this my cheifest remedy and best counsel, in this behalf, were taken,
that they hurt us not: which is this, to wit, that all Judges of Assise, which
sit upon life and death, but especially, all Barons, and Lords of the
Parliament, were admonished, that letting pass all vain and curious
disputations of this matter, they would wholly apply them selves to this,
diligently to enquire after such persons, and when they have found them out,
severely to punish them. For there is no vyler pestilence, nor that can be
named more execrable and cruel against man kind, then are Sorcerers, whom the
last law in the title, De Maleficis, in the Code, would have every man that
knows them to apprehend them, commit them to hold, and bring them to
judgment: this crime has always seemed so detestable. And I would to God,
Anthony, that those men to whom God has given the authority to make Laws,
and execute Justice, had taken such order by their laws, that every Judge
should have absolute and full authority within his circuit, territory, and
precinct, to make away and put to death, these perjured runnagates from the
Faith, and most wicked kind of men, that they might not through the long
prolonging of Judgment, and sundry breakinges of, and circumstances of apeales
and removing the matter, which they bring in and use, at length escape away
freely out of the Judges hands. As it chances oftentimes. For there is given
unto the gouerner of every province, full authority and jurisdiction
concerning murderers, and such as rob men upon the high ways, and other
fellons, to do his pleasure to the uttermost on them for their due execution:
and why should they not likewise have authority to determine of those crimes
also, without any apealing from them? and that, since the offense of him is
far worse and more intolerable that slays a man with poison, then that
kills him with a sword: and of him that does it privily, then that sets
upon him openly. Now this is the last poinct, Anthony, whereof I have to
admonish you, as being the conclusion of our whole disputation: How all men
ought to perceive and understand by those things which we have uttered
before, after what sort, and how continually we ought to commend our selves
to GOD, least that we fall into the snares of witches and Sorcerers, and be
hurt by them, for they are our mortal enemies, and they be passinge secret:
As we are also bounden to give most hearty thanks unto the same our God, that
he has defended us from the crafts of Satan, so deadly a foe of ours, that
we should not fall into the same error that Sorcerers do, and most miserably
run into the denying, and forswearing of his name. Finally you see, Anthony,
with how great praise the infinite goodness, and wonderful providence of our
good god and heavenly father toward mankind, is to be extolled and
commended. His infinite goodness, that whereas there have been so many Sorcerers
in all ages, that have so wickedly and so traytrously denied him utterly, and
chosen Satan for their God: he had not utterly consumed and destroyed the
whole world, which he might have done most justly. His wonderful providence, yt
although Satan endeavor very diligently to draw men away from their salvation
which is in god, working in the^ very craftily, and mightily: Yet God
notwithstanding, through his mere grace, preserves ye greater number of men,
now at this present, even from his snares, restrayneth his power, disapointeth
his purposes, finally, has tofore, and does so evermore work, that the
better number escapes and has the upper hand, through fear of whom, the
wicked are kept in awe, that they can not hurt as much as they would, and the
elect, and children of God thereby are not drawn away from the faith, but
constantly continue therein. Unto which our God everlasting, almighty, and
most loving: be all praise, honor, and glory, for evermore. Amen. Will you
ask of me any thing else, Anthony?


Anthony. Nothing at all. For you have answered me sufficiently throughout the
whole discourse of this argument, in respect whereof, I give you most hearty
thanks. Fare you well therefore, Theophilus.


Theophilus. And you also, Anthony.


FINIS.

