The Knave in Grain, New Vampt. A witty Comedy, Acted at the Fortune many
days together with great Applause. Written by J. D. Gent.

LONDON: Printed by J. O. and are to be sold by John Nicholson at his Shop
under St. Martins Church near Ludgate. 1640.

To the Generous Reader.
COurteous Reader, the ancient Latin Adage is, Sultorum, but I say Nebulonum
plena sunt omnia, Knaves be about all persons, and in all places. There are
twelve Coat-Cards in the bunch, of which four are Knaves, Heart, Diamond,
Spade, Club, suiting with the four C C C C: Court, City, Country, Camp: My
purpose is not to touch any in particular; only thus much of them in general:
some are notable, some notorious, some pimping, some panderly Knaves; some
prating, some pestilent; some cousening, some cunny-catching Knaves. There are
also lazy and lying, base, and deboist, fantastical, foolish, and false
Knaves. To these we may add Heretical and Hypocritical, schismatic, and
separisticall Knaves: not forgetting perjured, and shameless; impudent, and
informing; arrogant, and arrant Knaves, Cum multis alijs. And besides these, I
have heard of a Knave Tapster, a Knave Ostler, a Knave Sergeant, and a Knave
Broker: but with these we have nothing to do at this time; only with a Knave
in grain, or a Knave new vampt, in decyphering of whom, I give all the rest
this Caveat, Have amongst you my Masters: And now if any of the rest shall
find himself touched, he has his mends in his own hands, for he cannot say
but I gave him fair warning. And so much of the Argument, the Act follows.

The Actors Names.
IVlio the Knave in grain. Franciscus a Merchant of Venice. Chrisipus Father to
Cornelia. Thomaso. Lodwicke.
Gentlemen. Stultissimo a humerous gentleman. Fub his man. Arbaces a Senator of
Venice. Antonio his son. Vallentius a gentleman. A Hermit. A Doctor. A
Divine. A gentleman with him. Duke of Venice. Two Senators. A Guard. A Drawer.
The Bread and Meatman. A Mercer and his man. A Barber. Two Sergeants. A Carman.
A rabble of Boys and others. Two men. A Country fellow.
Cornelia wife to Franciscus. Phemone her sister. Monkey the Knaves wife. Pusse
the Bawd. Doctors Wife.
The Knave in Grain; OR New Vampt.
Actus primus. Scena prima.
Enter Julio and Monkey. Iulio. WHy how now Puss, what ails my Monkie to
chatter out of tune thus?


Monk. A whoreson senseless Coxcombe -- but I am glad thou art come, I long for
a pottle of wine and a Capon.


Iulio. Good provision for the present Monkie, but viderit futuritas, in the
mean time, who lays up for futurity? Come you raise four hundred per annum,
out of pottles of Wine and Capons?


Monk. Yes my Granado, in this quality: they that come short of my breeding
have don't. The first credit I won was in a Garrison.


Iulio. In Holland.


Monk. No; and yet in the low Countries: I never sat foot in a leaguer yet.


Iulio. The reason of that?


Monk. My hard fate nothing else, having as much impudence, and as many ways
to manage it, receiving weekly Corantoes from Paris, Roterdam, and Flushing,
and having trade too in Middleborough, I have been house Lecturer three years
together, and read Aretine, both in print and picture, and that is much for one
of my years.


Iulio. 'T may be thou wantst acquaintance.


Monk. No such matter, the old Exchange, the new Burse, and new Town, afford
plenty; not a Prentice that can cry Bawd, nor a Butchers Dog that can say bow
wow, but is of my acquaintance.


Iulio. Yet it may be they are precise, and will not be seen in it.


Monk. That I know not, but most sure, I have feasted the Liberty twice at mine
own charge, and helped their wives and daughters to the earning of many a fair
pound: they will be seen in that.


Iulio. Well, I am sure I have furnished thy Library with all books of
behavior, and tables of entertainment.


Monk. And I have culled out all my phrases as curiously and stuck my language
with such enticing conveniences: and for intellicence, all the lawn women, lace
women, box women, and to come nearer to the business, very hair women,
perriwig women, and candied Elicumpany lick halbars, come in twice a week like
decoy Ducks, with whole sholes at the ^aile of them.


Iulio. Why, then there is a fault in your company.


Monk. I, I, that villainous company undoes all, There Is Lodowick Tomaso
Vallentine, high talkers, and deep drinkers, but they have wit in their wine,
and too much honesty in their actions at all time, there is only on Gentleman --


Iulio. Stultissimo of a plain cut and square size, he runs just as you throw
him; rub him a little against the grain now, and he will come off a great deal
the smoother. You would not think, what charitable benefactours three or four
such plush Colonels would be to the founding of a new honor.


Monk. But have thou such a purpose, indeed?


Iulio. Why should not I have purpose and effect as much as any: A leager, yes,
so it lay in the I Will of plenty; I Would dig through the Alps with Haniball, and
fetch Theseus from Hell, with Hercules purpose and practice, my precious
Monkie, it is done.


Bawd. And shall I come to the honor to write Mistress of the Leaguer.


Iulio. Shall not bate an accent of that title my Catamptiall Monky, but you
must look out for Spiders Monky, and the Sprall of all four Puzz: I have laid
the foundation in gold already.


Monk. Have had a good return of thy Rings chuck?


Iulio. Rings hangum, they are as stale as Scotch Lanson, Or as your Decoy,

No, I have sent um out in a desperate venture to Cape.

No Monkie, my old friend Franciscus has repaired my Jacket already, and has
promised to new thatch my outside too.

One of these boxes has 100 pieces of new gold,

With chains and keys correspondent.


Monk. For what use Chick?


Iulio. For a dead lift Monkie: a Leaguer cannot be planted, manned, victuall'd
and munition'd with a small Magazine: to work Monkie, a mouzing Puss, make
choice of your company, admit no parley with the popular, be high and proud of
thy self, and let those that will needs buy thee, pay soundly for thee with a
pox to um, Puss a wink to the wise, you know my mind, let us have no more
midnight catterwowlings under Sale-mens shop windows, Vintners dark cellers, no
Justices long Entries, but bear up your self so civil and so meager*

You may be stilde a sister of the Leaguer.


Enter Dulciflora a Whore, and Mistress Durable a Bawd, old Signior Stultissimo
a foolish Gentleman, and Fub. Whore. Away you Rogue.


Stult. As I am a Gentleman body and soul I Will break your windows.


Fub. Master, as you are a man stand and tickle her.


Whore. Will you, you Rascal.


Bawd. Ah, sweet heart, prithee good woman.


Fub. Nay, let her come I Will give her heart belly full.


Stult. Let her alone Fub: let her alone, by this hand, I Will make the boys
maule her Ruffs.


Whore. Fie how I am tired a whoreson stinking shamleg'd, Fie, fie, fie, use a
Gentlewoman thus in her own lodging.


Bawd. How does your back, O the Fucas, out alas, here is half a Crown in
Complexion utterly cast away.


Whore. If I be not even with the Rutter --


Bawd. If he come where you have to do, let him pay soundly.


Whore. A plague upon his Asses ears, by my Virginity, I Will send his beard into
New Foundland for this.


Bawd. And so I would, to make lines to catch Cods: out, out, out, a Gentleman,
and use a woman no otherwise; in faith, yfath, it stands not with his reputation.


Whore. A whoreson smelt: Mistress Durable, I would I had some of your aqua
vitae, I Am sick after the conflict.


Bawd. And shall good woman, come, come, pray keep your self warm.


Enter Franciscus, and Julio, Julio very poor. Fran. Forsake me honor, when I
do forget the bond of friendship, let not poverty, no, nor your fathers
haviour Julio: though our Venetian law proved him a Traitor: come pluck away
your interest from my breast: when we were pupills in the Academy, I was
Franciscus and your fellow then; I am Franciscus and your fellow still, nor can
be altered: I have now a heart as free from pride, as when I clipped thee thus,
before thou knew'st the taste of poverty, or I prosperity. Think not ancient
friend I can forget thee, though thy need were such as beggary despised.


Iulio. The liberal hand of heaven reward your love, or lend my wishes that
ability to thank you in requital.


Fran. Amen to that and more.

I tell thee Iulio, I am not happier in my virtuous wife: and yet that is
greater than yielding thee relief it is all that good men wish: Why have we
wealth bestowed on us, but to return the same, where stern necessity pinches
the ribs of him or her that wants? it has no other worth, no more esteem of
me. Heap it together while the, massy weight e'ne crack, what bears it less
than dust? on dust deserves no more regard. I have a Wife, Nurse, and mother,
all she is in one; yet one deserves more Titles, besides her feature, which may
make compare with those that boast of parts: she is so kind, that many
millions may be stamped again, ere one so perfect current. She is worth more
than the earth is: but she is my wife, and I will cease her praise: you know
her father when you have his name: he is called Chrisippus, many style him
good, and wish all Venice such.


Julio. Ere I was banished for my fathers fact, my knowledge coated, and all
Italy, spoke of a Damsel called Cornelia, this good Chrisippus daughter.


Enter Chrisippus, Cornelia, Anthonio, Tomaso, Phemono, Stultissimo, and Fub.
Fran. She is that jewel, that unmatched, thing I made my boast of: That
Cornelia is none but mine, I dare boldly say, and eke affirm it: See my Julio,
she meets us unexpected, and comes to hinder what I would speak more, in cause
of her demerit, modesty, and sweetness.


Chris. Franciscus: son!


Fran. My Love and duty make me ever such.
To all this company a happy hour.

Corn. You have bin mist Franciscus.


Fran. You have been mist Cornelia.


Corn. Where?


Fran. Where ere I have bin, this is my friend, tender him your welcome with as
good respects as I my self where he.


Corn. Sir, bid your own welcome, and command as much as all we have, were
yours.


Iulio Your courtesies to one so thronged in misery As my self, dulls my
behavior, that I know not how Enough to laud or thank you.


Fran. You shall exchange your habit:

Phemone, sister, Anthonio --


Whispers. Anth. We mist you yester night.


Fran. I durst not come believe it:
Vallentius for says rowses are too great,
They make me quake to see 'em.
How fares my cosen Lodwick?

Anth. He spoyld our sport: he was not well he said:

I would you had been there: Tomaso pledged you twice.


Fran. I thank his love.


Tom. It is not worth it Sir.


Stult. In Faith Nephew I was extreme drunk, ask my man Fub else, he will tell
you what a coil he had with me: the rarest lest in faith: prithee tell 'em how
thou foundst me underneath the stairs.


Fub. By no means, 'twill make 'em drunk to hear it.


Enter Arbaces Anthonios Father. Cris. Signior Arbaces you are the man I wished
for.


Arb. Well met Gentlemen: are you here Antonio?


Cris. Cornelia.


Corn. Sir.


Cris. No, it is no matter. Tomaso you shall do it,
Go see nothing want; you are all my guests, you dine with
Me that is certain: Nay, I will not be denied:
Most welcome Sir to you: will you walk?

Fran. Ever, ever welcome.


Exeunt. Manet Stultissimo and Fub. Fub. Will you walk sir? will you munch?


Stult. Sirrah Fub, thou would not think how sore my head is, ever since I
had the knock with the Ladle?


Fub. I believe you: will you feed sir?


Stult. No more in the Ladle. Me thinks I am pocky melancholy here of late.


Fub. So I ghest, ever since you knew the Gentlewoman that beat you.


Stult. Thou say true, ever since in faith.


Fub. Why she is able to make any body pocky melancholy. But would you would
snap a bit sir.


Stult. I love her I cannot tell how: in faith and I were well searched, I think
I am little kin to a Spannell, the more I am beaten, the better I affect.


Fub. Would I were sure of that.


Stult. Well, she shall hear from me in some Sonnet or Ditty; some rare thing
of mine own invention, and that speedily: Let me see to what tune shall I have
it?


Fub. And if you please, let it go to the Punkes delight; it is your only
sweet tune: for women do love the Punks delight.


Stultis. By this hand gramercy; they do indeed, thou can sing if need be.


Fub. I can make a scurvy shift: But to say truth I am no good Querister.


Stult. But can thou do well and scurvily?


Fub. After my manner.


Stult. Would I might be hanged presently, but methinkes I am a piece of a Poet
already, there is such a whistling in my pate.


Fub. That Is nothing but your conceit sir.


Stult. Conceit merrily: O that my love were any thing but woman.


Fub. O that your love were any thing but Common: then might she be. --


Stu. What might she be.


Fub. Nay what you will in faith.


Stu. I Will to it while it is hot, I know I Am in an excellent vein.


Fub. Prick it quickly then:

But Hark you Signior, shall you not need my help?


Stult. I defie't, It shall be all mine own, I cannot abide, it is the scurviest
thing to rob others of their wit, good or bad, it shall flow from mine own
sweet brain.


Fub. I believe you will find the tide turned, it is ebbing water there, would I
might be begged, as he had like to have been, if his foolery do not vex my
discretion, but he gives me means, and I could do little if I could not smile.


Exeunt. Enter Lodowick and Vallentius. Lod. Well Vallentius, and you be caught
in the purlues: and you be not stung for it I Will forswear privacie, and all that
belongs too^^, I have a Girl, the very spirit of what she was made for, and
she were honest, she might crave supremacy of Hellen, and make her ride
behind.


Vallen. And I love one were she not honest, that is her only fault, she were a
Paragon unparalleld, mingle all beauty that our Venice yields, and set her
self aside, she would stand peerlesse, over-shine them all, and dim the
Artists cunning.


Lod. Is she a woman?


Vall. Yes, but such a one no voluntary habit, nor sly drift with all
accommodations that beseemes, unblemisht truth it self can bring to speech or
give my thoughts access.


Lod. What is she for a Saint, that stands in the how fair and beautiful: may
one of my birth entreat her name and knowledge?


Vall. Vow your assistance to my purposes, and I a Traitor to my self reveal
the treason of my mind.


Lod. Give me your hand, I am yours for better or worse, in all causes, all
adventures, my sword and self vow fealty: Is she a wife?


Vall. I, would she were not.


Lod. Know you Vanderman our great Physician.


Vall. What, my fretfull Doctor? the only curer of mad folks; Know I my self?


Vall. You know he is married.


Lod. Yes, and what of this (oh would you be ministering therein.) I have you my
dear Flora, well take my word she is thine.


Vall. I would that I were hers.


Lod. Why it lies in thine own choice.


Vall. But setting all this pleasantness aside, in earnest Lodowick I affect
her so, no motive mean nor yet dire accident can change my steadfast will, I
must enjoy her, or I must not live.


Lod. Thou shall enjoy her, or I will not live.


Vall. You speak like a friend.


Lod. I speak like what I am, a Christian, and by that Epethite, I meant as
much as I speak, nor could I think, Vallentius, you of all the men alive,
would have mistaken me.


Vall. In any kind but this I never had: pardon me Lodowick this doting loves
bears such a jealous sway, the least suspicion puts us on the wrack, and
breaks all chains of duty: You may persuade me to believe, but yet he that
never saw a Vessel under sail, cannot imagine what the Seaman brooks, the
Merchant sleeping on his downey Cowch, nere dreams what danger the bold
Souldie^r dures, and he that never felt the pangs of Hell, cannot report the
torments: assure thee Lodowick so be satisfied, since I knew her, I have not
known my self, so mighty is loves extremes.


Lod. It Is strange.


Vall. She troth plight was to me, and had been mine, had not desire of pelf
altered her friends, and I dare well vow she loved me once, what ere her mind
be now.


Lod. Come be ruled by me, thou shall set thy toe in the Doctors stirrup, ride
and go a foot at thy pleasure: did she love thee once?


Vall. I had her oath.


Lod. Go to, renew thy suite, the fire is not all out, stir up the ashes, and
thou do not find some embers, that will both glow and warm, pawn me for
buttered Sack, and let me never be worthy redemption.


Val. I want the means.


Lod. Think not of that, it is here my Flora, what man? he is not the first Doctor
has worn a corner Cap: come, will you be merry Vallentius, and you will forsake
not this mood, I renounce society.


Val. I am yours, obedient as your hand.


Lod. Follow me then, and I drive not this melancholy fit out of thee, I Will
never trust my conceit: what, ho Damazella? Knocks, and Clarislona looks out at
the window.


Whore. Whose there?


Lod. He Is here that should be here, come down?


Whore. Lodowick.


Lod. Yes.


Val. What Is she.


Lod. The commodity I told you of, there is a Gentleman a friend of yours in
love with her.


Val. Not your self.


Lod. No faith, though you shall hear her swear as much, it is our rich heir
Signior Stultissimo.


Val. What, the Fool?


Lod. That mor sell of man's flesh, she cannot beat him away, he haunts the
Eves like a Sparrow in March, you may hunt flies from honey sooner then him out
of her company: now Mistress how stands things with you, when did you play with
your fools babble?


Whore. You Will never leave this.


Lod. Bid my friend welcome.


Val. I thank you Lady.


Lod. Come kiss me?


Whore. Will you stay all night?


Lod. Yes, when I am weary of strength, and foes with my back.


Whore. In Faith Lodowick, you must leave this?


Lod. So I will*


Whore. When?


Lod. When thou leave thy trade?


Whore. Will you sup here?


Lod. Yes drink, nothing else.


Whore. Lord, how wise your grown?


Lod. So I were, if I could keep out of your company.


Whore. Fie, your'e to uncourteous Lodwick: nay, he is ever thus, but it is my
fault.


Lod. Marry mend it then for shame.


Whore. Where Is my Bracelet, which of your Truls has that?


Lod. Shall I be true to thee?


Whore. Your'e nere true to me.


Lod. I mean honest.


Whore. I care not for your honesty.


Lod. I believe that too, but in plain verity. Your bracelet embraces my horses
main.


Whore. Come, you jest.


Lod. No good troth.


Whore. Swear you, I hope you make a difference between your horse and me.


Lod. Faith but little: and yet your'e both good bearers.


Val. By the bright Sun you wrong her: weep not fair one.


Lod. What, shall we have tricks?


Enter Julio. Val. You are too blame beshrow me.


Lod. Now, when, what needs all this, nay, and you powt farewell.


Val. As I am a Gentleman you part not so.


Whore. Sweet, Lodwick.


Lod. Hum, why was not this before, I have seen the Bears.


Val. Do not I know your woman?


Enter the Bawd. Bawd. Hist, hist, Are you the man of War?


Lod. Nay, you must draw nearer, if you will have your Embassy answered: how is it
Mistress Durable?


Bawd. How do you Master Lodowick?


Lod. The worse for you, and your creatures.


Bawd. It Is a good hearing.


Lod. Shall I have three or four words in private?


Whore. Not with her unless I participate.


Bawd. What Is the matter?


Whore. Yonder Is Fub, the parties man you wot on has something under hand and
seal.


Bawd. For me.


Whore. So he gives out.


Bawd. You may admit him.


Whore. Rest you merry Gentlemen.


Enter Fub. Lod. Whose this secret party, this concealed Champion* What have ye
here, Signior Stuliissimoes man?


Fub. All hail.


Vall. This fellow would keep a vilde coil if he were a top ath' tiles.


Fub. Gentiles, good speed.


Lod. What, the Plough?


Fub. No, you, and you please, Marona to your self.


Lod. This fellows discreet.

(gives a paper)
Whore. To me.


Fub. So says his backside.


Enter Julio. Iulio You the man of War, or more properly Pirat, that gave
summons to the leaguer.


Lod. Leager, Sir.


Iulio. Leager, Sir, the report of your Pot-guns cannot make us hang up a white
flag.


Toma. The skirt of a clean smock's more proper ath' two.


Iulio. We come not to learn what is proper of you, Monkie, and catch flies.


Lod. Play at his foolery, come hither Punck.


Iulio. Sir, you are uncivil, she is none; nor this a Bawdy house; but a Leaguer
of gentle entertainment.


Lod. The fellow dreams: Come wake and be thy self.


Iulio. My self? Would you were as sure your selves as I am.


Tom. A what?


Iul. I Would feign know that of you:
But I advise you to take council of your best judgment first,
Your words will be questioned.

Lodw. Question that dares, thou art an arrant Cheater.


Iulio. It Is not your pare royal of plush Coxecombes can secure you in it.


Lodo. Valiant a the sudden too.


Iulio. Not suddenly neither:
The growth has both time and sufficient temper.
Why I a Cheater? let any impartial --
Ride Circuit, and sit in judgment of us all,
And show any reason either in Art or Nature,
Why I a Cheater more than any of you.

Lod. Thou have nothing but a little wit to live upon.


Iulio. That Is endowment enough for a Gentleman:
I ever shall count him the nobler gentleman
That makes himself a fortune in the world, than he
That brings it into the world with him.

Tom. Suppose this granted: yet why this a Leaguer?


Julio. I want words for you: only for conclusion, one out of a strange
affected carriage has gathered an admirable method of drilling, and training
men from the flying of Cranes: Another rare order and government of
Commonwealths, from the poor labor of the Be: And I out of this Leaguer --


Lodo. Will extract certain ways and carriages for Cheaters and Libertines.


Iul. Twere not from my purpose if I granted that to. Lycurgus was the first
Lawmakers; and the best Law that ever he made, was a provision or maintenance
for Cheats, as you call em, and Fellons (viz.) That he (without exception of
age, quality, or condition) which could do the most high dainty, and dangerous
piece of Felony, and come clear off, should be preferred to the most eminent
place of office in the State; but if he failed, he was then to receive Martial
Law.


Lodo. Strange course, pick Officers out of Fellons.


Iulio. It Is a kind of Meslin or mingled grain still. How much of the poores
money was found in one of the Churchwardens purchase last day?


Lod. None I think.


Iulio. How many thieves horses have bin watered at the High Constable of the
hundreds watring trough within this ten years?


Tom. I think not any.


Julio. It may be so: But I am sure, I have heard, or read* or something, that
a new Chief Justice of some place, or a better man would not ha made very nice
to bid a fat purse to breakfast with him if he light upon it soundly: so that
it is not so much the Art to know, as the government to dispose: that
quallifies the man.


Lodo. He says true: all times have bin guilty of good fellowship, why not
this? I like the Leaguer now so well, I care not if I buy a place of command in
it my self.


Julio. Why now you come to me,
That Is the Pearl I ha^ dived for all this while:
I have a catalogue of names, places, and prizes.
A cup of entertainment for my friend.
Welcome to the new Leaguer.

Lodo. We Will pledge, we will pledge:
Victual'd and Win'd already?

Iulio. To the Society at the Swan two pottles and a half: Monkey the health;
these are my noble and prime visi tants; the boxes I gave you to lay up.


Lod. How now Iulio, gold?


Tom. By this light, and the most curious.


Iul. A poor Grannams gift gentlemen: 300 pieces, or such a taste, par^ly
induction to a business, or so. There Is a Bordeaux Merchant in Town now,
would lay me between wind and water this twelve month, but the spite is, I am
tied not to part with this gold for ever: if I knew where to borrow but half
the worth on it --


Lodw. Half the worth?
I Will vow to lend the full worth,
If that will pleasure thee.

Iulio. You shall keep the gold under lock and key for your pawn.


Lod. Thou shall not want for such a courtesy to do thee good: I Am glad
thou art so thriving.


Tom. Lock up the box, and keep the key; there is the full sum.


Iulio. To a Piece I assure you: you shall see else again.


Lod. No more, no more trouble:
Let me see for how long?

Iulio. Three Months, not a day longer:
Nay sooner if money chance to come in before:
I have offices in my Leaguer stand upon Fortunes hill.
'Vds me Signior Stultissimo promi^ed
Me a courtesy last night:

Monkey. Assure thee sweet chuck he will not fail thee.


Iulio. I believe thee without an oath:
Make my friend welcome to the Leaguer Monkey:
As soon as I have dispatched my voyage
To the Canaries, I am for you again Lads.

Whor. Gentlemen, who can read?


Lod. Who cannot?


Fub. I can resolve you:
She cannot.

Lod. What Is here?
Opprobrious Saint, and most Angellicke fiend,
Ere I begin, thus do I make an end.

Lod. I should have been sorry else:
Nay silence, or the Proclamation's lost.
And if thy heart be not patcht up in Marble,
Hark how my pen does in thy praises warble.

Val. O dear Apollo, how art thou abused, Is there more?

Sweet stinging Waspe, and well conceited Dove*
For beauty nice, entitled Queen of love
Of me; Sir reverence; that does thee adore;
Which art esteemed a good one and no more:
Let reason rule thy Amazonian sist*
Let ladle rude be thrown at hady wist,
So shall I love thee, take it for no fable
Better then well, and more then I am able.
Yours despite your guts. S. S.


Lod. Ass, Ass.


Val. The Authors name.


Lod. Cannot you get her Signior Stultissimo?


Val. O, lamentable complaint!


Lod. As ever poor man heard.


Whore. Will he take no warning.


Val. Is this a Challenge?


Lod. Fie no, they are too violent to come in rhyme.


Whore. Lodowick, is not this your practice?


Lod. Why, do thou think me so simple, so ridiculous.


Fub. No, I Will assure you, It Is a token of good will of my Masters, there is no
brain guilty ont but his own: if you like it you may, and you will not, the
laws in your own hands, you may choose.


Whore. Good Gentlemen return the Carrier.


Lod. What? a cuffe or a knock.


Fub. He has penned a Song too, which I should have tickled, if I had not been
hoarse with drinking Flap-Dragons last night.


Lod. What Is thy name?


Fub. Fub.


Lod. Prithee honest Fub, tickle thy self out of our companies, we will be
Fubb'd no longer.


Fub. Will not you be Fubb'd Sir.


Lod. Thou know my resolution.


Fub. Nay, but will ye not indeed?


Lod. No faith*


Fub. I am glad I know it, -- be with you.


Exit. Lod. Have you any wine in the house?


Whore. Yes dearest.


Enter Julio. Lod. Come, a pox a these devices, hang off: will you drink
Vallentius?


Val. Will I live?


Lod. Where Is the Matron?


Whore. The Matron, Lord, you're the strangest man. --


Lod. Your Matron Grandum, what will you have it, your Bawd?


Whore. I must be quiet.


Val. Nay, enter, enter.


Exeunt omnes. Enter Julio, very brave, solu^. Julio. The easy time, and such
as thrive in it, favor my wishes, the ignorant whose sole dependence is on
verity, and carry conscience in their timorous breasts, are not associates meet
for Iulio. Those that near knew the strain of Policy, nor aim at more, then
what may well content, draw not my length, the way to prosper, the directest
course such are my sore necessities, is to get liking of this lovely Maid
Franciscus sister, bright Phemone, the Virgin's modest, chaste, and debonaire,
besides her brother's rich, there hang my hopes, but she affects not me, all
her desires are on young Anthonios, rich Arbaces son, my friend (supposed) at
least, but that is breath; by what man has, or can have, he is my foe that
hinders my design, where he my next of blood, that shall he find: the mean
to purchase what I reach at now, there is but only one, one only mean that can
supplant him, here it lies shall do it, were he as dear in estimation as
Nisus to Eurialus.

I love my self, I count him still most wise,
That cares not who is thrown down so he arise.

Actus secundus. Scena prima.
Enter Franciscus and Julio. sound Music. Fran. THou have to say something, yet
nothing I hope trivial, by our known affection I beseech thee, speak what thou
can.


Iulio. I would I had embraced my poverty, while the pale Moon has residence
in heaven, would I had been deaf.


Fran. Whereto tends this speech if I thought my fault, or any ones pertain'd
to me, through wilful negligence, or otherwise, to breed the occasion of this
passionate mood, I should condemn the cause of the offense, and deem my self
unhappy.


Iulio. Can heaven suffer it?


Fran, What, what does heaven suffer, speak my Iulio?


Iulio. Too much of ill.


Fran. Let me know that ill, and I rest satisfied.


Iulio. Pray no more, the malady is mortal, unsanctified, monstrous. Anthonio
is there such a man?


Fran. Many that wear that name in Italy: but one amongst that many known to
me.


Iulio. Hate all the name.


Fran. Pardon Iulio, I Will hate my self first.


Julio. Anthonio is a Villain.


Fran, Blot not the reputation of his youth with such calumny, he is no way
such, but as unblemisht, as the snow before it touch the Mountains.


Iulio. He Is a Villain.


Fran. Villain never had so fair an outside, nor yet heart so just as that he
carries.


Iulio. He Is a Villain.


Fran. I have some business at the Port, you will sup with me to night.


Iulio. Do you love your self, do you love honor, do you love your wife?


Fran. I do.


Iulio. Then hate that Anthonio.


Fran. Give me to understand, since you will force me to endure your report,
wherein he is culpable, or does deserve these ignominious titles.


Iulio. He loves not you.


Fran. It Is not my fault.


Iulio. He wrongs your sister.


Fran. Therein, he is too blame.


Julio. He loves your wife.


Fran. That amends, quits all his former wrongs.


Iulio. Can you bear it thus, wink Vulcan then,
And let the god of War, throw up her skirts again.

Fran. How Is this?


Julio. You will not understand; I Will speak no further.


Fran. Come, come, my wife is honest.


Julio. Yes.


Fran. If she be, it is nothing you have said, I Will hear no more; begone.


Julio. Will you list a word, Anthonio wongs you.


Fran. Wrong me, and if he would he cannot.


Julio. He plays the Parasite, the officious Ass to veil his sin.


Fran. Would I might understand you?


Iulio. The Serpent tempts your wife, these ears and eyes can testify; for
your sister, she is stale: his excuse, whereby he cloakes his vice.


Fran. I wish you Iulio, to know what you speak.


Iulio. I am not mad, I love you, it is my love, you are my father.


Fran. I pray be advised, consider what you do? speak not this no report, be
certain; do not abuse my patience. Tempt my wife, rent earth, and swallow
falsehood.


Iulio. Will you be moved Pernassus, the two topt, forked Mount?


Fran. My blood is not mine own, I want command of all that now obeyed me, how
different are my fits? I am now a congealed, kneaded cake of ice, bound from
all motion, now again (me thinks) a flaming Island, a Vesunius Hill, merely
combustion.


Iulio. Forget not, sir, your patience.


Fran. Tell me of patience when I am my self: how did he tempt her, how did
she accord on thy reputation?


Iulio. I would I had been dumb?


Fran. Hang not in the wind, (delay does torture) answer me as how?


Iulio. Kind, sir, recall your wonted manhood?


Fran. Answer me how.


Iulio. I pray pardon me.


Fran. What? strike and cry mercy, I must be resolved, thou have flung me in the
fire, even in the Oven, the mouth of Aetna, nothing thou coulst have said,
nothing have done, could have assured like torture.


Iulio. Would, when I saw him kiss her, crush her hand, wink and laugh out,
use his undecent language: Fie, fie.


Fran. Cornelia false, the flood may come again, nothing impossible, kiss, and
crush hands, wink, wink heaven and all above.


Iulio. Kind, sir.


Fran. Bear witness, all that good are, how dear, how dear, I held that
most false man: set him here, here, even on the spire and pinnacle of my heart;
my life was his, and all that I call mine, but her he has abused?


Iulio. Dear friend, do not forget your name, these are but likelihoods, far
from the thing it self, and say he be a Villain, as no doubt he is little
better in his rude exposures: she may be honest.


Fran. No Julio, no, had she meant well,
She would have warnd me of his foul attempts,
Said such, and so's his haviour.
When she was loyal, as sure one she was,
(If ever any was) no accident how vain
So e're it seemed, but she a woman, would unfold
Her sex, and say 'twas thus, and thus.

Iulio. I have stroke him through.


Fran. Treble abuse:
Deflowred my wife, abused me,
Disgraced my sister; thrown infamy
On all our heads at once: What beast uncivil bred,
Amongst careless Monsters (but thee Antonio)
Would have been kicked on to that damned enterprise?
That I had patience; me thinks thou should not
Be the Villain yet, report does speak thee.

Iulio. Nay gentle friend.


Fran. It Is true, it is true.
Had any 'twixt the North and Southern Pole
Spoke these words but he, it had not been,
And he had falsely lied.
This is a Creature I have raised, revived,
Snatched from destructions teeth,
Incorporated to me, so dear and just, as not
A thing in all the world can be more truer to it self
And certain: but his modesty conceales it,
Could write a Volume of their loathed designs,
And curse the stories cause. O false Cornelia!

Julio. Remember what you are.

Fran. Remembrance burst!
There Is no contemplation, nothing what ere can
Drive the thought of shame out of my mind:
Would I had never known discretion,
Could never have made distinctions of persons,
And harmless Creatures; hence forth be ignorance:
Mother of Nations and Understanding perish:
Fair, foul Cornelia. The blue faced
Occan, nor her fertile womb, that yields
Us all increase, nourishes none so false as woman:
Traitors have they been since their first being,
And betrayed poor man e're he beheld himself.
Cornelia can it be thou art a Strumpet?
Oh, oh, fury finish that, burns thee to Cynders.

Exit. Iulio. Work on, work on:
Fate lifts me to the seat of my desires;
And I am prosperous and happy.
This Devil jealousy, my present friend,
Cannot at least but quite supplant Anthonio:
Besides this seeming honesty of mine, begets me good
Opinion of Franscicus, as shall install my wish;
All adds to my avail: what need I curses fear
For the debate my policy shall raise betwixt these Turtles*
I hold with Machievel, for fame or profit
To break oath or league with friend,
Or Brother: there is nothing gainful bad:
I ha my wish, Advancement now
Is what I aim at, present glory here:
He Is true religious, that does nothing fear.

Exit. Enter Thomaso, Valentius, Lodwicks, Stultissimo, and Fub. Stult. And
how? and how?
Was it not patheticall and pretty?

Val. Y faith I never heard the like.

Lod. Nor I.

Stult. I thank the Muses, I have as sharp a conceit of mine own when I
list.


Lod. Sir I take you to be a great devourer of Verjuyce.


Stult. Now and then; but it is not altogether that; every one has his gift.


Val. It Is so.


Stul. Some has two or three.


Lod. You say true Signior, some has twenty: for which they may thank
impudency and the art of begging.


Stul. The art of begging: pray you how long has begging been an art?


Lod. Ever since in rid in a foote-cloath, and wore the badge of authority.


Stult. How long's that ago?


Lod. Ever since you Grannams daughter had a Calfe of your age.


Stul. Is It possible?


Lod. Yes, and will continue till he is a Bull and horn mad.


Stul. Most miraculous: would I were mercinary, and had no more in me than an
ordinary man: Signior, I cry you mercy. How do you since you powered the
pottle of wine in my neck, and threw the pot at my head, because I would not
pay my part o'th shot?


Tom. Was there such a time?


Stult. Was there? Why have you forgot how you kicked me, and I crept under the
Table: I Will be sworn this Hip's as lame ever since, as if I had the Cyatica.


Fub. Absurd and gross.


Vallen. We must leave you Signior.


Stul. I thank you with all my heart: I am going to the foresaid place: here is
my servant Fub can tell you if I lie in my throat.


Fub. I will assure you he is wandering to Pusse, or as a man would say, to deal
with Mistress Clariflora.


Stul. Yes faith am I: she beat me the other day, and I am now going to make her
amends. I think I endure more beating than any three in Venice.


Fub. Than a Stock Fish.


Val. It Is a sign you are offensive.


Stul. So they say that do it. Yester night a scurvy boy did so joule my head
and the wall together, for holding opinion that Cheese was unwholesome.


Val. No more good Signior: farewell.


Stul. At your service:
Shall we expect you at the old house?

Exit Stul. and Fub. Val. If you please:
Have you heard the like?

Tom. These are Asses so tedious --

Val. They Are kin to Burs, they will not off with shaking.
Now my Thomaso what I have to say:
The chief occasion made me summon you,
Is to entreat your knowledge and assistance
In such a project, (as your self set by) and him that must
Partake in the attempt, Venice in Italy
Conceales the man that I durst credit.

Tom. Let it not touch confusion of the State,
Treason, and Murder: whatsoever it be,
Command my will and sufferance.

Val. Defend that ever I should be such:
Vallentius never had so foul a thought,
To infect himself, and others.
Thus, in brief, I love a woman; fairer
Than her self never wore the Epethite:
You have seen her sure, and know her:
She Is wife to Vanderman.

Tom. Correma's daughter?

Val. That same only wight, is the most precious
Beauty I adore, and would feign call mine own.

Tom. Knew you her husband?

Val. By his name, no further;
By that knowledge you understand his course.

Tom. Yes he is a Physician: and besides,
What else report speaks of him.

Val. Listen then my purpose,
The severe sir, whose high stretched phrases
Galls the ears of Patience, and wisdom would fain shun,
Bears such a jealous and observant eye
Over the prey I aim at, all conference is debarred,
And you may sooner whisper with the Saint
Argos had charge of, than converse with her,
Unseen, and unsuspected.

Tom. Is there no device to compass her?

Val. But one, and this is it;
Your self and Lodwicke (harken I beseech you)
Shall to this skillful Vanderman present me
As one distracted: nay smile anon,
And with a kind of sober modesty, as if you list you can,
Report some probable possibility, how
And which way I got my ecstasy:
Let me alone to make your words seem truth,
And so possess my prating Mountebanke,
That he shall say and swear I Am mad at least.
If not past all recovery.

Tom. Will this do?

Val. This, or none.

Tom. Then none.
Why this is the shallowest, indirectest course to win a woman that ever was
composed, in my opinion.

Val. In your opinion: why sir?

Tom. Why, hope you to gain her thus with a mad fit: mark the event, this is
a course as wide: Are you so simple to imagine, she a timorous woman, will
endure your presence, seeming possessed? for shame believe it not, invent some
other means.


Lodw. I verily think so too, but he will never be persuaded.

Tom. This were a way to scare her, and to make her shun you.

Lodw. Leav't off, leav't off, and study some other new passage.

Tom. Do, do; this is the grossest: fie Vallentius:

Lodw. Come, you shall pardon him once: we all miss sometimes.

Val. Good gallants do not ride me, lest I gall you: I Will assure you I trot
hard: why my brace of conceits, my wits; what does your abundance of wit run
at waste: for shame, have you so poor a brain, and you my most exquisite
excellent, for shame take off your spectacles and see better: are you such a
dunce: are you so rare a Coxcombe, to deem I will appear always the same:
are you the men you promised? will you be Masters of your words and oaths,
tender your vowed assistances?


Lodw. I am Lodwicke still.

Tom. And I Tomaso.

Val. Continue so: what shall redound upon this adventure, falls upon my head,
be it no shame to yours: only preferment and your smooth apologies.


Lod. Leave that to us.

Tom. But can you act the madman bravely?

Val. Tut, I have played Ajax, and performed the part well, to make boast of
imitation, better than he that Lucian writes of, who so digested what he played,
that he run mad indeed.


Tom. Can you do it?

Val. So well, as Aesop could discharge his Scene, whereby he won most laud.

Lod. This praise were well in me.

Val. Mistrust not my behavior, and if it prove not correspondent to my word,
think me an idle vanter, and no meet associate for you.


Tom. When put we this in practice?

Val. There Is no deferring weeks, nor days, this hour, this very evening
does my fit begin.

Lod. Shall we about it then?

Val. What else, what else? Remember gentlemen you fall not upon the scandal
of Ignorance: but in any case keep your countenances.


Lodw. Make no doubt of that.

Val. Come then, and fortune friend us.

Exeunt omnes Enter Francisco, and Antonio, as in a Grove. Fran. Draw your
sword.

Ant. Against whom?

Fran. Against me.

Ant. Against any living man that's your enemy:
What ailes my dear Francisco?
By your face you should not be in health.

Fran. Draw your sword.

Ant. What mean you?

Fran. Draw your sword.

Ant. Against you never in anger:
Are you well Franciscus? me thinks your cheek
Carries a paler hue than wont to be his Livery.

Fran. I must fight with you.

Ant. With me.

Fran. With thee perfideous monster, with thee thou Judas.

Ant. Are you your self?

Fran. Thou have abused me, wronged me.

Ant. I wronged and abused you?
Franciscus, can you think so of me?

Fran. Do not enquire; yonder he sits knows all:
Look yonder, thou art to him transparent, and seen through,
As easy as the air: do not cloak thy vice, do not:
See thou this? see thou the place we tread on?
Mark my speech, one of us twain, or both (never start)
On this cold earth, this very Champion, shall
Offer up a crimson sacrifice of his most precious blood:
For that cause drew I to this silent shade,
Remote from all suspicion, where
Revenge might glut with satisfaction:
Draw thy sword, or else thou never shall.

Ant. Did not my love prohibit,
Think, Francisco, I could not be a Coward,
Nor endure the opprobrious taunts the malice
Of your heart has made your tongue throw on me;
Why I know not: believe me, and receive it for a truth,
Were you some other, in this wide vast world,
And not Franciscus, you had been a dog
That I had kicked long since; but you are my friend,
And my disgrace is buried: yet if you carry honor
In your breast, and bear your wonted venerable mind,
Make me to understand from whence, or why your
Comminations and undecent language point thus at me alone?

Fran. Will you draw?

Ant. Do you thirst for blood? if so, and mine, hide to the hilts your naked
instrument, my bosom is your mark: thrust home and take your fill.


Fran. Will you draw?

Ant. You had mine answer, never* never.

Fran. Do you not love my wife?

Ant. Yes, by Heaven.

Fran. Confess, o impudence! my wrong cries out, no more expostulation,
remember Iulio.

Ant. Wherefore him, he is a Toad more virulent, oh, oh!

Fran. Bathe there, adulterate fiend, and thy red drops wash off thy guilty
stains.

Enter Hermit and Shepherd. Ant. Oh, some charitable creaure!
Francisco, dear Francisco.
Exit. No pity, no remorse, I bleed, and much effusion robs me of my breath,
something of sense relieve me, help, o help.

Shep. That dying tune, was sure a man's, where art thou friend, speak thou that
cryd'st for help, if thou would have thy wish, speak once again: where art
thou?


Ant. Here.

Shep. To one in thy case could I nere less wish, then health and mercy, how
fare you sir?

Ant. Oh! Oh!

Shep. His utterance is decayed, and life begins to creep out of his wounds:
let me see, so many, and so mortal! can I but stay the course I wish no more:
have I nothing left, to stay this passage: well, yet still he breathes, that I
had here some help. Thy aid Omnipotent, yet his pulses beat, life is not quite
discharged, -- no succor! keep he but motion, till I can bear him to my Cell,
I doubt not, his recovery: this wind, this wind, that my Balmes were here:
for my youthful days heaven lend ability.


Exit. He carries him off. Enter Crissippus, Tomaso, Lod wick, Iulio, Cornelia,
and Phemone. Cris. Run to all brief confusion.

Lod. Good, sir, be pacified.

Cris. Even in the pride, and noon time of his fortunes, brought to destruction
thus: a milder, better tempered Gentleman, Venice nor Europe yielded; his
knowledge made me proud, and I was rich in his adoption.


Corn. O my Franciscus, o my gentle Lord!

Phe. My brother, my dear brother.

Cris. My son, my son, so noble, valiant, wise, dearer to me then him I
call mine own by true succession, do you weep?


Iulio. I am not blessed, all things do sort contrary; 'twill not do, my
projects thrive not, would I had been silent, we know the first, but not the
last, I begin to perceive our policies of times whets the Axe, cuts off our own
necks; I have and one my self, that it should come to this, we seek to mend
so long, that we mar all: for mine own part, would I could have been content:
but who would have dreamt the course would have proved so violent: well this I
am sure on, I may starve ere I get such another friend.


Tom. Sister, if it be true, as so the rumor goes, you have played false, and
wronged your dearest friend: you are not worthy such another man, you sole
Queen of Africa; had you to live as many ample years as our first fathers, or
their ages thrice: you might spend all those tedious houses twice told, ere you
find a Mate so worthy, were you equivalent, in birth and beauty, and had no
parallel: Neptunes gems to boot, you want worth and excellency both, to weigh
down his demerit; Virtue and Honor stamped him for their own, at his first
being, and the Graces strove to increase his plenitude. More perfection then he
has, he needs not, where ere he is betook.


Corn. Something that is mighty, stain me Leopard like, if ere I gave offense.

Iulio. I should be loath to wish so.

Cris. Not you offend? look here,
This letter left he as a testimony,
Who is there here amongst all this company,
That knew Franciscus, knew not he affected,
And highly prized the slain Antonio?
What could have raised such deadly enmity?
But this, but this, thou strumpet,
Between such twinlike friends?
Thy misdemeanour, thy approved falsnesse;
Which too, too well he knew*
Thou have und one him,
Fled he is and gone;
His goods already seized are for the State:
And die he shall if ever he be took,
Oh, fie upon thee my perpetual shame!

Corn. Can you this behold, you upright Justices?

Cris. Thou art not mine, I here deny thy claim,
And warn thee henceforth,
Come not near my roof:
Pine, starve and die, relief and comfort
Never more expect from him that was thy father.

Iulio. It Is nothing I see, to work the dissolution of a house,
How easily this is done?

Cris. I must weep, to deem
I should be forced to be so cruel;
More I have to say, if tears would let me;
(Me thinks) I could both kiss and curse her:
If she be wronged, and through some make-strife,
These foul ills prove a greater plague,
Then fell in Egypt, light on the Authors head,
The maws of Dogs be his Tomb:
Help me to curse him Iulio.

Iulio. Ten thousand swords struck me together.

Lod. Lived there such a wretch,
And that I knew him,
Let my faith not save me,
But I would tear the Viper with my teeth,
And like a rude and savage Caniball,
Eat out his treacherous heart.

Iulio. Now the foul Devil, stuff thy glutnous paunch,
I am no viand for thee?

Lod. Who Is this comes here, Arbaces?

Enter Arbaces, with two or three Gentlemen. Arba. Disgrace and woe smite all
this company, and make them feel my grief.

Cris. Disgrace, contagion, and what can be worse,
Smite thee and all thy tribe.

Arba. Undone, undone, where is Anthonio?
Where Is my son Crisippus?

Cris. Answer thine own words;
Where Is mine Arbaces?

Arba. Where such a Villain --
And fell murderer should.

Lod. More charity for shame.

Cris. Sorrow gripe my heart till it be blood less,
But what thou speak is false:
A more slanderous lie never left the lips of any.

Arba. Lie?

1 Gent. Sir, be persuaded.

Cris. Tell not me, I Will prove it on him, Arbaces, boy --

Arba. That we were alone.

Lod. Well said, old Lad.

Arba. Show thy self a man, meet me to morrow.

Lod. Good, sir, forbear.

Cris. Not meet him.

1 Gent. Will you be entreated?

Cris. Give me leave.

Lod. Will you be pacified?

Cris. Meet thee, yes I will meet thee;
I dare meet a man: Arbaces thou shall find it.

Arba. Come, you are a prater.

Cris. Prate; ye shall hear from me.

Toma. With reverence of your age, good sir,
You want of that discretion and stayed judgment;
Your years and place requires: It is not well,
One of your reputation and report,
Should so forget your self: to be plain,
You lack advice; and this same cavillation,
Merely provoked by you.
Proclaymes a loud your inconsiderate folly.

Arba. Sir, sir; check your own: --
You never lost a son, and cannot
Aim at my affections and paternall care:
You have undone me --
Robbed me of my joy.

Toma. You are not right considerate,
Who has undone you sir?

Arba. You, you, and she, and every one of you;
The punishment for murder fall on all your heads,
And blast your terrene hopes:
Cruel, cruel, butchery.
Wast not sufficient that he took his life,
As by his own confession:
Undid his woeful mother and my self,
But he must practice more
Immanly, more dire austerity;
Throwing his breathless trunk
In some obscure night-shaded Mansion,
A prey for ravenous beasts;
Where never eye of creature rational,
Shall more behold him: unchristian part,
If there be justice, above or here;
As certainly there is both: I Will petition,
My loud complaints shall pierce both sides of the globe,
And strike a sorrow in the rudest thing,
Nature for man's use molded:
O! my Antonio? my joy, my life;
My dear, my dear Antonio.

Exit. Lod. There Is cause for this.

Cris. Sure, sure, how fond was I
That could not weigh this before;
Having his proper cause,
If for some not slaughtred,
Nor mine own, but by selection,
I could sigh my age, shed floods of tears,
Meet dangers in my shirt, bid conquering
Death defiance, if all this and more I durst attempt,
For one no otherwise, then mine by law;
Needs must he rave past rules of Manhood,
And forget all precepts that support his suffrance:
See you this? What think you of your self?
Have you not done well? account thou scandal,
That like the Whore of Greece,
Was teemed for man's destruction;
Thy sin upon thy self, my door is shut;
That hospitality I show a stranger,
Shall be restrained from thee.

Corn. Most courteous sir, -- expect more.

Cris. Keep your Orisons to charm relenting beggars.
Such in need, as may thy wants relieve;
Or at least sympathy thy mournful tale,
When fierce distress smiles,
Expect more comfort from the blustering North,
When he does blow the highest Acorn head
Down to the Meadow, and there dips his cup;
Then least relief from me, for thee;
For thee chaste Maid, all benisons,
And goodness, that I can, command and have.

Phe. Your liberality was ever such,
As merits more then thanks; yet thus far,
Truth emboldens me to say you are too cruel kind,
Not all the proofs,
What ere incenst my brother to his rage;
Can wean me to that vain opinion,
To think it her desert: I dare protest for her,
No persuasion can drive belief in me,
To call Antonio false; if you prove so cruel,
So unnatural as you speak, there is no pity in you:
Nor are you such as a father ought to be,
Thrust her out, then turn me off;
If you supplant one, you extirp us both,
And her extremes are mine.

Cris. Since you disdain my proffered courtesy,
Together shelter your necessities;
Take up your harbor with the hardy beast;
These gates are locked to her and her relievers
Henceforth I will forget her,
Blot her name forth of the Bed roll
Where my children stand,
And vow I had none such:
Hence, hence, thou scandal.

Exit. Cor. Thus guilt less ones, suffer the guilties blame,
While they triumph in fraud, thus the strict Judge
Condemns the innocent for the thieves offense;
Whilst partiality allows his wrong,
And greatness makes it good;
Will equity never take place again?
Has trust left swaying here? that I but knew my crime:
Or that Francisco but beheld my heart!
Let mine eyes rain a river of salt drops,
And my tears drown me, if any foul sin of mine,
Deserve Franciscoes hate:
I had rather heaven had made me any thing,
Then one so much unhappy,
When ere thou bidest on the plenteous shore,
Or laboring flood,
Prosperity adhere to thy proceedings,
And fame conclude thy deeds,
For me despised, such be my fortune as my loyalty,
And I request no more,
My sweet, my sweet Francisco.

Exit. Phe. Heaven do thee right.

Lod. And if thou be not honest,
There Is neither pride nor coozenage in this City:
If every conscience were well searched,
And you did not find
Some dainty fine conceited Rogue
Has been tempering,
Let me return to my Cradle,
And be hanged in my swaddling clouts.

Actus tertius. Scena prima.
Enter Vallentius, and Doctors Wife, Lodowick, Tomaso, and Julio. sound Music.
Tomaso. THink you it so?


Lod. Yes, and verily believe't.


Toma. It Is strangly carried.


Lod. Mark the end, mark the end;
Why do you sigh, Signior?
Are you troubled with the Crampe?

Toma. O, blame him not, he has good cause to sigh,
Francisco set by him precious: How fare you, Signior?

Iulio. Never worse, my Friend's undone.


Lod. I, a mischief and a vengeance oth' cause, by this sword, nay, fear not
man, I am not angry, and I could not judge, well, I say no more: but if he did
not walk on Stilts, I do detest eating and drinking, and those are two
necessaries, a man can hardly live well without them.


Toma. The very Paragon, mirror of the time.

Lod. If I could not have wept when I beheld her, and that was more then I did
at the death of my father, I have no belief in me.


Toma. Who but she, the wonder of our age.

Lod. No more words, mark the end, mark the end; I say, still mark the end.

Toma. I must leave you.

Lod. Not as the wench left the Frenchman in the suds, there is neither mettle
nor society in thee; if thou abandon'st my company, till we have visited
Valentius.


Toma. I wonder how he speeds?

Lod. Did he not act the madman to the life, was it not well? could ever a
Dunsticall Doctor in this Town, have picked falsehood out of his behavior: he
was so mutable, so full of varying tricks (me thinks) I see him yet.


Toma. Defer your visitation till to morrow, or late sometime to night: I am
yet unfit, this sudden trouble has made me not my self.


Lod. Nay, you must go; I have sworn you shall, and (that presently.

Toma. I pray you pardon me,

Lod. I will not be denied, refuse me now and ever.

Toma. You Will have your humor still?

Lod. What, eschew acquaintanceship? forget, After my most hearty
commendations, my very trusty friend, 'Twere sin and shame Tomaso.


Toma. But some other time.

Lod. This time, sometime, other times, and all times, this day, yesterstay,
the other day, and every day; no hour amiss, march on, march on.


Exit. Julio. I could launch my Dagger through my side, at one easy throw:
beggar my friend; subvert mine own estate, and undo her, by whom I hope to
climb, accursed, brainles slave: could the damned Devil with all his
firebrarnds, beat into my pate no sounder subtilty. I had, I had relief, Fool
vaunt of that?* boast what thou had? or might have? it is past, it is gone, my
villain self, confounded has my self, and him that did sustain me:

What choaks Corn sooner than side-fed weeds,
Who ofter does man wrong than he afeeds:
Let me ponder; have I no other invention?
No trick to take away my life, after my means:
Study upon it, I Am struck upon a sand,
Swallowed, devowr'd, through wilful ignorance,
Never to rise again: it is a villains cast,
First to sink others, them himself at last.

Enter Valentius and Doctors wife. Val. You cannot blame me neither:
For love himself undertook more for love;
Had you been tangled in a Labyrinth more intricate
Than held the Minataure, or have been
By Enchantments bound to servitude,
My life's adventure had my love expressed,
And offered the release.

Doct. wife. Our plighted amities will dwell in me
While life endures; the many winters, and the tedious hours
We two have spent alone, alone Vallentius,
When nothing but what was not fit the Sun
Should look upon, -- Alack my Husband.

Enter Doctor, Thomaso, Lod wicke, Stultissimo, and Fub. Val. It must not be
denied, I Will maintaine't before the Synod, here is my witness: was it not well
done of brave Caligula to make his horse a Senator? deny't, deny't, would not a
good horse show well among a teame of Asses: ha, what think you: give me
another sword: O noble Hector, look, Achilles flies, and bloody Pyrrhus
shrinkes.


Tom. Alas, alas.

Val. What news, what news?

Stul. Gentlemen he takes me for a Carrier:
You are deceived sir, I am not the party.

Val. Will Pluto keep his word, shall all extortioners, engrocers, usurers, be
finely damned, of what kind soever? will he spare none?


Lod. Wondrously spent.

Val. Let me see, let me see, the son of Panace, a sprightly Lad; Hercules, a
lusty youth, a very lusty youth; Sampson, a tall young man, a very tall young
man.


Lod. Does he not do it well?

Val. I Will make thee proov't, I Will make thee proov't.

Fub. I think you are mad:
What shall I prove?

Val. Why greatest generals, that command whole Legions, and train, and keep
in order every man, cannot keep in a woman.


Fub. That Is an easy question, because most of them get Follies wings, and
grow so light there is no ho with them: they must fly out.


Val. Hang them, they are naught all: Tell not me learned Ovidius Naso, what is
your name.

Doct. Good sir.

Val. That bloody villain: Treason gentlemen, call up a Guard, the traytor's
discovered: bind him sure, sure: are you took napping sirrah: Down with him,
down with him, down.


Doct. Help, help, help Gentlemen.

Vallentius beats him in, the gentlemen would come between. Exit all but the
Doctors wife. Fub. I do not like this.

Fub goes off another way. Enter Valentius again, and kisses her. Val. Now my
sweet I have sent him off in post,
Let us retire the while.
Who in affection will not his wits prove,
Was never loyal, nor did ever love.

Enter Doctor. Doct. Past, past cure, I doubt. Give me leave, I find by my Art
it is no Vertiga, no whirling, but a mere settled frenzy: Nay I pray you give me
leave: for as both Hypocrates, and Gallen, Avicen, Podalirius, Rucis,
Cornelius, Celsus, Corannus, Augustino, and Rombart, do you conceive me?
besides a dozen or two of Englishmen, most learned and worthy physicians (if I
knew what they were) have demonstrated paraphrastically, both it and the cause,
styling the malady the digestion of the brain, or Irrevocabilis ignis, the
irrevocable fire: Nay, will you understand me?


Lod. Would we could.

Doct. I pray you give me leave.

Tom. Who hinders him?

Stul. Sir if you can speak our tongue, I would very feign be beholding to you.

Doct. Art thou mad?

Stul. Not altogether mad, though I confess I have been pricked with the
thorns of Love: I have been over shoes in my days.


Doct. Avoydance, for charity avoydance.

Stul. Yes marry shall you: I would desire you to help me to a pill, or a
potion that could make one honest, that I doubt is a little gone astray.


Doct. Avaunt, avaunt.

Stult. No sir, she is none of my naunts: she is one that must be my wife.

Doct. Turbulant fiend: avaunt, avaunt I charge thee.

Stul. I would have it applied sir.

Doct. Illiterate dunce, abandon my house, avaunt I say again.

Stul. Nay, I pray you be quiet, for though I have endured many hard words at
your hands, I shall hardly brook blows.


Enter Fub. Fub. Good gentlemen give me leave to laugh: ha, ha, ha, the Doctors
wife, and the Madman: the madman, and the Doctors wife.


Lod. Why, what is the matter?

Fub. Why sir, the fits upon him, and he is upon her, and younder's such sport,
ha, ha, ha.

Doct. Fire and Thunder.

Exit. Fub. Run: ware horns.

Tom. Is this true sirrah?

Fub. Follow the Doctor, believe your eyes.

Lod. Beware the trap Valentius.

Tom. Pray heaven he be not taken with nibbing.

Lod. Why are you melancholy Signior?

Stul. Faith sir IN me troubled with corns, and ever against rain they make
me so melancholy --

Lod. Is that it, for the thing you spoke on, you shall not be beholding to the
scald peremptory Doctor: Come to my Chamber anon, and I Will give you a powder
shall fulfill your request, as well as all the potions or Pills he can devise.


Stult. Nay, but will you be constant.

Lod. Say no more:

Stul. And you do take my word, while I live: She and I will be at your
service: when shall I come for it?

Lod Any time after noone. Will you walk Tomaso?

Stul. This is good news withal my heart: Fub we are all made; thou shall
have a new Livery out of the bargain.

Fub. I thank you sir, I would I had it.

Stul. Thou shall, that's as good: would I were whipped but I could be monstrous
merry now.

Fub. No I pray you be not monstrous merry till you are married.

Stul. I Will go give thee a pottle of Sack.
The Tavern Scene.
And ever he gave her a bob,
And ever he gave her a blow:
But where he knocked her once above,
He thumpt her thrice below.
What will it not do? prethee-let's be lusty.

Fub. As a Crow in a Gutter. Run there she goes.

Exeunt. Enter Antonio, and the old shepherd disguised. Ant. Father, for so I
must style you,
Your care and pains in my recovery,
Deserves a recompense more than I am able to perform:
Now I consider with my self, had we compassionate souls,
Or were men but good, they would banish beggary
The World quite over, and every one have sufficient.
As hitherto you have conceald my course,
Continue still your wonted secrecy,
Call me your son, and such appoyntments as a father
Should command me to endure I shall perform:
Blessed, blessed be you: effectual be my prayers.

Shep. The longer time you so journe here with me
The more welcome: nothing more I crave;
But if I dye while you recide in the grove,
Out of your charity you will take the pains
To lay me in the grave I have prepared, and with your hand,
Your foot, or any thing, cast dust upon my body,
And spend a little Ceremony.

Ant. More than this I will, and more than I will speak.
Francisco, whersoe're thou bidest, abide in quiet,
And have my pardon ever. If thou be'st fled
For any cause of mine, and I thy ruin prove,
Defend it heaveu, were it not for trial of Phemone's love,
And promised constancy, how soon would I renounce
My habitatiation, uncloath thy fear, and set all even again?
Nothing 'mazes, nor drives me into that serious
Contemplation, as whence his wrath should proceed.
Perchance Franciscus thinks me unfit to call him brother,
And his sud daine rage proceeded from advice.
Enter Corn. and Phemone disguised. If it be so for ever will I keep this shady
bower,
And never hold companionship with man,
More than is present, forget Arbaces ever
Called me his, or that I was his son.
Circle me safety, what are these come here
Where never neighbourd welt?

Corn. Calamity could not inflict so much as I could bear
With patienee, did Franciscus imagine but the truth:
No lenity, but all extremes that may
Attend me with their sharpest violence,
If e're I broke my vow: this sorrow,
Nor the haviour I sustain are for mine own endurings,
Witness you that know all secrets, it is for him
I wish thrice better than my self.

Ant. Yes, and that Cornelia; as sure as the black Ousell
Has a yellow mouth, that whistles me awake.
It Is she, or I am fond.

Corn. O my Franciscus! O my dearest Lord!

Ant. There needs no more for confirmation:
What make they here? Do not undo me wonder.
Never had two ragged coats more orient pearls,
Than you two shells do hide: it is she, or I am fond,
Leap not forth with joy, such needy robes
Should wrap the shoulders of necessity,
When winter falls the Leaf: happy Antonio,
I am disguised, and so, if that my speech reveal not,
Without suspect I may obtain my wish,
And have all doubts resolved: I Will greet 'em.
Bonny wight, what e're you be,
Luck be in your company:
Are you Sylvanus, say to me?

Phem. None such, good Shepherd.

Ant. Deft and trim ones mickle glee,
Be you what you please to be,
Some disaster tend by ye,

Corn. Never, never more.

Phe. A me unfortunate.

Ant. Welladay, now by my Creed,
And my merry Oaten Reed,
Sike another rousing sigh
Would well split me gay and blithe:
Let a loutish Clown partake,
Why this sobbing dole you make?

Corn. O inconstant world.

Phe. A me unfortunate.

Ant. Wonderment of woe relate
If simpleness you might not scorn,
How you hapt to be forlorn.

Corn. The story would be too tedious for the time,
And would undo the speaker: Friend no more,
You shall do well to leave us.

Ant. Be not all too keen, bright star,
If my pertnesse went too far,
Mercy is the doom I sue,
Good things never meant more true,
Than the silly shepherd did,
Late wen he your sorrow bid:
Discourse the means merry Pan,
And the sagest gods do scan;
Wherefore was it? well a near,
You foul mucky cloud I fear
Will be sprint us, Poebus twain,
If so list you but to daine
A poor shepherds entertain,
Welcome should you be, I wisse,
Nor thing comely should you miss,
Though not courtly: answer make,
Will you my small feasting take?

Phem. The rain begins to fall;
Sister accept the Shepherds courtesy,
His simpleness cannot but mean well sure.

Corn. Even what you please:
Whither I go, or wheresoever I rest,
Sorrow with me, and I with sorrow feast.
Welcome, welcome, welcome still,
Never with a freer will
Was welcome spoken, by the sky;
Welcome, welcome heartily.
Alack, alack, the rotten south
'Gins to open his dewy mouth,
Time to hide you: Father meek
Give kind welcome, I beseeke,
To these white ones, bonny girls,
Welcommer than heaps of Pearls.

Sheph. You see our Cave, and make as bold as welcome.

Exeunt. Anto. Receive my adorations Queen of chance, Thou never gav'st that
jewel to that man, was half so well esteemed; my hopes have their desires,
Phemone, blessed success; nothing that is amiss, but I shall understand:
disguise I thank thee, joy ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak;
they part not soon.


Exit. Enter Franciscus disguised. Fran. What Angle of the Earth must be my
grave?
The Sea and Sun have bounds, and know their course,
The sons of men have none:
Limitlesse he wanders the foreign deserts,
And begets more wonders every hour:
The Chime that tells the last minuite of the night,
Chides but in vain when every thing's a sleep;
So I in the relation of my woe, when no man hearkens,
Spend but idle breath, and never find relief.
But for increase sake, I could wish devoutly,
I never had known woman:
What comfort ever others reapt from them,
They have been plagues to me: to note the difference,
They are such things, nothing's more worse, nor better;
To say truth, they are Angels, and Devils;
I will not curse 'em, lest I make them worse
That needs no badnesse, nor rip up their defects,
Lest I spend all my after time of life in nothing else but that.
Iulio, the profit of my Orisona be thine,
Where e're I spend 'em, upright constant man:
Yet I am eased, in that I do not bear my slavish yoke,
Cocker mine infamy, as many do within our Venice gates:
Thanks to thee Iulio; Chastity, honor of women,
Whither art thou fled? that they are all so false
I must forget 'em, they will make me mad
To think of their abuse: would I could learn
What inquisition is made after me;
Some speech of my concealment will report blab out,
That I may hear the danger does pursue me,
Though I adventure life, I will know more,
Or dye in the presumption: I Will nearer to the City.

Enter Lodwick, Tomaso, Iulio, Stultissimo, Fub, the Whore, and the Bawd.
Stult. That Is a good jest in faith; Drawer, gives more Wine.

Lod. What Is a good jest Signior?

Stult. That none should be honest but the valiant.

Lod. How Is that? how is that?

Stult. Why my beetle-brow'd Host swears it is impossible for any to be honest,
that is not valiant.

Toma. What said he? What said he?

Enter Drawer. Stult. That none could be honest, that were not valiant.

Tomd. O very good, very good: more Wine here, he is packing, set out his hand.

Lod. And his foot too, ere I have done: where is this fellow? another Pottle
sirrah.

Stult. Sir I thank you for my powder, it gave her half a dozen of tickling
stools, she has been loose ever since.

Lod. Give me your hand, here is even now to all the invisible horns in the City.

Stult. Forget not the Country, let it go round I pray you.

Lod. A health.

Fub. You Will have reason to pledge this shortly.

Stult. Will you come? to morrow is the day I Will assure you, for better or worse.

Lod. To morrow from better to worse?

Fub. Yes faith he has said it, and I swear it, from better to worse indeed.

Toma. Married to morrow Signior?

Stult. You have said we shall be doing.

Fub. Undoing he means.

Toma. So near marrying Clariflora, and not acquaint your friend? in faith I
thought Mistress you would have let me understood what had past.


Bawd. It Is my part to conceal.

Fub. She were no good Bawd else.

Lod. Come, sit round, sit round, to morrow the day?

Stult. Pardon me, I Will not sit next this lousie fellow: gentlemen, what do you
with this poor rogue in your companies? Does he come to make mirth, can he
play the fool wittingly?


Lod. I know him not.

Toma. Would he were set down stairs, I never could endure him from the
first: Franciscus made me know him.

Stult. Sir, if you mean to depart in peace, begone suddenly.

Toma. Would the Ass could rid this intruding Copesmate.

Iulio. Let me beseech you.

Stult. You shall go, your prayers cannot save you; Fub, show him the way
down.

Fub. Shall I be your Usher? will you follow your leader sir?

Iulio. Thus poverty's despised at home, abroad, and in all companies.

Stult. A whoreson Tatred-demallion, come amongst Gentlemen of sort. What, is it
no more but up and ride? How now Fub, is he vanished?


Fub. The Drawers have drawn him out Sir.

Lod. Clinke boys.

Toma. Drink boys.

Stult. And let the Cannikin clinke boys.

Lod. Stultus.

Stult. Yes Lodwick.

Lod. Tomaso, shall's make a night on it mad lads?

Toma. And a mad night too Bullies: where shall's strike fail?

Lod. The Leaguer, where but a'th' new Leaguer: there is generous entertainment
for Gallants of sort at all times: and for entrance trust me my mates.


Toma. But money grows low, and expenses will fly high.

Stult. Fly hye, let it, I have a jacke in a box shall pay for all one day.

Lod. I am as full as a Sponge, I cannot sink up a drop more.

Stult. No matter, we can squeeze some more out thus: we can wake the
Constable, trouble the neighbors, disquiet the Master and whole family, spill
his Wine, puff his Tobacco, foul his rooms, practice who shall break most
holes, and cleanliest, in the bottom of quart-pots, with a piece of a
Tobacco-pipe: cry good morrow mine Host, we have made a mad night on it I vow,
and so trance; we are no Gallants and we cannot do this.


Lod. But this course is either conscionable, or commendable.

Tom. Faith it is the course, most of the corke-headed Candle-snuffes walk in
these latter days, late at nights.

Lod. Well, let them rest: So, ho, the Leaguer.

Munk. Chi-va-lah.

Lod. Amice.

Munk. The word.

Lod. Pecima largienda.

Munk. Let 'em pass: down with the Percullis:
Lights and attendance, welcome Gentlemen.

Enter Iulio, Drawer, Pusse, Bawd. Iulio. I ever said, it might come in a
night, that came not in an age, Et ecce noctem faelicem; see, that joviall
night is come: They have been playing high, and potting deep: Lights, Wine,
and more stools for these Gentlemen; welcome.


Enter Lodowick, Tomaso, Stultissimo, and Fub. Lod. Tomaso when is the day?

Stult. Assure's this the night before to morrow, I have brought in my Estate a
matter of 400 pound per annum, in Deeds, Leases, Fee-simple, and Coppy-hold
already: and that is no simple Estate you will say: I mean to bid you welcome to a
Leaguer of mine own shortly Gentlemen; some wine you Scondrils.


Lod. I Am pleased to here't, whose faults this, yours Tomaso?

Enter Julio. Iulio. What Is this Leaguer raised yet, Par la ho boy, I thought
we should have had a second siege of Troy on it, is their Reckoning paid? not a
penny, they called for one, but in such a drunken key; I bad em sleep upon it,
and I would tell em more on it when they were sober.


Iulio. Best of all, and what is to pay then?

Draw. Nine and six pence, Sir, allowance for lights, linen, coals to light
faggots: and six pence for one journymans sleep only deducted, and yet they
grumbled too.


Iulio. But nine and six pence, and grumble; my friend the reckoning's not paid
you say.

Monk. Not a penny.

Julio. The reckoning but nine and six pence, how poorly this shows, in a
Leaguer too, and friends that pretended me a courtesy too? How many joints of
meat to supper?


Draw. Only a couple of clean Pipes, some three times filled I think.

Iulio. No meat, come to hansell a Leaguer, what no meat? Are they abed at
Anthonies Ordinary yet?

Draw. Two hours ago.

Iulio. Step down, and see, nine and six pence, they must and shall hear more
of this: we may go beg, or buy up all the, refuse, broken bread and meat,
scraps, offall, and garbage that Cooks shops, Shambles, Ordinaries, Entries,
and Richmens doors afford; nine and six pence, if they do not hear more of
this --


Draw. It Is past that time of night; Charitie's bed, sir, but if not. --

Enter Bread and Meatman. Bread. Bread and meat for poor prisoners, Bread and
meat.

Iulio. What does that fellow cry?

Bread. Bread and meat for the poor prisoners, bread and meat.

Iulio. For poor prisoners? as fit for my purpose, as a Conny for a Pursnet;
here, take money, buy his provision by the lump: if I had studied for a fortune
to fall upon me, I could not have had a fairer.


Monk. Will thou victual thy Leager with scraps, sweet Chuck?

Iulio. No, my sweet Monkie, I have further aims then so, this broken meat and
baggage offall, will I strew in my Kitchen, Dressers, Hall, Entries, and every
door and drawwindow, and perspicous places about the house: foul all the
vessel, three or four times over, all to besmeere the rustie spits and
dripping-pans; break all my broken glasses, beat the bottom out of my Cans:
beat all my foul Tobacco-pipes, into fractions


Monk. And to what end all this?

Iulio. Perlahay, My friends shall hear more of that in the reckoning: My
sweet Monkie, when the Drunkards shall wake, and see all these ruins, or
rather remayns of a plentiful Leager: Oh, have thou no apprehension? Why, I
tell thee, they cannot choose out of their generous bounties, but see all
discharged?

Within. A cup of six, Drawer.

Iulio. Oh, the Leager begins to rise! Come Monkie a few directions for you in
private, give you attendance on the Leager; let em call for what they will, and
want nothing they call for: only I will tell em no more of nine and six pence
in the reckoning.


Monk. But for the nine and six pence.

Julio. Monkie, you shall hear more of that anon, when they are sober? why
Drawer, Dog, Dunghil-raker; is the Leaguer dry? By and by, a cup of six into
the low Leaguer, there.


Wake Lodwick, Tomasa, Stultissimo, Fub. Stult. So, ho, the Leaguer.

Draw. What do ye lack? by and by, do ye call Gentlemen?

Stult. No, and I called a Gentleman, he would answer me, I call a Drawer
goodman Rascal, art thou one?

Draw. For fault of a better, sir.

Lod. Could not ha said so then? where is the Master of the Leaguet?

Enter Julio. Iulio. Parlahey Monkie, been venu Gallants, com a stato Sigiores
mio com I stato.

Tom. Marry the better for your entertainment; thanks, sir.

Stult. Thank him, I scorn to thank him, I Will pay him, and be out of his debt:
come, to pay? A reckoning Drawer.

Iulio. You Rascal, who takes away here? here is a house bestrewed with garbage
and offall, as if the great Inquest had been feasted, etc.


Stult. As good men, to no man's disprayse be it spoken, where is a Bill?

Lod. Prithee knock us not down, before our time; was this certain feast of our
making? what a spoil of Poultery has here been? Tom^so, I must be beholding to
thee for this ordinary.


Tom. Some small trifle Stultissimo, the Reckoning is thought to be.

Stult. The Reckoning's very high, nine pound six shillings.

Iulio. Nine pound six shillings, Parlahey, and yet I use you like Christians
too boys.

Lod. Nine pound six shillings, how could we four devour so much being half
drunk when we came in?

Stult. Why there is the mystery? you fall asleep with meat in your mouths, my
Mistress and I stood it out.

Monk. Wast not an excellent Swan-pie? Servant.

Stult. As ere swam in Mil-dam.

Lod. Nine pound six shillings, one lay out for all,
Come, your purses Gentlemen.

Stult. And you love me, let me have the credit at this time there is: ten
pounds, give me the rest again (ah, we had the bravest Marchpane, and
Sugar Candy Custard) or do not, let it run on toward fouling of linen, and
paying for sawee: the rest again, or do --


Iulio. I do not think but you are sawst pretty well already, for the Devil a
bit of meat saw I, and yet all these scraps could not come of nothing.


Stult. The Reckoning's paid to a hair, come let us withdraw (but while the
Room be a little finificald.

Iulio. Parlahey, welcome Gallants to the Leaguer still: please you withdraw.

All. We accept it thankfully.

Lod. Whose fault's this yours Tomaso?

Toma. There wants lap.

Stult. Throw down the pottle pot, let us have a gallon more.

Enter a Fiddler. Fid. Wilt please you Gentlemen, to hear any Music* and a
good Song?

Lod. Very fain, a good one.

Toma. What Is your fellows, whose noise are you?

Fid. Ruberts noise, and please you?

Lod. Call your fellows, and strip your tools.

Tom. Here Is to you Signior.

Stult. A brace of them if you love me.

Toma. Marry and shall.

Draw. Score a gallon of Claret in the Pomegranat.

Fub. What Tim?

Draw. Master Fub I rejoice to see you well.

Lod. You are not merry Gentlewomen, Mistress Durable what, no mirth?

Draw. And how is it, how have you done this seven years, welcome again.

Fub. As you see, in perfect memory, when shall we ride the hogsheads?

Draw. Ha, do you remember that night, Ancient Thumps health overthrew me, my
Master goes out of Town next week; in faith and you will come, there is half a
dozen good boys, we will be swingeing merry, will give him a crash, old Will,
Will be here?


Fub. What Will?

Draw. Little Will of the Mitre. Oh, Master Fub, Sir, out Maid, that gave us
the Neats Tongue is gone.

Fub. See, see.

Toma. Some Sugar there?

Fiddler. Ha, ha, hum.

In ample stories written it is,
Who list but for to mind it;
How loved Narcissus?
Go look and you shall find it.
This Echo was a Nymph most chaste,
A lack, the more the pity*
She should be so, and should not reap*
What follows in my Ditty?
Narcissus was but young, I wisse,
But yet of perfect feature,
And had enough to satisfy
A reasonable creature.
His brawny limbs became his parts,
No one of sense could blame them:
And so did something else I trow,
Echo knew how to name them.

Stult. A virtuous piece of matter, Gentlemen, we will no more on it.

Lod. Nay, hold up, Signior.

Stult. Bid her hold up, fear not me.

Lod. Come Gentlewomen, shall we have a dance? Tomaso what say you?

Tom. You prevented me.

Stult. I thought it should have been my motion?

Fub. Wherefore ring those bells?

Stult. Bells, you are deceived, it is the clincking of pots.

Lod. I would have sworn, it had been Coronation day.
Masters, can you play us Gascoynes Whibling?

Fiddler. Yes, sir.

Lod. Let Us have it.

Toma. Here lacks a couple, we cannot dance it.

Fub. Lack a couple, what serve Tim and I for?

Lod. It Is true, well remembered.

Draw. Truly, Master Fub, I cannot dance.

Fub. Truly, you shall learn then.

Draw. I shall be willing to endeavor.

Toma. Strike.

Stult. I Will throw the pot at his head that strikes here,
Whose that will strike?

He drinks all the while they dance. Stult. Rare in faith, give's more wine.

Boy. What, Timothy?

Draw. By and by.

Boy. Look to the Lion.

He rises and throws down the table. Stult. I Will have my Galliard too

Toma. You spoil all.

Clar. How does your head, sweet heart?

Stult. Yes faith, and thank you too, what Rogue's he that turns the Room
round? shall we not quench our thirsts before we part?


Lod. What else my sweet Signior, this is your servant?

Cla. Good enough for a property, he will serve my turn, as well as a better, I
shall but use his name: do you think I would marry the Coxcombe, but only for
color and fear of the Law? I Would see him baked first.


Bawd. It Is wisely done of you? and so my Gossip Slight could say I warrant you.

Lod. Boy, another quart, and bring a Reckoning. Here sir.

Fiddler. Heaven keep your Worship.

Lod. In honester company.

Stult. Fub, call for a Looking-glass.

Lod. Did you go the right way?

Enter the Drawer. Draw. It Is a cup of neat wine, I Will assure --

Lod. Mistress to your self, and to our next meeting?

Tom. What Is to pay?

Draw. Nine and six pence, and you're welcome.

Tom. How comes that to pass?

Draw. Here Is seven groats Glasses.

Lod. How?

Draw. No less, I Will assure your Worship.

Lod. Come your money, Signior --

Let Us take away and pay together. Stult. Fub, discharge it Fub.

Monk. Some lights, show the Gentlemen.

Enter and follow with a letter from Vallentius. Stult. Fub, I am ene as full
as a Toad.

Fub. Yes, sir, but do not spit your venom.

Stult. Prithee give me another sip. I am as dry as a Cook.

Fub. So I think.

Stult. A pox a this Megrum.

Lod. What Is here, I prithee mark Tomaso: Lodwick, I have my desire: fetch me
off speedily, lest I cure the Doctor? yours Vallentius, lest I cure the
Doctor.


Tom. What should he mean by this?

Lod. Why, belike he has infused his fit into him, and the Physician's turned
Patient?

Tom. That Is impossible?

Lod. But for Vallentius.

Tom. We must redeem him.

Lod. What else.

Tom. Heyda, is the wind in that door?

He reels. Fub. A link good Tim, a link.

Draw. Here Is one ready, sir.

Lod. Signior, good night.

Fub lights the link* Stult. Not a drop more in faith.

Tom. We Will take our leaves.

Clar. When shall we see you?

Tom. Sometime to morrow, if my father send not.

Bawd. Good night Master Lodwick, good night good, sir.

Fub. Good night Tim, remember Friday.

Draw. I warrant you, forget not to bring Hugh, Welcome Gentlemen.

Exeunt omnes. Actus quartus. Scena prima.
Enter the Doctor and his Wife. Doctor. I Speak't in thunder once again, no
more: thou Babylonian Strumpet, in thunder I command thee thou lump of sin,
no more.


Wife. Have patience, sir.

Doct. I rore it in thy ears, once more aloud, no more: cannot I deal, but
you must be applying, you must be tampering, you must minister: have you not
Pills for Potions? do you not traffic? do not you exchange Merchant?


Wife. Good Vanderman.

Doct. Sorceresse, I defy thee, and thy deeds of darkness.

Wife. Hear me, sir.

Doct. I have heard and seen too much, has he not paid you soundly for your
pains: no, has he popt you.


Wife. You are deceived.


Doct. You say very true, I am deceived indeed, and Fub'd, and Guld, and Rid,
and you are Rid too.

Wife. What mean you?

Doct. Here blow it abroad, there is horns enough to do it.

Wife. Why are you thus impatient?

Doct. Dainty fine y faith, very dainty. Whore thou have made me monstrous, and
I may challenge Giants: Yes, he shall be your madman; Do you not like his
fits, do you not, do you not?


Enter Thomaso, Lodwicke, and Vallentius, Amb. God morrow to you both.

Doct. Why should this be?

Lod. How do you sir? how does your patient?

Doct. Are you not satisfied? am I a stale? must you have newfound Crochets?

Lod. Do you hear me sir: is he recovered*

Doct. Homo Armatus, a man armed.

Lod. Have you heard the like?

Tom. Me thinks it is excellent.

Doc. And when, when shall he plant again?

Lod. I wish you would understand me, sir.

Doct. Here Is a fruitful soil.

Tom: Ha, ha.

Lod. Sir, I will be heard, and understood:
Save you Lady:

(he kisses her.) Doct. More furies, might, and secrecy, whoredom and The
every bring all to confusion.

Tom. Would we had more of this: we will see what will come of all.

Lod. I perceive Vallentius was in the right, he is mad indeed:

Wife. Good Morrow Gentlemen: I have good news for you; your friend is well.

Lod. Your tidings makes us happy, and gives us a moyetie of that content which
nothing can do more.

Toma. I shall rejoice to see him what he was, and Master of that temper he
commanded, when he did dare the vaunting Bajeset for taxing his belief.


Enter Vallentius. Val. Tomaso, Lodwick.

Lod. Valentius.

Toma. I am glad to see you once again your self.

Lod. You're welcome to your wits.

Val. When time and place shall serve, my wit shall thank you I am ever bound
to you sweet Lady.

Tom. Hark you Lodwick, are not we partly Bawds?

Lod. Faith in one kind, we have a snatch that way.

Tom. So I say partly.

Lod. I must confess, partly.

Val. Not remember you, have not that bad opinion, do not think I can be one
so false by this kiss.

Doct. Sibylla.

(He calls within.) Wife. Ay me, my husband.

Val. Once again and part.

Doct. Sibylla.

Wife. Farewell, Valentius.

Val. A thousand take with thee.

Tom. What, hungry still Vallentius, that you cast such a greedy eye that way?

Lod. How is it man? what in a trance?

Val. And kinder far then fair.

Lod. What, shall we have a Pamphlet; that he begins to study? do you hear
Valentiuss: here is a friend of yours would speak with you, when you are at
leisure.


Val. I crave your pardon Gentlemen, as I live she is --

Lod. What Is this to the purpose?

Exeunt. Enter Julio, and the Mercer with his man. Mer. You know my price: for
the finenesse of the silk, the working of the stuff, and the pleasantness of
the color, the whole street shall not afford you a better, I Will assure you it is
died in grain.


Julio. The better for him that shall wear it, nothing but what is in grain can
please him: let me see, I know not how my money will reach: the Silkman has
emptied my pocket this morning, but you will bate nothing of your price?


Mer. I protest sir, I cannot, and save by it, and I know you would not wish me
to be a loser.

Iulio. By no means, I would have every man to live and thrive by what he
professes, it is mine own case: let me see, I cannot make up the sum, I pray
you let one of your men step over to the next lane: I lie there at the Barbers,
I Will dispatch him presently.


Mer. My servants are all busy for the present, you see my shop is full of
Customers, and every one striveth who shall be first served.


Iulio. And I am in haste too, for I have sent for my Tailor to meet me at my
lodging, and I am loath to disappoint him, because I would have his opinion in
the stuff.


Mer. I pray you, sir, be expeditious, and my man shall be with you by that
time you have told out the money.

Iulio. I am much obliged to you as a stranger, I care not if I accept --

Mer. Dispatch me that Customer quickly, and follow this Gentleman to his
lodging: you hear where he lies.

Iulio. Yes, at the next turning?

Mercers man. I Will but fold up this boult of Satin, and be with him instantly.

Iulio. Turn by the next lane, and thou shall be sure not to miss it, though
thou find not me, I have took sufficient order and you shall be sure to be
satisfied.


Mer. We have many cheapners, but few buyers, many such customers as this would
make quick riddance.

Mercers man. What comes the sum to, sir.

Mer. Three yards of Satin and a half at seventeene, eight yards of Plush at
four and twenty; nay, there are diverse other parcels, the sum is soon cast
up: thou shall have a note of all.


Mercers man. And I Will but fold up these few boults lie loose, and clear the
counter and be gone.

Mer. Be quick there.

Exeunt. Enter the Barber and Julio. Iulio. But thou must be secret.

Barb. As your self, Sir.

Iulio. A pretty handsome youth, and will be loath to discover himself, being
extremely bashful, and will make it strange.

Barb. Leave him to me, I Will persuade him that I knew him, ere I saw him.

Iulio. He Is my Kinsman, next Cousin German's by the Mothers side; now playing
the Wag, as many youths will do, you know it Barber.


Barb. Very well, it has been many a good man's case.

Iulio. He has got a clap.

Barb. These claps are got by clapping.

Iulio. But for one thing, never should it grieve me, I fear it might go nere
to spoil his marriage, which I would not for more than I Will speak.


Barb. You show your self a Kinsman.

Iulio. Now his exuse will be (as I told thee he is extremely bashful) to
enquire for a Gentleman that owes his Master money, to comply with the old
Proverb, Though his excuse be draff, yet drinks his errand.


Barb. And lotion must be used.

Iulio. As it shall seem best: but think thou he will endure it.

Barb. 'Twill put him to some pain.

Iulio. Which I Will not hear, my heart's so tender ore him: when he comes (as
long he will not stay) take him in charge, Thy pains shall be well paid, for
doubt not but I Will come to the conclusion.


Barb. Very good, sir?

Iulio. My hope is it will succeed according to my wishes.

Barb. Make no doubt of that, sir.

Iulio. If I had, I had not made choice of thee above any other.

Barb. You are my friend indeed: and so I hope to keep you.

Iulio. I will withdraw for the present, and instantly return.

Barb. Now good speed with you, good customers are thick sowed, and come up
but thin. It is good to make much of them, when we have them. This should be
the patient, that he talked off.


Enter Mercers man. Mercers man. I come to seek a Gentleman.

Barb. You do: that owes your Masters money.

Mer. man. Very true, sir, you know my errand then.

Barb. Before you came.

Mer. man. The Gentleman belike has told it you.

Barb. He has indeed.

Mer. man. Is he within?

Barb. But before he went, left order with me, you should be dispatched.

Mer. man. Then I shall find him as good as his word: he has acquainted you
with my occasions.

Barb. I Will assure you that, and intends well toward you, I pray come near into
the withdrawing Room.

Mer. man. I Will wait on you, pray know you what it comes too.

Barb. Yes youth, I know, wherefore you come: pray rest you in that chair, and
I Will be for you presently; be not ashamed, you are not the first, nor shall be
the last, that meet with these disasters: and now come, pray show me your
commodity.


Mer. man. The commodity belongs, sir, to my Master, 'twas not mine.

Barb. Are his in danger too? let him not fear, but if he have not let it run
too far, there may be help found: nay, come, will you show?


Mer. man. Mean you the note: there are the parcels sent.

Barb. These parcels may in time grow great, come, will you be ruled, the
Gentleman your Kinsman, told me before, how bashful you would be; and it
becomes you well: but for your parcels, show them in time: for if delay be
long, that little which perhaps you shall have left, in time will come to
nothing: your Kinsman's loath that you should spoil your Marriage?


Mer. man. Spoil my Marriage, spoil not my Masters debt, Neither draw these
fearful tricks on me: I need them not, pay me the money that your friend has
left, Dispatch me so, for Kinsman I have none; And honest Barber find some
else to sport with, make me none of your Guls?


Barb. But I pray say.

Mer. man. I say, pay me sir, what is my due, and what by your confession, your
friend left, or bring me to the party, or commodity he late had of my Master,
or Coin for it: you have confessed him to be your friend, therefore for him must
answer.


Barb. By your favor, no more friend of mine, then you found him, to claim
Kindred: my acquaintance with him, yet is scarce a full hour.


Mer. man. You are Confederates, and so I fear that I shall find you: You
know my errand, and promised me dispatch: Why am I not dispatched then?


Barb. My meaning was to give you a Sering, or an incision Knife, Of which he
told me you did stand in need: Indeed I deal in such commodities, And am
acquainted what such parcels mean: For other wares or money due for them, I know
not what belongs to it.


Mer. man. Satisfy my Master so, quit me, and clear thy self; or 'twill fall
foul upon thee.

Barb. Willingly: my cloak boy, I Will along, yet am afraid That he who had
professed himself thy Kinsman, and my dear friend, will prove thy Masters Cousin.


Exeunt. Enter Lodwick, Tomaso, Stulitssimo, Monky, Puss, etc. Puss. Give you
joy Master Stultissimo; give you joy.

Stult. You talk like Gentlemen, and I like your talk the better, because you
talk to a Gentlemen; you call me Stultissimo, and I say, Stultorum plena sunt
omnia: and now I talk to you like a Gentleman and a Scholar.


Gent. All health and joy betyde you.

Stult. Gramercy Gentlemen, I am not now the man, I was in the morning; I did
rise single, I return double: in the Meridian but Worshipful, in the afternoon
Honorable before Sunset, and who knows but Majesticall before midnight: nay I
persuade my self I am so: am I not sweet Monkie?


Monk. Thou art my dear Baboon.

Stult. Very pretty names in faith: I prithee let us enterchange them still
betwixt us: or Marmoset, or Apes face.

Monk. Yes, yes, by any means.

Stult. All thy goods and chattels, thy movables, and the stuff that belongs
thereto, thy utensils and implements; now are all mine.


Monk. They are, to have and to hold.

Puss. Yes, as long as ye can keep them.

Stult. I have purchased thee in thy proper person by my word, but all thy
other omnium gathrum, beforenamed, by my deeds, I think thou have them to show.


Tom. The mind gives sometimes words unto the tongue, and makes it speak
perforce, bear with him Lodwick.

Lod. Let the Doctors wife bear with him, for mine own part, without he
renounce this mood, and become sociable, as he had wont, I defy his
fellowship.


Tom. Will you dine with me Vallentius?

Val. Yes, shall we be merry?

Lod. O is the tide turned, is the wind come about, by this good day, and I
were not cursing my self, for being accessory to this melancholy, I have no
faith in me; if women can transmute men thus suddenly, hang me, if I keep not
out of their clutches.


Val. Gallants, shall we walk? I have a story for ye: prithee Lodwick frown
not, be a friend indeed, and see not my defects, I have a tale shall make you
laugh anon, and will excuse my blame; prithee be thy self, be jocund man.


Lod. Nay, I am soon persuaded.

Val. Where shall we be?

Tom. At the old house.

Val. Come then, I Will make you laugh I swear.

Enter Franciscus in disguise. Fran. Thus by degrees, with hazard of my life,
have I attained unto my wishes rest; and boldly gaze thee Venice in the face:
the time has been, Oh, but that time is past, when I was more familiar with
thy pomp, but all that bliss is gone: And murder now, has with a crimson
stain sealed me accursed, and like a condemned guilty Fugitive; I wander in
despair; fearing the ru^^le of the harmless bird, and the flies clamor, the
Ant, the Waspe, and every lesser thing, Dreadlesse of danger, strayes abroad
for food; Not caring who behold them, But I, alas, of all; am most unhappy:
Would I were dead, and past the fear of that, Makes me thus Cowish. Who art
thou comm'st here, more needy then my self?


Enter Julio poor. Iulio. Where might I run to meet destruction, And set a
period on my wretchedness? Stern misery I know, and feel thee now: Yet is the
earth content to bear my weight, And suffer what proud man disdains to know,
Unless to spit upon, or add to that, Which wants no extreme.


Fran. I cannot hold: his voice, his humor, I dare swear as much, it is he;
It Is he by heaven, my Iulio.

Iulio. Franciscus, preserver of my life; O let me kiss the ground whereon
thou treadest, then rise to thank thee.

Fran. That I could spend my self to tears for joy, bear witness you that
know it: Iulio, for ever dwell within these arms of mine, thou truest among
men, I have not power to question thee, my danger, my joy is so excessive;
run all to spoil, and terror meet with terror; I fear none my Julio.


Julio. Strike when thou will proud death, I dare thee now; For having what I
wished, I wish no more, nor would entreat time to defer a minuite to have him
rest an age, since all things must have end, end it at once, my prayer is
confirmed, I have seen you e're I die.


Fran. And if you love me wish me not that wrong by praying for your end: do
not quite undo me, if you but knew my heart, my Julio, you would not crav't
again: I could have comfort now, and clean forget the dangers I have past,
and those pursue me still: nothing to come can half so much dismay, as thou
do comfort; be it sudden death or torture worse than it: but for your sake,
would in my womb I had bin strangled, and never drawn this air.


Julio. Where art thou Conscience? whither have thou took Since thou did
leave man's breast? that we should all have mothers; Wisdom all, yet all
contemn her precepts: when you first fled, and by command'ment from the Senate
house, your ships and lands were siez'd on for the State, those that which
staid them did appear so near, as if their blood had tied them to your
service, grew so forgetful in a moments space, that neither argument, nor
extreme signs could win them to belief there had been such, as what you
were to them: I (as no less I could) bound to it by duty, spoke your merits
still, and did maintain your right, on the Allies of your inconstant wife: but
I am poor for it, truth was still despised, and less I could not be.


Fran. Take all I have* had I my former wealth,
My bounty could not recompense thy worth,
And power it all before thee (my dear Iulio:)
Be not impatient with thy sufferance, he is above will pay thee all
My debts, though I should perish now.
Contemned for me? alack, alack, if there be such
A thing in Charity, be charitable: do not curse the cause
Of this thy present want, I do beseech thee do not thou Iulio?
I prithee answer me, and either do what I have wished,
Or cure the wound thou have made.

Iul. Good sir no more: do not call all the tears out of mine eyes; think who
I am: would you did but know.

Fran. I will not urge thee further:
Shall we here combine, and shape our course alike,
And never, never part; yet pardon me,
I will not wish thee so much injury
To be unknown of woman.

Iulio. You wish me not so well, how e're you wish, if you wish otherwise: your
misery be mine, and my enduring yours; one grave receive our bones; and he
that says this Sepulcher is mine, call it Francisco's Tomb.


Fran. I have a habit for thee yet unknown, or worn,
But by my self: it is not a Furlong from the Antique Beech,
Whose hollow sides conceales it: bide but here,
Till I can reach it from the hidden place,
And take it for thine own: though homely,
Yet the coursenesse will keep warm,
And ward the sharpest blast.

Iulio. You bind me to my prayers.

Fran. I Will be with thee straight.

Iulio. Ignorant honesty, shallow Italian, yes, live a wretch: Can thou be so
fond to think me of that mettle? have thou eyes, and may, yet will not see
how thou art o're-recht: yes, do continue innocent, do, and die a fool, my
friend, my friend, my very loyal friend, all friendship I forswear, save
outward signs, which with my garment J cast nightly off. The father of the
slain Antonio promises liberally by Proclamation to any that can bring
Francisco forth. I will betray him, I will be the man shall purchase the
reward: What way I curses, or care for the report the multitude shall clamor
therein. I Will imitate the Lawyer, making bad words my gain. Franciscus thou
wast born for my advancement: he is sunk himself, and fruitless is the hope
depends on that which was, and not which is; give me the present, not precedent
man. Let me not hanker for emergency, but take the instant sway, the published
recompense is mine, it is said, it is mine.


Franciscus puts a coat upon him. Fran. That any should be false -- But were
there no dross, gold could not be esteemed, nor nothing precious rare.
Cornelia let me forget that name and nothing else.


Iulio. It is a month and more since she left Venice.

Fran. Would I had left the world when I first saw her.

Julio. And the same minuite did Phemone forsake her friends and kindred: but
where or whither they have betook themselves the most knowing but conjecture.


Fran. How easy could we make our miseries, if we might live and dye when it
pleased our selves?

Iulio. These strange additions to my news I add, Antonio's Carcass never
could be found since yours and his contention.

Fran. I left him dead: thou art still just; some beast has made that fouler
beast his prey, and made up my revenge: but come with me, let us withdraw unto
you thicket by, and speak at large that woeful history commixt of my
proceedings, and pursuith; wilst time's our own.


Iulio. I would provide me of some necessaries, small in expense, which make a
mighty miss, and health cries out to have: so if you please but let me fit my
present want, at my return enjoyne me to your will, though it continue to the
latest date, and I am serviceable.


Fran. Speak no more such words, but make your own content: yet good Iulio be
not absent long, make me not long to see thee.


Iulio. Such shall be my speed, you will not wish me sooner to return.

Fran. Not wish thee? yes, though thou should make return e're thou depart.

Iul. Mark the end.

Fran. Be brief, and goodness take with thee. This Iulio, if desert might
purchase Fame, deserves sufficient: but thou art partial Fortune in cramming
Buzzards, whilst the Eagle sterves: How many in this fertile Italy, whom Nature
molded when she loathed her task, and blew her seed among the ignorant, have
thou adorned with plenty? whilst seemly virtue, wrackt with poverty, jets
under base control: There Is no felicity, nor true content here upon earth:
The Spider builds his Web in Barnes and Palaces: and the Prince himself
tastes gall as honey: Happiness there is none, for least or greatest: Here my
grief so parches me, that it does pain me to relate my woes, and make my
feelings known. Beneath this Hill a clear and pleasant fountain curles
along, whose shallowness makes the small pibbles 'peare above like Rocks, and
murmr as she runs down to the silver Current, thither will I high, and
borrow so much of her watery store, as will assuage my thirst:

All things are kind,
And feed our wants when they themselves are pined.

Enter Iulio and Pusse. Iul. Now my Catter-whauling Pusse, how did thou like
my last Cheat? did I not fool them finely?

Pusse. Thou art the very mere Mephostophelus, and I persuade my self thou
have new vampt thy wits.

Iulio. Tush these are nothing: I have cheated one of the bravest Stats-men of
the world; the very quintessence of Spain: Nay, I have fooled him who boasted
in his Country, he had guld all our Nation A Guelding is not rid in the
horse-faire, but he is mine to ride, maugre his Masters teeth. I have
out-fac'd a fellow of his horse in the open Market, sold him before his face;
and but making a question whether he trots or ambles, ride away both with the
horse and money, my Pusse. Sweet Munkey look to the house at home, I must
abroad again, to fetch in a new purchase.


Pusse. May thou thrive according to thy will, and to my wishes.

Exeunt. Enter Stultissimo, Lodwicke, Tomaso, and two Sorieants. 1. Serg. And
what is your Action?

Stult. Three hundred pound: be you ready to snappe him, and not to escape you
without good bail: he is as slippery as an Eele.


2 Serg. Therefore we will take him by the shoulder, and not by the tail; and so
we shall be sure to hold him. But can you show us the man?


Tom. This is his walk, and without waiting long you may spy him.

1 Serg. Say but that is he, and it is enough.

Lod. Stand as close as you can: If he have but the least suspicion of an
arrest, he is gone in a twinkling.

2 Ser. But will not you stay and assist us?

Stult. By no meunes; I Will but see him in hucksters handling, and be gone. Are
you not paid your Fees aforehand, and -- That Is he now: Now let him escape upon
your own perrill. Farewell.


Exeunt. Enter Iulio. 1 Serg. If he do, say no more: Yeo man stand to me.

Iulio. Now let me see: whom shall I next encounter?

1 Serg. Marry the Counter sir: for we arrest you.

Iulio. Ha, Counterfeits so nigh?

2 Serg. Yet current enough to carry you to prison.

Iulio. And yet your Counter-tenour sounds but like scurvy Music: am I caught
then? I pray you at whose fuite?

1 Serg. At three men's suite.

Iulio. Then three merry men, and three merry men be we, are we not honest
Sergeants? well, there is a piece to begin withal: lets talk further of the
business.


1 Serg. You speak well sir, if you hold on as you begin: and if you can
find good bail, ten to one but we shall prove as you late called us (Honest
Sergeants.)


Iulio. Me thinks you do not speak like Varlets:

Enter a grave Doctor in serious discourse with a gentleman. Gent. May it
please you, sir, to employ mine industry For any further service?

Doct. Something more,
Which in my former Letter I forgot,
I would entreat you bear in memory:
And that is but this --

They whisper. Iulio. And in good time: Know you that reverend man?

1 Serg. Know him sir, yes, for a worthy Doctor.

Iulio. He Is mine own Uncle: will you take his word.
And make it to me as a free discharge?
If he but say (nay there is another piece)
I Will see you satisfied?

2 Serg. Yes could we hear him say so: for he is one whose word will not be
questioned.

Iulio. It Is enough:
Give me but so much leave as speak unto him,
All I Will keep in fair distance: on my life,
If he ^ay not I Will see you satisfied,
I will return your prisoner.

1 Serg. It Is enough: for so far we dare trust you: you have paid for it well:
but we will watch him at an inch.

Iulio. I know he will not suffer me to lie
For such a petty sum: Now brain or never.
Excuse my boldness Sir: though it be scarce manners,
To interrupt your serious conference.

Doct. With me sir is your business?

Iulio. Such a business,
Which as it touches me in Charity,
So should it you in Conscience.

Doct. Speak it pray.

Julio. Look well on these two men.

1 Serg. He points at us.

Iulio. The one is an arch Brownist, and the other
Cannot endure to see a Surplesse worn:
Subject indeed to no conformity;
Yet both so well persuaded of your learning,
And spotless life, that what you shall propose
They Are willing to subscribe too.

Doct. I am as ready to give them my instructions.

Julio. And please you say so, that they may hear you sir.

Doct. Well I will:
My honest friends, and please you to have the patience
Till I have ended with this gentleman,
And instantly I Will see you satisfied.

1 Serg. It is enough grave sir.

Iulio. Now honest Sergeants: what desire you more?

2 Serg. Nothing from you sir.

Iulio. I hope so honest Sergeant: you see I deal fairly.
Farewell my honest Sergeants.

Exit. Doct. I have told you all: only remember me to these my noble friends.

Gent. With all the art
My weak tongue can deliver.

Exit Gentlman. 1 Sergeant. So, he is now at leisure.

Doct. And now I come to you.

1 Serg. Most welcome, sir, we stay for the same purpose.

Doct. Now, tell me briefly, which of you is the Brownist?
which the other, cannot endure a Surplice?

2 Serg. You are pleasant, sir,
We wait here, hoping to be satisfied.

Doct. And to that end I stay, for these opinions
So erroneons and so gross.

1 Serg. Sir, all the opinion that we hold is that you will pay us the money.

Doct. Still obstinate in error; it is this money,
And worldly care on which so much you doat:
Breeds in you these distractions.

1 Serg. Please you to pay the money, you shall find us conformable in all
things.

Doct. Money my friends, are not you Sectaries?

2 Serg. Sectaries; no, sir, we are Sergeants.

Doct. Sergeants; and wait for me? I owe you money?

1 Serg. Yes, sir, for your Nephew that was with you but now, and told you of
it; and we heard you say, you would see us satisfied.

Doct. The man's to me a stranger I protest,
And his request was I should satisfy you
In some points of Religion.

1 Serg. Religion, sir, it is a theme we seldom think of,
But three hundred pound is money.

Doct. But I tell you,
I past my word for counsel not for coin,
And this is all that you from me can have:
Endure a Surplice, and beware a Knave.

Exit. 2 Serg. Had we not warning sufficient of this before?

1 Serg. Well, howsoever, we have had good counsel,
If we had the grace to follow it.

Exeunt. Actus quintus. Scena prima.
Enter Arbaces, and Julio in good apparel, with three or four with weapons.
Julio. ASsure me of the promised recompense, I Will bring you to his presence.

Arba. Hear me a word.

They whisper aside. Enter Vallentius, Lod wick, Tomaso, Stultissimo and Fub.
Val. Now Signior, how do you feel you self? How like you marriage?

Stult. Faith it is a pretty quaint thing, and there is much good sport belongs
to it, would I were unmarried again?

Lod. Why? are you weary of Clariflora already?

Stult. Weary no, but I would have store.

Fub. Hark you, sir, take my counsel; though store be no sore, meddle with no
more of them, lest you make me a Prophet, and get many a sore head by the
match: have you not heard the ancient saying, No man can serve two masters?


Lod. That Is true, but any man may serve two Mistresses.

Fub. And serve their turns well.

Lod. Nay, i will leave that to the performer.

Fub. Hark you Master Lodwick, you or any man may think he does well, and yet
come short.

Lod. Briefly, directly, and learnedly spoken, sweet Fub.

Fub. I speak by proof.

Lod. Go to, your are a Knave Fub.

Fub. Hold your peace, there is more in the company.

Val. Well said, in faith, thank him Lodwick.

Fub. It Is not worth it, though I should say as much by you.

Tom. This fellow flows with wit.

Stult. Gallants, when were you at Court? I have been desired thither forty
times, my wife (I think) has a hundred friends there: besides Cooks and
Pantlers, that she has had many a good thing of, and they have sworn to bid me
welcome for her sake.


Val. You may see what comes by marriage?

Fub. If we might see all that comes by marriage, there would be old butting
abroad?

Arba. Here Is the sum, perform thy word, and claim it.

Val. Good morrow, good Arbaces.

Iulio. Make me not known to these?

Arba. Vallentius.

Val. He?

Arba. Are you not mad, I heard no less of late.

Lod. Report's a calumnious queen, and will abuse virtue it self you see, both
what he is, and what he was?

Arba. I am not sorry, that I am deceived: hear you not of Franciscus.

Exit Arbaces with Julio, and the Watch. Val. Upon my credit nothing.

Arba. Fair be your company, come Gentlemen.

Lod. What Is he that throws his Cloak about his nose?
Is it not Iulio?

Tom. By all exterior seeming?

Val. My life it is he?

Lod. What should this mean?

Val. I was asking that.

Tom. Marked you Arbaces: he has some drift in hand.

Val. Did you not note his followers?

Lod. Yes, and the Arms they carried.

Val. Shall we trace them, firs? and leave our wonder: I dare gage my life, the
knowledge will deserve the industry?

Tom. You speak my words.

Lod. He named Franciscus.

Val. Yes, and questioned me.

Tom. Withal, observed you but his speed.

Val. Come, we will pursue him.

Stult. La, la, la, la: nay, I pray take me with you Gentlemen.

Fub. If not for company, for mirth's sake, take heed before there.

Enter Franciscus alone. Fran. In mighty men how great appears the virtue nere
so small; how small the vice, though mighty Philosophy, they rules bridles my
cogitations, and prolongs, what manhood would disdain, the time to come appales
my courage and strikes instant fears through every nerve and artery: might we
like beasts end when we die, and never make account in no other place then
here: what heart so base would fear the threatening Law? Flatter the Judge to
save him: I would not sure: but there is bliss and torment much to come, we
cannot think on it yet the Resurrection aws me, I am much distempered, and want
of company, begets in me millions of terrors: Iulio tarries long, my Orisons
secure him, could the tears wash the blood but of my hands, my mind were
something free.


Enter Julio mufled, Arbaces and a Guard. Julio. This is the place, and there
Franciscus walks.

Arba. Where?

Iulio. That Is he: apprehend him, i will not be seen in it.

Arba. Your office, sir.

Fran. What are these for men.

Arba. Lay hands upon him.

Fran. What mean you friends?

Constable. This we mean to attach you, as a murderer.

Fran. Arbaces, I am betrayed.

Arba. Look to the homicide, such mercy as a Tiger yields his prey, when he is
pincht for want of what is his booty, expect from me thou murderer.


Fran. None I have deserved, or am about to crave, I know the worst, my life
thou can but have, It Is thine; I make a tender of it ere the sentence come,
and give thy labor ease, alas, poor Iulio: thou will unfriended, run thy
future race without society, I pity thee my friend more then my self, danger
to me is such, I do expect and dread not. Fare thee well, my breach of promise,
is not with my will, but merely on constraint.


Enter the Gentlemen. Arba. Lead him hence.

Lod. Here they are.

Val. Who have we here bound to the good behavior? Franciscus!

Lod. My dear friend.

Tom. My brother.

Arba. Officers, why do you linger thus, away with him?

Val. How fare you, sir?

Fran. Sick, sick to death Vallentius: shall we hence?

Exit Franciscus with guard. Tom. I now behold my fear, when I did hear
Arbaces speak of him.

Val. Something of badnesse shoot me instantly, but he does pierce me through.

Lod. Good Gentleman.

Tom. Has he recided here since he first fled?

Val. I thought him now in Millain, where he did traffic much.

Lod. I wonder how he came to be discovered?

Tom. Beshrew my blood, I pity his estate.

Val. Will you accord with me, show that respect you once did tender him, and
withal willingness strive to invent a means may do him ease.


Lod. What, my sword, my word, or wealth can do is his, command it for him?

Val. Let us petition to his rough adversary, and like true Suppliants in our
own behalfs, draw mercy from Arbaces.

Tom. Agreed.

Val. About it then, and our intentions thrive. Manet Julio.

Iulio. The gold is mine, his certain bondage does assure me it, why should I
be an Ass, and nicely stand on that no Tradesman does: no thrifty one, what
conscience, any thing but such a word: our wise divines that preach an't, know
it not, nor make good use of that, or ought they say, but of good money: this I
daily see, and sometime make my daily meditation, all is Ceremony composed for
purpose:

But be it what it will, this is my grace,
If not for one, I Am for the oath place.

Enter the Duke of Venice, two Senators, Crissipus, Arbaces, Vallentius,
Tomaso, Lodwick, Clarke, and others. Duke. Bring the offender forth.

Cris. Have mercy, good my Lord.

Duke. Believe't thou may sooner move a rock, which neither blustering wind,
nor boisterous Sea could shake or swallow, then beget remorse or smallest
favor in so foul a case: I were unjust, and much unmeet to be the man I am,
should we show mercy where the crime deserves, beyond the laws extent. He
that shall pardon murder, take it from me, is accessory to the guilty deed, and
stands in self predicament: Heaven defend we should be such, were he my Nephew,
nay, my firstborn son, or one more near: let me not be blessed in my
proceedings, if our Authority should blind his sin, or alter justice
course, set him forth: what favor equity can yield be his, no more expect
Crisippus.


Enter Officers with Franciscus. Pri. Sen. Read the indictment.

Fran. Save that pains, guilty, nor do repent, that in my wrath I did, whereof
I stand convict.

Duke. Art thou not sorry for thy heinous crime?

Fran. No mighty sir, but rather joy the more, in that it breviats my passage
here, which I would willingly leave.

Arba. Impudent homicide: justice good my Lord, with that severitie which they
deserve, which wilfully commit --

Duke. Arise, thou needst not kneel, nor beg for justice, be assured Arbaces:
such his deservings, such his punishment, and cruel as the cause, thou most
brutish man, nay, beast or something worse: had thou no humanity, no spark
of reason then, nor sense, to think thy trespass foul and ugly? do not
repent thy tyranny in death, though not the deed it self: fie on thee monster,
have thou a foul and dreadst not her perdition: what heathen savage, nay, what
ruder thing, having the life thou soughtst, would have enacted such a deed of
ruth, as thou, thou worst of creatures, on the image and livelesse carcass of
thy loving friend.


Pri. Sen. 'Twas most uncivil, most unchristianly.

2 Sen. An act, a Tigre would not have performed, on one that had slain his
brood.

Fran. Hear me good my Lord.

Arba. My poor Antonio.

Fran. That I did take his life, I have confessed, what further accusations laid
on me, is merely malice, and proceed from some, could wish my torment worse.


Arba. Out on thee butcher: give me leave my Lord.

Clark. Silence.

Duke. Can thou deny thy wrathful cruelty, impetuous tyranny, and fell
revenge upon his bleeding trunk?

Fran. Unless I should belie my self, and speak like a vain boaster, more
then what I did, I must say this is false, and he is from truth, as far as I
am from hope of life, begot this slander.


Duke. Produce your proof Arbaces, strike blushes through the cheeks of this
false man, and let him see his shame.

Fran. What Devil should be raised from the lowest hell, to justify this
wrong?

Tom. This is strange.

Lod. I never thought Franciscus one so foul, as I behold him now.

Val. Not thought, I durst have sworn him of a purer mettle* and better temper
far.

Enter Julio and Arbaces. Iulio. Prosperity to the Venetian State.

Fran. Iulio: he is not his proof I hope.

Duke. Is this the Gentleman?

Arba. This is he my Lord.

Duke. Make room, give way there.

Fran. How comes this about?

2 Sen. The fact's confessed, my Lord, what need we further wade into the Law, or
heap on troubles which we may eschew, upon so plain a case? the crime is
Murder, Murder is confessed, then as you find the guilt, proceed to judgment,
and make no further question.


Duke. We shall be sudden.

Fran. My sentence, good my Lord.

Duke. Speak, sir, can you report any thing more touching this business then
what already is delivered here in the open Court.


Iulio. No more or less, then what his own tongue uttered, can I or have to
say.

Fran. How Is that?

Iulio. We were once friends: once had I such opinion of his virtues, my life
and estimation were both his, he might command them, much it were to speak of
all that past between us: thus in short, I would some other were compelled to
this, which you have tied me too, my nearest friend alive.


Duke. Arbaces: was this the man gave you first notice where this Murderer kept?

Arba. The same my Lord.

Fran. Did he betray me? can this be.

2 Sen. Forward.

1 Sen. Speak.

Iulio. Must we be enforced, what should I speak, he flue him, ripped his
bowels, mangled him, and in his wrath, as man will any thing: tumbled his
reeking quarters down a Vault most steep and loathsome: what of this, he might
deserve much worse austeritie, yet this was bad enough?


Fran. Ha?

Arba. Justice, gracious Prince, justice, justice, sir.

Duke. Is this truth?

Iulio. Let me be deposed --

Lod. The most erroneous, execrable part that ever was performed.

Val. Were he my father, should forget himself, and match this outrage, mercy
quite forsake me if I would sue his pardon.

Tom. It was ruthlesse, fell, and bloody.

Duke. Look not up for shame, thou have no interest there.

Fran. I have done wrong, mighty, mighty wrong.

Duke. Can thou behold it now?

Fran. Pardon me father, pardon good Arbaces: that villain, that foul
villain.

Enter Antonio, Cornelia, Phemone, and Shepherd. Antonio. 'Twas time to come.

Cor. Show mercy, mercy, Duke.

Phe. Pity our complaints, have some compassion.

Duke. What are these that make this earnest deprecation, with such a hearty
zeal; are they well known to this assembly?

Tom. Cornelia, sister.

Val. Fair Phemone.

Cris. When will these humid fountains be dried up, and yield no more warm
drops?

Cor. My sweet Franciscus.

Fran. Some good or bad thing fell me suddenly, let me behold no more.

Duke. Is that his wife?

Val. She was my Lord, while some hard fate dis-joyn'd their mutual league,
and burst the holy concord.

Fran. Will thou pardon me and live a happy one, when I am dead, and lapt in
this cold earth.

Cor. Franciscus I was ever true to you.

Fran. I see it, and believe: that villain, oh, that villain!

Duke. Harken thy sentence.

Fran. Hear me my good Lord, little I have to say, yet to much grief tend my
few words, this traitor, nay, it is title all too good for one so heinous foul,
that he is perjured, by the death I owe his latest words do witness what he
is more, and worse: with pardon Lords, I shall delate at large, that all
hereafter may example take, and shun a villains snare; I took him up, when
like an Adder in the frosty dew, the cold had starved him: that I had set my
foot upon his head, when to my bosom I did take the Serpent, not cherisht,
comforted long had he been, but he both bit and stung me: foolish man I was
to be so fond, not many months, nor happy days I had with this most truest,
most immaculate piece, but that perfidious Caitiffe, that black fiend by
strange suggestions, and invented projects, draws me into a confirmed
jealousy, that she had stained her honor, falsely played with young Antonio.


Anton. O forgive me heaven, what is this?

Fran. I from my wrong conceived, least could I not, Drew him apart into a
silent Grove, Having before vowed solemnly revenge, Where I made some
repetition of my grief: he still (I see him) innnocent gentleman, taking my
words For such as Lovers use, when they are wanton, Smiles me in the face, and
would not thing 'twas anger.


Ant. It Is truth he speaks.

Fran. This inkindled me, and as Boar,
When he does chaw his foame, predicts some mischief,
So my bended front foretold his ruin,
Forth I drew my sword, and sheathed it
Within his breast, what else is added,
He Is a Jew averres, and falser than a whore.

Iulio. See, see the Ages wickedness: can it be possible?
O miserable time, when men make no more reckoning of their souls! Fie, fie,
Francisco, think upon your end, and whither you must go. Most reverend
Fathers, observe you this his contumacy: I shall I fear be forced to speak
what in my heart till now I chested, and rib'd in, because mine oath, 'twas not
my will has hear constrained me to expose his blame, my soul had vowed to
hide; Note into malice how he throws himself, and would stain my reputation
with a calumnious lie.


Fran. Art thou a man, or something else; oh fool, fool.

Ant. Is this possible?

Duk. Give ear unto thy sentece.

They talk in private. Ant. I must, in --

Duke. Did not I say he is mad, stark raving mad, away with him. The man's
alive that is dead.

Val. Yes, they supt together: I love this fellow.

Iulio. Your Grace shall do well to punish this saucy groom.

Ant. You are a most pernicious damned villain, and your soul knows it.

Arb. Come, sir, depart, and rave not, or I shall see you whipped.

Ant. Good Father pardon; pardon mighty Duke, pardon Antonio, cause of this
disquiet. Lod. Antonio?

Val. By this light he supt with him indeed.

Fran. It is not so, this cannot be.

Jul. Is there no mountain nigh to fall on me, no roten house?

Arb. I know not whether I may call thee son, or rest in doubt for ever.

Ant. I am Antonio, and I was your son, when I left Venice last.

Duk. Is no man here amazed but only I?

Anto. My dear Phemone!

Phem. Were you the Shepherd?

Ant. You see chaste Cornelia.

Arb. Was ever man so blessed?

Ant. Nay, come Francisco, I must have your hand: I can as well forgive, as I
can love; and nothing more than both: good Crissippus, my old friend.


Val. You have bin a stranger Signior; but I Am glad it is thus.

Julio would be gone. Duk. Whither away: stay him officers; we have not done
with you.

Iulio. Wither shall I run to hide my self?
What Climate, or what Region? Pardon greatest Prince.
Pardon grave Fathers.

Arb. Against that prayer kneel I:
No pardon Prince, as thou do hope for bliss.

Cris. Grant him a halter; nothing else good Duke.

Duk. Give him his liberty: Art thou so impudent to plead for mercy, and beg
of me, having committed such a capital trespass here in my view?


Fran. Though what I speak, with some additions, I have done and more, and he
more false has played, than I have said, blot his offenses: be propitious Sir.


Ant. Though the greatest sufferance fell on my part, I here acquit him, and
beseech for mercy.

Fran. Yet be compendious, and possess this presence, what cause thou had
that tempted thee so badly to seek my ruin.

Iulio. The Devil and his Angels.

Fran. O fie Ioretzo.

Duke. How Ioretzo? not the son of that pernicious traitor, had plotted with
Lamunes for sums of gold to burn our City?

Fran. He Is dead, and suffered for the same offense.

Duke. When brought the toad forth other than himself, unless 'twere
something worse?

Ant. Forget his Fathers faults: be pitiful.

Duke. He that prays next in his behalf, by heaven friends not himself, and
is mine enemy: We have too long suffered such Weeds as these to flourish in our
soil: No more the bosom of this earth of ours, shall (like a mother) lend her
fruitless increase, to cherish those would bane her: The sword of justice cut
the justice off that keeps it sheathed to such: His deeds were shameful, his
rewards be so, and quittance his desert: S^are on his brow in letters
cappitall, the name of knave, that all behold may read him what he is, and
hate him in the sight: His next doom is this; after three days we charge thee
on thy life, never set foot more in thy Native Climate.

So, bear him to his torture, speech is vain:
For what is said there is nothing can restrain.

Exit Iulio. Arb. Most worthy Prince.

Lod. I Will be honester while I live for this trick.

Fran. Can you forgive mine injury, Antonio?

Ant. As freely as I hope to be forgiven; and crave no more amends, but only
this you will call me brother, and make Phemone mine.


Fran. I need not make what is made, take and enjoy her that has vowed to be
none but yours.

Cris. Thy hand Arbaces, our quarrell's over, we will no fighting.

Arb. Fight, yes: I hope we shall find something else to do.

Cris. Daughter I have done thee wrong too; but I Will seek forgiveness when we
have more leisure.

Fran. This day breeds wonders: by what accident escaped you of your wounds?

Ant. Here stands the means, whom I must ever tender with respect, as with my
full proceedings you shall hear, when none can interrupt.


Duk. Francisco, henceforth know your virtuous wife, and prize her as a jewel:
I have heard the world speak well of her, and those unmatched wish they may
have your fortunes. Lodwicke where is the dumb show you promised me.


Lod. Even ready my Lord; but may be called a motion: for puppits will speak but
such corrupt language, you will never understand without an interpreter, or a
short plot; which I have drawn thus -- Now the motion follows.


Enter Doctor. Doct. What not divulge: yes, yes, I will divulge.

Duk. The jealous Doctor: I have him.

Doct. Do me right, sweet Duke, do me right.

Duk. What art?

Doct. A fool, a physician, a maintainer of whoredom, with a pox to me.

Duk. Then Medice cura teipsum; more knave than fool, the plot's false drawn
else: away with em.

Lod. Come sir, depart.

Doct. Purge me Duke, purge me, or let my wife take out my corrupted brains,
and rince them in a Cucking-stoole: I come Skimmington, I come.


Exit. Lod. Vallentius you must take some order for the Doctors cure: he
befriended you in as great a courtesy.

Enter Stultissimo and Fub. Stult. Trot on before: is the Corne-cutter come yet?

Fub. The Horne-cutter is come, sir.

Stult. On, on to the Leaguer then: I am ashamed to show my head amongst
Animalls: on to the Leaguer.

Exit. Val. This is a Monster of your making, Lodwicke, buy him a Cap-case to
hide up his horns in, for shame of the world.

Lod. Come we are both --

A great Hubub and noise, a ringing of basins, a great many Boys before, and
Julio drawn in a Cart. 1 Boy. He comes, he comes.

2 Boy. Where does he come? he is rather drawn hither like a Bare to a stake.

3 Boy. What in a Coach?

1 Boy. Nay, rather in an open Chariot: and yet it cannot be properly called
a Chariot, because it runs but on two Wheels.


2 Boy. Room for him there: for I am sure he had rather any here had his
room than his company.

3 Boy. Silence there; you in the Docket there, let but one speak in the Court
at once.

All. Silence. Julio. Noverint universi,
It is the Dukes mercy;
And the condition of my Obligation,
To make my recantation,
That I within bound,
Should give reasons profound,
Why (much against my heart)
I thus ride in a Cart.
Nay, gentlemen, no eggs I beseech you: for I love them at this time, neither
raw, roasted, nor rotten. For should they hit me on the breast, they would go
clean against my stomach.


Tomaso in a corner of the Gallery. Tom. You Phaeton.
Is that your Father Phoebus his Chariot, and will he allow you never a Box to
sit in?

Iulio. No juglers Box, I Will assure thee friend: for here is neither pass, nor
repasse, I stand here you see for an example, And could wish all these good
people to follow it.


Lodwicke in another corner. Lod. Who Is that, Boots mounted in his Charles
waine? does he cry Pippings, Carrets, or Turnips?

Iulio. You are deceived, Signior: rather Bread, and Meat, as Pye-crust,
bones, and fragments out of the Ludgate man's basket: Nay, hold your hands, I
beseech you Gentlemen, and use your tongues and spare not.


Stul. Well, he stands hear but for a show, and I am sure I suffered for it
really and indeed.

Iulio. Bear witness my Masters, that is the maine malefactor indeed, and I
stand here for a show: I Will go no further than his own confession.


A Country fellow standing by. Country fell. They talk of Cheaters, here is a
twenty shillings piece that I put into my mouth, let any Cheater in
Christendom cosen me of this, and carry it away cleanly, and I Will not only
forgive him, but hug him and embrace him for it, and say he is a very Hocus
Pocus indeed.


Iulio. What said that fellow?

Pusse. He says he has a piece in his mouth, that all Europe shall not cheat
him of.

Julio. I have marked him, it is mine own: and notwithstanding all this
melancholy we will spend it at night in Wine and Music.


Count. fell. He that can pluck this piece out of my jaws, spite of my
teeth, and I keep my mouth fast shut, I Will say he is more than a Cheater, and
a Doctor Faustus, or Mephostophilus at least.


Puss. Do hear how he brags?

Jullio. It Is mine own I warrant thee.

Two Countrymen. 1 Count. But what is become of my horse?

2 Count. And what is become of my load of hay?

Iulio. May I eat hay with your horse, if they were not both done neatly and
cleanly. But Gentlemen, and the rest, you see I am at this present your
pitiful spectacle. I looked once within this twelve month, not to have been
mounted in such state: but no man knows what preferment he is born to. You see
I have hitherto sailed through this great storm without soyling my Suite,
spoiling my Ruff, or spattering my Beaver: thanks to these kind spectators.


1 Serg. But Master Fast and Loose; do you remember what a slippery trick you
served Master Doctor and us?

Iulio. And was it not fairly done Master Sergeant, to teach you how to
digest the wearing of a Surplice, before you came to stand in a white sheet.


1 Serg. Well now you are at your journies end: May it please you to alight for
your ease?

Iulio. Withal my heart: and if either you or any of my accusers be weary with
following me on foot, the Room is now empty, I will give him leave to ride in
my place. He seems to fall into a passion. Yet when I do but think of this
disaster, it draws tears from mine eyes.

He draws his handkerchiefe (as to wipe his eyes) just before the Country
fellow, and scatters some small money.

Country fellow. Sir, you have (I think) let fall some money.

Iulio. Thanks honest friend.

He takes it up. Count. fell. What do you look for? I can assure you here is all
that fell.

Iulio. Nay, sure I had more money? it is not in my handkerchief, nor in my
pockets, I have examined them both.

Serg. Why, what do you want sir?

Iulio. A piece, a piece, and had it now, just now; sure whilst I was so high
pearcht none could dive so low into my pocket, it was sure as I lighted, and
dropped from me, just as I drew my handkerchief.


Puss. Some such thing I saw fall.

Iulio. Pray who were they that stoopt?

Serg. I saw none stoop but this Country fellow.

Iulio. Then sir, I must demand this piece of you.

Count. fellow. Of me? I profess I took up but two shillings and six pence,
and that I gave into your hand.

Iulio. But I profess that one of them was a piece, and never came into my
hand, and that I must demand of you: say did no body stoop but he?


Serg. None I assure you.

Iulio. Thou art still my honest Sergeant.

Puss. That fellow has something in his mouth.

Count. fell. Yes my tongue and my teeth, and what of all that.

Puss. Nay, something else sure, for he is not troubled with the Mumps, and
yet see how one side of his cheeks bumps out.

Iulio. I am afraid, we shall find him a Cheater.

Serg. Sirrah know I am an Officer, I charge you open your mouth, and let us
see what you have in it, etc.

Count. fell. Well sir, I have a twenty shillings piece, what then?

Serg. And this man misseth a twenty shilling piece out of his pocket.

Iulio. Plead well Sergeant and thou shall have thy see.

Count. fell. Well, there it is, what can you make of it?

Iulio. Marry twenty shillings good and lawful current money, Puss, was not
this the piece that I put in my pocket this morning?


Puss. I know it by that mark.

Serg. And she is witness sufficient in conscience.

Iulio. Do you see Gentlemen. I am here brought to public penance for a
Cheater, and here is a plain fellow that (it seems) in his simplicity would
out-doe me: if I be thus censured merely for suspicion; shall he escape free
that is taken in the very action?


All. No, no, mount him, mount him.

Count. fell. Nay, by your favor Gentlemen, I have driven a Cart often for my
pleasure, and would be loath to ride in one now for my punishment. It is
penance enough for me to part with my piece, which cannot be more current of
Coin, then his is Arrant for Knavery.


Exit. Iulio. He Is gone, I am still here, now Gentlemen,
If heretofore there has been any Doll,
Any bold Beachum, and any Cutpurse Moll.
Any Bawd fat with wealth, or with care meager,
That spends her time in Garrison or Leager,
Grace me so far to say, that of a Cheater
Though some have been more grave; scarce any greater,
But Gentlemen; what need we more repeating?
Knowing, that even in all Trades there is cheating?
It Is common both in buying and in selling,
In all Commerce; nay, even in money telling.
It Is frequent 'twixt the Pander and the Whore,
We our selves find it at the Playhouse door.
And though (for an example) here I stand,
I am not all the Cheaters in the land.
Some here (no question) know it but I vow,
(They what they please) I will cheat none of you.

Duke. We understand their humors,
And the cause of their distempers;
And have too long suffered such weeds
As these to flourish in our soil,
But now no longer shall this earth of ours,
Like a ^inde Mother lend her fruits increase,
To cherish those would eclipse her worth.
But those whose aims and acts are imitable,
Crown with green Garlands, and with Bowls brim'd full.
Music proclaim a general Festival,
A Jubilee of joy and mirth to all:
May love and truth, never like comfort miss,
Nor Knave in Grain, escape a reward like this.

FINIS.

