CVPIDS MESSENGER: OR, A trusty Friend stored with sundry sorts of serious,
witty, pleasant, amorous, and delightful Letters.

What Cupid blushes to discover, Thus to write he learnes the Lover.

Newly written.

Cupid with bow and arrow aiming at richly dressed man and woman standing close
together (with her left hand in his) in a landscape How Not love,
Thou Shall love


Printed at London by M. F. and are to be sold by Francis Grove over against
the Sarazens head without Newgate 1629.

The Contents.
A Letter inuiting his Friend to write to him. Fol. 1 The answer. A Letter
excusatory for not writing Fol. 2 A Letter to a friend upon the death of his
wife. Fol. 3 A comfortable Letter upon the loss of an husband. Fol. 4 A Letter
of grief for friends absence. Fol. 5 A Letter for the entreaty of good will to
a young Gentlewoman. ibid. Her Answer. Fol. 7 Another Letter to his Mistress,
desiring her love. Her answer. Fol. 8 To a beauteous Lady upon a long
affection. Fol. 9 Her Answer. Fol. 10 To a judicious Gentlewoman. Her answer
Fol. 11 To a Lady, with whom he fell in love seeing her at a solemn Triumph.
Fol. 12 Her Answer. Fol. 13 To his Mistress that was of wanton and light
carriage. Fol. 14 Her Answer. Fol. 15 A desperate Lover to his quondam Mistress.
Fol. 16 Her Answer. Fol. 17 A Letter of true kindness. Her answer. Fol. 18 A
Letter of counsel from a discreet mother to her daughter newly married. Her
answer Fol. 19 A Letter in case of wrong supposed to be committed. Fol. 20 A
Letter from his Servant to his Master. Fol. 21 An answer of a Letter for
courtesy and favor received. Fol. 22 The Fathers Letter against the Son.
Fol. 23 The Answer. Fol. 24 To his mistress (quondam) having spent all his
means upon her in prosperity he being imprisond she forsakes him. Fol. 25 To
his friend lying long sick. Fol. 26 A Letter wherein is recommended to a
Nobleman from his inferior the conditions and behavior of a person. Fol. 27
The Answer. Fol. 28 A merry Letter to his friend in London. Fol. 29 A Letter
gratulatorie. Fol. 30 A Letter to his silent friend. The Answer. Fol. 31 A
Letter expostulatory for breach of promise. Fol. 32 To his friend salve to
poverty. ibid. A Letter of a Gentlewoman to a Gentleman with whom she fell in
love, and, His Answer. Fol. 33. 34 A Letter from a Chapman in the Country to a
Tradesman in London. with, The Answer. Fol. 35. 36 A Letter of thankfulness for
kindness showed to his son. Fol. 37 The Answer. Fol. 38 A Letter to his
Mistress in the Country that desired news from the City. ibid Her Answer.
Fol. 40 A wooing and comfortable letter to a noble widow that had newly lost
her husband. Fol. 41 Her Answer. Fol. 42 Another to the same purpose. Fol. 43
Her Answer. Fol. 44 A Letter of discontent after the falling out of Lovers.
Fol. 45 To his angry Mistress. Fol. 46 A Letter from an Apprentice in London, to
his father in the Country. ibid. A Letter from a husband to his wife. Her
Answer. Fol. 47. 58 A Letter from one kinsman to another in London or any other
place. Fol. 49 A Letter to request the borrowing of hundred pounds. Fol. 50 The
Answer. Fol. 51 A Letter to his friend for breach of promise. Fol. 52 The
Answer. Fol. 53 To his friend a Mercer. Fol. 53 A Letter to an unfaithful
friend. ibid. A Letter for admittance into service. Fol. 55 To his love upon a
long and fruitless affection. Fol. 56 To his sweet heart in the Country. ibid.
A young man's Letter to his enamoured mistress. Fol. 57 Her kinds answer. Fol. 58
A Letter of Request. ibid. A Letter of discontent, upon a denial of a Request.
Fol. 59 To a Court Lady. Her Answer. Fol. 59. 60
CVPIDS MESSENGER DELIVERING SUNDRY Excellent Letters.
A Letter inuiting his Friend to write to him.
THough the want of your sweet society my worthy Friend) do occasion reason
of grief, yet it lies in you even by the often mission of your desired
Letters, to mitigate that sorrow: and since the distance of place does deny us
our accustomed conference and orall communication, let the passage and
intercourse of our Letters supply that defect. Now our tongues cannot be
heard, let us be frequent in our writing: and let not the change of places
alter our minds. Therefore that you might not judge me negligent of our fore
passed amity, or forgetful of our old friendship, I have took boldness to
visit you with this letter, desiring you to be no niggard in this kind of
friendly remembrance. I wish to you all prosperous fortunes as to my self, and
continue my love to you with all sincerity. But lest the proliritie of my
Letter grow to the length of an Oration, I set bounds to my writing, and remains

Yours in boundless affection, C. D.
London. Febr. 4. 1629.
The Answer. A Letter excusatory for not writing.
I Am afraid (judicious and kind sir) that it is with me as it is with that
unfortunate Pylot who falls into the Gulf of Scylla, while he indeauors to
avoid the danger of Charybdis.

Incidit in Scyllam cupidus vitare Charybdim. I confess I have received
Letters from you, and seeking by not answering all this while to conceal the
rudeness of my unpolished pen from the deep discerning eye of your
judgment, I doubt whether I have not made shipwreck of your good opinion, who
happily imputes my silence unto my negligence of your love, or to my oblivion
of your passed kindenesses: But I beseech you (kindest Sir) to have thus much
confidence in disposition, that no confused Chaos of cogitations, no fulness
of employment, shall banish your remembrance out of my thoughts: though I be
never so busy I make answer to those I little regard, I dare scarce write to
you (I am possessed with such a due reverence of your worthiness) when I am
most at leisure. Yet finding in my self how far greater a crime it is to
neglect duty then to lay open my imperfection to a well wishing friend, I have
chosen the latter to make tender of the former: wishing that as you equalize
grave Nestor in wisdom, so you might parallel him in the longaeuity of a
happy life, I humbly surccase:

At your command. E R.
Newcastle, June 2. 1629.
A Letter to a friend upon the death of his wife.
THe acquaintance I had with your virtuous wife (honest friend) makes me feel
the sense of her loss, for he that can be insensible of the loss of a good
woman, is an alien to nature, and a rebel to all moral virtues. I may truly
say she was praiseworthy for her many good parts, but they were but good
provisions for the world to come.

Give me leave to ask you why you mourn, I mean not why you mourn
outwardly; which is an old custom and a matter of formality, but why do you
mourn inwardly, which is the true sorrow: you will say (I say) for the loss
of a companion. Indeed you do well, for as a man was solitary before God gave
him one, so should he be after God takes her away: but there is a mean in all
things. To be hard hearted is beast like, to be tender is effeminate, to be
sensible is manly. As for you, you cannot offer a more acceptable sacrifice to
the dead, then by turning the love you bare her, into care of her children, to
which I know you by nature so well inclined, that I need not to instruct, but
only remember you: but since wise men in sudden accidents and in cases
concerning themselves are sometimes to seek, I am bold to advise you now,
though henceforth I would be glad to be advised by you: resting

Your servant, I. M.
Arthingworth. July 7. 1629.
A comfortable Letter upon the loss of a Husband.
Madam:
THough none knows the value of your loss, nor feels the want so deeply as
your self. yet I may take upon me more feeling than another man, being for the
love I bear you more sensible of your misfortune and affliction: I my self
have contributed many tears, and I confess there is great allowance of grief
for good wives for the fatal departures of worthy husbands, but you were
better forget the dead then the living, (your daughters I mean) to whom (I am
opinionated) you would not wish so sad an increase as your death would bring
them, which by this (...) c^^^se of ^^^cating sorrow is too much hastened. O
let not your virtue of patience die before you, but so magnanimously behave
your self in your troubles, that your acquaintance may find more cause to
commend you, then to advise you. Madam I beseech you hold me to be

Your Honors friend W. M.
Arthingworth March 11, 1629.
A Letter of grief for his friends absence.
OF such comfortable use is the familiarity of a sweet companion, that those
hours of our life seem most happy which are passed away in the society of a
friend: If we take a journey his company is in stead of a Coach; there is not a
thought, nor a word, of the tediousness of the way: If we abide at home, we
imagine that the sith of Time too speedily sweepes away the hours. But on the
contrary, needs must his life be melancholic that has no friend to sweeten
the slow transcursion of Time. I wish my own experience were not too true
proof hereof, for since your absence, sweetest friend, melancholy has been
my concomitant, and your remembrance my greatest comfort. And as the Turtle
pines away after the loss of his mate, so since your departure my bosom has
admitted no consolation. I request you by that interest which I have in your
love, since in person I cannot, that I may see you in a Letter. Silence
between absent friends incurres the censure of an inofficious and inciuill
disposition. But I know you will vindicate your self from a stain of so
abhorent a nature. I rest

Yours vnremoueably, I. C.
Frandon. Aug. 1628.
A Letter for the entreaty of good will to a young Gentlewoman.
THe long and considerate regard by which in deep contemplation I have eyed
your most rare and singular virtues, joined with so admirable beauty, and much
pleasing condition, graffed in your person, has moved me, good mistress E. B.
among a number whom I know entirely to favor you, earnestly to love you and
therewith to offer my self unto you. Now howbeit I may happily seem in some
eyes, the least in worthiness of a number that daily frequent you, yet may you
vouchsafe in your own private to reckon me with the greatest in willingness.
Wherein, if a settled and immovable affection toward you if fervent and
assured love, grounded upon the vndecaiable stay and prop of your virtues, if
continual, nay rather inexterminable vows, in all perpetuity addicted unto
your services, if never ceasing and tormenting grief vncertainlie carried by a
hazardous expectation, closed in the circle of your gracious conceit, whether
to bring unto the ears of my soul a sweet murmur of life, or severe sentence
of a present death, may ought at all prevail, either to move, entreat, sue,
solicit, or persuade you, I then am the man, who shrining in my inward
thoughts the dignity of so worthy a creature, and prising in deepest weight
(though not to the uttermost value) the estimate of so incomparable a beauty,
have resolved living to honor you, and dying never to serve other but you, from
whose delicate looks expecting no worse acceptance, then may seem answerable
to so divine an excellency: I remain

Your most passionate, loyal, and perpetually devoted, R. F.
January 20. 1629.
Her Answer.
THat men have skill, and are by sundry commendable parts enabled to set forth
their meaning, there needs no other testimony then your present writing, your
eloquence is far beyond the reach of my poor wit, and the multiplicity of your
praises fitter for a poetical goddess, then to the erection of any such
deesse. For my part, I shall hold them as the fancies and toys of men, issuing
from the weakest of their humors, and how far my self can deserve, none
better then my self can conceive. Being one of so good sort, as you are, I
could do no less then write again unto you, the rather to satisfy the
importunity of your messenger, wishing such a one to your lot as might
paragonnize those excellencies you writ of, and answer every way to the
substance of all those inestimable praises. So having your love and your
writing, (as I take it) be best suited together.

Yours as far as modesty will, to answer your courtesies. E. B.
^^nuary 24. 1629.
Another Letter to his Mistress, desiring her love.
GOod mistress I. P. I am bold, though a stranger, to make these lines
messengers at this present of my good meaning toward you, wherein I go not
about by pretense of a most entire and hearty good will, which I profess to
bear you, to make present surmise thereupon that on so bare an assertion you
should immediately credit me, I prise your worthiness at a far greater value,
and weigh your good allowance so much, as I only desire by your favorable
liking I may entreat to have access unto you, not doubting but by being in
your presence, I shall so sufficiently by apparent proof mainetaine the
efficacy of that I now protest, and give so good occasion, to deem well of
me, as you shall have no reason to repent you, that upon so honest and loving a
request you have condiscended to my entreaty: whose health and prosperity
tendering as mine own. I send you with my Letter a token of that great
affection I bear you, which I pray you most heartily to accept of, and wear
for me. And ever so do continue,

Yours if so you please to accept of me. R. M.

Her answer.
SIr, your message is to me as strange as your self, who are unto me as
stranger, and what your good meaning unto me is, I know not: for giving of
credit unto your assertion, as you seem not to challenge it, so was I never
hitherto of my self so hasty to do it, having oftentimes been taught, that
of fairest speeches ensues the foulest actions: I cannot condemn your
purpose, because I intend the best of your dealings, and howbeit I am in no
point so restrained, but that in all reasonable sort that may be, any access
may be granted, so when you shall by farther notice sufficiently make apparent
that with modesty I may do it, I shall be willing so far forth as my years
and present being may minister occasion, in any thankful requital that may
be to yield my self unto you. Till which time I return your token again,
and my hearty thanks unto you by this bearer.

Your friend as one unacquainted hitherto may be. I. P.

To a beauteous Lady upon a long affection.
HOw impossible it is to keep heat from fire, being that very nature of the
element, I refer to your best judgment, and how near a spirit of that
nature, is the love of the heart kindled by the eye of beauty, I leave to your
kindness to consider: since then such is the force of true love, as cannot be
so smothered up in silence, but that it must burst out into words and actions,
either to gain comfort, or to suffer death, pardon (fairest of beauties) that
Patient that in anguish seeks ease and deny not your help in the excellency of
the cure: your beauty has moved me, your excellent teature your comely
gesture, your sweet behavior, have all concurred to make me unhappy, unless
your hand help me, and though the hurt be more felt then seen, yet is it not
deadly, if you be kind: loath I am to be a beggar without desert, and yet
love will stoop a high spirit, which, by the bond of due honor has sworn me
your true servant: in which Title, under heaven, shall be my hearts greatest
honor: and in the honor of whose favor, shall be the height of my worlds
happiness: in hope whereof, praying to the highest Power in the heavens to
bless you with all felicity on earth, I rest

Your devoted, and not to be removed P. E.

Her Answer.
SIr, how easy it is to quench a fire in his first kindling, experience can
deliver; in the diversity of hearts love being not the least that is like to
do much hurt, I wish you to take order with your wits, lest it bring your
brain to an ill comfort. And therefore in placing of affection, be not too
far from discretion, lest the persuasion of self will, be an abuse of a better
sense. If I had skill in Physic, I would prescribe you help for your
disease, but being a simple woman, you must have patience with my plainness,
who not knowing how to do you good, and unwilling to wish you hurt, leaving
you to a better Paradise then in the torment of an idle passion, I rest in what
I may,

Yours as kindly as I find cause. A. N.

To a judicious Gentlewoman.
Dear friend:
THe forcible effect and conquest which your beauty has wrought in my heart
constrained me in your kindness to place the hope of my fortune: beseeching
you so to equal your outward excellence with an inward perfection, that faith
may not have fear of favor, where humility shall guide the course of
affection: I should esteem my self the most unhappy if I should give your
ears any distaste by my suit but if it light within the line of your liking, it
shall begin the garden of my paradise: so under heaven seeking no other star,
then the guide of your grace to lead my heart to the joy of my life: I rest,
never to rest till I ever rest

Yours all, or mine own nothing at all. E. C.
From Madrid. March 26.
Her Answer.
I Am sorry to think that a shadow of dust should have that force (in conceit)
to rob reason of his contents: for beauty is but a shadow, which if your eye
has found in my face, let it go no further lest it do wrong to my will in
hurting your heart: my inside I hope is far from disgracing any good in my
outside, and both altogether unhappy, if they have been any occasion of evil:
but least I may seem discontent either at the matter or manner of your
writing, I discharge you of the burden of that fear, by the kind acceptance
of your affection, which though I cannot answer as I would, yet, as in good
reason I may, I will think and consider of, which if it fall out to your
liking, be not unfaithful in your love, in hope whereof I rest,

Yours wholly, if at all. A.B.

To a Lady, with whom he fell in love seeing her at a solemn Triumph.
When I saw you (excellent Lady) viewing the Triumphs, looking upon your eyes
me thought Heaven opened to discover a greater glory, and Angels tylting
there took from my judgment all things else done out of that blessed
compass, but mine amazement became my death, and my death must be your
Triumph, for how ever the conflict appeared, your glances which were the
wounding weapons, struck through my weak sight, and slew my heart, though
armed in the strongest sort of my bosom; I am not so happy as to be a
prisoner (for there were hope) but so unfortunate to die in despair, that to
have the monument of my remembrance erected in the Temple of your pity, is
the utmost aim my bliss looks to, the cruelty of fair ones has pronounst
my judgment, and says, it is impossible to affect where they have not seen?
Oh see me in this sorrowful paper, (you fairest of adored beauties) and let
that sight move affection, affection knowledge, knowledge pity, and pity
that work of the highest, which is only to do miracles, so shall cruelty
give himself the lie, prove you a goddess, and make me (the happiest of men)
a trumpet of your renown and glory: My love is like your goodness without
parallel, my faith shall go beyond that love, and my service crown both with
an infinite merit. This is my sacrifice, which if you accept, (excellentest of
fair beauties, and innobled with all rich perfections) I live, if otherwise,
my joy is, I perish by so excellent a creature.

Prepared to suffer. I. S.
From Dover June 9. 1628.
Her answer.
SIr, he that of a light blow with the eye, makes a deadly wound at his heart,
is either too unworthily faint, or much too superstitious in the signs and
planets; for mine own part, my knowledge assures me I am free from any such
malignant influence: I confess a weak appetite unguarded with judgment, nay
often stumble and receive knockes: nay sometimes fall to utter ruin; and to give
to that weakness the government of my fortune, were to rob my self of all
good men's pities. In my worst mischances, the ils I cause not, reason cannot
blame me, if I cure not, since what is without me, nothing appertains unto
me, but you will make my beauty guilty, poor nothing, how pitifully art thou
slandred; which being a mere Chymera of imagination, have not any thing in
th^^, but the strength of folly, and man's fancy; it is not a substance, for
then it might be felt, let loose or restrained; it has no certain shape, for
then all men would like one figure; nor has it any abiding, for then it would
ever be found in its own mansion; it is not compounded of perfect colors for
then no man would dote of mixed deformities, nor does it subsist of real
virtues, for then no man would wed with the vicious: to conclude, it is nothing
has hurt you, and that nothing I send to cure you: rashness shall not breed
my repentance: your love is too infinite, your faith too worthy, and your
service too rich; a meaner proportion will guard safest a mean fortune; and so
wishing your great sacrifice to a greater deity, I rest,

Your best Counselor. A. N.
Canterbury.
To his Mistress that was of wanton and light carriage.
BEcause my vow of love (my sometimes dearly beloved mistress) has made me your
friend, therefore the care of your honor shall make me your counselor;
whether it come seasonably or no, examine your heart, that it comes freely and
with a wholesome intent, truth be my witness. It is told me (mistress) that
your actions are publicly noted: for their contumelious leuity, and your
wanton lightness is so marked by your beholders, that contempt is become your
only companion your apparel is like your mind unconstant and uncomely, and
draws rather admiration then reverence toys are your studies, and vanities
your practice, so that making your self a slave to pleasure, you have
forgotten the violence of misfortune, if this he true (my dearly beloved
mistress) then in this I must perish, since living in you, your least fall
wounds both me and mine honor: I know you are fair and young: but if you
cloth them here with vices, what will you wear in the grave, but infamy?
life runs without feet, misfortune strikes without an alarm, and the glory
of vanity breaks like a bubble, and leaves nothing behind but the print of
disgraces: it is too much to be evil once, for the evil is never forgotten,
and it is too little not to be ever good, since the smallest blot dashes all
out of remembrance. I would I could as easily excuse you, as fame is apt to
accuse you: pardon me if I be too hold in writing, it is urged by a too much
boldness in action the one made good, the other shall be gracious beyond
expression; till then give my pen leave to keep my heart from breaking.

Your griued friend, A. Z.
Farndon. Apr. 1628.
Her Answer.
A Zeal that is kindled (my best servant) with the false fire of men's reports,
is rather held a superstition then an honest devotion; for it both wrongs
truth, and wounds an innocent reputation; and those light believers, which
build faith on such weak grounds, deserve nothing but ignominy and contempt:
if now you accuse my life in your absence, where was your judgment when I walked
in your presence? O be not so false to the worth of your own truth, to say you
could not see that which all the world has discovered, or if you did, to be so
blind to affect a thing unworthy, but it may be, absence has begotten new
thoughts, those thoughts new affection, and that affection must needs find a
new quarrel with old friendship: if it be so, your own course lead you. I
freely confess I am not such a beggar that can wear rags, such a miser that
can eat roots, nor so subtle to speak like a Iugler, with a reed in my
mouth: Truth I serve, freedom I love, and plainness is my condition. If these
have tastes you cannot relish, you must in some other soil seek new comforts,
for mine own part I will be no bondslaue to opinion, till I know it constant,
nor no servant of the time, till it be vncorrupt, and more honest. As for my
life, had it for every feather a wing, and my fortune double so many hazards,
yet will I bring the one to my grave with honor, and make the other ashamed
with my sufferance. I rest,

Your injured mistress. D. P.
Maidston. May. 7.
A desperate Lover to his quondam Mistress.
IT shall be virtue in you (fairest) to receive my despaires though you (...)
no comforts, and if in the reading you vouchsafe a sigh to my remembrance, it
is a dirge that shall make me for ever sleep in quiet: despair long since
gave me judgment, and obedience only shall make my death patient: ^t is
necessary I die for you, since fate denies me to live with you, for my self is
such an interposition betwixt you and your glory, that my griefs would keep
much of your Sun eclipsed: I know my wants, and that there is nothing either
in my life or fortune to deserve you, only an infinite desire, which but by
death can never be lessened, then since all things suit with my despaires, be
all delays with your love (ever far from me) and let the world only
remember this in my Epitaph, that it was not my folly, but your will; not my
despair, but truth in obedience: But O this is that I should do, not speak:
and the music is more unfit for your ear, then your love for my heart:
pardon my tell-tale sorrow, it rather speaks things fit to be done, then
done, and will sooner crave the glory in wish then action, and yet the poison
of disdain is so violent, I know it will wast me, and wast me it shall, for my
comforts are already consumed, and in that consumption let all things but my
memory turn to its first Chaos, and so live as happy as I unfortunate:

Only in remembrance. F. L.
Northampton. September. 6.
Her Answer.
HOw much I stand divided with the vnresonablenesse of your affection, my
distracted writing may witness; wherein I can observe no order, because
nothing in your desires holds good proportion, you bid me love, and will not
hear when destiny denies it, and you seek that rule from me, which is quite
taken out of my knowledge (dear Sir) awaken up your first wisdom, and tie
your actions on providence, then shall you see I have less power to draw on
mine, then you to withdraw your affection: will you make beauty such a slave,
that it must obey every gaze, or the poor owner so unfortunate, that she must
be servile to the desire of any wilful longing, then so, how much safer were
it to be foul and fortunate? But you will dye, woes me that folly should make
you so impudent, to boast you dare do a sin so damnable; but I know you will
dye but as actors dye, in one scaene and revive in the next, to make it more
glorious, thus to dye I allow you, and to such I will give a smile for pity:
to any other a charitable tear, to think that any Gentleman should become a
traitor to Nature. Lastly, let me win you by the love you boast of, never
henceforth to solicit me, for as no relief can come from such vain labor,
so nothing but great disdain will grow from my vexation: So hoping you will
make that hope desperate, which is without all hope of virtue, I rest,

Your chaste friend. P. C.
Rowel March 7.
A Letter of true kindness.
IF dame Nature had been pleased to have made my bosom transparent, your eyes
should see the secrets of my heart, which if it have any happiness in the
world, it is in the hope of your favor: but amazed with the admiration of your
worth, I know not what to say of your worthiness, but only this, that finding
the due of your desert exceeding my capacity in commendatio^, I will leave the
excellency thereof to more honorable invention, and think Fortune enough
favorable, if she prefer my service to your commandment: presents I have
none worthy the sending, but the heart of my love at your emploiment which
being nothing more then what you will, I rest, ever one and the same.

Your servant. W. W.

Her Answer.
IF your speeches be led by your thoughts, it is needless to desire a
transparencie in your bosom, for when as the heart and the tongue agree
together, then men's protestations are followed with real performance: words of
admiration trouble discretion, in construction, and eloquence in love has not
the best commendation, inventions are ready where fancy is studious, but where
wit is virtuous, there is will gracious: your present most worthy of all
acceptance, cannot be better requited then thankfully remembered, and if
conceits meet in a mutual content, what comfort may follow, I leave to the
heavens favor, and so I rest,

Your friend. A. W.

A Letter of counsel from a discreet mother to her daughter newly married.
MY good daughter: thou art now going into the world, and must leave to be a
child, and learn to be a mother, and look to a family, rather then to the
intertainment of a friend, and yet both necessary, in their kinds: find the
disposition of thy husband, and in any wise move not his impatiencie, let thy
kindness bind his love, thy virtue his comfort, thy huswiferie his
commendations: avoid tatling gossips, yet be kind to thy neighbors, and no
stranger to thy kindred: be gentle to thy servants and not over familar: have
an eye to thy door, and a lock to thy chest: keep a bit for beggar, and a
bone for a dog: cherish the Be that brings home honey, and make much of the
Cock that makes much of his Chickens, take heed abroad of the Kite and within
of the Rat: pray to God for his blessings on all thy proceedings, and have a
religious care of thy modest government; and rather for charity then praise,
give relife unto the poor; if at any time thou have need of any good I can do
thee, be assured whilst thou have a mother, thou have a friend: so hoping in
thy kindness, thou will take care of thy counsel, beseeching God to bless
thee, that I may ever have joy of thee, with my hearts love, to his tuition I
leave thee.

Thy most loving mother. R. S.

Her Answer.
MY good Mother: I have passed the years of a child, and know the care of a
mother, and therefore for your kind advise for my carriage I thank you, and
what benefit I will make of your lessons, you shall find in the fruit of my
observation, I am but newly come into the world, and God knows when I shall
go out of it; and am yet scarce warm in my house, and therefore hardly know
yet how to go through it. For me husbands humor, if he alter not his nature,
I do not doubt but we shall live as Doves, while care and kindness shall
continue content: my servants shall find me both a mistress and a friend; my
neighbors no strangers, and idle gossips no companion. Thus in the duty of
love, with thanks for your motherly care, in prayer to the Almighty to bless
me with his grace, and to live no longer then in his love and yours: I take my
leave, for this time, but rest during life,

Your most loving daughter, P. E.

A Letter in case of wrong supposed to be committed.
SIr, your Letter is more troublesome to my conceit then sauouring (as I am
credibly led to think) of that your wonted most noble disposition unto me I
have received. With what supportation and unaccustomed grief I have retained
them, I refer to any one (guiltless accused and suspended from so high
savors, as formerly by your bounty to me have been performed) simply to be
coniectured. Long was it ere I could satisfy my self by any access that
might be, to profer my self or these humbled Letters unto you, yet
nevertheless weighing how far different those new occurrents were from those
your ancient favors, I surmised with my self that the instigation proceeded
solely from others, hardly perchance bearing those graces wherein I stood with
you, and becoming thereupon my bitter enemies, the sinister devise whereof
stood upon me wholly to overthrow or impugn. For which having no other nor
better means at this time then these submissiue lines, I purpose them unto you
as solicitors of your former liking, confessing if in any ways I have erred
unto you, as I will not utterly seclude my self from every error, it was but
as a young man rather by ignorance then of malice any way to be intended: as
touching any other objection, let me but crave pardon to have access unto your
presence, and then judge as you find me: two ways are only left, my accusers
to my face, or mine own simplicity to clear me. This is all I require, and
so much I hope you will not deny me: wherewith resting in due acknowledgement
of that your former bounty, I humbly surcease, this 15 of December. 1628.

Yours to command. T. C.

A Letter from a Servant to his Master.
SIr, my humble duty remembered, unto you, and to my good mistress. You may
please to understand that I have dispatched the business unto Master C. for the
money you sent me for, and have given him an acquitance for the same, and
according to your good remembrance unto (...), I have bought for you twelve
gallons of the best Sack, and eighteen gallons of Claret, and fifteen yards
of fine Broad cloth, and thirty else of fine Holland all which I hope by Gods
grace shall come unto your hands: I have sent you also here enclosed your Bill
of parcels, and their several prices.

I wrote formerly unto you for certain commodities out of the Country, which I
have now received by the Carrier. Here is at this present small news worth the
writing unto you: wherefore praying unto all Almighty God for the health and
prosperity of you and all yours, I humbly take my leave, and rest,

Your faithful and ready servant to command, I.P.

An answer of a Letter for courtesy and favor received.
MY good friend M. G. how much I am bound unto you for multitude of favors,
and especially for that you have made choice of me, as to write your kind and
friendly Letters in my befalse, I can no other ways express, then to continue
your affectionate poor friend, and will for ever acknowledge it, as of your
great kindness beyond any merit of mine own, and as by duty I am bound, no
day shall pass me that I will not pray to God for your health and prosperity,
and the redoubling of your days: beseeching you to excuse me in that in person
I cannot do or perform what I desire, by reason at this time some have
extraordinary will not permit me. I therefore most humbly take my leave of you,

this 14. May. Your affectionate poor friend, P. C.

The Fathers Letter against the Son.
THe sight of your Letters and message received by your servant, have (good
Cosen) bred to me in perusing and harkening unto the same no small matter of
disquiet: not that your letters or messages for themselves are or have been at
any time ill welcome to my hands, but in respect of him for whom they come, so
filled have I been long since with the evils by him committed. I am nothing
ignorant that of mere love and good will you framed your speech unto me in the
behalf of my ungracious Son. I need not repeat here unto you with what
fatherly care I have brought him up to man's estate how likewise I sought both
with maintenace and place of credit to continue him as a Gentleman. I placed
him with a right godly and worshipful Knight Sir T. H. who for my sake loved
him, and I know took pains to reform him. Complaints were infinite against
him. This man could not be quiet for him, that man's servants he misused: this
party he deceived, and others hi^hly wronged. Since which, too much to be
revealed how stubbornly in mine own house, how injuriously amongst mine own
people has he behaved himself. And because it was against Christmas, and I
would not dismiss him unfurnished, I gave him for himself and his man a
couple of good Geldings, and twenty pound in his purse: he was no sooner gone
twenty miles, but spent his money at Cards and Dice, pawnd his apparel, sold
his Geldings, and in the end coming to one of my tenants to borrow money which
he denied to lend him, he fell upon him and beat him. Thus (loving Cosen) you
see in part his ill led life, and may thereby conceive my grief. Sending in
the mean time my commendations and earnest thanks for your care of my well
being, to you and your bedfellow.

This 20 Aug. 1628. T. R.

The answer.
I Have received your letter (my kind uncle) in answer to the last letter I
sent, which was the business of your son. I am very sorry that a Gentleman of
your gravity and knowledge in the world, and for the good estimation that the
country has of you, that Master F. C. your son should deal so unkindly with
you. I know your fatherly care of him from time to time, and how diligent, and
not sparing any cost in bringing him up; and to place him with a gentleman of
the best rank in all the country was nobly done, yet with all you might (if so
you please) do well to consider he is your own son, and if you look into
your own youth, you shall find these were your youthful strains, and so
much the more to be borne withal, and time and age will tame all these things
in an ingenious and witty Gentleman. I desire you for my sake retain him
kindly into your favor this once more, for he has (upon the reputation of a
Gentleman) promised never to do the like enormities, but to live as a most
dutiful and loving son: and for the same I dare pass my credit. I pray you
entertain him respectively, and I will ever remain,

Your loving kinsman, T. F.

To his mistress (quondam) having spent all his means upon her in prosperity,
he being imprisond she forsakes him.
IF my paper were made of the skins of croking Toades, or speckled Adders, my
ink of the blood of Scorpions, my pen plucked from the Screech-owles wings,
they were but fit instruments to write unto thee, that art more venomous, more
poisonous, more ominous, then the worst of these: for do but descend into the
depth of thy guilty conscience, and see how many vows, promises, and deep
protestations, nay millions of oaths have thou sworn thy fidelity unto me,
which one day will witness against thee. If I should speak with the voice of
Mandrakes, or as loud as the noise of the Summers thunder, yet could I not
proclaim unto the world thy infinite basenesses; I being so firm and constant
unto thee when I swomme in the golden floods of prosperity, then wast thou (as
often thou did protest) firm and constant unto me. But when the water began
to ebb, and my ship run on ground, then (like thy self) thou forsookest me At
first thy love was as hot to me as an Italian to a wench of fifteen, but when
my gold was spent and consumed, then thy love grew as cold to me as a
Fishmongers fingers are in a great frost. Do not think I write this unto thee
to be a means to help me in this my great distress and imprisonment: for
know thou though all my friends have forsaken me, nay though death, grief,
affliction, and all the miseries that possibly can befall a miserable man in
this wretched world while he lives here, and all these griefs do every
minute torment me, yet I had rather fall by their force, then rise by thy
assistance, so hateful, grievous, so loathsome, so tedious and so incomparably
abominable is thy very name unto me.

Leprosy compared to thee, is all health, and all manner of infection but a
flea-biting, and all manner of diseases, though they were fetched from twenty
Hospitals, were but like the fit of an Ague: for thou art all Leprosy, all
diseases, for neither thy body nor thy soul are free, thy body from the
disease of shame and disgrace of the world, nor thy soul free from the
sickness of sin. God amend and pardon thee.

Once thy friend. I. P.

To his friend lying long sick.
MY worthy friend Master Prince: though the distance of place be such, that we
cannot hear one another, you in the center of the Kingdom (London) I at
York, yet you shall see me in my Letter, my tongue, my pen, my heart, are
all your servants. You plainly perceive a long lingering sickness will draw you
to a long desired rest, where long your mind has had his residence. You now
perceive Fame is but smoke, metalls but dross, pleasure but a pill with
sugar. All these earthly delights if they were sound, how short they are,
fleeting every day: they are but as a good day betwixt two Agues, or like
Sodomes Apples, fair red outsides, being handled are black dust. I admire the
faith of Moses, but presupposing his faith, I wonder not at his choice, that he
preferred the afflictions of Israel to the pleasures of Egypt, and chose
rather to eat the Lamb with sour herbs, then all their fleshpots. That God
has given you a virtuous wife, dutiful children, wealth in abundance, an
honest esteem and good repute amongst your neighbors, and the general love
of your country where you live, are favors that look for thanks. Who would
desire to live, that knows his Savior died, who can be a Christian and would
not be like him? Could you be happy and not die? indeed Nature knows not what
she would have. Our friends of this world can neither abide us miserable in our
stay, nor happy in our departure. What God has given you on earth, is nothing
to that he will give you in heaven: you are a stranger here: there at home.
There Saints and Angles shall applaud you, there God himself will fill you
with himself: have patience in all afflictions, and read the troubles of Job,
and in that exercise your self both day and night, until God shall either
mend or end these your days on earth. To which great God and merciful Lord I
commit you, praying for your eternal rest.

Remaining your friend; I. M.

A Letter wherein is recommended to a Nobleman from his inferior the
conditions and behavior of a person.
MAy it please your Lordship, this Gentleman the bearer hereof, with whom along
time I have been acquainted, and of his qualities and good behavior have
sound and large experiment, having been a good time a suter unto me to move
this preferment unto your Lordships service, I have now at last condiscended
unto, as well for that I know your Lordship to be now presently disfurnished
of such a one, as also that there will hardly be preferred upon the sudden any
one so meet as himself to supply that place. And thus much by your pardon and
allowance day I assure unto you, that if it may please you in credit of my
simple knowledge and opinion to employ him, you shall find that, besides he
is in parentage descended from such of whom I know your Lordship will very well
account of, he is also learned, decree, sober, wise, and moderate in all his
actions, of great secrecy, assured trust, and well governed in all companies.
Finally, a man so meet and to this present turn so apt and necessary, as I
cannot easily imagine how you may be served better. Pleases your Lordship the
rather, for the great good will I bear him, and humble duty I owe unto you, to
accept, employ, and account of him: I nothing doubt but your Lordship having by
such means given credit to my choice, shall find him such as for whose good
service you shall have further occasion to think well of me for him. Whereof
nothing doubtting, I do refer both him and my self, in all humblenes to
your best and most favorable opinion. From my house in Arthingworth, this 5 of
June.

The Answer.
AFter my hearty commendations unto you. Sithence the receipt of your last
letters and commendations of W. R. into my service, I have had small occasion
either to write or to send unto you till this present; and for as much as upon
your certain notice delivered unto me in favor of his preferment, I held my
self so well assured in all things of his behavior, as I doubted not
thereupon to receive him into place of greatest fidelity; I have thought good
hereby to let you understand, what great pleasure I have taken in his diligent
attendance, assuring you, for many unexpected qualities, which I have proved to
be in him, and that with so good affection as that I intend not omit any thing
that may tend to his advancement. In beholding of him oftentimes, methinkes he
many ways does resemble his father, whose sound truth I do suppose might have
been entertained with the best for his well deserving: this bearer shall
inform you of two special causes concerning my affairs in the country, whom
I do pray you to confer with, and to afford him your travel for his present
dispatch, which I will not fail: heartily to require unto you. For your care
had of my wants, and diligent supply of such a one, I do many times thank
you, and have promised in my self to become a debtor unto you. And even so I
bid you heartily farewell.

From the Court this 5. of May, 1628.
A merry Letter to his friend in London.
Heroical spirit:
I Have received your Epistle of alacrity and remain much indebted to your
kind heart for vouchsafing us poor country Swains so much of the labor of
your pen to deceive slow-footed time withal: Thanks unto the Almighty, I
have had my health indifferent well since my coming down only the separation
of my second self has been a continual sickness unto me: to remedy which
I have hitherto found out no better way then to call for a cup of Rubicular, to
help to exhilerate and corroborate my fatigated spirits. We Ruricolars are
very barren of any novelty worthy the presenting to your curious
understanding, but do presume out of the bundle of your affection that you
that live at the wels head will be pleased to vouchsafe us your poor friends a
report by your Letters, at least of such Exchange news as passes current
amongst you, which we shall take as a special favor from you and study how
to remunerate We are at this present putting foot into the stirrup, and riding
some dozen horse of us to a maritine coast, where there will be provided for us
all the rarities for fish the Sea can afford, where I will not be unmindful
to remember all your healths in a full ocean. In the mean time commending my
love to my loving sister your wife, with your worthy self and all our
friends, I wish you all true happiness suitable to a brave disposition, and
will ever rest,

Your assured l^uing Brother. R. S.

A Letter gratulatorie.
Good Mr. P.
I Am yet to learn the phrase and method how to write to so beneficient a
friend as your self, to whom I stand obliged more by desert then I can answer
with requital, and more in affection then I am able to merit: a predicament it
is into which I am easily and often (as it were) precipitated, and out of
which to raise my self fortune only has disabled me, who if with her gifts
she had supplied my wants, and given me competent wealth to the freedom of my
will my honest heart should not be debtor to the hand of any, nor should my
disabilitie curb the scope of my affection: but seeing wishes are but vain, I
pray you accept these my lines as tokens of the remuneration of my thanks and
the acknowledgement of the love of

Your humble servant. D. P.

A Letter to his silent friend.
YOu are happily innocent (dearest friend) what pain I am in, and with what
unrest I spend my irksome days, through your parcimoniousnesse, and sparing of
a little ink and paper: Is it not enough that I am deprived of your sight, but
I must be also unsaluted by your Letters, one of them alone does too waightily
oppress me with sorrow, and ouerwhelme my heart with disquietnesse. As place
has wrought a separation between our bodies, will your permit also that a few
days absence shall bury each others remembrance in the Lethean waves of
oblivion; oh be not so injurious unto sacred friendship, which is the greatest
joy allotted unto mortal men in all the universe: I have got the start of you
in writing, but I hope I shall not need to send you any more expostulatorie
Letter for your slacknesse in this kind. For the sound state of my body I am
well, yet I cannot be said to be perfitly well, being (as I am) so solicitous
for your welfare, and so ignorant of your health, who are animae dimidium meae.

Farewell. Animae dimidium tuae. L. M.

The Answer, excusing his not writing.
LEt the multitude of my businesses and my want of bodily health, and
debilitie, plead my excuse with you for my remissness in writing. The drift
of these present lines is to apologize for that I writ to you no sooner, and to
enquire of your health and welfare. Compare not, nor do not think my love as
little as my writing, for I protest unfeignedly, that if I may stead you in any
kind, or if my means can procure any thing to make a clearer manifestation of
my manifold love you shall assuredly find whenever any occasion shall offer
it self to you, to make trial what great interest you have in me and my best
affection, I cease, ever resting

Yours (...) my power. W. W.

A Letter expostulatory for breach of promise.
IT had been more honesty in you to have given me a speedy denial, then
not to perform what you so constantly promised me, for then you had not
injured me, because you had not owed me any thing. Promise is debt: for I yet
hope you are none of the number of those men who think promises do not bind
them unto performance: this is my belief of you yet, it is in your power to
make me hold or alter my opinion. I only desire thus much of you, if you will
not do me that good turn, yet leau^e doing me injury: feed me not with
improficient words, but bid me not trust any longer to vain hopes. In brief,
you shall much oblige me by doing that kindness, by omission thereof you shall
make me muse at the lack of your fidelity, and at your carelessenesse to
incur the report and infamy of a dishonest man.

Your injured friend. H. G.

To his friend fallen to poverty.
IF your weath had been the foundation of my love, I should now cease to love,
because you are no longer rich, but should I now so err, I should show my
self to have been unto you in your prosperity not a friend, but (like unto
the rest that have derelinquished you in your poverty) a mere flatterer: we
see how during the Summer time the Swallows flock to our houses, we may
observe how Mice will be sure to get into the barn that is replenished with
corn and while the pot has any honey it is hard keeping the flies away: but
rare is the friendship which fleets not in the probation time of adversity.
Besides that poor comfort of adversity, pity, I lend you the sum of
twenty pound, which so long make use of till Time, the mother of of mutations,
increase your store with a proportion able to make repaiment to

Your friend to his ability. I. R.

A Letter of a Gentlewoman to a Gentleman with whom she fell in love.
IF ever I could wish my self unborn (most worthy sir) or my well being
taken from me, I call truth and my sometimes modesty to witness, it is now:
not that I have found you, but that I am forced thus to seek you. Call to mind
(fair, and I hope virtuous Sir) some horrid and violent women, taken with the
love of their own fathers, as was Micah; or incestuously pursuing their
nearest brother, as was Biblis: so my affection will appear more modest, and
my suite more pardonable: I dearly love you, (and in so saying me thinks the
gods blush to hear me,) who in the strictest laws of desire are most worthy
to be loved, whose virtues might inflame a Nun, and excellentest qualities
take the most retired: If I have (as I know too well I have) contrary to the
nature and custom of Virgins, our-shot my self in my violent passions, pardon
her that had rather die then make it known, yet chooses rather to make it
known, then not enjoy you so desired, and far more worthy to be desired. If
you were acquainted what afflictions I suffer in my discovery, yet fearing all
well not serve, you will, I hope, rather incline to pity, then disdain:
little will the death of a silly maiden avail the triumph of your beauty, and
the overthrow of my credit less benefit your virtue. Raise me from the one by
your love, and assure me from the other by your secrecy: whilst I will ever
remain a most constant votaresse to all your perfections, blessing the parents
that left behind them such an issue.

Never less her own. R. D.
Althorp. May 22.
His Answer.
HOw happy may I account my self (sweetest of creatures, and beautifillest of
women) that having bound my self in the search and pursuit of a jewel, have
it now offered and given into my hands, far above my expectation; far
transcending my hopes; I accept it as lovingly, as you freely bestow it, and
will account it no less dear and pertious, then if much time and long labor
had been the purchase of it, esteeming it a blessing thrown upon me, by the
appointment of the highest, and suitable to my happy desires. Nor shall I need
to load my memory with those horrid examples, to give your love a freer and
welcomer passage into the very depth of my love and choicest desires: to love
we were made, and by love we are made: they only are without being that have
not the heavenly taste and enjoying of it, I only deny those excellencies
which you lay to my unguilty charge, it was the reflection of your own worth
(stricken from me) which has Narcissus like so inamoured you, it was your own
image shown in my eyes, which has thus captiuated you: which since you like
in so dim and dull a myrrour, I will cherish, and make much of it only for
your sake, that you may the perfect lier see your self, and the more love me:
for your love, take all I am; for my secrecy, I will not breathe it to my
self how I attain this happiness, but living and dying, rest the true
honourer and admirer of your worth and virtue,

Yours more then his own. H. H.

A Letter from a Chapman in the Country to a Tradesman in London.
MY loving and kind friend M. G. you have done me much wrong in detaining the
wares I writ for: I have disappointed some Gentlemen in relying upon you, whose
custom has much aduantaged me: my credit I hope will ever be above that
value: and my dealing for much more yearly between us might without other
circumstances therein have satisfied you: I must tell you plain, in the
country there are many good men, whose estates are known very sufficient,
which cannot raise money upon their credit in an instant: we want a common
bank with us which might furnish us suddenly and thoroughly: Broakers trade not
here, nor Usurers take their place, but in Summer for their recreation: think,
friend, me an honest man, and so you have much cause to think: confident in
which, though my estate were brittle, (as I thank God) I know it is sure: you
may be armed, I will never fail nor deceive you. I roue not beyond my
compass, neither make a sure foundation out of other men's ruins, but content
with a little leaving a blessing to my children, and a good memory amongst my
neighbors. Let me hear from you concerning the cause of this breach, and a
note of the reckoning between us, which I will make even, and rather rest
honest then rich.

September. 6, Your true friend as you shall use me, L. M.

The Answer.
MAster M. truly it much grieves me you were so disappointed, and the
negligence of my man went not away unpunished, by whose default the Carrier
went without them: believe me on my word, and I account my self happier in
being a master of that, then in much riches, no fear of payment, nor least
doubt of your estate was any hindrance to it: I have well known you by others,
and have had so much experience of you my self, that you shall sooner want
occasion for wares, then I confidence to trust you: your neighbors speak much
good of you, and all men that know you give you a fair report, which makes me
happy both in your custom and friendship. If sinister occasions shall any
time happen (as while we are here they are incident unto us) I shall rather
pity your fortunes then call in question your fair dealings. And know we are
all men accountable every instant for all our possessions. The Cartier this
week brings those commodities, and better and more vendable you never had of
me; and I verily believe the Gentleman will think themselves happily repaid in
the stay with the exceeding goodness and lastingnesse of the ways. For your
reckonings at more leisure I will peruse and send them, in whose place receive
my kind commendations, and entre^ty for my man's carelessness, I bid you most
heartily farewell.

Your friend as you know. I. G.

A Letter of thankfulness for kindness showed to his Son.
SIr, the favors you have already done me are of such effect and merit, that I
shall never be at quiet until I have made some requital of them I am ashamed
you should be thus continually troubled with a son of mine, whom I have
charged to obey you in all things as my self, and I pray you do so much as
have a careful hand over him, as if you were his father, or he your only
child: I kindly and heartily th^nke you for the apparel you have made him
l^^ely which is decent, comely, and profitable, and the money you ^aue paid for
him: you may accommodate him with the rest if you think it fitting: for my
part I give you all power and authority over him, seeing you are pleased to
take the trouble upon you. So wishing but to meet with some good occasion that
may lie in my poor power, to acknowledge how much I am beholding unto you, I
for this time commit you to the protection of the Almighty. Resting

Your assured loving friend, D. B.

The Answer.
MAster B. I have received your Letter concerning your son. Sir, for any favor
I can do you, either in this or any other, I shall be right willing, knowing
how much from time to time I and mine are bounden unto you. And assure your
self it shall be no trouble unto me to use the best of my counsel and care
over him. For his apparel, it will keep him warm, I know, which is the
principal thing I aim at, and I hope pleasing to him and his friends. The
other money I shall deliver him as I shall see good both for himself to use,
and the credit of you his father. Moreover (Sir) he is to me very dutiful and
loving, by which he shall lose nothing in my care of his welfare, and he very
well spends his time at School, and to good purpose I hope; wherein I doubt
not you shall have great comfort. He behooves himself so well by his good
demeanure to all, that he is generally beloved of all my neighbors. For my
power and authority over him, I will employ my self only for his good, and
your fatherly care committed to me. And so with a thousand commendations I
commit you to God.

Your friend, I.D.

A Letter to his Mistress in the Country that desired news from the City.
MOst excellent mistress, your command (which is to me a law) binds me to obey
you, and though the task be infinite hard to contain so great a beast in so
little paper yet for your satisfaction, I will delineate to life the proportion
of some of his members. It is news you desire, and believe me (fair one)
since I came into the City, I have not seen or heard any thing old; even from
the Capitol, to the Cottage, all things are in their new garments, the Court
has new favorites, the City a new Senate, and the Commonwealth new
officers: the first are as great as good, the second are as rich as wise, and
the third as awefull as just: Men are new, for where they should love they
fear, women are new, for where they should honor they subdue, and children are
new, for where they should reverence they astonish, Customs and manners are
new, for the poor daily feed the rich, the rich cozen the great, and the great
make fools of the good ones. The fashions though they were never old, are now
newer then ever, for in man and woman there is not a point to choose betwixt the
sexes, the one has descended so much downward, and the other ascended so much
upward, that met in one circle they are both now trussed up together without
difference: Apparel that was made to cover, is now made to discover folly and
lewdness, and they are finest that are nearest to the naked Anatomy:
Discourse is new, for wise men talk of their wealth, learned men of their
deceit, and great men of vanity, Old men like old Wolves boast of their preyes
past, middle age like Lions talk of that which is in their powers, and
children like dogs bark of the reuenges which shall be: Our Citizens like
Asses are proud of rich burdens, and like Apes, joy in pyde trapping, and our
gallants like Beere-brewers horses brag how much drink they can carry. To
conclude, all things are so new, that even virtue her self is despised in old
garments, and he that keeps any phrase of his forefathers, is but a rude
speaker, for to say Hic mulier, is now the purest and truest Latin. Thus (my
dear Mistress) you have the newest News of the season, which I write rather
to keep you in your old way of virtue, then to lose your self in the folly of
imitation, I know your goodness, and how true a rewarder it is of its own
merits, rely upon it ever, it will make your end happy, and my life fortunate,
that am the servant of so great a perfection.

T.W.

Her Answer.
YOu have sent me (worthy servant) my desire back with so great an interest,
that I stand two ways fearful how to receive it, either to incur the
suspicion of too greedy an inquiry, or the envy of a weak nature, that is
pleased with detraction: from both which I am free, in as much as my aim is
held within the level of modesty. I confess, the parts you have given me may
belong to a beast, or rathers Monster, for the shape has little proportion:
yet I have heard of excellent Painters which have made curious pieces of
perspectiue, that beheld with a liberal eye on the plain Table, has appeared
ugly and most deformed, but the sight straightened and drawn into a more severe
and narrow compass it has been beautiful, and in the glory of the best
perfection: such, I fear, was the picture from whom you took your copy, and
looking upon it the wrong way, you saw the lines, but not the beauty. I do
confess, the world is old, yet not so old but it may continue to wear out
many new garments. Age makes it subject to sickness and infirmity, and what
better defense then warm and sound clothing? Sickness brings corruption, and
ill savors, what better prevention then much shift and many new things? so
that I conclude, these novelties which you dislike are but to cure something in
the world that is unwholesome. Again, I have seen an Italian Comely,
consisting of a lover, a woman, a zany or fool, and a devil; and to it I may
fashion the world, for that the stage, the people the actors, each degree have
their zanie and their devil; Now if the zany will steal his masters apparel,
and make between vice and virtue no difference, blame not the discretion of
the master, if it devise new fashions, till either the foolish zany be tired,
or the devil for his pride fetch him away, and conclude the interlude. This
(my best servant) you may apply at your pleasure, for mine innocence has
taught me that charity, not to accuse any of that crime I would not my self
be guilty; nor is my defense an argument to draw on your silence, but rather a
motive to make you more liberal, in bestowing on me the rest of your
collections; in which doubt not my constancy, since no enchantments can make
me forget to preserve my self ever worthy to be your Mistress.

M. S.

A wooing and comfortable letter to a noble widow that had newly lost her
husdand.
THough (my noble Widow) I am the last that send you comfort, yet was I the
first that felt your anguish, and will be the readrest of all men to serve you
in your trouble: you have lost a dearly desired husband, and sound an infinite
way to grief, the one is the act of Fate, and cannot be prevented, the other
is the work of Nature, and by wisdom must be corrected: Remember (fair
Widow) who is gone (a good man) to whom he is gone (to a good God,) and from
whom (from a wicked World, and worse people) and you shall find more cause to
praise heaven for his happiness then to murmr for your loss of comfort; a
good man dies to live, there is your joy, an ill man lives to die, there is true
anguish: the joys of marriage should be writ in Table-bookes, not upon paper,
that Widows might blot and rub out the writing, for they ought not to
remember the delights past, but to meditate on pleasures to come, not to marry
for eternity, but during the will of heaven, neither have you lost any thing,
for he was but a treasure lent you, and to grieve at the repayment were to
wrong your goodness with ingratitude. Believe me Madam, were your cure in my
hands, as your grief is at my heart, neither should your anguish hurt you, nor
the memory of your loss survive a moment, but it is in heaven, and your
wisdom, couple them together by yielding to providence, and you shall see
your comforts flow upon you in a new tide, you have reputed me your friend,
and shaped your best actions by my counsels, you were never more weak then now
because alone, nor did you ever stand in more need, because many assaults are
prepared against you, to keep you then in perfect safety, please you make me
of a tried friend, a true husband, of a faithful counselor, a profitabe
Ruler, and of an able help a devout servant, I doubt not but you shall find
that armor aganst all necessities. which shall both guard you against injuries,
and bring you much honor, my character you know best, for I am no stranger,
and my zeal you may judge by my former services, if they appear faultlesse
before you, there will be no let but ceremony, which to countenance against
virtue, were to be guilty of soul superstition: you are wise, and that
wisdom I make my advocate, if he approve me worthy to be yours, my faith
shall make me your truest servant among the living.

F. R.

Her Answer.
SIr, had the comforts you sent me comne in a true wedding garment, pure and of
one entire stuff: I could not have chosen but received it as the rest of your
chaste counsels, and feasted on it with my daily meditation, but being so
disorderly patcht, I can neither believe it is yours, nor affect that which is
so uncomely, you have sent me delicate gilt pills, where though the gold be
more then the poison, yet is this poison enough to confound; therefore as much
as with safety I may retain (for your ancient friendship) I will keep and
study, the rest pardon me to return you, not out of malice to your wish, but
grief at your folly, you have told me so well the excellency of my loss, that
it were madness in me to run into a second hazard, and how ever you would
take from widows, the bliss of remembrance, yet dear Sir know that I can
never forget this maxim, that the death of a good husband ought not to take
away the love of a chaste wife. To conclude, what you desire is not in my power
to grant, for all my love I have sent with him to the grave, whom I have lost,
and to hold me without that portion, were to grasp a cloud that would bring
froth a Centaure; yet from thence should either Fate, or my follies deliver it,
I could not find any more worthy then your self to keep it; but the first is
too constant, and the latter I hope shall never so far rule in me: Therefore
being as you were a chaste counselor, and no seducer, you shall find me as
you have done a faithful Cabinet full of your goodness.

E. L.

Another to the same purpose.
Much honored Mistress.
THe neuer-ceasing stream of your gracious kindnesses, has by the often
thinking on their due deseruings profoundly imbosomed themselves in my
grateful affection, which no course of tedious time can extenuate, nor the
longest absence by distance have power to diminish But oh most kind meriter of
all respect, whose good will I estimate as my greatest enrichment, although the
condign requital of such your rare courtesies lie not in the compass and
precinct of my poor power, whose tenuity is not able to pay such and exceeding
tribute: yet how willing my mind is, and how inextinguishable my desires, this
illiterate Epistle will testify, which deuoid of elegancies, yet full fraught
with the unfeigned profession of my love promises the employment of my
uttermost powers in all serviceable endeavors, if all that I can do may but
defray one mi^e of your inualuable courtesies Command my service, there is not
any thing so great that I will shrink, or so small that (...) will disdain to
effectuate for your sake, having vowed to dye before any word issuing from your
lips shall come in vain.

But least I should detract too much time from your more serious affairs, in
all humility I take my leave.

Yours unfeignedly. P.Q.

Her Answer.
THough I am far from vanity to esteem my self worthey of the style of
beauty, yet I see not how to excuse your sinister opinion, that would thereto
annexe so great an inconvenience: for it seems (if things might be ordered by
your mind) you would have beauty and love to be inseparable companions: oh
gross! oh absurd wish, and most execrable position against beauty and love!
Then any vicious, deformed or beggarly creature, being but conducted by good
fortune to the view of some rare Virgin, this unworthiness must not only be
entertained, but he that rather deseru^d to be hissed away with disdain, must
straight be made the owner and Lord of her love: Nor shall it be in her power
to give a repulse to the presumption of ind^g^e^u^ers, or to make ^^ee election
of a deserving personage, to honor him with her gracious favor.

But I hope sir, being thus clearly convinced, you will confess and make
recantation of your error, I rest as I have reason.

Yours not to use, S. M.

A Letter of discontent after the falling out of Lovers.
Most discourteous and painted friend:
IT is the custom of Lovers after the breach of their league and amity, to
send back those gratuities which formerly passed as tokens of their natural
affections: you have taken up the fashion, and believe me I abhor any longer
to have nearness with one of your qualification, who for mere trifles can
dissolve the knot of friendship, and shake hands with familiarity. For know
that your memory which was sometime dear in my thoughts, is now abhorred,
seeing that the firmness and stability of affection (then which there is
nothing ought by men more religiously to be observed) you have so causelessly
brought to annihilation. I may parallel my present condition to the state of
the Sun when pitchy clouds which enuironing him round about, seem to
extinguish his splendour, but time the perfecter of all terrestrial things, may
in due season impart a luster correspondent to my hopes, and suitable to my
disposition: till when I will scorn the blasts of adversity, and dead all
those who having little or no merits, are endowed by the dispensation of the
owly-eyd goddess Fortune with large possessions: howsoever if I can find no
better to converse and spend my time withal then your self, I will turn
Momus and for ever hate the society of men: but having a better opinion of the
generality, for your part I cashiere you with this Vltimum vale, and rest,

A stranger. A B.

To his angry Mistress.
AS the declining of the Sun brings a general darkness and discomfort, so
the deficiencie and absence of your shining and glorious favors has
ouercouered me with clouds of care. But as the Suns heavenly essence by the
course of Nature is daily revived, so here I humbly sue that your wonted
gracious aspect may return in your countenance, to solace the doleful heart
of your servant with vicissitude of long intermitted alacrity, it will redound
to your great commendation, when the world shall understand that your heart is
of wax, not inexorable and of a flinty and adamantine constitution, hoping
that you will be as ready compassionatly to grant as I do submissiuely implore
the renouation of your love, I rest,

Yours in unutterable affection. R. S.

A Letter from an At prentice in London, to his father in the Country.
MY humble duty remembered good father unto you and my mother. Having the
opportunity of this bearer, I thought good to certify you of my present
being, giving you to understand that I am, I thank God, and you, in good
health, and very well placed here in London, where I am in hope to continue my
here being to some profitable and good purpose: My Master uses me in good
sort, and I want nothing that appertained to such a one as my self. I trust
you shall have joy of me, and ere a few years pass, I doubt not but so to be
have my self that I shall well deserve this good liking that already I have of
my master, and further credit at his hands and employment about his business I
hope you and my mother; and all our friends in the country are in good health.
I pray you that you will write unto my master as occasion serves, and thank
him for his good usage: and if you can to remember him with some good
convenient token from the country. Thus desiring your daily blessings, and
with a recommendation of my humble duty unto you both, I take my leave:

Your loving and obedient son to command, D. P.
London.
A Letter from a husband to his wife.
GOod wife, considering my hasty departure from you, and my children, my hope
is that you will have that loving and respective care toward them and your
family that appertains. I have left many things raw by reason of the
suddenness of my journey, which stands upon your good regard to be ordered,
as namely the charge of my servants, and the disposition of some other affairs
and businesses. You shall now show your self a discreet and careful wife, if
in my absence you will take upon you to be in my place. Regard and consider
with your self, that servants are negligent and careless, and if the master
forget his own profit, they are as ready as others to share with his gains
Your painful attendance to oure-looke them, shall strain their labors to my
using, your desire to see to them, shall work their using to my well
deserving. You must now a little forget neighborhood, and walking for
company, considering the old proverb, that when the Cat is a way, the Mouse
will go play: If Master and Dame have both continued absence, servants fall a
wasting, and do what they list. You know good wife, I have now taken a great
charge of late upon me, which with some careful lookeing to may turn to good.
Let it not be grievous unto you, nor think it hard that I thus make you
partaker of my charge, as I do of my profit, for we are yoakefellowes you
know, and the charge is equal betwixt us both to be borne and supported. If as
loving mates and fellows we draw forth together, we shall by Gods blessed
goodness see the fruits of our labors: our children shall participate with us
of our trauells, and God shall prosper our endeavors. And howbeit good wife I
have ever found you such, as of whose care of my well doing I need have no
doubt, yet if by the importance of my charge I be driven to write thus much
unto you, think that in great trust of your modesty, respect of your love,
and zeal to both our goods I have done the same. And though no distrust
remain of any one about me, yet do I put you in mind what youth by too much
sufferance and giving of liberty may be inclined to. This is all I would, and
so much I hope as you gladly will yield unto. Commend me many times unto
yourselfe. Kiss my little ones, and remember me, and commend my love to all
our friends

From Rye the 3 of Febr. 1628. Your assured loving husband. F. G.

Her Answer.
GOod husband, I am glad you have at last remembered your self by this bearer
to write unto me, that have thought it very long until I heard from you. I
do greatly rejoice at the good and prosperous success, of your journey, and
chiefly, that you have endured your travel so well, being in so good plight
and streng^h of body, as I understand you are by your Letter. We are much
beholden unto our good friends in the country that have given you so great and
good entertainment: and I pray you heartily commend me unto them. Your
business here goes very well, and your servants both dutiful and diligent
about their affairs, and we have no want but your presence, which if you would
hasten hitherward, it were a comfort unto us all to see you, having been as to
me it seems, very long absent. But Master Prince, and his friends where you
are, uses you so kindly, that I think you cannot well tell how to wind your
self out from your good company. Yet good husband remember that at last you
must come home, and the sooner the better. I refer all to your good
discretion: and so commend me most heartily unto you.

From London. Your ever loving and loyal Wife. R.G.

A Letter from one kinsman to another in London or any other place.
MY good Cousin, I am glad to hear of your good preferment in London, and that
as I hear by your father and mother, you are so well placed there, and with so
good a Master. It is no little comfort to me to understand that you do so
resolutely and with so good a mind dispose your self to your business, which
I gladly wish you would continue. You must now remember, that your friends with
great care, charge, and industry have brought you up, and that their intent
and meaning therein was, that in expectation thereof they should have joy and
comfort of you in your elder years: for which as you have now bequeathed your
self to this place of service, so must you for any fear of hard usage,
bitterness of speech, or other mislike of taunts or rebukes, make a account to
endure and continue. It may be, being yet unacquainted with the customs and
usage of London, you do now think well of that which hereafter may turn to
coffeehouse. But good cozen so be it, you have no want of things needful
and necessary, frame your self to forbear all those cross matters
whatsoever, and give your self wholly on Gods name, to the benefit of your
service, you shall therein want no help, furtherance or encouragement on my
part, and if you perform it well and honestly, you shall not want when time
serves for an hundred pounds or two, if in the mean space I may see your good
care of your masters business, and please your mistress, for therein you shall
the better please your master. Your friends are all well, who rejoicing in that
already they see you so well behaved, do daily pray to God to prosper and
bless you: and thus with my hearty commendations I bid you farewell.

Farndon this 18 of May 1628. Your loving kinsman, B. C.

A Letter to request the borrowing of an hundred pounds.
SIr, I am bold in my great necessity, under assurance of your forwardness to
do me good, to entreat your special aid and furtherance in two things, the
one whereof is to lend me of your wonted favor one hundred pounds, the other
this bearer shall instruct you in, both which consist in your kind and
friendly care of my well doing, I am of opinion none other then your self can
fit the occasion, better. And truly such is the force of imprisonment, as
contrary to that you have wontedly known in me, my understanding is quite
decayed, and sore worn with want of liberty, and where the spirits are so
distuned, it must needs follow, the memory must needs sound nothing but
discord. In fine, Sir, it is in you to do me good, and to make me by this
only action for ever beholden unto you, wherein if I may so far forth presume
of your fidelity assure your self if ever God give me liberty, to none so
much as you shall I be yoked in courtesy Good master ^. A. the matter hereof
requires some haste, whereto I must heartily entreat you fail me not.

Fare ye well this 18 of December. 1628. Your imprisoned friend, I. S.

The Answer.
GOod Master I. S. needless it were you should entreat me in that wherein you
have found me most willing, and such whom with small persuasion you may induce
to a far greater purpose then what in you last letter is required; the
messenger I have appointed to return again to my chamber to morrow morning,
at which time I will not fail to send you your desired sum: for the other,
hard will it be for me to accomplish that wherein your self seem so
imperfect, for that the dullest conceit forged from the most distempered of
your imaginations, cannot but sound far better tunes then the ripest of my
inventions any way are able to deliver. Nevertheless such as it is, or (by
dislike of your own) you have will to account of, that will I prepare to your
view, and put forward to your good speed, thinking it better by the delivery of
a gross device to satisfy the demand of a friend, then by the concealing the
simplicity thereof, to be consured discourteous. In conclusion, it is lawful
for you to use me to the uttermost, and fittest to your conformed league of
amity, that (in whatsoever) you should employ me, wherein I desire you
conceive no more then such as I intend to become, and you shall assuredly find
me,

Your faithful friend. I.P.

A Letter to his friend for breach of promise.
MAster Iackson, I have abstained hitherto to come or send unto you, partly
being wearied with importunity, for that I thought, now two months being
passed, I might in this space have found a time convenient wherein to have
ended with you. Having taken this cause in hand, I would (as in good reason I
thought it fit) you should determine with me upon some conclusions whereon to
rest assured, I might thenceforth know where to trust, and neither waste labor
in coming to so small purpose, nor hinder my certain business by the
vnsteadie stay of your affairs, as already I have done. We have talked many
times, and set down certain limits, but to slender effect, as I neither know
when to demand, nor you how to satisfy. So that depending upon shadows, I
have passed my time to samll benefit, and you have gone forward to little
purpose. I do pray you therefore that such meaning may assure us, as already
between us has been performed. To delay me thus with nifles, as I think is
far from a Gentleman, so do I suppose you not intend it, considering how
many ways thereby I am and shall be hindered. This therefore may be the
certain means to satisfy us both, that you will (as on Friday last you
promised) come and see the agreement between us performed, whereof so I pray
you advertise your full resolution by this bearer. And so I bid you heartily
farewell.

Your ever assured loving friend, W. M.
Arthingworth. May 7. 1628.
The Answer.
GOod master W. M. my breach of promise in not having visited you with deserved
requital sithence my departure, may breed suspicion and doubt of
unthankfulness, but I hope, and by hope presume, that of your own good
disposition toward all your acquaintance, you will yield unto an approved
trial before you condemn. For my part, if I should not owe unto you all
honest mind and fidelity, I should much contrary your great courtesy, and
deservedly incur the shame of ingratitude. You know that having strayed as I
have done out of the limits of a controuled rule, and displeased so much
thereby, as my case has bewrayed unto you, those whom by nature and duty I
ought to be awed unto, It is reason that by a more district observance I make
amends for the residue. The day appointed I will not fail to meet to view the
writings, and to make some conclusion to your best satisfaction. Wherein you
shall perceive the honest mind of a Gentleman. My father it seems, though
not yet by me, has otherwise understood how much I stand yoaked (in all
friendly league of amity) unto you, and thinks himself for all his sons
unthriftiness somewhat therein to be tied unto you. His meaning is, one of
these days to entreat your pains hitherward. But howeuer deserts be noted, or
care by nature does bind, assure your self, whilst life leads a long this
earthly coarse, I am and will be also yours most unfeignedly and in most
entirely. To whom and to your good bedfellow, I most heartily and often commend
me:

From Thindon. June 28. 1628. Remaining your much bounden friend in all good
affection, I. R.

To his friend a Mercer.
Dear sir, many salutations, etc. As my occasions fall out I still presume to
trouble you, grounding my boldness upon the hope of your love and good will, I
request you to send me as much black Satin as will make me a suit. I am your
debtor already, besides in good will and love, a small sum, which for that
it has been long detained, you may conjecture it to be desperate: yet on my
credit it is as sure as any money in your purse: My intent being honest, but my
store not such as at this time I can satisfy: next Term I expect the plenty
of my purse will be so profuse, that God permitting without fail for these and
the old debt you shall be fully discharged. Acknowledging my self beholding, I
rest

Your thankful friend, R. G.

A Letter to an unfaithful friend.
SIr, I have ever been so loath to think ill of you, that I scarce allow mine
own witness against you, or those strong presumptions that make me think
you mean to keep no promises nor no friends: If you will needs have it so,
let our acquaintance now grow sickly, and die privately, lest I be blamed for
trusting, and you for deceiving so great a trust. For since our love is grown
into so desperate a Lethargy, I will not wake it, for I had rather it should
pass away in a trance, and the remembrance thereof never hereafter to be
mentioned. What your friendship was I cannot tell, but I am assured to the view
it was fit for greater courtesies then I required: what mine own was judge
when you have most need of a friend. Neither will I tell you what a sea of
misfortune your breach of promises has let in upon me: but I Will bid you now
and ever farewell, and with my letter conclude all rites of love betwixt you
and me, and rest

No longer your friend. I. B.

A Letter for admittance into service.
Honorable sir: I have ever been so addicted to follow you, that in mine own
opinion I am an old retainer of yours: so I am within a degree of a household
servant, which is all the promotion that by the intercession of this Letter I
strive to come to. But I see so many steps directed that way, that I may
perhaps come too late, yet I hope your number is not full, though it be great,
and I supposse all are not invited that go: but some intrude. I will take it
for extreme bounty to be admitted within your gates: what I do is pressed by
no necessity, but to save my longing, and to satisfy my desires, which a far
off have ever served you Once I thought to have moved this suit by friends, but
that way I was afraid it might miscary: and I was not very willing it should
succeed, being loath to entangle my self in obligations, to other men, when I
was to pass my self over unto you, so I thought best to write, for to speak
had been too bold. So in hope at the least of a pardon, I rest as far as in me
lies,

Your humble servant, B. I.

To his love upon a long and fruitless affection.
IT is the property of none but of a faint-hearted soldier for receiving a
repulse or two to retire from assault, and to give over his enterprise: when
every one ought to use constant perseverance, that he may work the
accomplishment of his desires. The long vnsuccessiuenesse of my suit has not
made me weary of your service, though since I first fell in love with you (O
might the examples incite you no longer to retard your affection) the Sun has
gone about the world, and given a new life to all things which the tempestuous
winter had left forlorn: the joyful Merchant has made a rich return, and
the laborious husbandman has crammed his barnes with the plenteous crop of the
ever fruitful earth: Every one has his hope, only my self more unfortunate
then all the rest, in this revolution of time have not had any success. I am
you see peerless in misfortune: it rests in you with the sympathy of
affection to make me peerless in felicity, of which I will never despair,
there being no heart that is more infinitely affected toward you then the heart
of

Your truest servant, E. I.

To his sweet heart in the Country.
Sole mistress of my affections:
THough in London where I now am many singular beauties are daily obuious to my
sight, yet I beseech you not to charge me unfeigned lines with flattery, if in
the just collaudation of your own unparalleled pulchritude I prefer your
unmatchable form before the ratest of their composures: Their formosities come
as far short of yours as the splendour of the twinkling Stars comes short of the
all-enlightning radiance of the Sun beams, and they all are as far your
inferiors in the rauishing gifts of Nature, as the vilipended pibble is
inferior to the worth of the most high prized Carbuncle. To which outward
endowments when I reuolue in my mind (and no hour passes without
commemoration of your perfections) how sweetly you have united all internal
graces, then am I distracted with grief for my absence, and though my
unrestrained mind be inseparably with you, yet I curse the distance of place
which depriues me of all comfort, because it disioynes me from your presence,
which till I enjoy, all joy is banished out of my breast, and I have given
grief a free dominion in me, I cannot say I rest, but I remain,

Your entire vessall, I. S.

A young man's Letter to his enamoured mistress.
Fairest of a thousand:
IF you were not absolute, I would not be thus resolute: only to love you whom
I hold only worthy loving: your beauty tells mine eye, and your kindness
persuades my heart of your goodness; for, if you were proud, I should disdain
you, and if you were not fair I would not affect you: now, if you know the one
true in your self, believe the other in me, and wrong not your self, in not
doing me right: Modesty and vicenesse are two, and delays are the hindrances
of happiness: to urge your patience with importunity I will not, and yet to
give over my suit I cannot: and therefore knowing your judgment sufficient to
understand your own good, I hope to find your disposition not inclinde to
hurt him, who remains,

Your as you will, and when you will, T. D.

Her kind answer.
MY worthy friend, how long I have loved you, was from the first instant that I
beheld you: how much I do love you, I would I could tell you: how dearly I
will love you, my best endeavors shall truly make known unto you: and if under
heaven I may find such happiness on the earth as to be regarded in your
favor, I will think it idle that figures earthly felicity: for your
excellence, being almost without exception, let my love be without comparison:
and if truth may have belief, let my affection be without suspicion: and as
you have won my heart with your eyes, make it happy with your hands: so hoping
that so sweet an aspect can have no sowrenesse in spirit, in the hope of your
kind answer, I rest

Yours, devoted to be commanded. A. B.

A Letter of Request.
Kind friend: I would entreat a kindness, but for fear of a denial, not out
of mine own deserts, but rather your disposition, which I doubt is too near
the nature of the world, rather to grant then to gratify: excuses are more
trials of wit then truth, and a faithful heart has no stop in love, and
therefore, that I may not have cause to wrong my self in my assured confidence
of your worth do right to your self in the good of that performance, that,
without parenthesis may conclude in a full point of kindness. The substance of
my suit I have sent you by word of mouth, because my handwriting shall not
witness my unhappiness if my hope should fail the expectation of my
affection, in which without greater care of the contrary, I rest,

Yours as you know, D. S.

A Letter of discontent, upon denial of a Request.
My small friend,
I Thank you for nothing more then that I have nothing to thank you for,
wherein you rather considered what I am, then your self should be: pardon my
folly, in presuming above knowledge, and believe me no more if I fall into the
like error of opinion: you willed me to make account of your uttermost power,
in my good: It may be it was in wishes, which are easily requited, but when
they are void of effects, they are but troubles to reason: I cannot spell
without letters, nor understand words without substance, therefore loath to be
tedious, when I have unwillingly been troublesome, I pray you let complements
be without cost, so shall kindness continue, in that condition of judgment
that shall make me always ready to requite your denial of my request as I
find cause,

Your friend to command, R. T.

To a Court Lady.
IF Love could dissemble, patience could have no passion, but truth is so tied
to affection, that as a sound limb it cannot halt. If you ask the reason of
my affection, look into the excellency of your own worth, and then if there
be any extreme, take it in the best part, which grows from your self: for
such is my judgment of your deserving, as can be answered in nothing but in
admiring: for surely, he must be either very dim sighted that does not
prefer your beauty to all shadows, or dull witted, that understands not the
honor of your worthiness. O (...) me leave then, out of the sight of my best
sense, and sense of my best sight, to deuote my service to your command, that
may give a happiness in your employment: and while idle Complements are but
Court fashions, let plain truth have such acceptance in your favor, that
suspicion may not wrong a true affection: in which I vow ever to rest,

Yours all, or mine own not at all, I. G.

Her complementall answer.
What words shall I use to win your affection, holding under heaven my
happiness but in your love: if (...) would please you in your affairs, I would
never rest (...) in your favor: if gifts might be graciously accepted, I would
give you my self for your love: if pity might move you, I would lay before
you my passion: and if my death might only answer your desire, I would not
live to despair of your comfort: but love being a spirit of that nature, that
only is pleased in being himself, I will leave all my hopes to that happy
hour, wherein he may in your eyes, cast those blessed beams of favor, upon
the faith of my heart, that may make me in the infringible bond of devoted
service to the last period of my life

Yours wholly and only to be commanded, E. N.

FINIS.

