A Hedgerovv of Busshes, Brambles, and Briers: or, A Field full of Tares,
Thistles and Tine: Of the vanities and vain delights of this World, leading
the way to eternal damnation: with several Exhortations or oauiats for the
careless to shun and beware the same. Now newly compiled by I.D.

The works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations,
wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness,
gluttony, and such like: whereof I tell you before, as I also have told you
before, that they which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

Gall. 5. Imprinted at London by William White for John Brown, and are to be
sold at his shop in Fleete-streete at the sign of the Shugerloafe. 1598.

To the gentle and friendly Reader.
THere are in foreign countries (gentle Reader) certain men called by the
name of Quacksaluers, who use in Fayres, Markettes, and open places, to show
forth in desiphered colors many infirmities, griefs, and diseases, which do
afflict and reign in man's body: and withal they lay open in viwe of the
people diverse waters, powders, and drugges of diverse sorts, as remedies for
the same: And also there they do tell and expound unto the beholders, as well
the nature and qualities of the same diseases, as the virtue, force, and
efficacy, of the same Drugges, to the intent the hearers and beholders may
take knowledge, and receive benefit thereby. The which ensample (gentle
Reader) being (in my simple opinion) very good and christian like, I have
immitated, by laying open before our eyes in this small Book following,
(according to my small skill and knowledge) the Vanities and vain delights of
this World, and have named it (as me thinks most fit) A Hedgerowe of Bushes,
Brambles, and Briers: or a Field full of Tares, Thistles, and Tine; of the
Vanities and vain delights of this World, leading the way to eternal
damnation, with several exhortations or cauiats for the careless to shun and
beware the same: That as I have reduced another Book into a smaller volume,
called Paterickes Places, a Treatise concerning the doctrine of Faith, and the
doctrine of the Law; which is the only mark to shoot at, and the only
means to obtain salvation: So by reading and understanding of both, we might
thereby learn to choose the right and good way, and to shun and fly the
wrong and busshie bad way: as for a familiar example. If two men were set in a
plain to run a race for a great prize, and it were decreed that he which
came first to the end of the race, should have the prize for his reward: The
one steppeth aside out of the way amongst Busshes and Briers, seeking after
Butterflies, whereby he loses the prize; the beholders would not only think
him a vain man, but would also deride and laugh him to scorn for his vanity
and foolishnes: Even so (gentle Reader) we having two ways laid before our
eyes, one leading to damnation, and the other to salvation; it were a great
folly, or rather madness, for us to leave the right way, and to take the
wrong: Therefore it behooves us to be wary and careful, that we chouse the
right way; for it is described unto us by our Savior Christ, to be very
narrow and straight, Math. 7.
and few there be that find it. And let us examine our selves, that if we be
entangled in any Brier of this Hedgerow, we strive to get out in time, least
being caught by one Brier, and careless to get loose, an other also lays
hold; and so by degrees we be fastened and overwhelmed in the Hedge, as when
we would get loose we can not, Math. 25.
and the night come upon us at unawares, whereby we be taken tardie, as the
foolish Virgins, Reave. 12.
and our adversary or accuser, bring us before the Judge, placing us amongst
those careless livers, after the lusts of the flesh, and workers of iniquity,
on the left hand; Luke 13.
and the Judge pronounce that heavy sentence, Math. 25.
Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels: But rather let us think upon, or take example by the seely Sheep,
feeding by the Hedge, or in the Fields; so soon as he finds him self
caught by the Brier, he forthwith turns and windeth himself about to get
loose again, and deferreth not the time, but will so struggle and strive, that
in the end he will get loose, albeit he leave some of his Wool behind him.
And Saint Paul teaches us to cast off the old man, Ephesians. 4.
which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts: Ephesians. 5.
and put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness: Tit. 2.
And wills him that has stolen, to stoale no more, having no fellowship
with the works of darkness: but deny ungodliness and worldly lusts: And that
we should live soberly and righteously and godly in this present world,
walking in the spirit, Gal. 5.
and doing and performing the fruits of the spirit: which is love, joy, peace,
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes, temperancie, against such
there is no law: for they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and the lusts. If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the
spirit, that we may be set amongst the number of those on the right hand, and
the Judge will say unto us, Math. 25. 1. John. 2.
Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world: For those that walk in the spirit, love God, and are
good and righteous, and do those things that please him: therefore such must
not doubt, but that God will also give them the crown of righteousness: To
which we pray him, he will grant us. Amen.

Your welwiller in the Lord, and most unworthy. I.D.

The Contents of this Book.
1 Of the World, and the Prince thereof, our accuser, adversary, and enemy.
2 Of Sin and Sinners. 3 Of Images and Idolles. 4 Of Antichrist and false
Christ's. 5 Of false Prophettes, false Doctrine, and Teachers. 6 Of worldly
Wisdom. 7 Of Riches and Rich-men. 8 Of Pride and Proude-men. 9 Of Whoredom
and Whoremongers. 10 Of Drunkardes and Gluttons. 11 Of Covetousness. 12 Of
Usury and Usurers. 13 Of false Weightes and Measures. 14 Of Swearing. 15 Of
Lying. 16 Of Backbiters and Talebearers. 17 Of Scorning and mocking. 18 Of
Anger and Wrath. 19 Of Envy, Hatred, and Strife. 20 Of Sloth and Idleness. 21
Of the Tongue and evil speaking. 22 Of feigned Friends and friendshyp. 23 Of
Witches and Sorcerers. 24 Of Fools. 25 Of Wicked and evil Men. 26 Of hard,
stony, and stubborn Hearts. 27 Of the works of Darkness, and works of the
Flesh. 28 A godly Prayer and confession of our sins unto God.
The end of the Table.
OF THE WORLD, AND THE PRINCE THEREOF, OUR ACCVSER, ADVERSARY, AND ENEMY.
BE sober, and watch: 1. Pet. 5.8.
for your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom
he may devour.

We wrestle not against flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6.12.
but against principalities, against powers, and against the worldly
governors, the princes of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickednesses, which are in the high places.

In time past ye walked, Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
according to the course of this world, and after the Prince that rules in
the air: even the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience:

Among whom we also had our conversation in time past, in the lust of our
flesh, in fulfilling the will of the flesh, and of the mind: and were by
nature, the children of wrath, as well as others.

In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds (that is) of the
Infidels, 2. Cor. 4.4.
that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the image of God,
should not shine upon them.

John. 12, 31.
Now is the judgment of this world: Now shall the Prince of this world be
cast out.

Collo. 2, 15.
And has spoiled the Principalities, and powers, and has made a show of them
openly, and has triumphed over them in the same Cross.

Luke 22, 31.
And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, Behold, Satan has desired to winow you, as
wheat.

Reave. 12.10.
I heard a loud voice, saying, Now is salvation in heaven, and strength, and
the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: For the accuser of his
brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.

1. John. 2, 16.
All that is in the world (as the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes,
and the pride of life) is not of the Father, but is of the world.

Eccle. 1, 1.
Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher: Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

EXHORTATION.
1. John. 2, 15, 17.
Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

The world passes away, and the lusts thereof: but he that fulfilleth the
will of God, abides for ever.

1. Corin. 7, 31
And they that use this world, as though they used it not: for the fasshion of
this world goes away.

Iam. 4, 4.
Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, know ye not that the amity of the world, is
the enimitie of God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, makes
him self the enemy of God.

If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: John. 15, 19.
But because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you.

They are not of the world, as I am not of the world. John. 17, 16.


I pray not for the world, John. 17, 9.
but for them which thou have given me: for they are thine.

And fashion not your selves like unto this world, Romans 12, 2.
but be ye changed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the
good will of God, and acceptable, and perfect.

OF SIN AND SINNERS.
BY one man Sin entered into the world, Romans 5, 12, 13.
and death by Sin, and so death went over all men, forasmuch as all men have
sinned: For unto the time of the Law was Sin in the word; but Sin is not
imputed while there is no Law.

By the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight: Romans 3, 20.
For by the Law comes the knowledge of Sin.

What shall we say then? Is the Law Sin? Romans 7, 7, 12, 13.
God forbid. Nay, I knew not Sin, but by the Law: for I had not known lust,
except the Law had said, Thou shall not lust.

Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment is holy, and just, and good.

Was then that which is good, made death in me? God forbid: But sin, that it
might appear sin, wrought death in me by that which is good, that sin
might be out of measure sinful by the commandment.

Romans 5, 23.
But I see an other law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind,
and leading me captive unto the law of sin, which is in my members.

1. John. 3, 8.
He that commits sin is of the Devil: for the Devil sins from the
beginning: for this purpose appeared the Son of God, that he might loose the
works of the Devil.

John. 8, 34.
Verily, verily I say unto you, that whosoever commits sin, is the servant
of sin.

Wisd. 10, 13.
Because of the foolish devices of their wickedness wherewith they were deceived,
and worshypped Serpents, that had not the use of reason, and vile beasts, thou
sendedst a multitude of unreasonable beasts upon them for a vengeance, that
they might know, that wherewith a man sins, by the same also shall he be
punished.

Romans 6, 20. 2. Pet. 2.19.
When ye were the servants of sin, ye were freed from righteousness.

1. Kin. 8, 46. 2. Chro. 6, 36
If they sin against thee (for there is no man that sins not) and thou be
angry with them, and deliver them to the enemies, so that they carry them away
prisoners unto the land of the enemies, either far or near.

Eccle. 25, 26. Genesis 3, 6.
Of the woman came the beginning of sin, and through her we die all.

2. Esd. 15, 24
Woe be to them that sin, and keep not my commandementes, says the Lord.

Pro. 14, 21.
The sinner dispiseth his neighbor: but he that has mercy on the poor, is
blessed.

Who can say, I have made mine heart clean, Pro. 20, 9.
I am clean from sin?

Surely there is no man just in the earth, Eccle. 7, 22.
that does good, and sins not.

The way of sinners is made plain with stones: Eccle. 21, 10.
but at the end thereof is hell, darkness, and pains.

If we say that we have no sin, 1. Ioh. 1, 8, 10
we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us.

If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, Galla. 3, 22.
that the Promise by the Faith of Jesus Christ, should be given to them that
believe.

EXHORTATION.
HE said unto them, The whole need not a Physician, Math. 9, 12, 13.
but they that are sick.

But go ye and learn what this is, I will have mercy, and not Sacrifice: For
I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance.

The Lord is slow to anger, and of great mercy, Nom. 14, 18 Psalm. 103, 3.
and forgiving iniquity, and sin: but not making the wicked innocent, and
visiting the wickedness of the fathers upon the children, in the third and
fourth generation.

Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord, Ezec. 33, 11.
I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way,
and live: Turn you, turn you from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O ye
house of Israel.

Psalm. 32, 1.
Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgeuen, and whose sin is covered.

1. Tim. 1, 15.
This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, That Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.

Mar. 2, 17.
He said unto them, the whole have no need of the Physician, but the sick. I
came not to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance.

Exodus 34, 7.
Reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and
sin, and not making the wicked innocent, visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, and upon the childrens children unto the third and
fourth generation.

1. Pet. 4, 1.
Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind, (which is) that he which has suffered in the
flesh, has ceased from sin.

1. Cor 6, 11. Ephesians. 2, 12, 13 Titus. 3, 3.
And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
iustefied in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

1. Pet. 1, 15, 16.
As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation.

Because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy.

Act. 3, 19.
Amend your lives therefore and turn, that your Sins may be put away, when
the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

Ro^. 6, 22.23.
But now being freed from Sin, and made servants unto God, ye have your
fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life.

For the wages of Sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

If we acknowledge our sins, 1. John. 1, 9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

Speak unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, and say unto them,
Ye shall be holy, Leuit. 19, 2. and 20, 7. Luke 1, 75. Deuteronomy. 10, 17 Romans 2, 11.
Galla. 2, 6.
for I the Lord your God am holy.

OF IMAGES AND IDOLS.
YE shall see in Babylon Gods of Silver, Bar. 6, 3, 13, 14, 18, 21, 22
and Gods of Wood, borne upon men's shoulders, to cause the people to fear.

One holds a Scepter, as though he were a certain Judge of the Country, yet
can he not slay such as offend him.

Another has a Dagger or an Axe in his right hand, yet he is not able to
defend him self from battle, nor from thieves: So then it is evident that
they be no Gods.

They light up Candles before them, yea more then for them selves, whereof they
cannot see one: for they are but as one of the posts of the Temple.

The Owls, Swallows, and Birds, fly upon their bodies, and upon their
heads; yea, and the Cattes also.

By this ye may be sure, that they are not Gods: Therefore fear them not.

All they that make an Image are vanity, Esa. 44, 9.
and their delectable things shall nothing profit: and they are their own
witnesses, that they see not nor know: therefore they shall be confounded.

Esa. 46, 7.
They bear it upon the shoulders: they carry him and set him in his place: so
does he stand, and can not remove from his place. Though one cry unto him,
yet can he not answer, nor deliver him out of his tribulation.

Psalm. 115, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Their Idols are silver and gold: even the work of men's hands.

They have a mouth and speak not: they have eyes and see not.

They have ears and hear not: they have noses and smell not.

They have hands and touch not: they have feet and walk not: neither make
they any sound with their throat.

They that make them are like unto them: so are all that trust in them.

Psalm. 16, 4.
The sorrows of them, that offer to an other God, shall be multiplied: their
offerings of blood will I not offer, neither make mention of their names with
my lyppes.

Ier. 10, 5.
The Idols stand up as the palm tree, but speak not: they are borne, because
they can not go: fear them not, for they cannot do evil, neither can they do
good.

Wisd. 13, 10.
Miserable are they, and among the dead is there hope, that call them Gods,
which are the works of men's hands, gold and silver, and the thing that is
invented by art, and the similitude of beasts, or any vain stone that has
been made by the hand of antiquity.

Leuit. 26, 1.
Ye shall make you none Idols nor graven Images, neither rear you up any
Pillar, neither shall ye set any Image of Stone in your land, to bow down to
it: for I am the Lord your God.

Ye shall take heed to all things that I have said unto you, Exodus 23, 13.
and ye shall make no mention of the name of other Gods, neither shall it be
heard out of thy mouth.

Neither company with these nations: that is, Josh. 23, 7.
with them which are left with you, neither make mention of the name of their
Gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve them, nor bow unto them.

The residue thereof he makes a God, Esa. 44, 17.
even his Idol; he boweth unto it, and worshypeth and prays unto it, and
says, Deliver me, for thou art my God.

For mine own sake, for mine own sake, Esa. 48, 11, 12, 13.
will I do it: For how should my name be polluted? Surely I will not give my
glory to another.

Hear me O Jacob, and Israel my called: I am, I am, the first, and I am, the
last.

Surely mine hand has laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand
has spanned the heavens: when I call them, they stand up together.

Cursed be the man that shall make any carved or molten Image, Deuteronomy. 27, 15.
which is an abomination to the Lord, the work of the hands of the
Craftsman, and puts it in a secret place: And all the people shall answer
and say, So be it.

EXHORTATION.
2. Cor. 6, 14, 15.
BE not unequally yoked with the Infidels: For what fellowshyp has righteousness
with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with darkness?

And what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has the believer with
the Infidel?

1. John. 5, 21.
Babes, keep your selves from Idols. Amen.

1. Cor. 8, 4, 5, 6.
Concerning therefore meat sacrificed unto Idols, we know that an Idol is
nothing in the world, and that there is none other God but one.

For though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven or in earth (as
there be many Gods, and many Lords)

Yet unto us there is but one God, which is the Father, of whom are all
things, and we in him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and
we by him.

1. Cor 10, 14.
Wherefore my brethren, flee from Idolatry.

John. 13, 13.
Ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye say well: for so am I.

1. John. 4, 12.
No man has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwells in us,
and his love is perfect in us.

John. 1, 18.
No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him.

1. Cor. 12, 3.
I declare unto you, that no man speaking by the spirit of God, calls Jesus
execrable: Also, no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

The hour comes, and now is, John. 4, 23, 24.
when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth: for
the Father requires even such to worship him.

God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and
truth.

And that every tongue should confess, Phil. 2, 11.
that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God the Father.

These shall fight with the Lamb, Reave. 17, 14.
and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings: and they that are on his side, called, and chosen, and faithful.

And he has upon his garment, and upon his thigh, Reave. 19, 16.
a name written, The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

I thank him, which has made me strong, that is, 1. Tim. 1, 12
Christ Jesus our Lord: for he counted me faithful, and put me in his service.

Who only has immortality, 1. Tim. 6, 16
and dwells in the light that none can attain unto, whom never man saw,
neither can see: unto whom be honor and power everlasting, Amen.

OF ANTICHRIST and false Christ's.
WHO is a liar, 1. John. 2, 22.
but he that denies that Jesus is Christ? the same is the Antichrist that
denies the Father and the Son.

And every spirit which confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
1. John. 4, 3.
is not of God, but is the spirit of Antichrist; of whom ye have heard, how
that he should come, and now already he is in the world.

1. John. 4, 5.
They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world
hears them.

2. John. 7.
Many deceyuers are entered into the world, which confess not that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh. He that is such one, is a deceyuer, and an Antichrist.

Math. 24, 5,
Many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

2. These. 2.9.
Even him whose coming is by the working of Satan, with all power, and signs,
and lying wonders.

Mat. 24, 24. Mar. 13, 22.
There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders; so that if it were possible, they should deceive the very
elect.

1. John. 2, 18, 19.
Babes, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come,
even now are there many Antichrists: whereby we know, that it is the last time.

They went out from us, but they were not of us: For if they had been of us,
they would have continued with us. But this comes to pass, that it might
appear, that they are not all of us.

EXHORTATION.
Mat. 24, 23. Mar. 13, 21. Mat. 24, 25.
IF any shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not.

Behold, I have told you before.

Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, Mat. 24, 26.
he is in the desert, go not forth: behold, he is in the secret places,
believe it not.

Then they shall say to you: Behold here, Luk 17, 23.
or behold there: But go not thither, neither follow them.

Take heed that ye be not deceived, Luke 21, 8.
for many will come in may name, saying, I am Christ, and the time draws
near: follow ye not them therefore.

And Jesus answered and said unto them, Math. 24, 4. Mark. 13, 5.
Take heed that no man deceive you.

Let no man deceive you with vain words: Ephesians. 5, 6.
For such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.

Let no man deceive you by any means, 2. These. 2, 3.
for that day shall not come, except there come a departing first, and that
that man of Sin be disclosed, even the son of perdition.

OF FALSE PROPHETS, false Doctrine and Teachers.
Son of man, Eze. 13, 2, 3.
prophecy against the Prophets of Israel that prophecy, and say thou unto
them that prophecy out of their own hearts, Hear the word of the Lord.

Thus says the Lord God, Woe unto the foolysh Prophets that follow their own
spirit, and have seen nothing.

And if the Prophet be deceived when he has spoken a thing, Eze. 14, 9.
I the Lord have deceived that Prophet, and I will stretch out mine hand upon
him, and will destroy him from the mids of my people Israel.

Eze. 22, 25.
There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in the mids thereof like a roaring
Lion, ravening the pray: they have devoured souls: they have taken the riches
and precious things: they have made her many widows in the mids thereof.

Ier. 23, 9, 11, 21.
Mine heart breaks within me because of the Prophets, all my bones shake: I am
like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine has overcome, for the presence of
the Lord, and for his holy words.

For both the Prophet and the Priest do wickedly: and their wickedness have I
found in mine House, says the Lord.

I have not sent these Prophets, says the Lord: yet they run: I have not
spoken to them, and yet they prophesied.

Ier. 14, 14.
The Prophets prophecy lies in my name: I have not sent them, neither did I
command them, neither spoke I unto them: But they prophecy unto you a false
vision, and divination, and vanity, and deceitfulness of their own heart.

Ier. 27, 15. and 29, 9.
I have not sent them, says the Lord, yet they prophecy a lie in my name, that
I might cast you out, and that ye might perish, both you, and the Prophets that
prophecy unto you.

1. Tim. 2, 1.
This know also, that in the last days, shall come perilous times.

2. Pet. 2, 1.
There were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false
Teachers among you: which privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even
denying the Lord, that has bought them, and bring upon themselves swift
damnation.

And many shall follow their damnable ways, 2. Pet. 2, 2.
by whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

There are certain men crept in, Jude. 4, 18.
which were before of old ordained to this condemnation: ungodly men they are,
which turn the grace of our God into wantonness, and deny God the only
Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

This first understand, 2. Pet. 3, 3.
that there shall come in the last days mockers, which will walk after their
lusts.

The Prophet that shall presume to speak a word in my name, Deuteronomy. 18, 20, 22.
which I have not commanded him to speak, or that speaks in the name of
other Gods, even the same Prophet shall die.

When a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor
come to pass, that is, the thing which the Lord has not spoken, but the
Prophet has spoken it presumptuously: thou shall not therefore be afraid of
him.

The Priests said not, Where is the Lord? Ier. 2, 8.
And they that should minister the Law, knew me not: The Pastors also offended
against me, and the Prophets prophesied in Baal, and went after things that
did not profit.

I know this, Act. 20, 29.
that after my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing
the flock.

1. Timo. 4, 1.
Now the spirit speaks evidently, that in the later times some shall depart
from the Faith, and shall give heed unto Spirits of error, and doctrines of
Devils.

Galla. 1, 6, 7.
I marvel that ye are so soon removed away unto another Gospel, from him that
had called you in the grace of Christ,

Which is not another Gospel, save that there be some which trouble you, and
intend to pervert the Gospel of Christ.

2. Cor. 11, 13, 14.
For such false Apostles are deceitful workers, and transform them selves into
the Apostles of Christ.

And no marvel: for Satan him self is transformed into an Angel of light.

EXHORTATION.
Romans 16, 17
NOw I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently which cause division and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

1. Cor. 3, 10, 11.
According to the grace of God given to me, as a skillful master builder, I
have laid the foundation, and another buyldeth thereon: But let every man take
heed how he buyldeth upon it.

For other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid; which is Jesus
Christ.

2. John. 10.
If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to
house, neither bid him, God speed.

But though that we, or an Angel from heaven, Galla, 1.8.
preach unto you otherwise, then that ye have received, let him be accursed.

That we henceforth be no more children, Ephe. 4, 14.
wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the deceit of men,
and with craftines, whereby they lay in wait to deceive.

Beware of Dogs, beware of evil workers, Phil. 3, 2.
beware of the concision.

Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you by humblenes of mind, and
worshypping of Angels, Collo. 2, 18.
advancing himself in those things which he never saw, rashly puffed up with
his fleshly mind.

Beware of false Prophets, Math. 7, 15.
which come to you in Sheep clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines: Heb. 14.9.
for it is a good thing that the heart be stablished with grace, and not with
meats, which have not profited them that have been occupied therein.

OF WORLDLY WISDOM.
BEHOLD, Esa. 26 14.
I will again do a marvelous work in this people, even a marvelous work,
and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.

The knowledge of wickedness is not wisdom, Eccle. 19, 22
neither is there prudence whereas the counsel of sinners is: but it is even
execrable malice, and the fool is void of wisdom.

Wisd. 1, 4.
Wisdom can not enter into a wicked heart, nor dwell in the body that is
subject unto sin.

Eccle. 1, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18
I have given mine heart to search and find out Wisdom, by all things that
are done under the heaven: (this sore travel has God given to the sons of
men, to humble them thereby.)

I have considered all the works that are done under the Sun, and behold
all is vanity and vexation of the spirit.

I thought in mine heart, and said, Behold I am become great, and excel in
wisdom all them that have been before me in Jerusalem: and mine heart has
seen much wisdom and knowledge.

And I gave mine heart to know wisdom and knowledge, madness and foolishnes: I
knew also that this is a vexation of the spirit.

For in the multitude of wisdom is much grief: and he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow.

Eccle. 38, 25.
How can he get wisdom that holds the plough, and he that has pleasure in
the goad, and in driving Oxen, and is occupied in their labors, and talks
but of the breed of Bullockes?

1. Cor. 1, 26.
Brethren, you see your calling, how that not many wise men after the flesh, nor
many mighty, nor many noble are called.

Romans 8, 7.
The wisdom of the flesh, is enimitie against God: for it is not subject to
the law of God, neither in deed can be.

Romans 1, 22.
When they professed themselves to be wise, they became fools.

This wisdom discendeth not from above: Iam. 3, 15.
but is earthly, sensual, and diuelysh.

For it is written, 1. Cor. 1, 19, 20.
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise; and I will cast away the
understanding of the prudent.

Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the disputer of this world?
has not God made the wisdom of this world foolishnes?

EXHORTATION.
HE takes the Wise in their craftines, Job. 5, 13.
and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish.

He only that applies his mind to the law of the most high, Eccl. 39, 1, 9.
and is occupied in the meditation thereof, seeks out the wisdom of all the
ancient, and exercises him self in the prophecies.

Many shall commend his understanding, and his memory shall never be put out,
nor depart away: But his name shall continue from generation to generation.

He that has small understanding, and fears God, Eccle. 19, 23
is better then one that has much wisdom, and transgresses the Law of the
most high.

The wisdom of a Learned man comes by using well his vacant time: Eccle.
38, 24.
and he that cease from his own matters and labor, may come by wisdom.

The preaching of the Cross is to them that peryshe foolyshnesse: But unto us,
which are saved, 1. Cor. 1, 18.
it is the power of God.

1. Cor 1, 21, 27, 28.
For seeing the world by wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe.

But God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise: and
God has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the mighty things.

And vile things of the world, and things that are despised, has God
chosen, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are.

1. Cor. 2, 6, 7, 8.
And we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: not the wisdom of this
world, neither of the princes of this world, which come to naught.

But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hid wisdom, which
God had determined before the world, unto our glory.

Which none of the princes of this world has known: For had they known it,
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

1. Cor. 3, 18, 19.
Let no man deceive himself: If any man among you seem to be wise in this
world, let him be a fool, that he may be wise.

For the wisdom of this world, is foolyshnesse with God: For it is written,
He catches the wise in their own craftiness.

Iam. 3, 17.
The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without judging, and without
hypocrisy.

Eccle. 12, 13.
Let us hear the end of all: Fear God, and keep his commandementes: for this
is the whole duty of a man*

OF RICHES AND RICH-MEN.
WOE be to you that are rich: Luke 6, 24.
for ye have received your consolation.

Go to now ye rich men: Iam. 5, 1, 3, 4, 5, 6.
weep and howl for your myseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are
corrupt, and your garments are motheaten.

Your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness
against you, and shall eat your flesh, as it were fire. Ye have heaped up
treasure for the last days.

Behold, the hire of the laborers, which have reaped your fields (which is
of you kept back by fraud) cries, and the cries of them which have reaped,
are entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts.

Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and in wantonness. Ye have nourished
your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.

Ye have condemned and have killed the just, and he has not resisted you.

Riches avail not in the day of wrath: Pro. 11, 4.
But righteousness delivers from death.

The rich deals unrighteously, Eccle. 13, 3.21.
and threatens withal: but the poor being oppressed, must entreat. If the
rich have done wrong, he must yet be entreated: but if the poor have done it,
he shall straight ways be threatened.

As the proud hate humility, so do the rich abhor the poor.

Eccle. 13, 22, 23, 24.
If a Rich man fall, his friends set him up again: but when the poor falls,
his friends drive him away.

If a Rich man offend, he has many helpers: he speaks proud words, and
yet men justify him: But if a poor man fail, they rebuke him, and though he
speak wisely, yet can it have no place.

When the Rich man speaks, every man holds his tongue, and look what he
says, they praise it unto the clouds: But if the poor man speak, they say,
What fellow is this? And if he do amiss, they will destroy him.

Eccle. 11, 18, 19.
Some man is rich by his care and niggardshyp, and this is the portion of his
wages,

In that he says, I have gotten rest, and now will I eat continually of my
goods: yet he considers not that the time draws near, that he must leave
all these things unto other men, and die him self.

Eccle. 31, 3.
The Rich man has great labor in gathering riches together, and in his rest
he is filled with pleasure.

Eccle. 4, 8.
There is one alone, which has neither son nor brother, yet is there no end
of all his travel, neither can his eye be satisfied with riches: neither does
he think, For whom do I travel, and defraude my soul of pleasure? this also
is vanity, and this is an evil travel.

Eccle. 5, 9, 12 13.
He that loves Silver, shall not be satisfied with Silver: and he that loves
Riches, shall be without the fruit thereof,

There is an evil sickness that I have seen under the sun: to wit, riches
reserved to the owners thereof for their evil:

And those riches perish by evil travel: and he begets a son, and in his
hand is nothing.

A man to whom God has given riches, Eccle. 6, 2.
and treasures, and honor, and he wants nothing for his soul of all that he
desires: but God gives him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger shall
eat it up: This is vanity, and an evil sickness.

The Rich man's riches are his strong city, Pro. 18, 11.
and as an high wall, in his imagination.

Riches remain not always, Pro. 27, 24.
nor the crown from generation to generation.

What profit has the pomp of riches brought us? Wis. 5, 8, 9.13.


They passed away like a shadow, and as a Post that passes by.

Even so we, as soon as we be borne, we begin to draw to our end, and have
showed no token of virtue, but are consumed in our wickedness.

Doubtless man walks in a shadow, Psalm. 39, 6.
and disquietch him self in vain: he heapeth up riches, and can not tell who
shall gather them.

Where are the Princes of the Heathen, Bar. 3, 17, 18
and such as horded up silver and gold, wherein men trust, and made none end
of their gatheringes?

They that coined silver, and were so careful of their work, and whose
invention had none end,

Baru. 3, 19.
Are come to naught, and gone down to hell, and other men are come up in their
steedes.

Job. 27, 8, 14 19, 23.
What hope has the hypocrite when he has heaped up riches, if God take away
his soul?

If his children be in great number, the sword shall destroy them, and his
posterity shall not be satisfied with bread.

When the rich man sleeps, he shall not be gathered to his fathers: they
opened their eyes, and he was gone.

Every man shall clap their hands at him, and hiss at him, out of their place.

Mar. 4, 19.
The cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of
other things, enter in and choke the word, and it is unfruitful.

Luke 16, 13. Math. 6, 24.
No servant can serve two Masters, for either he shall hate the one and love
the other, or else he shall love the one and despise the other: ye can not serve
God and Riches.

Eze. 7, 19.
They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be cast far
off: Their silver and their gold can not deliver them in the day of the wrath
of the Lord. They shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels,
for their ruin is for their iniquity.

Zepha. 1, 18.
Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of
the Lords wrath: But the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his
jealousy, for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in
the land.

Jesus said unto his disciples, Mat. 19, 23.24.
Verily I say unto you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

And again I say unto you, It is easier for a Cammel to go through the eye of
a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

And I will say to my soul: Soul, Luke 12, 19, 20, 21.
thou have much goods laid up for many years: live at ease; eat, drink,
and take thy pastime.

But God said unto him. O fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from
thee: then whose shall those things be which thou have provided?

So is he that gathers riches to him self, and is not rich in God.

EXHORTATION.
BLessed is the rich which is found without blemysh, Ecclu. 31, 8.
and has not gone after gold, nor heaped in money and treasures.

We came naked into this world, Job. 1, 21.
and naked we must go forth again.

Trust not unto thy riches: and say not, Ecclu. 5, 1, 8.
I have enough for my self: for it shall not help in the time of vengance and
indignation.

Trust not in wicked riches, for they shall not help thee in the day of
punishment and vengeance.

Beware least thou say in thine heart, My power, Deuteronomy. 8, 17.
and the strength of mine own hand, has prepared me this abundance.

Luke 12, 15.
Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for though a man have abundance, yet
his life stands not in his riches.

1. Tim. 6, 17.
Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, and
that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God, which gives
us abundantly all things to enjoy.

OF PRIDE AND Proude-men.
Eccle. 10, 7, 12, 13, 14.19
PRIDE is hateful before God and man.

Why is earth and ashes proud, seeing that when a man dies he is the heir of
Serpents, beasts, and worms.

The beginning of man's pride, is to fall away from God, and to turn away his
heart from his maker.

Pride is the original of Sin, and he that has it, shall power out
abomination, till at last he be overthrown: therefore the Lord brings the
persuasion of the wicked to dishonor, and destroys them.

Pride was not created in man.

Psalm. 10, 2, 4.
The wicked with pride, does persecute the poor: Let them be taken in the
crafts that they have imagined.

The wicked is so proud, that he seeks not for God: he thinks always,
There is no God.

The proud have laid a snare for me, Psalm. 140, 5.
and spread a net with cords in my pathway, and set grinnes for me.

The Lord cut off all flattering lyppes: Psalm. 12, 3.
and the tongue that speaks proud things.

Lord, mine heart is not hautie, Psalm. 131, 1.
neither are mine eyes lofty: neither have I walked in matters hid from me.

Let not the foot of pride come against me: Psalm. 36, 11.
and let not the hand of the wicked men move me.

Mockery and reproach follow the proud: Ecclu. 27, 28
and vengeance lurketh for them as a Lion.

The proud man is as he that transgresses by wine: therefore shall he not
endure, Haba. 2, 5.
because he has enlarged his desire as the hell, and is as death, and can not
be satisfied, but gathers unto him all nations, and heapeth unto him all
people.

The high look of man shall be humbled, Esa. 11, 11, 12.
and the loftines of men shall be abased; and the Lord only shall be exalted.

For the day of the Lord of hosts is upon all the proud and hautie, and upon
all that is exalted, and it shall be made low.

We have heard the pride of Moab (he is exceeding proud) his stoutnesse, and
his arrogancy, Ier. 48, 29.
and his pride, and the hautinesse of his heart.

A hautie look, and a proud hatt, Pro. 21, 4.24
which is the light of the wicked, is sin.

Proud, hautie, and scornful, is his name, that works in his arrogancy
wrath.

Pride goes before destruction, Pro. 16.18.
and an high mind, before the fall.

Pro. 11, 2.
When pride comes, then comes shame: but with the lowly is wisdom.

Pro. 29, 23.
The pride of a man shall bring him low: but the humble in spirit shall enjoy
glory.

EXHORTATION.
Psalm. 40, 4.
BLessed is the man that makes the Lord his trust, and regards not the proud.

1. Pet. 5, 5, 6.
Submit your selves every man one to another: deck your selves inwardly in
lowliness of mind: for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble.

Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time.

Ecclu. 10, 15 16, 18.
The Lord has cast down the throne of the proud Princes, and set up the meek
in their stead.

The Lord plucketh up the roots of the proud nations, and planteth the lowly
among them.

God destroys the memorial of the proud, and leaves the remembrance of the
humble.

Romans 12, 10.
Be affectioned to love one another with brotherly love: In giving honor, go
one before another.

Iam. 4, 6, 10.
But the Scripture offers more grace, and therefore says, God resists the
proud, and gives grace to to the humble.

Cast down your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.

1. Pet 2, 17.
Honor all men: love brotherly fellowship: fear God: honor the King.

Whosoever exalts himself, shall be brought low, Luke 14.11. and. 18, 14. Mat.
23, 12.
and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

OF WHOREDOM and Whoremongers.
FOR because of the whorish Woman, Pro. 6, 2, 32
a man is brought to a morsel of bread: and a woman will hunt for the precious
life of a man.

He that commits adultery with a woman, he is destitute of understanding:
he that does it, destroys his own soul.

I saw among the fools, Pro. 7, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 14, 15, 16.
and considered among the children a young man destitute of understanding,

Who passed through the street in the twilight in the evening, when the night
began to be black and dark.

And behold, there met him a woman with an Harlots behavior, and subtle in
heart.

(She is babbling and loud: whose feet can not abide in her house.

Now she is without, now in the streets, and lies in wait at every corner.)

So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him,

I have peace offeringes, this day have I paid my vows.

Therefore came I forth to meet thee, that I might seek thy face: and I have
found thee.

I have decked my bed with ornaments, Carpets, and laces of Egypt.

Pro. 7, 17, 18 19, 20, 21, 22 23.
I have perfumed my bed with Myrrh, Oloes, and Cinamom.

Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning: let us take our
pleasure in daliance:

For mine husband is not at home: he is gone a journey a far off.

He has taken with him a bag of silver, and will come home at the day
appointed.

Thus with her great cralt she caused him to yield, and with her flatteryng
lyppes she entised him.

And he followed her straight ways, as an Ox to the slaughter, and as a fool
to the stocks for correction,

Till a dart strike through his liver, as a bird hastes to the snare, not
knowing that he is in danger.

Pro. 19, 3.
He that feeds Harlottes, wastes his substance.

Ecclu. 9, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Give not thy life unto a woman, least she overcome thy strength, and so thou be
confounded.

Meet not an Harlot, least thou fall into her snares.

Use not the company of a woman that is a singger and a dauncer: neither hear
her, least thou be taken by her craftines.

Gaze not on a Maid, that thou fall not by that, that is precious in her.

Cast not thy mind upon Harlots in any manner of thing, least thou destroy both
thy self and thine heritage.

The lyppes of a strange woman drop as an honey comb, and her mouth is more
soft then oil: Pro. 5, 3, 4, 5, 6.


But the end of her is bitter as wormwood, and sharp as a two edged sword.

Her feet go down to death, and her steps take hold on hell.

She weighs not the way of life: her paths are moveable, thou can not know
them.

An adulterous woman, Pro. 30, 20.
she eats and wypeth her mouth, and says, I have not committed iniquity.

Thou shall not commit adultery. Exodus 20.14


In the midst of thee, Eze. 22, 9, 10 11.
they have committed abomination.

In thee have they discovered their fathers shame. In thee have they vexed her,
that was polluted in her flowers.

And every one has committed abomination with his neighbors wife: and every
one has wickedly defiled his daughter in law: and in thee has every man
forced his own sister, even his fathers daughter.

How should I spare thee for this? Ier. 5, 7, 8.
Thy chidren have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods: though I
fed them to the full, yet they committed adultery, and assembled them selves
by companies in the harlottes houses.

They rose up in the morning like fed Horses: for every man neyed after his
neighbors wife.

The man that commits adultery with another Leui. 20, 10.
man's wife, because he has committed adultery with his neighbors wife, the
adulterer and the adulteress shall die the death.

Leui. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 16, 17, 18, 19 20, 21.
And the man that lies with his Fathers wife, because he has uncovered his
fathers shame, they shall both die: their blood shall be upon them.

Also, the man that lies with his daughter in Law, they both shall die the
death: they have wrought abomination; their blood shall be upon them.

The man also that lies with the Male as one lies with a woman, they have
both committed abomination: they shall die the death; their blood shall be upon
them.

Likewise, he that takes a wife and her mother, commits wickedness: they
shall burn him and them with fire, that there be no wickedness among you.

Deuteronomy. 23, 17, 18.
There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel: neither shall there be a
whore keeper of the sons of Israel.

Leui. 19, 29.
Thou shall not make thy daughter common, to cause her to be a whore, least the
land also fall to whoredom, and the land fall of wickedness.

Eccle. 23, 17.18.
All bread is sweet to a whore-monger: he will not leave off till he perish.

A man that breaks wedlock, and thinks thus in his heart, Who sees me? I
am compassed about with darkness: the walls cover me: no body sees me:
Whom need I to fear? the most high will not remember my sins.

The same man shall be punished in the streets of the City, Eccle. 23, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25 26.
and shall be chased like a young Horse foale: and when he thinks not upon it,
he shall be taken: Thus shall he be put to shame of every man, because he would
not understand the fear of the Lord.

Ye have heard that it was said unto them of old time, Thou shall not commit
adultery. Math. 5, 27, 28.


But I say unto you, that who soever looks on a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart.

EXHORTATION.
TVrne away thine eye from a beautiful woman, Eccle. 9, 8.
and look not upon others beauty: for many have perished by the beauty of
women: for through it love is kindled as a fire.

Hear ye me now therefore O children, Pro. 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
and depart not from the words of my mouth.

Keep thy way far from her, and come not near the door of her house,

Least thou give thine honor unto others, and thy years to the cruel:

Least the stranger should be filled with thy strength, and thy labors be in
the house of a stranger,

And thou mourn at thine end (when thou have consumed thy flesh and thy body)

And say, How have I hated instruction, and mine heart despised correction!

Let us not commit fornication, as some of them did, 1. Cor. 10, 8.
and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.

1. Cor. 6, 15.16, 18, 19, 20
Know ye not, that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I then take the
members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot? God forbid.

Do you not know, that he which coupleth himself with an Harlot, is one body?
for two, says he, shall be one flesh.

Fly fornication: for every sin that a man does, is without the body: But he
that commits fornication, sins against his own body.

Know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost, which is in you,
whom ye have of God? and ye are not your own.

For ye are bought for a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in
your spirit: for they are Gods.

Pro. 6, 24, 25
Keep thee from the wicked woman, and from the flattery of the tongue of a
strange woman.

Desire not her beauty in thine heart, neither let her take thee with her
eyelids.

1. Cor. 6, 9.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God?
Neither fornicators, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers.

Ephe. 5, 5, 3.
This ye know, that no whoremongers, neither unclean persons, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.

But fornication, and all uncleanness, let it not be once named amongst you,
as it becomes Saints.

OF DRVNKARDS and Gluttons.
IT is not for Kings to drink wine, Pro. 31, 4, 5, 6, 7.
nor for Princes strong drink,

Least he drink and forget the decree, and change the judgment of all the
children of affliction.

Give ye strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto them
that have grief of heart.

Let him drink, that he may forget his poverty, and remember his misery no
more.

To whom is woe? to whom is sorrow? Pro. 23, 29.30, 31, 32.
to whom is strife? to whom is murmuring? to whom are wounds without cause?
and to whom is the redness of the eyes?

Even to them that tarry long at the wine, to them that go, and seek mixed wine.

Look not thou upon the wine, when it is red, and when it shows his color
in the cup, or goes down pleasantly.

In the end thereof it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrise.

Woe unto them that rise up early to follow drunkenness, Esa. 5, 11, 12.
and to them that continue until night, till the wine do inflame them.

And the harp, and the viole, timbrell and pipe, and wine, are in their faces:
but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the work of his
hands.

Esa. 5, 22.
Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine; and to them that are strong to
power in strong drink.

1. Esdr. 3, 18, 19, 22, 23.
O ye men, how strong is wine? it deceives all men that drink it.

It makes the mind of the king and of the fatherless both one; of the
bondsman, and of the freeman, of the poor man and of the rich man.

When men have drunk, they have no mind to love either friends or brethren;
and a little after they draw out swords.

But when they are from the wine, they do not remember what they have done.

Esa. 28, 7.8.
They have erred because of wine, and are out of the way by strong drink. The
Priest and the Prophet have erred by strong drink, they are swallowed up with
wine, they have gone astray through strong drink, they fail in vision, they
stumble in judgment.

For all their Tables are full of filthy vomyting; no place is clean.

Esa. 56, 12.
Come, I will bring wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.

Haba. 2, 15.
Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink: thou ioynest thine heart and
make him drunken also, that thou may see their priuities.

Leui. 10, 9.
Thou shall not drink wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee,
when ye come into the Tabernacle of the congregation, least ye die: this is an
ordinance for ever throughout your generation.

Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is raging: Pro, 20, 1.
and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise.

Wine drunken with excess, Eccle. 31, 29, 30.
makes bitterness of mind with brawlinges and scouldinges.

Drunkenness increases the courage of a fool, till he offend: it
diminishes his strength, and makes wounds.

EXHORTATION.
DO that to no man which thou hate: Tob. 4, 15.
Drink not Wine to make thee drunk, neither let drunkenness go with thee in
thy journey.

Show not thy valiantness in Wine: Eccle. 31, 15, 16, 17.
for Wine has destroyed many.

Eat moderately that which is set before thee, and devour not, least thou be
hated.

Leave thou off first for manners sake, and be not insatiable, least thou
offend.

Keep not company with drunkardes, Pro. 23, 20.
nor with gluttons.

Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is excess: Ephe. 5, 18.
but be filled with the spirit.

Take heed to your selves, Luke 21, 34.
least at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness
and cares of this life, and least that day come on you at unawares.

OF COVETOVSNES.
Eccle. 14, 9.
A Covetous man's eye has never enough of a portion, and his wicked malice
wythereth his own soul.

Eccle. 10, 9.
There is nothing worse then a covetous man: Why art thou proud, O earth and
ashes? There is not a more wicked thing then to love money: for such one would
even sell his soul, and for his life every one is compelled to pull out his
own bowels.

Eccle. 31, 1, 2.
Waking after riches, pineth away the body: and the care thereof dryueth away
sleep.

This waking care breaks the sleep, as a great sickness breaks the sleep.

Esa. 3, 14, 15.
The Lord shall enter into judgment with the auncientes of his people, and the
princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyarde, the spoil of the poor is
in your houses.

What have ye to do, that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of
the poor, says the Lord, even the Lord of hosts?

Esa. 56, 11.
And these greedy Dogs can never have enough: and these Sheepheards can not
understand: for they all look to their own way, every one for his advantage,
and for his own purpose.

Esa. 5.8,
Woe unto them that join house to house, and lay field to field, till there
be no place, that ye may be placed by your selves in the myds of the earth.

As a cage is full of birds, Ier. 5, 27, 28.
so are their houses full of deceit: thereby they are become great, and waxen
rich.

They are waxen fat and shyning: they do over pass the deeds of the wicked:
they execute no judgment, no not the judgment of the Fatherles; yet they
prosper, though they execute no judgment for the poor.

Therefore will I give their wives unto others, Ier. 8, 10.
and their fields to them that shall possess them: for every one from the
least to the greatest, is even too covetous: and from the Prophet even unto the
Priest, every one deals falsely.

He has undone many: Job. 20, 19.
he has forsaken the poor, and has spoiled houses which he buylt not.

Incline mine heart unto thy testimonies, Psalm. 116, 36
and not to covetousness.

The grave and destruction can never be full: Pro, 27, 20.
So the eyes of a man can never be satisfied.

EXHORTATION.
BEtter is a little with the fear of the Lord, Pro. 15, 16.
then great treasure and trouble therewith.

A small thing unto the just man, Psalm. 37, 16.
is better then great riches to the wicked and mighty.

Let your conversation be without covetousness, Iam. 13, 5.
and be content with those things that ye have: for he has said, I will not
fail thee, neither forsake thee.

Collo. 3.5.
Mortify your members which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness, the
inordinate affection, evil concupisence, and covetousness which is idolatry.

1. Timo. 6, 9, 10.
They that will be rich, fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and
noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction.

The desire of money is the root of all evil, which while some lusted after,
they erred from the faith, and pearsed them selves through with many sorrows.

Luke 12, 33. Math. 6, 19.20, 21.
Lay not up treasures for your selves upon the earth, where the Moth and canker
corrupt, and where thieves dig through and steal.

But lay up Treasures for your selves in heaven, where neither the Moth nor
canker corrupts, and where thieves neither dig through nor steal.

For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

Ephe. 5, 3.
But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once
named amongst you, as it becomes Saints.

OF VSVRIE AND VSVRERS.
Deuteronomy. 23, 19.
THOU shall not give to usury to thy brother: as usury of money, usury of
meat, usury of any thing that is put to usury.

Exodus 22, 25.
If thou lend money to my people, that is, to the poor with thee, thou shall
not be as a Usurer unto him: ye shall not oppress him with Usury.

If thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall restore it unto him
before the Sun going down.

Thou shall take no Usury of thy brother, Leui. 25, 36, 37.
nor vantage: but thou shall fear thy God, that thy brother may live with thee.

Thou shall not give him thy money to Usury, nor lend him thy victuals for
increase.

He that increases his riches by Usury and interest, Pro. 28, 8.
gathers them for him that will be merciful unto the poor.

The poor and the usurer meet together, Pro. 29, 13.
and the Lord lyghteneth both their eyes.

Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? Psalm. 15, 1, 5.
who shall rest in thine holy mountain?

He that gives not his money unto Usury, nor takes reward against the
innocent.

In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood: Eze. 22, 12.
Thou have taken Usury, and the increase, and thou have defrawded thy
neighbors by extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord.

He that has not oppressed any, Eze. 18, 7, 8.
but has restored the pledge: He that has spoiled none by violence, but has
given his bread to the hungry, and has covered the naked with a garment, and
has not given forth upon usury, neither has taken any increase, but has
withdrawn his hand from iniquity, and has executed true judgment between
man and man, He shall surely live, says the Lord.

EXHORTATION.
Deu. 15, 7, 8.
IF one of thy brethren be poor, thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shut
thine hand from thy poor brother:

But thou shall open thine hand unto him, and shall lend him sufficient for
his need which he has.

Math. 5, 42
Give to him that asks: and from him that would borrow of thee turn not away.

Luke 6, 34, 35.
And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank shall ye have?
for even the sinners lend to sinners, to receive the like.

Wherefore, Love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, looking for nothing
again, and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the most
High: for he is kind unto the unkind, and to the evil.

OF FALSE WEIGHTES and Measures.
Deuteronomy. 25, 13, 14.
THOU shall not have in thy bag two manner of Weightes, a great and a small.

Neither thou shall have in thine house, diverse Measures, a great and a small.

Pro. 11, 1.
False Balances are an abomination unto the Lord: but a perfect Weight pleases
him.

Pro. 20, 10.
Diverse Weightes, and diverse Measures, both these are even abomination unto the
Lord.

Hose. 12, 7.
He is Canaan: the Balances of deceit are in his hand: he loves to oppress.

With him is strength and wisdom: Job. 12, 16.
he that is deceived, and he that deceives, is his.

Ye shall not do unjustly in judgment, in line, Leuit. 19, 35.
in weight, or in measure.

EXHORTATION.
A True Weight and Balance are of the Lord: Pro. 16, 11.
all the Weightes of the bag are his work. Leuit. 19, 36


Ye shall have just Balances, true Weightes, a true Ephah, and a true Hin. I am
the Lord your God, which have brought you out of the land of Egypt.

Thou shall have a right and a just Weight: Deuteronomy. 25, 15, 16.
a perfect and a just Measure shall thou have, that thy days may be lengthened
in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are
abomination unto the Lord thy God.

OF SWEARING.
THOU shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, Exo. 20, 7. Deuteronomy.
5, 11.
for the Lord will not hold him giltles, that takes his name in vain.

Also, ye shall not swear by my name falsely, Leui, 19, 12.
neither shall thou defile the name of thy God: I am the Lord.

Let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbor, and love
no false oath: Zecha. 8, 17.
for all these are the things that I hate, says the Lord.

Psalm. 15, 4.
In whose eyes a vile person is contemned: but he honors them that fears
the Lord. He that swears to his own hinderaunce, and changes not.

Ier. 5, 2.
Though they say, The Lord lives, yet do they swear falsely.

Eccle. 23, 11.
A man that uses much Swearing, shall be filled with wickedness, and the plague
shall never go from his house: when he shall offend, his fault shall be upon him;
and if he knowledge not his sin, he makes a double offense: and if he swear
in vain, he shall not be innocent, but his house shall be full of plagues.

EXHORTATION.
Ecclu. 23, 13
USE not thy mouth to ignorant rashness, or inordinate Swearing: for therein is
the occasion of sin.

Math. 5, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37
Ye have heard that it is said to them of old time, Thou shall not forswear
thy self, but shall perform thine oaths to the Lord.

But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is the throne
of God:

Nor yet by the earth: for it is his footestoole: neither by Jerusalem: for it
is the city of the great King.

Neither shall thou swear by thine head, because thou can not make one hair
white or black.

But let your communication be, Yea, yea: Nay, nay. For whatsoever is more then
these, comes of evil.

But before all things, my brethren, Swear not, Iam. 5, 12.
neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any other oath: but let your yea be
yea, and your nay, nay, least ye fall into condemnation.

Accustom not thy mouth to Swearing, Ecclu. 23, 9.
for in it there are many faults: neither take up for a custom the naming of
the holy one: for thou shall not be unpunished for such things.

OF LYING.
YE are of your father the Devil, John. 8, 44.
and the lusts of your father ye will do: He has been a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When
he speaks a lie, then speaks he of his own: for he is a liar, and the
father thereof.

They have sharpened their tongues like a Serpent: Adders poison is under their
lips. Psalm. 140, 3.


Take from me the way of Lying: Psalm. 119, 29
and grant me graciously thy law.

A faithful witness will not lie: Pro. 14, 5.
but a false record will speak lies.

A false witness shall not be unpunished, Pro. 19, 5.
and he that speaks lies shall not escape.

Now therefore, behold, 1. kin. 22, 23.
the Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy Prophets, and
the Lord has appointed evil against thee.

The Lord shall have no pleasure in their young men, Esa. 9, 17.
neither will he have compassion of the fatherles and their widows: for every
one is an hypocrite, and wicked, and every mouth speaks folly.

Job, 13, 4.
For in deed ye forge lies, and all you are physicians of no value.

Pro. 17, 4.
The wicked gives heed to false lips, and a liar harkeneth to the naughty
tongue.

Esa. 19, 14.
The Lord has mingled among them the spirits of errors, and they have caused
Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken man erreth in his vomyte.

Pro. 12, 22.
The lying lips are an abomination to the Lord: but they that deal truly,
are his delight.

Psalm. 120, 2.
Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue.

Act. 5, 3, 4.
Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart, that thou should lie unto the
holy Ghost, and keep away part of the price of the possession?

Whiles it remained, appertained it not unto thee? and after it was sold, was
it not in thine own power? How is it that thou have conceived this thing in
thine heart? thou have not lied unto men, but unto God.

Eccle. 20, 23, 24.25.
A lie is a wicked shame in a man: yet it is often in the mouth of the unwise.

A thief is better, then a man that is accustomed to lie: but they both shall
have destruction to heritage.

The conditions of liars are dishonest, and their shame is ever with them.

EXHORTATION.
CAst off lying, Ephe. 4, 25.
and speak every man truth unto his neighbor: for we are members one of
another.

Lie not one to another, Collo. 3, 9.
seeing that ye have put off the old man, with his works.

Blessed is the man that makes the Lord his trust, Psalm. 40, 4.
and regards not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.

Sow not a lie against thy brother, Ecclus. 7, 12.
nor do the same against thy friend.

These are the things that ye shall do, Zecha. 8, 16.
Speak ye every man the truth unto his neighbor: execute judgment truly,
and uprightly in your gates.

Keep thy tongue from evil, Psalm. 34, 13.
and thy lips that they speak no guyle.

Use not to make any manner of lie: Ecclus. 7, 13.
for the custom thereof is not good.

If any man long after life, and to see good days, 1. Pet. 3, 10.
let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no
guyle.

OF BACKBITERS and Tale-bearers.
THOU shall not walk about with Tales among the people. Leui. 19, 16.
Thou shall not stand against the blood of thy neighbor: I am the Lord.

A Backbiter defiles his own soul, Ecclu. 21, 28
and is hated wheresoever he is: But he that keeps his tongue and is
discreet, shall come to honor.

Pro. 18, 8. and 26, 22.
The words of a Talebearer are as flatterings, and they go down into the
bowels of the belly.

Pro. 11, 13.
He that goes about as a Slanderer, discovers a secret: but he that is of a
faithful heart, concealeth a matter.

Psalm. 140, 11.
The Backbiter shall not be established upon the earth: evil shall hunt the
cruel man to destruction.

Eccle. 10, 11.
If the Serpent bite when he is not charmed, no better is a Babbler.

EXHORTATION.
Eccle. 28, 13.
Abhor the Slanderer and double tongued: for such have destroyed many that
were at peace.

Eccle. 5, 15.
Be not counted a Talebearer, and lie not in wait with thy tongue: for shame
and repentance follow the thief, and an evil condemnation is over him that is
double tongued: But he that is a Backbiter shall be hated, envied, and confounded.

Psalm. 15, 3.
Lord, Who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? etc.

He that slandereth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor
receives a false report against his neighbor.

OF SCORNING and Mocking.
A Scorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not: Pro. 14, 6.
but knowledge is easy to him that will understand.

The wicked thought of a fool is sin, Pro. 24, 9.
and the Scorner is an abomination unto men.

When the Scorner is punished, Pro. 19, 25. and 21, 11.
the foolish is wise: and when one instructs the wise, he will receive
knowledge.

With the scornful he scorneth, Pro. 3, 34.
but gives grace to the humble.

O Lord, thou have deceived me, Ier. 20, 7.
and I am deceived: thou art stronger then I, and have prevailed: I am in
derision daily, every one mocketh me.

The Son of man came eating and drinking, Mat. 11, 19.
and they say, Behold a glutton, and a drinker of wine, a friend unto
Publicans and Sinners: but wisdom is justified of her children.

The eye that mocketh his father, Pro. 30, 17.
and despises the instruction of his mother, let the Ravens of the valley
pluck it out, and the young Eagles eat it.

He that reproves a Scorner, Pro. 9, 7.
purchases to himself shame: and he that rebukes the wicked, gets
himself a blot.

And others mocked, and said, Act. 2, 13.
They are full of new wine.

And the people stood and behold, Luke 23, 35.
and the Rulers mocked him with them, saying, He saved others, let him save him
self, if he be the Christ, the chosen of God.

Luke 24, 36.
The Soldiers also mocked him, and came and offered him vinegar.

Job. 12, 4.
I am as one mocked of his neighbor, who calls upon God, and he hears him:
The just and the upright is laughed to scorn.

Pro. 13, 12.
A Scorner loves not him that rebukes him, neither will he go unto the wise.

EXHORTATION.
Ecclu. 7, 11.
LAugh no man to scorn in the heaviness of his soul: for God which sees all
things, is he that can bring down, and set up again.

Pro. 13, 1.
A wise son will obey the instruction of his father: but a scorner will hear
no rebuke.

Pro. 1, 22.
O ye foolish, how long will ye love foolishnes? and the scornful take their
pleasure in scorning, and the fools hate knowledge.

Pro. 17, 5.
He that mocketh the poor, reprocheth him that made him: and he that reioceth
at destruction, shall not be unpunished.

Pro. 9, 8.
Rebuke not a scorner, least he hate thee: but rebuke a wise man, and he will
love thee.

Psalm. 14, 6.
You have made a mock at the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his
trust.

OF ANGER AND WRATH.
AN Angry man stirs up strife: Pro. 15, 18.
but he that is slow to wrath, appeaseth strife.

He that is slow to Anger, Pro. 16, 32.
is better then the mighty man: and he that rules his own mind, is better
then he that wins a city.

An Angry man styrreth up strife, Pro. 29, 22.
and a furious man abounds in transgression.

The discretion of a man deferreth his anger; Pro. 19, 11.
and his glory is, to pass by an offense.

There is not a more wicked head, Ecclu. 25, 17 18, 19, 20.
then the head of a Serpent: and there is no Wrath above the Wrath of an enemy.

I had rather dwell with a Lion and Dragon, then to keep house with a wicked
wife.

The wickedness of a woman changes her face, and makes her countenance black
as a sack.

Her husband is sitting amongst his neighbors, because of her he sigheth sore
or he beware.

It is better to dwell in the wilderness, Pro. 21, 19.
then with a contentious and angry woman.

He that is hasty to Anger, commits folly: Pro. 14, 17.
and a busy body is hated.

As the matter of the fire is, so it burns; Ecclu. 28, 10
and man's anger is according to his power: and according to his riches his
anger increases; and the more vehement the anger is, the more is he inflamed.

EXHORTATION.
Eccle. 7, 11.
BE not thou of an hasty spirit, to be angry: for anger rests in the bosom
of fools.

Psalm. 37, 8.
Cease from Anger, and leave of Wrath: fret not thy self also to do evil.

Ephe. 4, 26.
Be angry, but sin not: Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath.

Ecclu. 8, 16.
Strive not with him that is angry, and go not with him into the wilderness:
for blood is nothing in his sight: And where there is no help, he will
overthrow thee.

Pro. 22, 24, 25.
Make no friendshyp with an angry man, neither go with the furious man,

Least thou learn his ways, and receive destruction to thy soul.

Math. 5, 22.
I say unto you, Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be
culpable of judgment. And whosoever says unto his brother, Raca, shall be
worthy to be punished by the counsel. And whosoever shall say, Fool, shall be
worthy to be punished with hell fire.

OF ENVY, HATRED, and Strife.
Eccle. 14, 8.
THE envious man has a wicked look: he turns away his face, and enuieth men.

Ecclu. 30, 24
Envy and Wrath shorten the life: and carefulnes brings age before the time.

Eat not the bread of him that has an evil eye, Pro. 23, 6, 7.
neither desire his dayntie meats:

For as though he thought it in his heart, so will he say unto thee, Eat and
drink: but his heart is not with thee.

As the coal makes burning coals, Pro. 26, 21, 26, 24.
and wood a fire: so the contentious man is apt to kindle strife.

Hatred may be covered by deceit: but the malice thereof shall be discovered in
the congregation.

He that hates, will counterfeit with his lips, but in his heart he lays up
deceit.

Better is a dry morsel, if peace be with it, Pro. 17, 1.
then an house full of sacrifices with strife.

It is a man's honor to cease from strife: Pro 20, 3.
but every fool will be meddling.

Where envying and strife is, there is sedition, Iam. 3, 16.
and all manner of evil works.

Neither will I have to do with consuming envy, Wisd. 6, 23.
for such a man shall not be pertaker of wisdom.

EXHORTATION.
LEt us not be desirous of vain glory, Galla. 5, 26.
provoking one another, envying one another.

Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart: Leui. 19, 17.
but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin.

Should a man bear hatred against a man, Eccle. 28, 3.
and desire forgiveness of the Lord.

Beware of Strife, and thou shall make thy sins fewer: for an angry man
kindles Strife.

2. Tim. 2.23
Put away foolysh and unlearned questions, knowing that they engender Strife.

Romans 13, 13.
So that we walk honestly, as in the day, not in gluttony and drunkenness,
neither in chambering or wantonness, nor in strife and envying.

OF SLOVTH AND IDLENESS.
Pro. 26, 15.
THE Slothful hides his hand in his bosom, and it greeueth him to put it
again to his mouth.

Pro. 18, 9,
He that is slothful in his work, is even the brother of him that is a great
waster.

Pro. 19, 15.
Slothfulness causes to fall a sleep, and a deceitful person shall be
affamyshed.

Pro. 21, 25.
The desire of the slothful, slays him: for his hands refuse to work.

Pro. 20, 4.
The slothful will not plough because of winter: therefore shall he beg in
Summer, but have nothing.

Pro. 12, 11.
He that tilleth his Land, shall be satisfied with bread: but he that follows the
Idle, is destitute of understanding.

Eccl. 10, 17
Seek not excuses when thou should do thy work, neither be ashamed thereof
through pride, in time of adversity.

Eccl. 22, 1, 2.
A slothful man is like a fylthy Stone, which every man mocketh at for his
shame.

A slouthful man is to be compared to the doung of Oxen: and every one that
takes it up, will shake it out of his hand.

By slothfulness the roof of the house goes to decay: and by the idleness
of the hands, Eccl. 10, 18
the house droppeth through.

EXHORTATION.
MY Son, in all thy works be quick, Eccl. 31, 22
so shall there no sickness come unto thee.

Go to the Pismyre, O Sluggarde, Behold her ways, Pro. 6, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and be wise.

Be not slothful to do service, fervent in spirit, Romans 12, 11.
serving the Lord.

When we were with you, this we warned you off, 2. These. 3, 10, 11, 12.
That if there were any which would not work, that he should not eat.

For we heard, that there are some which walk among you inordinately, and
work not at all, but are busy bodies.

Therefore, them that are such, we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus
Christ, that they work with quietness, and eat their own bread.

And that ye study to be quiet, 1. These. 4, 11.
and to meddle with your own business, and to work with your own hands, as
we command you.

Ye know that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that
were with me. Act. 20, 34.


1. Cor. 4, 12.
And labor, working with our own hands: we are reviled, and yet we bless: we
are persecuted, and suffer it.

1. These. 2, 9.
For ye remember, brethren, our labor and travail: for we labored day and
night, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, and preached unto
you the Gospel of God.

OF THE TONGVE, and evil speaking.
Iam. 3, 2, 5, 6, 8.
IN many things we sin all. If any man sin not in word, he is a perfect
man, and able to bridle all the body.

The Tongue is a little member, and bosteth of great things: behold how great
a thing a little fire kindles.

The Tongue is fire, yea a world of wickedness: So is the Tongue set amongst
our members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of
nature, and it is set on fire of hell.

The Tongue can no man tame. It is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.

Eccle. 5, 14.
Honor and shame is in the talk, and the Tongue of a man causes him to fall.

Pro. 12, 13.
The evil man is snared by the wickedness of his lyppes: but the just shall come
out of adversity.

Pro. 13, 2.
A man shall eat good things by the fruit of his mouth: but the soul of the
trespassers, shall suffer violence.

He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life: Pro. 13, 3.
but he that opens his lyppes, destruction shall be to him.

A false Tongue hates the afflicted, Pro. 26, 28.
and a flattering mouth causes ruin.

No constancy is in their mouth: Psalm. 5, 9.
within they are very corrupt: their throat is an open Sepulcher, and they
flatter with their tongues.

The stroke of the rod makes marks in the flesh: Eccle. 28, 17, 18, 19.
but the stroke of the Tongue breaks the bones.

There be many that have perished by the edge of the sword: but not so many as
have fallen by the tongue.

Well is him that is kept from an evil tongue, and comes not in the anger
thereof, which has not drawn in that yoke, neither has been bound in the
bands thereof.

The man that is accustomed to opprobrious words, Ecclu. 23, 15
will never be reformed all the days of his life.

Well is him that dwells with a wife of understanding, Ecclus. 25, 8.
and that has not fallen with his tongue, and that has not served such as are
unworthy of him.

Blessed is the man that has not fallen by the word of his mouth, Ecclus. 14,
1.
and is not tormented with the sorrow of sin.

He that refrayneth his tongue, Ecclu. 19, 6.
may live with a troublesome man: and he that hates babbling, shall have less
evil.

Ecclu. 19, 16
A man falls with his Tongue, but not with his will: and who is he that has
not offended in his Tongue?

EXHORTATION.
1. Pet. 3, 10.
IF a man long after life, and to see good days, let him refrain his Tongue
from evil, and his lips that they speak no guyle.

Ephe. 4, 31.
Let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath; railing and evil speaking, be put
away from you, with all maliciousness.

Ephe. 5, 4.
Neither filthynesse, neither foolish talking, neither jesting, which are
things not comely, but rather giving of thanks.

Eccle. 28, 25, 26.
Bind up thy silver and gold, and weigh thy words in a balance, and make a
door and a bar, and a sure bridle for thy mouth.

Beware that thou slide not by it, and so fall before him that lies in wait,
and thy fall be incureable, even unto death.

1. Pet. 4, 11.
If any man speak, let him talk as the words of God.

Pro. 4, 24.
Put away from thee a froward mouth, and put wicked lyppes far from thee.

Collo. 3, 8.
Now put ye away even all these things, wrath, anger, maliciousnes, cursed
speaking, filthy speaking, out of your mouth.

OF FEIGNED FRIENDS and Friendshyp.
LET every one take heed of his neighbor, Ier. 9, 4.
and trust you not in any brother: for every brother will use deceit, and
every Frinde will deal deceitfully.

Some man is a Friend for his own occasion, Ecclus. 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
and will not abide in the day of thy trouble.

And there is some Friend that turns to enmity, and takes part against
thee, and in contention he will declare thy shame.

Again, some Friend is but a companion at thy table, and in the day of thy
affliction he continues not:

But in thy prosperity he wylbe as thou thy self, and will use liberty over
thy servants.

If thou be brought low, he wylbe against thee, and will hide him self from
thy face.

Every Friend says, I am a Friend unto him also: Ecclus. 37, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
but there is some Friend, which is only a Friend in name.

Remains there not heaviness unto death, when a companion and Friend is turned
to an enemy?

There is some companion which in prosperity rejoices with his Friend: but in
the time of trouble is against him.

There is some companion that helps his Friend for the bellies sake, and
takes up the buckler against the enemy.

Pro. 27, 10.
Thine own friend, and thy fathers friend, forsake thou not; neither enter
into thy brothers house in the day of thy calamity: for bettet is a neighbor
that is near, then a brother far off.

Ecclu. 27, 16
Who so discovers secrets, loses his credit, and finds no friend after
his will.

Ecclu. 6, 1.
Be not of a friend, thy neighbors enemy: for such shall have an evil name,
shame, and reproach: and he shall be in infamy as the wicked, that has a
double tongue.

EXHORTATION.
Ecclu, 6, 7.
IF thou gettest a Friend, prove him first; and be not hasty to credit him.

Ecclu. 27, 17
Love thy Friend, and be faithful unto him: but if thou bewrayest his
secrets, thou shall not get him again.

Pro. 18, 24.
A man that has Friends, ought to show himself friendly: for a Friend is
nearer then a brother.

Ecclu. 6, 6, 14, 15, 16, 17
Hold Friendshyp with many; nevertheless have but one counsaylour of a
thousand.

A faithful Friend is a strong defense; and he that finds such one, finds
a treasure.

A faithful Friend ought not to be changed for any thing: and the weight of
gold and silver is not to be compared to the goodness of his faith.

A faithful Friend is the medicine of life and immortality; and they that
fear the Lord, shall find him.

Who so fears the Lord, shall direct his friendshyp aright; and as his own
self, so shall his friend be.

Give not over thy Friend for any good, Ecclu. 7, 18.
nor thy true brother, for the gold of Ophir.

Forget not thy Friend in thy mind, Ecclu. 37, 6.
and think upon him in thy riches.

Forsake not an old Friend; Eccle. 9, 12.
for the new shall not be like him: a new Friend is as new wine: when it is
old, thou shall drink it with pleasure.

Do good unto thy Friend before thou die, Ecclu. 14, 13
and according to thine ability stretch out thine hand, and give him.

OF WITCHES and Sorcerers.
IF a man or woman have a spirit of divination, Leui. 20, 27.
or south saying in them, they shall die the death: they shall stone them to
death; their blood shall be upon them.

Saul said unto his servants, 1. Sam. 28, 7, 8.
Seek me a woman that has a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and ask
of her. And his servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman at En-dor, that
has a familiar spirit.

Then Saul changed him self, and put on other raiment, and he went, and two
men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and he said, I pray thee,
conjecture unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring me him up whom I shall
name unto thee.

Josiah also took away them that had familiar spirits, and the soothsayers,
and the images, 2. kin. 23, 24
and the idols, and all the abominations that were espied in the land of Judah
and in Jerusalem, to perform the words of the Law, which were written in the
book of Hilkiah the Priest, found in the house of the Lord.

Act. 8, 9, 11.
And there was in the city, a certain man called Simon, which used Witchcraft,
and bewitched the people of Samaria, saying, That he himself was some great
man.

And they gave heed unto him, because that of long time he had bewitched them
with sorceries.

Exodus 12, 11.
Pharaoh called also for his Wisemen and Sorcerers: and those Charmers also of
Egypt did in like manner with their enchauntmentes.

1. Sam. 28, 3.
And Saul had put away the Sorcerers and Soothsayers out of the land.

Act. 13, 6.
When they had gone throughout the I Will unto Paphus, they found a certain
Sorcerer a false Prophet, being a Jew, named Bariesus.

Act. 19, 13, 16.
Certain of the vagabonde Jews, exorcists, took in hand to name over them
which had evil spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by
Jesus, whom Paul preaches.

And the man in whom the evil spirit was, ran on them, and overcame them, and
prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked, and wounded.

Wisd. 17, 7.
And the illusions of the Magical arts were brought down, and it was a most
shameful reproach, for the boasting of their knowledge.

EXHORTATION.
YE shall not regard them that work with Spirits, neither Soothsayers: Leui.
19, 31.
ye shall not seek to them, to be defiled by them: I am the Lord your God.

If any turn after such as work with Spirits, Leui. 20, 6.
and after Soothsayers, to go a whooring after them, then will I set my face
against that person, and will cut him off from among his people. Deuteronomy. 18, 10,
11, 12.


Let none be found among you that makes his son or his daughter to go
through the fire, or that uses Witchcraft, or a regarder of Times, or a marker
of the flying of Fowls, or a Sorcerer,

Or a Charmer, or that counsaileth with Spirits, or a Soothsayer, or that
asks counsel at the dead.

For all that do such things, are abomination unto the Lord: and because of
these abominations, the Lord thy God does cast them out before thee.

OF FOOLS.
THE way of a Fool is right in his own eyes: but he that hears counsel,
is wise. Pro. 12, 15, 16.


A Fool in a day shall be known by his anger: but he that covers shame, is
wise.

The Fool has said in his heart, Psalm. 53, 1.
There is no God. They have corrupted and done abominable wickedness: there is
none that does good.

Eccle. 19, 11, 12, 28.
A Fool trauaileth when he has heard a thing, as a woman that is about to
bring forth a child.

As an Arrow that sticks in ones thygh, so is a word in a Fools heart.

A man's garment, and his excessive laughter, and going, declare what person he
is.

Eccle. 27, 13.
The talking of Fools is grecuous, and their sport is in the pleasure of sin.

Pro. 14, 15, 16.
The foolysh will believe every thing: but the prudent will consider his steps.

A wise man fears, and departs from evil: but a Fool rages, and is
careless.

Pro. 27, 22.
Though thou should bray a Fool in a mortar among wheat, brayed with a
pestle, yet will not his foolyshnes depart from him.

Eccle. 10, 3, 12, 13.
Also, when the Fool goes by the way, his heart fails, and he tells unto all that he is a fool,

The words of the mouth of a wise man have grace: but the lips of a Fool
devour himself.

The beginning of the words of his mouth, is foolyshnesse: and the later end
of his mouth, is wicked madness.

Eccle. 21, 14, 16, 18, 19.
The inner part of a Fool is like a broken vessel: he can keep no knowledge
whiles he lives.

The talking of a Fool is like the burden in the way: but there is comelines
in the talk of a wise man.

As is an house destroyed, so is wisdom unto a Fool: and the knowledge of
the unwise, is as words without order.

Doctrine unto Fools, is as fetters on the feet, and like manacles upon the
right hand.

A Fool lyfteth up his voice with laughter: Ecclu. 21, 20 21, 22, 23, 24
but a wise man does scarce smyle secretly.

Whosoever despises wisdom and discipline, Wisd. 3, 11.
is miserable, and their hope is vain, and their labors are foolysh, and
their work unprofitable.

All such as regarded not Wisdom, Wisd. 10, 8.
had not only this hurt, that they knew not the things which were good, but
also left behind them unto men, a memorial of their foolishnes; so that in
the things wherein they sinned, they can not lie hid.

Foolysh men will not take hold upon her: Ecclu. 15, 7.
but such as have understanding, will meet her: the sinners will not see her.

EXHORTATION.
DEpart from the Foolish man, Pro. 14, 7, 9.
when thou perceiuest not in him the lips of knowledge.

The Fool makes a mock of sin: but among the righteous, there is favor.

Unto the Horse belongs a whipp, Pro. 26, 3, 4.5.
to the Ass a bridle; and a rod to the Fools back.

Answer not a Fool according to his foolishnes, least thou also be like him.

Answer a Fool according to his foolishnes, least he be wise in his own
conceit.

Take no counsel at a Fool, Ecclu. 8, 17.
for he can not keep a thing secret.

Whosoever tells a Fool of Wisdom, Ecclus. 22, 10 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
is as a man which speaks to one that is a sleep: when he has told his
tale, he says, What is the matter?

Pro. 9, 6.
Forsake your way ye foolysh, and ye shall live: and walk in the way of
understanding.

OF WICKED AND EVIL MEN.
Esa. 57, 20.
THE Wicked are like the raging Sea that can not rest, whose waters cast up mire
and dyrt.

Esa. 59, 7.
Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shead innocent blood: their
thoughts are wicked thoughts; desolation and destruction is in their paths.

Ier. 5, 26.
Among my people are found wicked persons that lay wait, as he that sets
snares: they have made a pit to catch men.

Psalm. 36, 1, 3, 4.
Wickedness says to the wicked man, even in mine heart, that there is no fear
of God before his eyes.

The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he has left off to
understand, and to do good.

He imagines mischief upon his bed: he sets him self upon a way that is
not good, and does not abhor evil.

Job. 24, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Some remove the land marks.

They lead away the Ass of the fatherles, and take the wydowes Ox to pledge.

They make the poor to turn out of the way.

Eccle. 9, 3.
This is evil among all that is done under the Sun, that there is one
condition to all: and also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and
madness is in their hearts whiles they live, and after that they go to the dead.

The way of the wicked is as the darkness: Pro. 4, 19.
they know not wherein they shall fall.

A wicked soul destroys him that has it, Ecclus. 6, 4.
and makes him to be laughed to scorn of his enemies, and brings him to the
portion of the ungodly.

As they regard not to know God, Romans 1, 28, 29, 30.
even so God delivered them up unto a reprobate sense, to do those things
which were not convenient.

Being full of all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, couetosnes,
maliciousnes, full of envy, of murder, of debate, of deceit, taking all
things in the evil part, whisperers,

Backbyters, haters of God, doers of wrong, proud boasters, inuenters of evil
things, disobedient to parents, without understanding, covenant breakers,
without natural affection, such as can never be appeased, merciles.

EXHORTATION.
ENter not into the way of the Wicked: Pro. 4, 14, 15 16, 17, 18.
and walk not in the way of evil men.

Avoid it, and go not by it: turn from it, and pass by.

For they can not sleep, except they have done evil, and their sleep
departs, except they cause some to fall.

He that imagines to do evil, Pro. 24, 8.
men shall call him the author of wickedness.

Pro 3, 33.
The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked: but he blesses the
habitation of the righteous.

Psalm. 5, 4.
Thou art not a God that loves wickedness: neither shall evil dwell with thee.

Psalm. 7, 15, 16
He has made a pit and dug it, and is falled into the pit that he made.

His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his cruelty shall fall
upon his own pate.

Eccle. 4, 20.
My Son, make much of Time, and eschew the thing that is evil.

Eccle. 7, 1, 2.
Do no evil, so shall no harm come unto thee.

Depart from the thing that is wicked, and sin. etc.

Eccle. 15, 11.
Say not thou, It is through the Lord that I turn back: for thou ought not
to do the things that he hates.

Eccle. 20, 17.
The fall of a Pauement is very sudden: so shall the fall of the wicked come
hastily.

Eccle. 27, 26.27.
Whosoever diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that lays a stone in his
neighbous way, shall stumble thereon: and he that lays a snare for another,
shall be taken in it himself.

He that works evil, shall be wrapped in evil, and shall not know from whence
they come unto him.

Romans 12, 9, 21.
Abhor that which is evil, and cleave unto that which is good.

Be not overcome of evil: but overcome evil with goodness.

OF HARD, STONY, and Stubborn hearts.
THey made their hearts as an adamant stone, Zecha. 7, 12
least they should hear the Law, and the words which the Lord of hosts sent
in his spirit by the ministry of the former Prophets: therefore came there a
great wrath from the Lord of hosts.

O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? Ier. 5, 3.
thou have stricken them, but they have not sorowed: thou have consumed them,
but they have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder
then a stone, and have refused to return.

Make the heart of this people fat, Esa 6, 10.
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes least they see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and
he heal them.

I know that thou art obstinate, Esa. 48, 4.
and thy neck is an Iron sinew, and thy brow brass.

I will hardon Pharaohs heart, Exodus 7, 3, 4.
and multiply my miracles and my wonders in the land of Egypt.

And Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay mine hand upon Egypt,
and bring out mine armies, even my people the children of Israel, out of the
land of Egypt, by great judgments.

It came of the Lord to harden their hearts that they should come against
Israel in battle, Ioshu. 11, 20.
to the intent that they should destroy them utterly, and show them no mercy,
but that they should bring them to naught, as the Lord God commanded Moses.

Deuteronomy. 29, 19
So that when he hears the words of this curse, he bless him self in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, although I walk according to the stubbornnes
of mine own heart; thus addyng drunkenness to thirst.

Pro 29.1.
A man that hardens his neck when he is rebuked, shall sodaynely be
destroyed, and can not be cured.

Job. 21, 14, 15
They say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we
have, if we should pray unto him?

Eccle. 3, 27, 28, 29.
A stubborn heart shall fare evil at the last: and he that loves danger, shall
perish therein.

An heart that goes two ways, shall not prosper: and he that is froward of
heart, shall stumble therein.

An obstinate heart shall be laden with sorrows, and the wicked man shall heap
sin upon sin.

1. Sam. 16, 7.
The Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, nor on the height of
his stature, because I have refused him: for God sees not as man sees; for
man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart.

Rom 9, 18.
He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.

John. 12, 40. Mat. 13, 14. Mark. 4, 12. Luke 8, 10. Act. 28, 26.
He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see
with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and
I should heal them.

Ye stiffnecked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always resisted
the holy Ghost: Act. 7, 51.
as your fathers did, so do you.

EXHORTATION.
WHerefore as the holy Ghost says, Heb. 3, 7, 12, 13.
To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the
provocation, according to the tentation in the Wilderness.

Take heed brethren, least at any time there be in any of you an evil heart,
and unfaithful, to depart away from the living God.

But exhort one another daily, while it is called To day, least any of you be
hardoned through the deceitfulness of sin.

This day if ye hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Heb. 4.7.


A new heart will I give you, Ezec. 36., 26
and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart
out of your body, and I will give you a heart of flesh.

And I will give them one heart, Ezec. 11, 19.
and will put a new spirit within their bowelles: and will take the stony heart
out of their bodies, and will give them an heart of flesh.

And I will give them one heart, and one way, Ier. 32, 39.
that they may fear me for ever, for the wealth of them, and of their children
after them.

Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, Deuteronomy. 10, 16
and harden your necks no more.

OF THE WORKS OF DARKNESS and works of the Flesh.
Genesis 6, 5.
THE Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth:

Genesis 8, 21.
And all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only evil
continually.

Ephe. 4, 18, 19.
Having their cogitation darkoned, and being strangers from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their heart:

Which being past feeling, have given them selves unto wantonness, to work
all uncleanness even with greedines.

Romans 1, 21.
Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolysh heart was
full of darkness.

Mark. 7, 21, 22.
For from within, even out of the heart of man, proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders, theftes, covetousness, wickedness,
deceit, uncleanness, a wicked eye, backbyting, pride, foolyshnesse: All these
evil things come from within, and defyle a man.

Gall. 5, 19, 20
The works of the Flesh are manifest, which are adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations,
wrath, contentions, seditions, herisies, envy, murder, drunkenness, gluttony,
and such like, whereof I tell you before, as I also have told you before, that
they which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, Math. 7, 23.
have not we by thy name prophesied? and by thy name cast out deuyls? and by
thy name done many great works?

Then shall ye begin to say, Luke 13, 26.27.
We have eaten and dronken in thy presence, and thou have taught us in our
streets.

But he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence ye are: Depart from me
all ye workers of iniquity.

Away from me all ye workers of iniquity: Psalm. 6, 8.
for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping.

Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, Math. 25, 41
Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
devil and his angels.

EXHORTATION.
THE night is past, and the day is at hand: Romans 13, 12.
let us therefore cast away the works of darkness, and let us put on the
armor of light.

And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even reprove
them rather. Ephe. 5, 11.


The grace of God, Tit. 2, 11, 12
that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared,

And teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts; and that
we should live soberly and righteously, in this present world.

Walk in the spirit, Gall. 5, 16.
and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Gal. 5, 22, 23 24, 25.
The fruits of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperancie: against such there is no law.

For they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections.

If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit.

Math. 7, 13.
Enter in at the straight gate: for it is the wide gate, and broad way that
leads to destruction: and many there be which go in thereat.

Luke 13, 24.
Strive to enter in at the straight gate: for many, I say; unto you, will seek
to enter in, and shall not be able.

FINIS.
A GODLY PRAYER AND CONFESSION OF our Sins unto God.
O MOST merciful Lord God, and my tender and dear Father, vouchsafe I heartily
beseech thee, to look down with thy fatherly eyes of pity upon me a most
vile and wretched sinner, which lie here prostrate in heart before the feate of
thy bottomless mercy: for I confess I have most grievously sinned against
the throne of thy glory, and before thee (O Father) in so much as I am no more
worthy to be called thy son: nevertheless, forasmuch as thou art the God and
Father of all comfort, and desire not the death of a sinner, but like a true
Samaritan take thought for my seely wounded soul: Make me, I pray thee, by
infunding thy precious oil of comfort into my wounds; joyfully to run with
the lost Son, unto the lap of thine everlasting pity: For lo, thou art
my hope and trust, in whom I only repose my self, having in thee full
confidence, and steadfast faith: and so I say, with a very true and faithful
heart, trusting only in thy mercy. I believe in thee O God the Father, in thee
O God the Son, and in thee O God the holy Ghost; three persons, and one true,
and also very God; besides whom, I acknowledge none other God in heaven above,
nor in the earth beneath: yea, and I poor miserable sinner do accuse my self
unto thee dear Father, that I have sore and greeuosly offended thy Almighty
goodness and majesty, in the committing of mine abundant and manifold sins
and wretchedness, which exceed the number of the Sands in the Sea, and have
not kept the least of thy most godly and blessed commandments, like as thy
righteousness may require and demand the same of me: which if thou (Lord)
should so require, there were no help or hope in me, but that I must needs
perysh and be damned for ever. I confess also, that I have not honored thee
like my God, nor dread thee like my Lord; loved thee like my Father, nor
trusted in thee like my creator and Savior. Thy holy and dreadful name (unto
whom all honor and glory of duty belongs) have I used in vain: I have not
sanctified the holy days with works which be acceptable unto thee, nor in
instructing my neighbor in virtue accordingly. I have not honored my
Parents, nor been obedient unto them. The high powers and rulers (which take
their authority of thee) I have not been willingly obedient unto. I have not
kept mine heart pure and clean from man slaughter, theft, adultery, envy,
malice, hatred, disdaynefulnes, pride, covetousness, drunkenness, gluttony,
wantonness, backbyting, slander, falsehood, and false-witnes bearyng: but
have in my heart and mind wyshed and desired my neighbors goods and things.
I have followed the great Prince of this world Satan (which has been a liar
even from the beginning) in concupisence of the flesh, in deceitfulness, in
all kind of evil and wicked living, in thought, word, and deed, in
despair, and also mysbeliefe: But in what manner soever that I have offended,
and sinned against thy eternal Majesty (for no man knows thoroughly his
sins, as the prophet witnesses) whether it has been by day or else by night;
yea, even from my chyldhood unto this day, were it in words, works, or
thoughts, secretly or openly; O most merciful God, and heavenly Father, I am
most sorry for it, even from the bottom of my heart: yea, and my soul mourns
for very sorrow within me (O most merciful Father) that I am not a thousand
times more soryer then I am: Howbeit, in token of my great and unfeigned
repentance (though all hearts be known well enough unto thee) I do cry and
call unto thee for refuge in the bitterness of my heart and soul, Lord God and
Father, have mercy: Lord God and Son, have mercy: and Lord God holy Ghost,
have mercy. Spare me, good Lord, of thine infinite mercy, both now and all
the days of my life; and grant me of thine abundant grace, so as I may
change my sinful life, and put off the old man with all his evil
concupisence, and deceivable lusts; and that I may die unto the world, and
so go forth in a new life. Strengthen thou me, O Lord, I humbly beseech
thee, in a true, humble, lowly, and perfect heart, faithfully to love, hope,
and trust in thee. Give my soul (most heavenly Father) the grace of thy holy
spirit, to desire thee only, in thee only to rejoice, and repose my self:
and that I may utterly renounce and forsake the vanities and vain affiance and
delights of this world, so that thou may find me ready with the good
Servant in the midnight of my death, which shall sodaynely steal upon me like
a thief ear I be aware: Be thou unto me at that time of need (O Lord) a
Tower of strength, a Palace of refuge, and a defencible God; namely against
the face of the feende, who like a roaring Lion, will be then most ready to
devour me: and against desperation, which then will be busy to grieve and
assail me. Grant me most merciful Savior, that when death shall shut up
the eyes of this my mortal body, yet that the eyes of my soul may still
behold and look upon thee with a lively and perfect faith; that when death
has taken away the use of my tongue and outward senses, yet that my heart and
soul may cry and say, unto thee, O Lord into thy hands I give and commit my
soul. Lord Jesus receive my spirit unto thee: Fetch then again, Lord God the
Father, I humbly beseech thee, that which thy wisdom and puissant might has
shapen and fashioned: Fetch then again, Lord God the Son, that which thou
have so wisely and carefully governed, and bought with the dear price of thy
most precious blood: Take then again, thou Lord God holy Ghost, that which
thou have kept and preserved so lovingly in this region of sin, and vale of
misery: Unto whom (as of right and duty belongs) be all honor, power,
praise, and glory, for ever and ever, world without end. Amen.

Despise not a man that turns himself away from sin, nor cast him not in
the teeth withal: but remember that we are all worthy blame. Ecclus. 8.5.
Imprinted at London by William White. 1598.


