A true Report of the gener^^ Imbarrement of all the English Ships, under the
domin^^^ of the king of Spain: and of the dangerous adventure, a^^
wonderful deliverance, of a Ship of London called the Viol^^ being of the
burden of 130. Tun: by the especial prouid^^^^ of God, from the violence of
Spanyardes, at a Port called (...) Sebastian in Biskay: which adventure was
enterprised (...) 25. of May 1585. and was finished the 29. of the same month,
without hurt either to men, or Ship.

warship

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf for Thomas Butter, and are to sold at his shop
near S. Austins gate, 1585.

I Have offered here unto thy sight (Gentle Reader) some kind of taste, such
as it is, of the general Imbarme^t of al our English Ships now wrongfully
withhelde, ^^^lt the Ports of Spain, from our countrymen, by their Kings
Commission. For me, being a poor English subject, omnium postremissimus, to
define, or search the cause it appertains not: only of this am I sure, that
no such trouble, or adverse perturbation happens at any time unto gods
people, which his provident wisdom does not determine, both foreseeinge the
beginning, the cause, the means, and continuance, and limiting the end or
escape out of the same. Wherein neither chance, nor fortune, nor luck, nor
disposition of man has mastery, but only the gouernemente of the Lords
providence. It is but folly therefore to be moved with the unrighteous course
of this wicked world: for we see that even from the beginning the wicked
brood of the Serpent have allwaies whetted their teeth against the woman's
seed: and that the children of darkness sometimes vex, sometimes persecute,
sometimes preuail against the children of light. Howsoever the cause hereof
proceeds, whether for the punishment of our sins here in this life, or for
our vigilant watch, or for our trial of faith, or for discovery of wicked and
hollow hearts, or in fine for confusion of the adversary: this is certain it
is the Lords doing, as the trouble, so the deliverance, and it is marvelous in
our eyes. The Prophet David found the experience hereof in the deserte of
Maon: whom Saul and Doeg, and whole armies compassed in on every side, they
hemmed him in, and came about him like stinging hornets: but yet unlooked for,
when he thought himself lost, yea when the gates of death had taken hold
upon him, the Lord of his especial grace delivered him, and set his feet in
a large room. For God had sworn by his holiness he would not fail David.
And how can it be, but that the same our God having likewise in the same
promise through Christ reconciled us his servants unto him, and bound himself
unto us, yea even the force, and power likewise of all his creatures, for he
has all power in his own hand, how can it be, but that he does and will
protect especially, yea and wonderfully his servants, that truly fear, and
believe in his holy, blessed, and almighty name.

This spiritual goodness, and lively feeling of faith, because it wants in
the children of this world, where God wonderfully builds, they wilfully
pluck down, and in reaching a natural compass, they over reach themselves,
trusting and who ly depending upon their worldly policy, and devise. Hereby
they have confidence in the strength of their own hand, but distruste in deed
that our God is sufficient almighty, and so by hook, or by crook, and
extraordinary means perform their unrighteous will, but use violence and force
against their Christian Faith. But whatsoever is rightly good, that, is of God,
and what God will have performed in performance thereof he woorketh always
like unto himself, for he is good: and therefore whatsoeuuer is of him and his
government it is finished by good means, and has his success profitable, and
good: as for the contrary, though it seem good and profitable for the time,
according as they would have it, yet in final account, it proves mere
loss, and utter confusion, as they justly deserve it.

In these actions lies the trial of faith, and in such extremities, or baits
of temptation is discerned the note, and difference of good spirits, and bad
minded men. The one seeks help, and thrusts, or shooueth his will and
purpose forward to some, though simple proof, and that with injuries,
wickedness, and shipwreck of conscience: the other waits the Lords leisure,
with long, faithful, and patient looking till he come. As the Hen over her
Chickens, so does the Lord over these his servants spread his wings, and
especial providence: for he covers them as with a cloud in the heat of the
day, and guides them as a pillar of light in darkness, he is unto them a
springing well in time of drought, and a safe, or easy path and way in
extreme danger, yea through armies of men, and maine floudes of the red Sea.

The exploit lately attempted, and performed by some of our countrymen
Marchantes, and Mariners, and chiefly encouraged thereunto by Rouland Randall
master Gunner of the same Ship, who lately, and most happily escaped the
violence and bondage of the Spaniards does sufficiently declare the same. For
whereas certain English Ships, the number as yet uncertain, are at this
present generally through all the dominion of Spain imbarred, and arrested by
King Philips Commission to his use and service, when and where, and against
whom it shall best please him, and are to that end watchfully and strongly
guarded that none should escape, our men spoiled of their force, and power: it
pleased notwithstanding the Lord our God most wonderfully, when all hope was
past, to deliver a Ship of London called the Violet from the rage, and tyranny
of their oppressors: the truth whereof is thus as follows.

The 25. of May last past this present year of our Lord 1585. ye aforesaid
Ship called the Violet, with eight other Ships were at road in the Harbor or
Quince of S. Sebastian. The Shipp was in burden of 130. Tun: which but a
little before having vnbarcked her Merchandise, was now bound to England
again, and had to that end received in threscore Tun. The English men in the
Ship being thus occupied about their freight, and the master Gonner Rouland
Randall being on land, there came unto them the Chorage of Door, the Captain
of ye Town, so called, with the kings Commission to stay the Ship, and take
the sails a shore: which they supposing to have sufficiently performed, they
departed.

The next day they came aboard again, and called for a note of the furniture
and shot. The master Gunner espying such a number in the Ship, plied him
thither, and after many speeches he gave a note thereof, but not in such sort,
and so fully as they were furnished indeed. Certain English Merchants came a
board the same time to make merry, but this news was to them a bitter sause
for their good cheer. The note of the shot that then was given was 8.
Kalicuers, and 8. cast pieces, which they would have had away, but that M. Young
became bound for the stay of the same and the Ship. The same day we heard that
the Primerose M. Bonds Ship had escaped. Which escape so encouraged us,
considering the great suit we had made to get our discharge and could obtain
no favor, that every man in the Ship bound himself to other to stand to al
extremities, and when time and wind served, either to loose our lives, or
find a passage: Emboldned the rather by the forwardnes of Randall the master
Gunner, who left nothing unassayed, or unready for his part.

The Spanyardes albeit they had surprised all our sails, as they thought, with
sufficient bonds, yet for more security they enuirened us with force by sea and
by land: 6000. men within and without the walls were attenda^t on this service:
three nights before our adventure, besides them that gave assault, as you shall
understand in the verses followinge. But yet it pleased God to give us a gale
of wind for passage, and so we adventured our liberty through the midst of our
enemies, who made a wonderful shootinge and crying, O Anglois, Anglois.

After which our escape, a Pinnase followed us with a Flag of Truce, wherein
the Captain had sent an English Merchant with letters for our return: bindinge
the same marcha^t in 18000. crowns not to escape. This merchant and other
Spaniards coming aboard our Ship found, as they said sufficient power to
withstand all their force, and so were glad to depart with aunsweare as
follows in the verses.

THe day and year aforesaid was,
at Saint Sebastian:
The Violet of London staid
both Ship and also man.
The Captain of the High Castle,
with Soldiers of his train.
In Ship with Kings Commission
took sails from yard amain.
They thought they had caught all our sails
yet took but one away:
Our maine corse and a drabiler,
the rest aboorde did stay.
As Ship in Quince then moared was,
by three kables full fast:
This news to hear was strange to us,
and made us all aghast.
Conuited was a board on Ship
that present day at noone
Diverse, with merchants Englishmen
whose merryment soon was done.
The wind then being contrary
resistance was in vain:
And therefore armed with patience
our hands perforce refrain.
Yea more then so: bonds must be made
that all things be forth coming:
Then George Young merchant of the Town,
was bound unto the king
In body, goods, and all he had
incompast in a strait:
If Ship did escape, that then he should
remain a Spanish bait.
The Ship continued stayed four days,
without hope of release:
No way was found for help, but care
did more, and more increase.
For Spanyardes plied with cruel force
to guard on every side:
Inraught we were as birds in cage
bereft of wind, and tide.
Their Ordinance great on Tower walls,
were bent against our Ship:
And Soldiers in a great Bisken
their small shot well did keep.
A great Pinnase of twenty Tons
likewise a loofe there lay:
Y fraught with fifty Soldiers shot
our English Ship to stay.
What more, then fifty Soldiors were
placd on the Blocks hard by:
With Hatgabushes ready pressed
in watch there did they lie.
They planted fifty Soldiers more
upon the Rocks by West:
And on the Blocks that there do lie
our Ship for to infest.
On watch tower, and upon the wall
were set a hundred more
Of Soldiers shot, with Hargabushes
our English Ship to gore.
And if perhaps we escape all this
yet is the Castle strong:
With hot and roaring Cannons force
to lay our Ship a long.
In fine, the Harbors outlet is
but narrow for the place:
With Rocks, and Western raging seas
all hurtful in such case.
Thus have you heard the dangers great
wherein our Ship did lie:
Right happy men you may us think
that now our Ship should fly.
For Ship in all unreadiness is
this nine and twentieth of May:
Therefore unlike for to escape
at breaking of the day.
And no preparing was to be
before the time present:
Therefore to have it well applied
was every man's intent.
What than? when earthly hope was past
we called upon the Lord:
And humbled down our woeful hearts
in prayers with one accord.
That he would still be unto us
our God and stretch his hand:
To rid us from the power and thrast
of this same cursed land.
It pleased the Lord of his good grace
to hear our woeful cry:
And in good tune a gale of wind
he sent us prosperously.
Now cheer my hearts, the Master said
the wind does serve our turn:
Be yare my mates and fellows all,
or else we are undone.
Bring over Kable to Kapstene,
veer both, or other fast:
Out end for end: give Ship the way,
bring sales to yard, be pressed.
Then did the slaves in Biskin cry,
Hola naue, adonda voye
O Anglois, Anglois, Anglois,
beginning to annoy.
Pit, pat Kalieuers thundered thick
good fellows cut our kable
In have, and hoyse our foresaile, shoot
as fast as you are able.
When once we past the great Biskine
and somewhat set at large:
From out the Block, and watch tower came
a second cry, and charge.
O Anglois, Anglois, Latherunes
o atarra arma:
O Diabilo the Anglois
arma, arma, arma.
The Pinnase that on other side
did lie with soldiers there:
Was gone before our going out
and did not come us near.
Now was out foresaile, and myssine
with toretopsaile also
Set rucking with our boat a head
amain our Ship did go.
The great shot straight from off Town walls
did rage on every side:
The Block shot, Rock shot, and Watchtower
their deadly force have tried.
At last the thundering Cannon shot
did roar from Castle hie:
We shronke not from our tackeling though,
it was time for us to plie.
Than hoyst our maine topsaile aloft
being set with other three:
And so were like to run on Rocks
tweene fear, and hope of glee.
But God out God, who from the shot
preserved us: From the Blocks
Did shield our London Violet
likewise from dangerous Rocks.
Praised be God our Lord therefore
who is of mighties most
For that he has defended us
from Spanish bloody coast.
At last aloof we spied full fast
a Pinnase to us bent:
Which to our sight a Flagge of truce
did willingly present.
Strike Topsaile quoth our Master then
to approach lets give them leave:
Perhaps of their or our ill speed
some News we shall receive.
Their message stood upon three points
of Flattery, Threats, and Pity:
A seemly song for Spanish lips
to catch some fools vnwitty.
The first that if we would return
a pardon we should have:
And freedom large, as erst before,
the king our lives should save.
For so the Captain General
had sworn full solemnly:
Upon Gods Sacrament, say they,
believe it verily.
If not, two Biskins with their shot
and thousand men likewise:
And other Sippes with Pinnases
should quickly us surprise.
And than our Ship, our Goods, our Lives
confiscate should remain:
Unto the King, out Bail likewise
and Merchant should sustain
The loss of Goods, and liberty,
and live as Captives thrall:
Besides a thousand mischiefs should
to us and them befall.
When this would not prevail, halas
Anglois, our men must die:
Who placed in Biskin for your stay,
have let you safely fly.
Besides our Captain of the Town,
had rather loose this day
A hundred thousand Ducates, than
your Ship should thus away.
Their letters and their glosing speech
they both had this effect.
A bootelesse parle, our short Auaunt
did easily them reject.
We heard, said we, in harbor late
the cause of this our stay:
Forsooth our Ship, and shot should serve
the king for his own pray.
And that our Ship should serve his use
even where it pleased his Grace:
And we beg homeward, or take up
in Spain a Captives place.
What Spanyardes? think that we be men
and loath to loose our own:
Our lives shall rather buy our escape
than wife, and children moan.
Auaunt therefore: do what you can,
dispatch your Ships with speed:
As for your King, your power and laws
we pass them not a reed.
This aunsweare once received, forthwith
the Pinnase made away:
Our masters then with cheerful hearts
unto us all began say.
Our Ship you have preserved this time
we thank your manly hearts:
Our Ship though ours, yet now your guist,
who stoutly played your parts.
The Spanyardes yet made no reply
we no return have seen:
Therefore all praise be to the Lord
God save our noble Queen.
FINIS.
R. D.


