THE BLOODY BANQVET. A TRAGEDY.

Hector adest secumque Deos in proelia ducit
Nos haec no vimus esse nihil.
BY T. D.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Cotes. 1639.

Drammatis Personae.
The King of Lydia. Tymethes his Son. Lapirus his Nephew. The King of Lycia.
Zantippus his Son. Eurimone his Daughter. Armatrites King of Cilicia.
Zenarchus his Son. Amphridote his Daughter. His Young Queen. Her Maid.
Mazeres his Favorite. Roxona the young Queens Keeper Fidelio. Two faithful
Servants to the Lydian King. Amorpho Two faithful Servants to the Lydian King.
Sextorio. Two unfaithful Servants of his. Lodovicus. Two unfaithful Servants
of his. The Old Queen of Lydia. Her two little Children. Chorus. The Clown.
Two Shepherds. 4. Servants. Soldiers.
THE BLOODY BANQVET, A TRAGEDY.
INDVCTIO. Enter Flourish. AT one door the old King of Lydia, Tymethes his
Son, Lapyrus his Nephew, and Soldiers. At the other the old King of Lycia,
Zantippus his Son, Eurymone his Daughter, and Soldiers. The two Kings parley,
and change hostages for peace. Lapyrus is given to the Lycian, and Zantippus to
the Lydian. The Lycian seems to offer his daughter Eurymone to Lapyrus to fall
from his Uncle, and join with him; he accepts her, drawing his sword against
his Country and Uncle. The Lydian sends his son Tymethes for aid; he enters
again with Armatrites King of Cilicia, Zenarchus his son, and Mazeres a
young Prince, the Cilician Kings follower. All they draw against the Lycians
party, whereat they all vith Lapyrus fly; the two other Kings pursuing them.
Then enter the old Queen of Lydia flying from her Nephew Lapyrus, with two
Babes in her arms; he pursuing her with his drawn sword. Enter Chorus. After
the waste of many thousand wounds
Given and received alike, in seven set battaile^s,
Lydia's old King upon conditions signed
For Peace and truce, entered onfeigned league
With his fierce enemy the Lycian King
Gave him in Hostage as his pledge of faith,
His Nephew, Lord Lapyrus, and received
Noble Zantippus from the Lycian;
To make the contract full and honorable,
This Lord Lapyrus entertained and wellcom'd
But chiefly by the fair Eurymone
The Kings sole daughter, who unto Lapyrus
Offers her as his Bride, so he would turn
A Traitor to his Country and his King:
Lapyrus, to obtain the beauteous maid
Turns Traitor to his King, and joins his force^
Unto his fair loves Fathers, Lycia's King*
The old King of Lydia being so beset
By his own Nephews unexpected treche^ries,
Sent forth his son Tymethes to crave aid
From Armatrites King of great Cilicia,
Which he obtained in a disastrous hour
As the event will witness; In this trouble
The frighted Queen with her two Infants fled
Into a Forest, fearing the sad ruin
Hourly expected, until Armatrites
With a fresh Army forced Lapyrus fly
And saved the King, doomed for worse treachery.
What follows shows it self; it is our full due,
If we with labor give content to you. Exit.
Act. 1.
Scene. 1.
Enter, The two Kings of Lydia and Cilicia, Zenarchus son to the Cilician,
Tymethes, son to the Lydian, Mazeres, Fidelio, Amorpho, Sextorio, Lodovicus,
when they come unto the Throne, the Tyrant of Cilicia puts by the old King, and
ascends alone: all snatch out their swords, Mazeres crowns him, the old King
and Tymethes stand amazed. Flourish. Arm. Speranza.

Omn. Long live Armatrites King of Lydia.

King. How?

Arm. Art thou amazed old King, and all thy people
Mutually laboring in a fit of wonder?
Start from those pale^ dreams, we will prove all true,
Who wins the day the brightness is his due.

King. King of Cilicia.

Arm. I and Lydia now,
Bate us not our Titles, we and ours
Have sweat and dearly earned them in our flesh.

King. It savors not of nobleness nor virtue,
Religion, loyalty, heaven or natures laws
So most perfidiously to enter, Tyrant,
Where was, expected honesty and honor,
Assistance from a friend, not a dissembler,
A Royal neighbor and no politic foe.
What worse than this could the enemy perform?
And when shines friendship best but in a storm?

Arm. Why, doting Lydia, is it of no virtue
To bring our Army hither and put in venture
Our person and their lives upon our foes?
Wasting our courage, weakening our best forces;
Impoverishing the heart of our munition,
And having won the honor of the battle
To throw our glory on unworthy spirits,
And so unload victories honey thighs
To let Droanes seed?

King. Will nothing satisfy but all?

Arm. Without all, nothing.
The Kingdom and not under suites our blood,
Flies ate are not Eagles preyes nor thanks our food:
And for Cilicia our other sphere,
Our son Zenarchus let thy beams move there.

Zen. Rather, my Lord, let me move pity here,
Unto that reverend fate-afflicted King;
For whom, with his disconsolate son (my friend
And plighted Brother) I here kneel as Suitor.
Oh my most Noble Father, still retain
The seal of honor and religion,
A Kingdom rightly possessed by course,
Contains more joy than is usurpt by force.

Arm. The Boy has almost changed us.

Maz. He cooles -- my Lord, remember you are possessed.

Arm. What, with the Devil?

Max. The Devil! the Dukedom, the Kingdom, Lydia.
All pant under your Scepter; the sway's yours,
Be not bought out with words, a Kingdome's dear,
Kiss fortune, keep your mind, and keep your state,
You Are laughed at if you prove compassionate.

Arm. Thanks to Mazeres, he has refresht our spirits,
Zenarchus, it is thy death if thou proceed,
Thy words we threate, rise silent or else bleed.

King. Who can expect but blood where Tyrants govern?

Arm. We are not yet so cruel to thy fortune
As was Lapyrus, thy own Nephew, treacherous;
That stole upon thy life, beseig'd thee basely,
And had betrayed thee to thine enemies anger
Had we not beat his strength to his own throat;
And made him shrink before us, all can tell
In him it was monstrous, it is in us but well;
A trick of war, advantage, policy, nay rather recompense;
There Is more deceit in peace, it is common there
TO unfold young heirs, the old may well stand bare.
You have your life, be thankful, and it is more
Than your perfidious Nephew would consent to,
Had he surpised you first, your fate is cast,
The sooner you be gone 'twill prove the safer.

Kin. On thee Lapyrus, and thy treacheries, fall
The heavy burden of an old man's curse.

Fid. Your Queen with her two Infants fled the City
Affrighted at this treason and new wars.

Kin. News of more sadnesses than the Kingdoms loss,
She fled upon her hour, for had she stayed
Sh' had either dyed, been banished, or betrayed.
I have some servants here?

Arma. All these my Lord.

Kin. All these? not all* you did forget, I am not worth the flattering, I am
done^,
Old and at set, honor the rising Sun.
If any for love serve me, which is he?
Now let him shame the world and follow me.

Fid. That Is I my Lord.

Amor. And I.

Kin. What two of you?
Let it be enrould
Two follow a King when he is poore^ and old. Exit cum suis.

Sex. Farewell King. I Will play the Flounder, keep me to my tide.

Lod. And so will I, this is the flowing side.

Maz. Those men are yours, my Lord.

Arm. We Will grace them chiefly,
Wait for employment, place and eminence,
The like to each that to our bounty flies,
For he that falls to us shall surely rise.
His son Tymethes little frights our thoughts,
He Is young, and given to pleasure, not to plots.

Maz. Your Grace defines him right, he may remaine^,
The Prince your son, binds him in a love-chaine;
There Is little fear of him.

Arm. Their loves are dear,
Base Boy, he leaves his father to live he^re.

Maz. His presence sets a gloss on your atte^mpts,
They have their luster from him.

Arm. He Is their Countenance,
It Was well observed and followed, he shall stay,
Mazeres, thou armest us that won the day*

Exit, all but Zenarchus and Tymethes. Zen. None but Mazeres, that Court fly,
could on
The virtues of the King blow such corruption,
Man falls to vice in minutes, runs, and leapes,
But unto goodness he takes wary steps.
How soon a Tyrant? why Tymethes, Friend, Brother?

Tym. Peace, prithee peace, you undo me if you wake me,
I hope I Am in a dream.

Zen. Would twere so happy?

Tym. No! why then wake Beggar; but the comfort is
I have brave seeming kinsemen: why Zenarchus,
It Is not the loss of Kingdom, Fathers banishment,
Uncertainty of Mother, afflicts me
With half the violence that those crossed affections,
Betwixt your Princely Sister and our self,
Who upon fortune, or her Fathers frown,
Erecting the whole Fabric of her love,
Either now will not, or else dare not love me.

Zen. Chance alters not affection, see in me
That hold thee dear still spite of Tyranny:
Fate does but dim the glass of a right man,
He still retains his worth, do what fate can.
Change faith for dross? I will not call her sister,
That shall hate virtue for affliction.
Enter Amphridote. And here she comes to clear those doubts her self.

Amp. Strange alteration! will the King my Father
Go to his grave a Ruffian and a Treacher?
In his gray heirs turn Tyrant to his friends?
Wasting his penitential times in plots,
Acting more sins than he has tears to we^epe for them?

Tym. Alas Lady, fortune has changed my state, can you love a beggar?

Am. Why fortune has the least command ore love,
She cannot drive Tymethes from himself,
And it is Tymethes, not his painted glories,
My soul in her accomplished wish desires.

Zen. What say you now sir?

Tim. Nothing but admire
That heaven can frame a creature^ like a woman
And she be constant, seeing most are common.

Zen. Put by your wonder sir, she proves the same,
I spoke her virtues for her ere she came,
And when my father dies I here do vow,
This kingdom now detained wrongfully
Shall then return unforcedly to you,
In part thy dowry, but in all thy due.

Tym. Unmatched honest young man.

Enter Mazeres observing. Zen. Come^, let your lips meet though your fortune^s
wander.

Maz. Ha! taste lips so bounteously with a beggar?

Zen. Thus in firm state let your affections rest,
Time, that makes wretched, makes the same men blessed. Exeunt.

Maz. What Is here? either the Princes out of charities rareness
Are pleased to lay aside their glories, and refresh
The gasping fortunes of a desperate wretch;
Or if for larger bounties I was mad
TO advise the King for his remaining here
That had been banished, and with him my fear:
I love the Princess, and the King allows it,
If he should prove a rival to my love,
I have argued fair for his abiding here:
My plots shall work his ruin, if one fail
I Will raise a second, for I must prevail:
I that used policy to cause him stay
Can show like Art to rid my fears away. Exit.

Scene. 2.
Enter the old Queen with two Babes, as being hard pursued. Que. Oh whither
shall I fly with these poor Babe^s?
Twice set upon by Thieves within this Forest
Who robbed me of my Clothes, and left me these,
Which better suite with my calamity:
What fate pursues the good old King my husband,
I cannot learn which is my worst affliction;
Oh treacherous Lapirus! impious Nephew!
All horrors of a guilty breast keep with thee;
Either poor Babes, you must pine here for food,
Or have the wars drink your immaculate blood.
Cry within follow, follow. Oh flye^, least life and honor be betrayed. Exit.

Scen. 3.
Enter Lapirus disguised. Lap. Villaine^ and fugitive, where will thou hide
The abhorred burden of thy wretched flesh?
In what disguise can thou be safe and free,
Having betrayed thy Country? base Lapirus.
Earth stretch thy throat, take down this bitter Pill,
Loathing the hateful taste of his own ill.

Enter the Queen and two soldiers pursuing her. Qu. Oh help, good heaven save
a poor wretch from slaughter.

The. 1. Stop her mouth first, soldiers must have their sport
It Is dearly earnd, they venture their blood for it.

Lap. A Mother so enforced by pitiless slaves?
Let me redeem my honor in her rescue,
And in this deed my former baseness dye.

The. 2. Come, come.

Que. If ever woman bore you.

Lap. Who ere bore them monsters begot^ them; merciless damned villains.

Both. Hold, hold, sir; we are soldiers, but do not love to fight. Exeunt.

Que. Let me dissuade you from all hope of recompense
Save thanks and prayers, which are the Beggars gifts,

Lap. You cannot give me that I have more need of
Than prayers; for my soul has a poor stock;
There Is a fair house within, but it is ill furnished
There wants true tears for hanging* penitent falls,
For without prayers soldiers are but bare walls:
Whence are you? that with such a careful charge,
Dare pass this dangerous Forest?

Que. Generous sir,
I was of Lydia once, as happy then
As now unfortunate; till one Lapyrus,
That traiterous villain Nephew to the King
Sought the confusion of his State and him;
And with a secret Army guirt his Land,
When peace was plighted by his enemies hand*
Little expecting such unnatural Treason
From forth a Kinsmans bosom; all admired
But I his miserable Queen.

Lap. Oh sink into perdition, let me hear no furthe^r, aside.

Que. I Will tell you all; for your so late attempt
Confirms you honest, and my thoughts so keep you:
I frighted at new wars, and his false breath,
Chose rather with these Babes this lingering death.

Lap. Oh in her words I endure a thousand deaths.

Que. The truth of this sad story has been yours.
Now, courteous sir, may I request your name,
That in my prayers I may place the same,

Lap. I Will put my death into her woeful hands.

Que. I hear you not sir, I desire you name.

Lap. To add some small content to your distress,
Know that Lapyrus, whom your miseries
May rightly curse, and be revenged justly
Lurkes in this Forest equally distressed.

Que. In this Forest lurkes that abhorred villain?

Lap. These eyes did see him; and faith Lady, say
If you should meet that worst of villains here,
That Treacher, Monster; what would you attempt?

Que. His speedy death, I should forget all mercy,
Had I but means fully to express my vengeance.

Lap. You would not, Queen.

Que. No? by these Infants tears
That weep for hunger, I would thoroughly do it.

Lap. See yonder he comes.

Que. Oh where^?

Lap. Here, take my sword,
Are you yet constant? shame your Sex and be so; will you do it?

Que. I see him not.

Lap. Strike him through his guilt and treachery
And let him see the horrors of his perjured soul,
Are you ready?

Que. Pray let me see him first. Pulls off his false beard and kneeles.

Lap. You see him now -- now do it.

Que. Lapirus!
Oh fortunate revenge! now all thy villainies
Shall be at once requited, thy countries ruin
The King thy Uncles sorrow, my own miseries,
Shall at this minute all one vengeance meet.
Alas, he does submit, prays, and relents,
Who could wish more? none made from woman can,
Small glory 'twere to kill a kneeling man:
When he in penitent sighs his soul commends
Thou send'st him to the Gods, thy self to the fiends:
But hearken to thy piteous Infants cries,
And they are for vengeance, peace then, now he dies.
Ungrateful woman, he delivered thee
From ravishment, can thou his murthresse be?
What Is riches to thy honors? that rare treasure
Which worlds redeem not, yet it is lost at pleasure.
Kill him that preserved that? and in thy rescue
His noble rage so manfully behaved:
Rise, rise, he that repents is ever saved.

Lap. Will misery yet a longer life afford;
To see a Queen so poor, not worth her word?

Que. I am better than my word, my word was death*

Lap. Man's nere past grief, till he be past his breath.

Que. I pardon all Lapyrus.

Lap. Do not do it.

Que. And only to one penance I enjoyne thee
For all thy faults past, while we here remain
Within this Forest, this thy task shall be,
To procure succor to my Babes and me.

Lap. And if I fail may the earth swallow me.

Que. Thou Art now grown good, here could I ever dwell,
Were the old King, my husband safe and well. Exeunt.

Scene. 4.
Enter Tymethes and Zenarchus. Zen. Come, come, drive away these fits, faith
I Will have thee merry.

Tym. As your son and heir at his fathers funeral

Zen. Thou see my sister constantly affects thee.

Tym. There were no mirth nor music else for me.

Zen. Sir in this Castle the old King my father
Ore-worne with jealousy keeps his beauteous wife,
I think thou never saw her.

Tym. No, not I.

Zen. Why then thy judgments fresh, I Will visit her
On purpose for thy censure.

Tym. I speak my affection.

Zen. Nay on my knowledge she is worth Jealousy*
Enter Roxano. Though Jealousy be far unworthy a King.

Rox. My loved Lord?

Zen. How cheares the Queen? they whisper.

Tym. Have I not seen this fellow before now?
He has an excellent presence for a Pander,
I know not his office.

Zen. Use those words to her.

Rox. They shall be used my Lord, and any thing
That comes to using, let it come to me. Exit.

Tym. What Is he Zenarchus?

Zen. Who Roxano? a fellow in great trust,
Elected by my fathers jealousy.
But he, and all the rest attend upon her
I think would turn he^r Panders for re^ward;
For it is not watch nor ward keeps woman chaste,
If honors watch in her mind be not placed.

Tym. Right Oracle; what gain has Jealousy?
Fruitless suspicion, sighs, ridiculous groans,
Hunger and lust will break through flesh and stone^s:
And like a whirle-winde blows open Castle doors.
Italian padlockes,

Zen. What mad Lords are your jealous people then,
That locks their wives from all men but their men?
Make them their keepers, to prevent some greater,
So often it happens to the poores relief,
Keepers eat Venison when their Lords eat Beef.
Enter young Queen with a book in her hand. See, see, she comes.

Tim Honor of beauty? there man's wishe^s rise,
Grace and perfection lighten from her eyes.
Amazement is shot through me.

Zen. It Is Tymethes, Lady, Sonne^ to the banished King.

Que. Is this he?

Zen. It is sweet Lady.

Que. I never knew the force of a desire
Until this minute struck within my blood;
I fear one look was destined to undo me.

Zen. Why Tymethes? friend.

Tym. Ha?

Zen. A Courtier, and forget your first weapon? go and salute our Lady Mother.

Que. He makes toward us: you are Prince Tymethes? so I understand.

Tym. The same unfortunate, most gracious Lady,
Supreamest of your Sex in all perfections.

Que. Sir, you are forgetful, this is no place for Courtship,
Nor we a subject for it, return to your friend.

Tym. All hopes killed in their blossom.

Que. Too cruelly in faith I put him by,
Wine for our son Zenarchus, it was done kindly
Enter Roxano with wine. You son, and our best Visitant.

Zen. Duty binds me.

Que. Begin to me Zenarchus, I Will have't so.

Tym. Why then there is hope shele take occasion
To drink to me, she has no means to avoid it.

Que. I Will prevent all loose thoughts, drink to my self,
Drinks and gives Roxano the Cup. My mind walks yonder, but suspect walks
here.

Tym. The divell's on that side and engrosses all,
Smiles, favors, common courtesies, none can fall
But he has a snatch at them; not drink to me?

Que. Make you yon stranger drink. Rox. offers it him.

Tym. Pox often not I.

Que. I speak strange words against my fantasy.

Len. Prithee Tymethes drink.

Tym. I am not dry.

Zen. I think so too; dry, and so young, 'twere strange,
Come prithee drink to the Queen, my mother.

Tym. You shall rule me -- unto that beauteous Majesty?

Que. Thanks noble sir; I must be wary, my mind's dangerous.
I Will pledge you anon sir. Gives Roxano the Cup.

Tym. Heart? how contempt ill fortune does pursue?
Not drink, nor pledge, what was she borne to do?
I Will stay no longer, least I get that flame,
Which nothing but cold death can quench or tame.
Zenarchus, come. Exit.

Zen. I go, music of mind to the Queen.

Que. To you no less.

Zen. And all that you can wish, or I express. Exit.

Que. Thanks to our son,
The other took leave in silence, but left me
To speak enough both for my self and thee.
Tymethes? that is his name, poor heart take heed,
Look well into the event ere thou proceed:
Love, yet be wise; impossible, none can;
If ere the wise man claim one foolish hour
It Is when he loves; he is then in follies power.
I need not fear the servants that ore-watch me^
Their faiths lie in my Coffers, in effect,
More true to me then to my Lords suspect.
The fears and dangers that most threaten me,
Live in the party that I must enjoy,
And that is Tymethes; men are apt to boast;
He may in full cups blaze and vaunt himself
Unto some meaner Mistress; make my shame
The politic Engine to beat down her name,
And from thence force a way to the Kings ears,
Strange fate; where my love keeps, there keep my feare^s.

Enter Tyrant. Tyr. Alone? why where is her guard? suffer her alone?
Her thoughts may work, their powers are not her own.
Women have of themselves no entire sway,
Like Dyall needles they wave every way,
And must be thoroughly taught to be kept right,
And point to none but to their Lords delight.
Enter Roxano and guard. Time to convey and plot? leave her alone!
Why Villains -- kiss me, my perfection,
This night we will banquet in these blissful arme^s.

Qu. Your nights are music, and your words are charms.

Tyr. Kiss me again fair Tethis.

Walks off with her, and the guard follows. Rox. My Lady is scarce perfect in
her thoughts
How ere she framed a smile upon the Tyrant.
I have some skill in faces, and yet they never were more deceitful;
A man can scarce know a Baud from a Midwife by the face;
An hypocritical Puritan from a devout Christian
If you go by the face; well all is not straight in my Lady.
She has certain crooked cogitations if a man had the liberty to search 'em:
If ought point at my advice or performance, she may fortunately
Disclose it: she knows my mettle, and what it yields to an ounce,
She cannot be deceived in it: here is service, and secre^cie, and no Lady can
Wish more, beside a Monkey; she is assured of our faculties, there is none
Of us all that stand her smock Centinells, but would venture a joint
To do her any pleasurable service, and I think that's as much
As any woman desires -- mass here she comes.
Enter Queen sad. It Is so me strange Physic I know by the working.

Que. It cannot be kept down with any Argument,
It Is of aspiring force; sparks fly not downward,
No more this received fancy of Tymethes,
I threaten it with my Lords Iealousy,
Yet still it rises against all objections;
I see my dangers, in what fears I dwell
There Is but a Planke^ on which I run to hell,
Yet were it thrice narrower I should venture on,
None dares do more for sin than woman can.
Misery of love -- Roxano? I am observed,
What news Roxano?

Rox. None that is good, Madam.

Que. No? which is the bad!

Rox. The worst of all is, Madam, you are sad.

Que. Indeed I am not merry.

Rox. Would I knew the means would make you so,
I would turn my self into any shape or office
To be the Author of it, sweet Lady.

Que. Troth I have that hope of thee, I think thou would

Rox. Think it? sfoote, you might swear safely in that action
And never hurt your oath -- I nere fayld yet.

Que. Twere sin to injure thee, I know thou did not.

Rox. Nay I know I did not.

Que. But my trusty servant,
This plot requires art, secrecy and wit,
Yet out of all can hardly work one safety.

Rox. Not one, that is strange, I would 'twere put to me,
I Will make it arrive safe what ere it be.

Que. Thou could not my Roxano -- why admit I love, now I come to thee.

Rox. Admit you love? why all is safe enough yet.

Que. I, but a stranger.

Rox. Nay, now we are all spoyld Lady,
I may look for my brains in my Boots -- now you have put
Home to me indeed, Madam; A stranger? there is a hundred
Deaths in the very name, besides vantage.

Que. I said I should affright thee.

Rox. Faith no foole^ can fright me, Madam, commonly called a stranger.

Que. Have thou the will? or dare thou do me good?

Rox. Do thee good, sweet Lady? as far as I am able nere doubt it;
Let me but cast about for safety, and I Will do any thing, Madam,

Que. I, I, our safeties; which are mere impossibles,
Love forgets all things but its proper objects.

Rox. What is he? and his name?

Que. Tymethes, in a most unluckie minute
Led hither by our Son in Law Zenarchus.

Rox. Hum, is that the most fortunate, spider catching, smock wrapped Gentleman?

Que. Yet if he know me.

Rox. What then?

Que. I am undone.

Rox. And is it possible a man should lie with a woman and yet not know her?
And yet it is possible too -- thank my Invention, follow that game still.

Que. He must not know me; than I love no further;
Although for not enjoying him I dye;
My Lords pale jealousy does so orelooke^ me,
That if Tymethes know what he enjoyes
It may make way unto my Lords mistrust;
Then since in my desire such horrors move
I Will dye no other then the death of love.

She swounds and Roxano holds her in his arms. Rox. Lady, Madam, do you hear?
Have you leisure to swoune now, when I have taken such pains in the business?
To take order for your safety, set all things right; why Madam?

Que. What says the man?

Rox. Why he says like a Gentleman every inch of him,
And will perform the office of a gentleman; bring you together;
Put you together, and leave you together: what gentleman can do more?

Que. And all this safely?

Rox. And all this safely? I by this hand will I,
Or else would I might never do any thing to purpose;
If he have but the first part of a young gentleman in him.
It Is granted Madam; I have crotchets in my brain
That you shall see him and enjoy him, and he not know where he is, nor who it
is.

Que. How? shall he not know me?

Rox. Why it is the least part of my meaning he should Lady.
Do you think you could possibly be safe and he know you?
Why some of your young Gallants are of that vainglorious and preposterous
Humor, that if they lay with their own Sisters you should hear them prate
often,
This is too usual, there is no wonder in it: what I have said
I will swear to perform, you shall enjoy him ere night
And he not know you next morning.

Que. Thou art not only necessary but pleasing,
There, catch our bounty, manage all but right,
As now with gold, with honors we will requite. Exit.

Rox. I am your creature Lady; pretty gold,
And by this light me thinks most easily earned,
There Is no faculty, say I like a Pander, and that makes so many
Now adays dye in the Trade: I have your gold Lady,
And eke your service; I am one step higher,
This office makes a gentleman a Squire. Exit.

Act. 2.
Scene. 1.
Enter Clown, and two Sheapheards. Shep. 1. Come fellow Coridon, are the pits
dug?

Clo. I, and as deep as an Usurers conscience I warrant thee.

Shep. 2. Mas and that is dee^pe enough, 'twill devour a widow and three Orphans
At a bre^akefast; soft, is this it?

Shep. 1. I, I, this is it.

Clo. Nay for the deepenesse I Will be sworn; but come my masters and lay these
boughs cross over: so, so, artificially, and may all those horson
Muttonmongers the wolves, hole here, which eat our sheep.


Shep. 2. I wonder what wolves those are which eat our sheep,
Whether they be he wolves or she wolves?

Clo. They should be he wolves by their loving Mutton,
But by their greediness they should be she wolves.
For the belly of a she wolf is never satisfied till it be damned up.

Shep. 1. Why are the she wolves worse than the he is?


Clo. Why, is not the dam worse than the Devil pray?


Shep. 1. You have answered me there indeed.


Clo. Why man, if all the Earth were Parchment, the Sea Ink Every stick a pen,
and every knave a Scrivener, they were not all able to write down the
knaveries of she wolves.


Shep. 2. A murren on them, he is or she is, they sucke^ the blood of none but
our Lambs.


Clo. Oh always the weakest goes to the wall, as for example, knock down a
sheep and he tumbles forwards, knock down a woman and she tumbles backewards.


Shep. 1. Sir, I wonder how many sorts of wolves there be^.


Clo. Marry just as many sorts as there be knaves in the Cards


Shep. 2. Why that is four.


Clo. First there are your Court wolves, and those be
Foul eaters and clean drinkers.

Shep. 2. And why clean drinkers?


Clo. Why because when they be drunke^ they commonly cast up all, and so make
clensing week often.


Shep. 2. So sir, those are clean drinkers indeed.


Clo. The next are your Country wolves, nothing choakes them but plenty, they
sing like Sirens when corn goes out by ship-fulls, and dance after no tune but
after an angel a Bushel.


She. 1. The halter take such cornecutters.


She. 2. Are there no City Wolves?


Clo. A rope on them, yes, huge routes, you shall have long lane full of them;
they will feed upon any whore, carrion, thief, or any thing.


Shep. 1. Have they such mawes?


Clo. Mawes? why man, fiddlers have no better stomachs,
I have known some of them eat up a Lord at three bits.

Shep. 2. Three bonds you mean.


Clo. A Knight is no body with them,
A young gentleman is swallowed whole like a Gudge^on.

Shep. 1. I wonder that Gudgeon does not choke him.


Clo. A Gudgeon choke him, if the throat of his conscie^nce be sound, he will
gulpe down any thing; five of your silken Gallants are swallowed easier than a
Damask Prune: for our City wolves do so roll my young prodigal first in
wax, which is soft, till he look like a gilded Pill, and then so finely wrap
him up in Satin which is sleeke, that he goes down without chewing, and
thereupon they are called slippery Gallants.


Shep. 1. I Will be no Gentleman for that trick.


Clo. The last is your Sea wolf, a horrible ravene^r to, he has a belly as
big as a ship, and devours as much silk at a gulp as would serve forty dozen
Tailors against a Christmas day or a running at Tilt.


Shep. 1. Well, well, now our trap is set what shall we do with the wolves we
catch?


Clo. Why those that are great ones and more than our matches we will let go,
and the lesser wolves we will hang: shall it be so?


Both. I, I, each man to his stand. Exeunt.


Scene. 2.
Enter Lapirus, solus. Lap. Foule^ monster monger, who must live by that
Which is thy own destruction: Why should men
Be natures bondslaves? Every creature else
Comes freely to the Table of the Earth;
That which for man alone does all things beare^
Scarce gives him his true diet any where.
What spightfull winds breath here? that not a Tree
Spreads, forth a friendly arm? distressed Queen,
And most accursed Babes; the earth that bears you
Like a proud mother, scorns to give you food: ha?
Thanks fate, I now defy thee starveling hunger,
Blessed tree, four lives grow in thy fruit, run taste it then,
Wise men serve first themselves then other men.
He falls in the Pit. Oh me accursed and most miserable,
Help, help, some Angel lay a listening ear
To draw my cry up; none to lend help? oh
Then pine and dye. Enter Clown.

Clo. A wolf caught, a wolf caught.

Lap Oh help, I am no wolf good frie^nd.

Clo. No! What art thou then?

Lap. A miserable wretch.

Clo. An Usurer?

Lap. No, no.

Clo. A Broaker then?

Lap. Mock not a man in woe, in a green wound,
Pour Balsome and not Physic.

Clo. Snayles, he talks like a Surgeon,
If you be one why do you not help your self sir?

Lap. I am no Surgeon friend, my names Lapirus.

Clo. How? a wolf caught hoa -- Lap what Lap, hoa!

Lap. Lapirus is my name do thou not know me?

Clo. Yes, for a wolvish rascal that would have worried his own Country.

Lap. Torture me not, I prithee, I am that wretch; a villain
I was once; but I am now --

Clo. The Devil in the Vault; you sir, that betrayed your Country, and the
old King your Uncle, there lie till one Wolf devour another, thou treacherous
rascal. Exit.


Lap. Oh me most miserable and wretched creature!
I now do find there is a revenging fate
That doomes bad men to be unfortunate.

Scene. 3.
Enter Zenarchus, Tymethes, Amphridote, and Mazeres. Tym. We are observed.

Zen. By whom?

Tym. Mazeres follows us.

Amp. Oh he is my protested servant, your sole Rival.

Tym. The devil he is.

Amp. You Will make^ a hot Suitour of him anon?

Tym. He may be hot in the end, his good parts sue for it,

Zen. He eyes us still.

Tym. He does, you shall depart Lady;
I Will take my leave on purpose in his presence,
He Is jealous, and a kiss runs through his heart,
I Will make a thrust at him on your lip.

Maz. Death! minute favors? every step a kiss?
I think they count how the day goes by kissing,
It Is past four since I met them.

Tym. I have hit him in the Call in stead of the blood,
He sheds distractions, which are worse than wounds.

Zen. But sir!

Maz. Stays he to prove my Rival? cursed be the houre^
Wherein I advised the King for his stay here,
I have set slaves to entrap him, yet none prosper,
I Will lay no more my faith upon their works
The are weak and loose, and like a rotten wall,
Leaning on them may hazard my own fall.
I Will use a swifter course, cut off long journeys,
And tedious ways that run my hopes past breath,
I Will take the plain roade^ way and hunt his death. Exit.

Tym. So so, he departs with a knit brow, no matter;
When his frown begets earthquakes, happly then
'Twill shake me too: I shall stand firm till then.

Enter Roxano disguised. Rox. Mass here a walks; I am far enough from my
self,
I challenge all disguises except drinking
To hide me better; I give way to that,
For that indeed will thrust a white gentle^man
Into a suite of mud, but whist I begin to be noted.

Zen. I, he changed upon it.

Tym. I marked him.

Rox. Good your honors, your most comfortable charitable relief
And devotion to a poor star crossed Gentleman.

Tym. Pox on thee.

Rox. I Am bare enough already if it like your honor.

Tym. He did!

Rox. Pox on thee? your young gallants love to give no Alms*
But that that will stick by a man, that is one virtue in them:
He Is not content to have my hat off, but he would have my hair off too.
Thank your good Lordship.

Tym. No! was that his Action!

Amp. It called him Lord.

Zen. Nay he is a Villain.

Rox. Good your honors! I have been a man in my time.

Tym. Why what art thou now?

Rox. Kept goodly beasts, had 3. wives, 2. men uprising, 3. maids down lying;
oh good your kind honors.


Tym. Sfoote, I am a beggar my self.

Rox. Perhaps your Lordship gets by it;
Good your sweet honor*

Tym. This fellow would be whipped.

Rox. Your Lordship has forgot since you were a Beggar.

Tym. I Will give thee somewhat for that jest in troath.

Rox. But now you are in private, shut your purse, and ope^n your ear sir.

Tym. How?

Zen. He Is dealing his devotion, hinder him not.

Rox. I am not literally a Beggar, as Puritanicall as I appear
The naked Truth is you are happily desired.

Tym. Ha?

Rox. Of the most
Sweet, delicate, divine, pleasing, ravishing creature

Tym. Peace, peace, prithee peace.

Rox. That ever made man's wishes perfect.

Tym. Nay, say not so; I saw one creature lately
Exceeds al humane form for true perfection; this may be beauteous.

Rox. This for white and red sir, her honor and my oath sue for that pardon,
You must not know her name nor see her face.

Tym. How?

Rox. She rather chooses death in her neglect
Than so to hazard life or lose respect.

Tym. How shall I come at her?

Rox. Let your will
Subscribe to the sure means already wrought,
She shall be safely pleased, you safely brought.

Tym. Ha! and is this sheere faith, without any trick in it?

Rox. Let me perish in this office else; and I need wish
No more damnation than to dye a Pander.

Tym. Thou speak well, when meet we?

Rox. Five is the fixed hour, upon to morrowes Evening.

Tym. So, the place?

Rox. Near to the further lodge.

Tym. Go to then, it holds honest all the way?

Rox. Else does there live no honesty but in Lawyers.

Tym. Enough, five? and the furthest lodge? I Will meet thee.

Rox. Enjoy the sweetest Treasure in a woman. Exit.

Tym. Always excepting and the Tyrants Gem.

Zen. What, have you done with the Beggar?

Tym. None that lives can say he has done with the Beggar.

Zen. Hold conference so long with such a fellow?

Tym. How? are your wits perfect? if one should refuse to talk with every
beggar, he might refuse brave Company sometimes, gallants y faith. Exeunt.


Scene. 4.
Enter the old King, Fidelio, and Amorpho. King. The loss of my dear Queen
afflicts me more
Then all Lapirus cursed trecheries: Inhumane monster!

Lap. [in the pit.] If you have humane forms to fit those voices
And hearts that may be pierced with miseries groans
Sent from a fainting Spirit; pity a wretch,
A miserable man, Prisoner to darkness,
Your charitable strengths this way repair,
And lift my flesh to the reviving Air.

King. Alas, some traveling man, by night out stripped,
Missing his way into this danger slipped;
Set all our hands to help him; Come, good man,
They that sit high may make their ends below.

Lap. Millions of thanks and praises.

King. You Are heavy sir, who ere you be.

Lap. There Is weight within keeps down my soul and me^

King. One full strength more makes our pains happy, poor strength helps
the poor.

So sir, you are welcome to -- Lapirus? oh. Lapi. falls down.
We do forgive thy Treachery, revive,
It Is pity and not hate makes goodness thrive.

Lap. Oh that astonishment had left me dead!
Shame, sitting on my brow, weighes down my he^ad:
Even thus the guilt of my abhorred sin,
Flasht in my face when I beheld the Queene^.

King. Our Queen! oh where, Lapirus? tell the rest.

Lap. Within this forest with her Babes distressed.

King. Which way? lead dear Lapirus.

Lap. Follow me then.

King. Not only shall we quit thy souls offence^
But give thy happy labor recompense. Exeunt.

Dumb show. Enter the old Queen weeping, with both her Infants, the one dead;
she lays down the other on a bank, and goes to bury the dead, expressing
much grief. Enter the former shepherds, walking by carelessly, at last they
epsy the child and strive for it, at last the Clown gets it, and dandles it,
expressing all signs of joy to them. Enter again the Queen, she looks for
her Babe and finding it gone, wrings her hands; the Shepherds see her, then
wisper together, then beckon to her; she joyfully runs to them, they return
her child, she points to her breasts, as meaning she should nurse it, they all
give her money, the Clown kisses the Babe and her, and so Exeunt several
ways. Then enter Lapirus, the Old King, Amorpho, and Fidelio, they miss the
Queen and so expressing great sorrow. Exeunt. Enter Chorus. The miserable
Queen expecting still
The Infants succor from Lapirus hand
Who wants himself; it chanced through extreme want
The youngest dyed, and this so near his end
That had not Shepherds happily passed by
And on the Babe cast a compassionate eye,
And snatched the child out of the arms of death
Where the sad mother left it, the same hour
Had been his grave that gives his life new power.
Thus the distressed Queen to them unknown
Was as a Nurse received unto her own.
Whose sight Lapirus missing* having led
The King her husband to this hapless place,
They all depart in extreme height of grief
To get unto their own sad wants relief. Exit.
Act. 3.
Scene. 1.
Enter Roxano with his disguise in his hand. Rox. This is the farther Lodge,
the place of meeting; The hour scarce come yet -- well -- I was not borne to
this, There Is not a hair to choose betwixt me and a Pander in this case, shift
it off as well as I can: I do envy this fellows happiness now; and could
cut his throat at pleasure: I could ene gnaw feathers now to think of his
downie felicity. I that could never aspire above a dayrie wench, the very
cream of my fortunes; that he should bathe in Nectar, and I most unfortunate
in Buttermilke, this is good dealing now, is it?


Enter Mazeres musing. Maz. I Will have some other, for he must not live.

Rox. Who Is this? my Lord Mazeres discontent*
H' has been to seek me twice, and privately,
I wonder at the business; I Am no Statesman;
If I be, it is more than I know; I protest therefore
I dare not call it in question; what should he make^ with me?
I Will discover my self to him -- if the othe^r come in the me^ane time so I may
be caught bravely, yet it is scarce the hour, I Will put it to the trial.


Maz. Roxano in my judgment had be^ene fittest,
And farthest from suspect of such a deed
Because he keeps in the Castle.

Rox. My loved Lord.

Maz. Roxano!

Rox. The same my Lord.

Maz. I was to seek thee twice;
Tell me Roxano, have I any power in thee? doe^ I move there,
Or any part of me flow in thy blood?

Rox. As far as life my Lord.

Maz. As far as love man, I ask no further.

Rox. Touch me then my Lord, and try my mettle.

Maz. First there is gold for thee,
After which follow favor, eminence,
And all those gifts which fortune calls her own.

Rox. Well my Lord.

Maz. There Is one Tymethes son to the banished King,
Lives about Court, Zenarchus gives him grace,
That fellow's my disease, I thrive not with him,
He Is like a prison chain shook in my ears
I take no sleep for him, his favors mad me.
My honors and my dignities are dreams
When I behold him; That right arm can ease^ me,
I will not boast my bounties, but for ever
Live rich and happy: thou art wise farewell. Exit.

Rox. Hum, what news is here now? thou art wise farewell.
By my troth I think it is a part of wisdom to take gold
When it is offered, many wise men will do it: that I learnt
Of my learned Council: this is worth thinking on now.
To kill Tymethes, so strangely beloved by a Lady, and so monstrously detested
by a Lord? here is gold to bring Tymethes, and here is gold to kill Tymethes. I,
let me see, which weighes heaviest; by my faith I think the killing gold will
carry't: I shall like many a bad Lawyer, run my Conscience upon the greatest
fee; who gives most is like to fare best. I like my safety so much the worse in
this business in that Lord Mazeres is his professed enemy: he is the Kings
bosom, he blows his thoughts into him; and I had rather be torn with
whirlewindes than fall into any of their furies. Troth as far as I can see, the
wisest course is to play the knave, lay open this Venery, betray him; but see
my Lord again.


Enter Mazeres. Maz. Have thou thought of me? may I do good upon thee?
I Will out of recreation, make thee worthy; play honors to thy hand.

Rox. My Lord?

Maz. Art thou resolved? and I will be thy Lord.

Rox. It will appear I am so; be proud of your revenge before I name it;
Never was man so fortunate in his hate,
I Will give you a whole Age but to think how.

Maz. Thou make me thirst.

Rox. Tymethes meets me here.

Maz. Here? excellent, on Roxano; he meets thee here.

Rox. I meant at first to betray all to you sir: understand that my Lord.

Maz. Y faith I do.

Rox. Then thus my Lord -- he comes.

Enter Tymethes. Maz. Withdraw behind the Lodge^, relate it breefely.

Tym. A delicate sweet Creature? slight, who should it be^?
I must not know her name, nor see her face?
It may be some trick to have my bones bastinadode^
Well, and so sent back again; what say you to a blanquetting
Faith, so twere done by a Lady and her Chambermaides
I care not, for if they toss me in the Blankets
I Will toss them in the Sheets, and that is one for the other.
A man may be led into a thousand villainies; but the fellow swore enough,
And here is blood apt enough to believe him.

Maz. I both admire the deed, and my revenge.

Rox. My Lord I Will make your way.

Maz. Thou make thy friend. Exit.

Tym. Art come? we meet ene jumpe upon a minute.

Rox. I but you will play the better jumper of the two.
I shall not jumpe so near as you by a handful.

Tym. How! at a running leap?

Rox. That is more hard;
At a running leap you may give me a handful.

Tym. So, so, what is to be done.

Rox. Nothing but put this hood over your head.

Tym. How? I never went blindfold before.

Rox. You never went otherwise sir; for all folly is blind;
Besides sir, when we see the sin we act,
We think each trivial crime a bloody fact.

Tym. Well followed of a Serving man.

Rox. Servingmen always follow their masters sir,

Tym. No not in their Mistresses.

Rox. There I leave you sir.

Tym. I desire to be left when I come there sir.
But faith sincerely is there no trick in this?
Prithee deal honestly with me.

Rox. Honestly, if protestation be not honest,
I know not what to call it.

Tym. Why, if she affect me so truly, she might trust me with her knowledge,
I could be secret to her chief actions, why I love^ women too well.

Rox. She Will trust you the worse for that sir.

Tym. Why because I love women?

Rox. O sir, it is most common,
He that loves women, is near true to woman.
Experience daily proves he loves none
With a true heart, that affects more than one.

Tym. Your wit runs nimbly sir, pray use your pleasure.

Rox. Why then goodnight sir. He puts on the hood.

Tym. Mass the candles out.

Rox. Oh sir the better sports taste best in the night,
And what we do in the dark we hate i'th'light.

Tym. A good doer may thou prove, for thy experience;
Come give me thy hand, thou may prove an honest Lad,
But however I Will trust thee.

Rox. Oh sir, first try me,
But we protract good hours, come follow me sir,
Why this is right your sportive Gallants prize,
Before they will loose their sport they will loose their e^ye^s. Exeu.

Scen. 2.
Enter the Queen and four servants, she with a book in her hand. Que. Oh my
feare-fighting blood! are^ you all here.

Ser. 1. All at your pleasure Madam.

Que. That Is my wish, and my opinion
Has ever been persuaded of your truths,
And I have found you willing t'all employments
We put into your charge.

Ser. 2. In our faith's madam.

Ser. 3. For we are bound in duty to your Bounty.

Que. Will you to what I shall prescribe swear secrecy?

Ser. 4. Try us, sweet Lady, and you shall prove our faith's*

Que. To all things that you hear or see
I swear you all to secrecy;
I pour my life into your breasts,
There my doom or safety rests.
If you prove untrue to all
Now I rather choose to fall
With loss of my desire, than light
Into the Tyrants wrathful spite:
But in vain I doubt your trust,
I never found your hearts but just.
On this book your vows arrive,
And as in truth in favor thrive.

Omn. We wish no higher, so we sweare^.

Que. Like Jewels all your vows I Will wear.
Here, take this Paper, there those secrets dwell,
Go read your charge, which I should blush to tell.
All Is sure, I nothing doubt of safety now,
To which each servant has combined his vow.
Roxano, that begins it trustily,
I cannot choose but praise him, he is so needful,
There Is nothing can be done about a Lady
But he is for it; honest Roxano;
Even from our head to feet he is so officious,
The time draws on, I feel the minutes here,
No clock so true as love that strikes in fear. Exeunt.

Scene. 3.
Soft music, a Table with lights set out. Arras spread. Enter Roxano leading
Tymethes. Mazeres meets them. Tym. How far lack I yet of my blind
pilgrimage?

Maz Whist, Roxano*

Rox. You are at your -- In my Lord, away, I Will help
You to a disguise.

Maz. Enough. Exit.

Tym. Me thinks I walk in a Vault all under ground.

Rox. And now your long lost eyes again are found: good morrow sir. Pulls off
the hood.

Tym. By the mass the day breaks.

Rox. Rest here my Lord and you shall find content,
Catch your desires, stay here, they shall be sent.

Tym. Though it be night, it is morning to that night which brought me hither,
Ha! the ground spread with Arras? what place is this?
Rich hangings? fair room gloriously furnished?
Lights and their luster? riches and their splendour?
It Is no mean creatures, these dumb tokens witness;
Troth I begin to affect my Hostess better;
I love her in her absence, though unknown,
For courtly form that is here observed and shown.

Loud music. Enter 2. with a Banquet; other 2. with lights; they set 'em
down and depart, making obeisance. Roxano takes one of them aside. Rox.
Valesta? yes, the same; it is my Ladies pleasure,
You give to me your coat, and vizarded attend without
Till she employ you -- so now, this disguise
Serves for my Lord Mazeres, for he watches
But fit occasion: Letcher, now beware,
Securely sit and fearelesse quaffe and eat,
You Will find sour sauce still after your sweet meat. Exit.

Tym. The servants all in vizards? by this light
I do admire the carriage of her love;
For I account that woman above wise
Can sin and hide the shame from a man's eyes.
They never do their easy sex more wong,
Than when they venture fame upon man's tongue.
Yet I could swear concealment in loves plot,
But happy woman that believes me not.
What ere is spoke or to be spoke seems fit,
All still concludes her happiness and wit.

Loud Music, Enter Roxano, Mazeres and the 4. Servants, with dishes of sweet
meats, Roxano places them: each having delivered his dish makes low obeisance
to Tymethes. Rox. This banquet from her own hand received grace
Her self prepared it for you; as appears
By the choice sweetes it yields, able to move
A man past sense, to the delights of love,
I bid you welcome as her most prized guest,
First to this banquet, next to pleasures feast.

Tym. Who ere she be we thank her, and commend
Her care and love to entertain a friend.

Rox. That speaks her sexes rareness, for to woman,
The darkest path love treads is clear and common;
She wishes your content may be as great
As if her presence filled that other seat.

Tym. Convey my thanks to her, and fill some wine.

Maz. My Lord?

Rox. My Lord Mazeres caught the Office
I cannot but laugh to see how well he plays
The Devil in a vizard; damne^s where he crouches; little thinks the Prince
Under that face lurkes his lives enemy,
Yet he but keeps the fashion; great men kill
As flatterers stab, who laugh when they mean ill.

Maz. Now could I poison him fitly, aptly, rarely,
My vengeance speaks me happy; there it goes.

Tym. Some wine?

Maz. It comes my Lord.

Enter a Lady with wine. La. My Lady begun to you sir, and does commend,
This to your heart, and with it her affection.

Tym. I Will pledge her thankefully; there remove that.

Spils the wine. Maz. And in this my revenge must be removed
Where first I left it, now my abused wrath
Pursues thy ruin in this dangerous path.

Rox. That cup has quite dashed my Lord Mazeres.

Tym. Return my faith, my reverence, my respect,
And tell her this, which courteously I find,
She hides her face, but lets me see her mind.

Rox. I would not taste of such a Banquet to feel that which follows it,
For the love of an Empress. It Is more dangerous to be a letcher
Than to enter upon a breach; yet how securely he munches
His thoughts are sweeter than the very meats before him:
He little dreams of his destruction;
His horrible fearful ruin which cannot be withstood,
The end of Venery is disease or blood

Soft Music. Enter the Queen masked in her night-gowne; her maid with a
shirt and a Night cap. Tym. I have not known one happier for his pleasure
Than in that state we are; it is a strange trick,
And sweetly carried; by this light a delicate creature,
And should have a good face if all hit right;
For they that have good bodies and bad faces
Were all mismatcht, and made up in blind places.

Rox. The wind and tide serve sir, you have lighted upon
A Sea of pleasure; here is your sail sir, and your top streamer
A fair wrought shirt and a nightcap.

Tym. I shall make a sweet voyage of this.

Rox. I, if you knew all sir.

Tym. Is not all known yet? what is to be told?

Rox. Five hundred Crowns in the shirt sleeve in gold.

Tym. How?

Rox. It Is my good Ladies pleasure,
No Clouds eclipse her bounty, she shines clear,
Some like that pleasure best that costs most dear;
Yet I think your Lordship is not of that mind now;
You like that best that brings a Banquet with it, and 500. Crowns.

Tym. I by this light do I; and I think thou art of my mind.

Rox. We jumpe somewhat near sir.

Tym. But what does she mean to reward me before hand?
I may prove an Eunuch now for ought she knows.

Rox. Oh sir, I nere knew any of your hair but he was absolute at the game.

Tym. Faith we are much of a color; but here is a Note, what says it?
He reads. Our love and bounty shall increase
So long as you regard our peace.
Unless your life you would forgo,
Who we arese eke not to know.
Enjoy me freely: for your sake
This dangerous shift I undertake.
Be therefore wise, keep safe your breath,
You cannot see me under death.
I Would be loath to venture so far for the sight of any Creature under heaven.

Rox. Nay sir I think you may see a thousand faces better cheap.

Tym. Well, I will shift me instantly, and be content
With my groaping fortune. Exit.

Rox. Oh sir, you will groape to purpose. Exit.

Maz. I Will after thee, and see the measure of my vengeance upheapt
His ruin is my charge; I have seen that
This night would make one blush through this vizard.
Like lightning in a Tempest her lust shows,
Or drinking drunk in Thunder, horrible:
For on this Act a Thousand dangers wait,
The King will seize him in his burning fury
and seal his vengeance on his reeking breast,
Though I make Panders use of ear and eye
No office vile to damme mine Enemy.
This course is but the first, twill not rest there,
The next shall change him into fire and Air. Exit.

Act. 4.
Scene. 1.
Enter Tymethes and Zenarchus. Tym. Nay, did ere subtlety match it?

Zen. Slight, led to a Lady budwinck'd!
Placed in state, and banqueted in Vizards.

Tym. All by this light: but all this nothing was
To the delicious pleasures of her Bed.

Zen. Who should this be?

Tym. Nay enquire not brother,
I Would give one eye to see her with the other.
See thou this Jewel? in the midst of night
I slipped it from her veil, unfelt of her,
'T may be so kind unto me as to bring
Her beauty to my knowledge.

Zen. Can not guess at her, nor at the Place^?

Tym. At neither for my heart; why I Will tell thee man
'Twas handled with such Art, such admired cunning,
What with my blindness and their general darkness,
That when mine eyes received their liberty, I was nere the nearer.
To them in full form I appeared unshrowded
But all their lights to me were masked and clouded.

Enter Tyrant and Mazeres observing. Zen. Fore heaven I do admire the cunning
often.

Tym. Nay you cannot out vye my admiration,
I had a feeling often beyond your passion.

Zen. Well, blow this over, see, our sister comes.

Enter Amphridote. Tyr. Art sure Mazeres that he courts our Daughter?

Maz. I Am sure of more my Lord, she favors him.

Tyr. That Beggar?

Maz. Worse my Lord, that villain Traitor, and yet worse my Lord.

Tyr. How?

Maz. Pardon my Lord, a riper time shall bring him forth.
Behold him there my Lord. Tymethes kisses her.

Tyr. Dares she so far forget respect to us,
And dim her own luster to give him grace?

Maz. Favors are grown to custom twixt them both,
Letters, close banquets, whisperings, private meetings.

Tyr. I Will make them dangerous meetings.

Amp. In faith my Lord I Will have this Jewel.

Tym. It Is not my gift Lady.

Tyr. What Is that Mazeres?

Maz. Marry, my Lord, she courtly begs a Jewel of him
Which he keeps back as Courtly, with fair words.

Amp. I have sworn my Lord.

Tym. Why upon that condition
You Will keep it safe and close from all strange eyes
Not wronging me, it is yours.

Amp. I swear.

Tym. It shall suffice.

They kiss, and Exit Zenarchus and Amphridote. Maz. It Is hers my Lord, at which
they part in kisses.

Tyr. I Will make those meetings bitter; both shall rue,
We have found Mazeres to this minute true.

Exit com* Mazere. Tym. No trick to see this Lady? heart of ill fortune!
The Jewel that was begged from me too was
The hope I had to gain her wished for knowledge.
Well; here is a heart within will not be quiet;
The eye is the sweet feeder of the soul,
When the^ taste wants, that keeps the memory whole;
It Is bad to be in darkness all know well,
Then not to see her what does it want of Hell?
What says the Note?
Unless your life you would forgo,
Whom we are, seek not to know.
Pish, all Idle.
As if she'de suffer death to threaten me
Whom she so bounteously and firmly loves?
No trick? excellent, twill fit; make use of that.

Enter Mazeres and Roxano. Maz. Enough, thou art honest; I affect thee much;
Go, train him to his ruin. Exit.

Rox. Let me alone my Lord; doubt not I Will train him:
Perhaps sir I have the Art.

Tym. Oh, I know thy mind.

Rox. The further lodge?

Tym. Enough, I Will meet thee presently.

Rox. Why so; I like one that will make an end of himself at few words;
A man that has a quick perseverance in ill:
A leaping spirit; he will run through horrors jaws
To catch a sin; but to oretake a virtue
He softly paces, like a man that is sent
Some tedious dark, unprofitable journey.
Corrupt is nature, she loves nothing more
Than what she most should hate, there is nothing springs
Apace in man but gray hairs, cares, and sins. Exit

Tym. I Will see her come what can; but what can prove?
She cannot seek my death, that seeks my love. Exit.

Scene. 2.
Enter Amphridote and Mazeres. Amp. My Lord, what is the matter?

Maz. I know not what;
The King sent.

Amp. Well, we obey.

Maz. Here comes his Highness. Enter Tyrant.

Tyr. How now what is she?

Amp. I my Lord?
Your Highness knew me once, your most obedient Daughter.

Tyr. They lie that tell me so, this is not she.

Amp. No, my Lord?

Tyr. No, for as thou art I know thee not,
And I shall strive still to forget thee more;
Thou neither bearst in memory my respects
Nor thy own worthes; how can we think of thee
But as of a dejected worthless creature?
So far beneath our grace and thy own luster, that we disdain to know thee.
Was there no choice mong our selected Nobles
To make thy favorite besides Tymethes?
Son to our enemy, a wretch, a Beggar?
Dead to all fortunes, honors, or their hopes,
Besides his breath, worth nothing; abject wretch,
To place thy affection so vigorously
On him can nere requite it; deny't not,
We know the favors thou have given him,
Pledges of love^, close letters, private meetings,
And whisperings are customary twixt you.
Come, which be his gifts? whereabout lie his pledge^s?

Amp. Your Grace has been injuriously informed,
I nere received pledge.

Tyr. Impudent creature,
When in our sight and hearing shamefully undervaluing thy best honors
And setting by all modesty of blood thou be^g'dst a Jewel of him.

Amp. Oh pardon me^ my Lord, I had forgot, here it is,
That is the same, and all that ere was his.

Tyr. Ha! this! how came this hither?

Amp. I gave it you my Lord.

Tyr. Who gave it thee?

Amp. Tymethes.

Tyr. He! who gave it him?

Amp. I know not that my Lord.

Tyr. Then here it sticks, Mazeres!

Maz. My Lord!

Tyr. It Is my Queens, my Queens, Mazeres.
How to him came this?

Maz. I can resolve your highness.

Tyr. Can Mazeres?

Maz He is some Ape, the husk falls from him now,
And you shall know his inside: he is a villain,
A Traitor to the pleasures of your Bed.

Tyr. Oh, I shall burst with torment.

Maz. He Is received this night
Into her bosom.

Tyr. I feel a whirle wind in me
Ready to tear the frame of my mortality.

Maz. I traced him to the deed.

Tyr. And saw it done?

Maz. I abused my eyes in the true survey often,
Tainted my hearing with lascivious sounds;
My loyalty did prompt me to be sure
Of what I found so wicked and impure.

Tyr. It Is spring tide in my Gall, all my blood's bitter,
Puh, lungs too.

Maz. This night.

Tyr. Lodovico.

Enter Lodovico. Lod. My Lord.

Try. How came thou up? lets heare^.

Lod. My Lord, my first beginning was a Broker.

Tyr. A knave^ from the beginning; there is no hope^ of him, Sertorio? Enter
Sertorio.

Ser. Here my Lord.

Tyr. We know thee just, how came thou up? let us hear.

Ser. From no desert that I can challenge but your highness favor.

Tyr. Thou art honest in that answer; go, report we are 40. leagues off
Rid forth: spread it about the Castle cunningly.

Ser. I Will do it faithfully my Lord.

Tyr. Do It cunningly,
Go, if thou should do it faithfully thou lie;
I Am lost by violence through all my senses,
I Am blind with rage, Mazeres, guide me forth
I tread in Air, and see no foot nor path,
I have lost myself, yet cannot lose my wrath.

Exeunt all but Amphridote. Amp. What have I heard? it dares not be but true*
Tymethes taken in adulterate trains,
And with the Queen my mother? now I hate him,
As beauty abhorres years, or Usurers charity;
He does appear unto my eye a Leaper
Enter Mazeres. Full of sinne^s black infection, foul Adultery:
Cursed be the hour in which I first did grace him,
And let Mazeres sterve in my disdain
That has so long observed me with true love,
Whose loyalty in this approves the same.

Maz. Madam.

Amp. My love? my Lord I should say, but would say my love.

Maz. I do beseech your Grace for what I have done
Lay no oppressing censure upon me;
I could not but in honesty reveal it,
Not envying in that he was my Rival,
Nor in the force of any ancient grudge
But as the deed in its own nature craved,
So mong the rest it was revealed to me:
Appe^aring so detested that your self
Gracious and kind, had you but seen the manner
Would have thrown by all pity and remorce
And took my office or one more in force.

Amp. Rise dear Mazeres, in our favors rise,
So far am I from censure to reprove thee
That in my hate to him I choose and love thee.

Maz. If constant service may be called desert, I shall deserve.

Amp. Man has no better part.

Maz. Why this was happily observed and followed; a side.
The King will to the Castle late to night,
And tread through all the Vaults, I must attend.

Amp. I wish that at first sight the had forced his end. Exit.

Maz. It Is better thus; so my revenge imports;
Now thrive my plots, the end shall make me great,
She mine, the Crown sits here I am then Compleate^. Exit.

Scene. 3.
Enter Queen and her maid with a light. Que. So, leave us here a while, bear
back the light,
I would not be discovered if he come,
You know his entertainment, so be gone,
I am not cheerful troth, what point so ere
My powers arrive at: I desire a league
With desolate darkedesse, and disconsolate fancies,
There is no music in my soul to night.
What should I fear when all my servants faiths
Sleep in my bounty, and no bribes not threats,
Can wake them from my safety? for the King,
He Is forty leagues rode forth, I heard it lately:
Yet heaviness like a Tyrant, proud in night
Usurps my power, rules where it has no right. She sleeps.

Enter Roxano as she sleeps with Tymethes hudwinckt. Tym. Me thinks this a
longer voyage than the first?

Rox. Pleasures once tasted makes the next seem worse.

Tym. Is that the trick?

Rox. Oh sir, experience proves it,
You came at first to enjoy what you nere knew,
Now all is but the same what ere you do.

Tym. I Will prove that false, the sight of her is new.

Rox. I have forgot a business to my Lord Mazeres,
My safety to the King relyes upon it,
You are in the house my Lord, this is the withdrawing Room.

Tym. I see nothing.

Rox. No matter sir, as long as you have
Feeling enough.

Tym. Is the Hood off?

Rox. It Is here in my hand sir,
I must crave pardon, leave you here a while,
But as you love my safety and your own
Remove not from this room till my return.

Tym. Well here is my hand I will not.

Rox. It Is enough sir. Exit.

Tym. Hist, art gone? then boldly I step forth
Cunning discoverer of an unknown beauty
As subtle as her plot: Thou art mask't too,
Opens a dark Lantern. Show me a little comfort, in this condensive
darkness;
Play the flatterer laugh in my face;
Why here is enough to perfect all my wishes;
With this I taste of that forbidden fruit
Which as she says death follows; death 'twill sting,
Soft, what rooms this? lets see, it is not the former
I was entertaind in, no, it some what differs:
Rich hangings still, Court deckings, I, and all --
He spies the Queen. Oh all that can be in man's wish comprised
Is in thy love immortal, in thy graces.
I am not the same flesh, my touch is alterd.

She awakes. Que. Have thou betrayed me? what have thou attempted?

Tym. Nothing that can be prejudicial
To the sweet peace of those illustrious graces.

Que. Oh my most certain ruin?

Tym. Admired Lady hear me, hear my vow,

Que. Oh miserable youth none saves thee now.

Tym. By that which man holds dearest dreadful Queen.
And all that can be in a vow contained
I Will prove as true, secret, and vigilant
As ever man observed with serious ve^rtue
The dreadful call of his departing soul.
Your own soul to your secrets, shall not prove more true
Than mine to it, to them, to all, to you.

Que. Oh misery of affection built on breath?
Were I as far past my belief in heaven
As in man's oaths, I were the foulest devil.

Tym. May I eat and nere be nourished, live and know nothing,
Love without enjoying, if ever --

Que. Come, this is more than needs.

Tym. There Is comfort then.

Que. You that profess such truth, shall I enjoyne^ you
To one poor penance then to try your faith?

Tym. Be It what it will command it.

Que. Spend but this hour, wherein you have offended
In true repentance of your sin, and all
Your hasty youth stands guilty of, and being clear,
You shall enjoy that which you hold most dear.

Tym. And if this penance I perform not truly
May I henceforth nere be received to favor.

Que. Why then I Will leave you to your task a while:
Most wretched, doubtful, strange distracted woman,
Ene drawn in pieces betwixt love and fear,
I weep in thought of both: bold venturous youth,
Twice I writ death, yet would he seek to know me,
He Will make no Conscience where his oaths bestow me* Exit.

Tym. I Am glad all is so well past, and she appeased,
I swear I did expect a harder penance
When she began to enjoyne me; why, this is wholesome
For soul and body, though I seldom use it.
Her wisdom is as pleasing as her beauty,
I never knew affection hastier borne,
With more true Art and less suspicion:
It so amazed me to know her my Mistress
I had no power to close the light again,
Enter the Queen with two Pistols. Unhappy that I was, peace, here she comes.
Down to thy penance, think of thy whole youth,
From the first minute that the womb conceived me
To this full heaped hour I do repent me,
With heart as penitent as a man, dissolving,
Of all my sins, borne with me, and borne of me;
Dishonest thoughts and sights, the paths of youth,
So thrive in mercy as I end in truth.

She shootes him dead. Que. Fly to thy wish, I pray it may be given,
Man in a twinkling is in earth and heaven:
I dealt not like a coward with thy soul,
Nor took it unprepared.
I gave him time to put his armor on
And sent him forth like a Celestial champion,
I loved thee with more care and truer moan,
Since thou must dye to taste more deaths than one
Too much by this pity and love confesses,
Had any warning fastened on thy senses:
Rash, unadvised youth, whom my soul weepe^s for,
How often I told thee this attempt was death?
Yet would thou venture on, fond man and kne^w?
But what destruction will not youth pursue?
Here long might thou have lived, been loved, enjoyed,
Had not thy will thy happiness destroyed;
Thought thou by oaths to have thy deede^s well borne?
Thou should have come when man was nere forsworn*
They are dangerous now; witness this breach of thine;
Who Is false to his own faith, will nere keep mine.
We must be safe, young man, the deed's unknown,
There are more loves, honors no more than one.
Yet spite of death I Will kiss thee; oh strange ill,
That for our fears we should our comforts kill?
Whom shall I trust with this poor bleeding body?
Yonder Is a secret Vault runs through the Castle
There for a while convey him; hapless Boy
that never knew how dear 'twas to enjoy.
Enter Tyrant with a Torch. Oh 'me confounded everlastingly,
Damnd to a thousand Tortures in that sight
What shall I frame? my Lord She runs to him.

Tyr. What Is she?

Que. Oh my sweet dearest Lord.

Tyr. Thy name?

Que. Thy poor affrighted and endangered Queen.

Tyr. Oh, I know thee now.

Que. Did not your Majesty hear the piteous shreikes
Of an enforced Lady?

Tyr. Yes, whose were they?

Que. Mine my most worthy Lord; behold this Villain
Sealed with his just desert: light here my King,
This violent youth, whom till this night, I saw not,
Being, as it seems, acquainted with the footesteps
Of that dark passage, broke through the Vault upon me
And with a secret Lantern searched me out;
And seized me at my Orisons alone
And bringing me by violence to this room
Far from my guard, or any hope of rescue,
Intending here the ruin of my honor;
But in the strife, as the good Gods ordained it
Reaching for succor, I lighted on a Pistol,
Which I presumed was not without his charge,
Then I redeemed mine honor from his lust,
So he that sought my fall lies in the dust.

Tyr. Oh let me embrace thee for a brave unmatchable
Precious, unvallewed admirable whore.

Que. Ha! what says my Lord?

Tyr. Come hither, yet draw nearer, how came this man
To's end? I would hear that, I would learn cunning,
Tell me that I may wonder and so lose thee.
There is no Art like this; let me partake
A subtlety no devil can imitate,
Speak, why is all so contrary to time?
He down and you up? ha, why thus?

Que. I am sorry for my Lord, I understand him not.

Tyr. The deed is not so monstrous in it self
As is the Art which ponders home the deed;
The cunning does amaze me past the sin,
That he should fall before my rage begin.

Que. My Lord.

Tyr. Come hither yet, one of those left hands give me,
Thou have no right at all;
Nothing but put a Ring upon a finger

Que. That Is a wrong finger for a Ring my Lord.

Tyr. And what was he on whom you bounteously bestowed this Jewel?

Que. I do not like that word. a side

Tyr. Look well upon it, do know it? I, and start.

Que. Oh heaven, how came this hither?
Your Highness gave me this, this is mine own.

Tyr. It Is the same ring, but yet not the same stone
Mystical Strumpet, do thou yet presume
Upon thy subtle strength? shak'st thou not yet?
Or is it only Art makes women constant, whom nature makes so loose?
I looked for gracious lightning from thy cheeks,
I see none yet; for a relenting Eye,
I can see no such sight; lust keeps in all;
My witness? where is my witness? rise in the same form.

Enter from below, Mazeres habited like Roxano. Que. Oh I Am betrayed.

Tyr. Is not you woman an Adulteress.

Maz. Yes, my good Lord.

Tyr. Was not this fellow caught for her desire?
Brought in a Mist? banquetted and received
To all her amplest pleasures!

Maz. True, my Lord,
I brought him, saw him feasted and re^ceiv'd,

Tyr. Down, down, we have too much.

Que. Oh it is Roxano.

Maz. So, by this slight I have deceived them both,
I Am took for him I strive to make her loath. Exit.

Tyr. Needs here more witnesses? I Will call up more.

Que. Oh no, here lies a witness against my self
Sooner believed than all their hired faiths;
Doom me unto my death, only except
The lingering execution of your look;
Let me not live tormented in that brow,
I do confess.

Tyr. Oh I felt no quick till now.
All witnesses to this were but dead flesh
I was insensible of all but this.
Would I had given my Kingdom so conditioned
That thou had nere confessed it.
Now I stand by the deed, see all in Action,
The close conveyance, cunning passages,
The Artfull fetch, the whisperlng close disguising;
The hour, the Banquet, and the baudy Tapers*
All stick in mine eye together; yet thou shall live.

Que. Torment me not with life, it asks but death.

Tyr. Oh had thou not confessed? had thou no slight?
Where was thy cunning there?
I see it now in thy confession.
Thou shall not dye as long as this is meat,
Thou kill'dst a Bucke which thou thy self shall eat.

Que. Dear sir?

Tyr. Here Is Dear struck dead with thy own hand,
It Is Venison for thy own tooth, thou know the relish
A dearer place has been thy Taster; hoa, Sertorio! Lodovico

They Enter. Ambo. Here sir.

Tyr. Drag hence that body, see it quartered straight,
No living wrath can I extend upon it,
Else torments, horrors, Gibbets, rackes and wheels
Had with a thousand deaths presented him,
Ere he had tasted one; yet thou shall live.
Here, take this Taper lighted, kneel, and weep,
I Will try which is spent first, that of thine eye,
I Will provide food for thee, thou shall not dye.
If there be hell for sins that men commit,
Marry a strumpet and she keeps the pit. Exit.

Que. I feared this misery long before it came,
My ominous dreams, and fearful dreadfulnesse
Promised this issue long before it was borne.

Enter Mazeres. Maz. Yonder she kneeles, little suspecting me
The neat discoverer of her Venery.
I were full safe had I Roxano's life
Which in this stream I fish for; how now Lady;
So nere the earth suites not a living Queen.

Que. Under the earth were safer and far happier.

Maz. What is it that can drive you to such discomforts*
To prize your glories at so mean a Rate?

Que. The treachery of my servants, good my Lord;

Maz. Dare they prove treacherous? most ignoble Vassals,
To the sweet peace of so divine a Mistress?

Que. I Am sure one Villain, whom I dearly loved,
Of whom my trust had made Election chief,
Perfideously betrayed me to the fury
Of my tempestuous unappeased Lord.

Maz. Let me but know him, that I may bestow
My service to your Grace upon his heart
And thence deserve a Mistress like your self.

Enter Roxano from below. Que. Oh me, too soon behold him.

Maz. Madam, stand by, let him not see the light.

Rox. Now I expect reward.

Maz. He dies were he my kinseman for that guilt,
Though twere as far to's heart as it is to the hilt.

Runs at Roxano. Rox. Ha? what was that? there is a reward with a vengeance.

Maz. Fall villain, for betraying of thy Lady,
Such things must never creep about the earth
To poison the^ right use of service -- a Trecher!

Que. This is some poor revenge, thanks good my Lord,
Into that cave with him from whence he rose
Not long since and betrayed me to the King.

Maz. O villain, in, and overtake thy soul.

Que. Here Is a perplexed breast, let that warm steel
Perform but the like service upon me,
And live the rarest friend to a Queens wish.

Maz. Oh pardon me, that were too full of evil,
I threat not Angels though I smite the Devil:
Doubt not your peace, the King will be appeased
There I Will bestow my service.

Que. We are pleased.

Maz. As much as comes to nothing; I Will not sue
To urge the King from that he urged him to. Exit.

Que. Betrayed where I reposed most trust? oh heaven,
There is no misery, fit match for mine.

Enter Tyrant Sertorio, Lodovico, bringing in Tymethes limbs. Tyr. So, bring
'em forward yet, there, there bestow the^m,
Before her eyes lay the divided limbs
Of her desired Paramour; so, you are welcome,
Lady you see your cheer, fine flesh, course fare,
Sweet was your lust, what can be bitter there?
By heaven, no other food thy taste shall have*
Till in thy bowels those Corpse find a grave.
Which to be sure of, come, I Will lock thee safe
From the worlds pity: hang those quarters up,
The bottom drinks the worst in pleasures cup. Exeunt omn.

Act. 5.
Scene. 1.
Enter Zenarchus solus. Zen. Oh my Tymethes! truest joy on earth!
Has thy fate proved so flinty? so perverse?
To the sweet spring both of thy youth and hopes?
This was Mazeres spite, that cursed Rival,
And if I fail not, his own plot shall shower
Upon his bosom like a falling Tower.
Enter Tyrant. My worthy Lord.

Tyr. Oh, you should have seen us sooner.

Zen. Why my Lord!

Tyr. The quarters of your friend passed by in Triumph,
A sight that (...) had pleased you well.

Zen. (...) villain to my fathers pleasure,
No friend of mine* the sight had pleased me (...)
Had I not like Mazeres, run my hate
Into the sin before it grew to act;
And killed it ere't had knotted* 'twas rare service^,
If your vexed Majesty conceive it right.
In politic Mazeres, serving more
In this discovery, his own vicious malice
Than any true peace that should make you perfect:
Suffering the hateful treason to be done
He might have stopped in his confusion.

Tyr. Most certain.

Zen. Good your Majesty bethink you
In manly temper and considerate blood;
Went he the way of loyalty, or your quiet,
After he saw the courtesies exceed
To Abuse your peace, and trust them with the deed?

Tyr. Oh no, none but a Traitor would have done it.

Zen. For my Lord, weigh't indifferently.

Tyr. I do, I do.

Zen. What makes it heinous, burdensome, and monstrous,
Fills you with such distractions, breeds such furies
In your incensed breast, but the deed doing?

Tyr. Oh.

Zen. The Intent had beene^ sufficient for his death,
And that full satisfaction; but the act --

Tyr. Insufferable,
Sertorio! where is Sertorio. Enter Sertorio.

Ser. My Lord.

Tyr. Seek out Mazeres suddenly, peace Zenarchus
Let me alone to trap him.

Zen. It may prove,
Behold my friend, how I express my love.

Tyr. Oh villain, had he pierced him at first sight,
Where I have one grief, I had mist ten thousand by it.

Enter Mazeres and Sertorio. Maz. I dreampt of some new honors for my late
service^,
And I wondered how he could keep off so long from my desert,

Tyr. Mazeres?

Maz. My loved Lord.

Tyr. I am forgetful
I am in thy debt some dignities Mazeres,
What shift shall we make for thee? thy late service
Is warm still in our memory and dear favor:
Prithee discover to's the manner how
Thou tookest them subtlely.

Maz. I was received into a waiters room my Lord.

Tyr. Thou wast!

Maz. And in a vizard helped to serve the banquet.

Tyr. Ha, ha!

Maz. Saw him conveyed into a Chamber privately.

Tyr. And still thou let'st him run?

Maz. I let him play my Lord.

Tyr. Ha, ha, ha!

Maz. I watched still nere, till her arms claspt him.

Tyr. And there thou let'st him rest.

Maz. There he was caught my Lord.

Tyr. So art thou here; drag him to execution he shall dye.
With tortures bove the thought of Tyranny. Exit.

Zen. No words are able to express my gladness,
It Is such a high borne^ rapture that the soul
Pertakes it only.

Enter Amphridote and Lodovico. Amp. My Lord Mazeres led
Unto his death?

Lod. It proves too true dear Prince^sse.

Amp. Cursed be the mouth that doomed him, and for e^ve^r
Blasted the hand that parts him from his life.
Was there none fit to practice Tyranny on
But whom our heart elected? misery of love!
I must not live to think often.

Zen. Here Is my Sister,
I could not bring that news will please her better,
My news brings that command over your passions, you must be merry.

Amp. Have you warrant for it Brother?

Zen. Yes, strong enough in faith; here me, Mazeres
By this time is at his everlasting home;
Where ere his body lies, I struck the stroke
I wrought a bitter pill that quickly choked him.

Amp. Oh me, my soul will out, some wine there hoa!

Zen. Wine for our Sister, for the news is worth it.

Enter Lod* with wine and Exit. Am. It will prove dear to both; so, give it
me; now leave us.

Zen. Revenge nere brought forth a more happy issue
Than I think mine to be.

She poisons the wine. Am. I'me^ setting forth Mazeres, here Zenarchus.

Zen. Thou art not like this hour, joviall.

Am. I shall be after this.

Zen. That does't if any,
Wine does both help defects, and causes many.
Here Is to the deed faith of our last revenge.

Amp. Dying men Prophecy, faith it is our last end;
Now I must tell you brother, that I hate you,
In that you hive betrayed my loved Mazeres.

Zen. What Is this?

Amp. His deed was loyal, his discovery just,
He brought to light a monster and his lust.

Zen. Nay if you grow so strumpet like in your behavior to me,
I Will quickly cool that insolence.

Amp. Peace, peace,
There is a Champion fights for me unseene,
I need not fear thy thereats.

Zen. Indeed no Harlot
But has her Champion, besides Baud and Varlet; oh!

Amp. Why law you now such geere will nere thrive^ with you.

Zen. I Am sick of thy society, poison to mine eyes.

Amp. It Is lower in thy breast the poison lies.

Zen. How?

Amp. It Is for Mazeres.

Zen. Oh you virtuous powers,
What a right strumpet? poison under love?

Amp. That man can nere be safe that divides love. She dies.

Zen. Nor she be honest can so soon impart,
Oh ware that woman that can shift her heart. Dies.

Scene. 2.
Thunder and lightning. A blazing star appears. Enter Tyrant. Tyr. Ha?
thunder? and thou marrow melting blast
Quick winged lightning; and thou blazing star,
I like not thy prodigious bearded fire;
Thy beams are fatal: ha? behold the Influence
Of all their malice in my childrens mines?
Their states malignant powers have envyde,
And for some have struck with their envies died:
It Is omenous; within there?

Enter Sertorio and Lodovico. Lod. Here my Lord.

Tyr. Conveigh those bodies a while from my fight.

Ser. Both dead my Lord.

Tyr. Yes, and we safe, our death we nee^d less feare^,
Usurpers issue often proves dangerous,
We depose others, and they poison us,
I have found it on Records, it is better thus.

Enter the Old King, Lapirus, Fidelio, Amorpho, all disguised like Pilgrims.
Lap. My Lord, this Castle is but slightly guarded.

King. It Is as I hoped and wished; now bless us heaven,
What horrid and inhumaine spectacle
Is yonder that presents it self to sight?

Fid. It seems three quarters of a man hung up.

Kin. What Tyranny has been exercised of late? I dare not venture on.

Amo. Fear not my Lord, our habits give us safety.

Lap. Behold, the Tyrant makes toward us.

Tyr. Holy, and reverent Pilgrims, welcome.

Kin. Bold strangers, by the Tempest beaten in.

Tyr. Most welcome still, we are but stewards for such guests as you,
What we possess is yours, to your wants due,
We are only rich for your necessities.

King. A generous, free, aad charitable mind
Keeps in thy bosom to poor Pilgrims kind.

Tyr. It Is time of day to dine my friends; Sertorio?

Enter Sertorio. Ser. My Lord?

Tyr. Our food.

Ser. It Is ready for your highness.

Land Music. A banquet brought in, and by it a small Table for the Queen.
Tyr. Sit, pray sit, religious men right welcome
Unto our Cates. Grave sir I have observed
You waste the virtue of your serious eye
Too much on such a worthless objects as that is.
A Traitor when he lived called that his flesh;
Let hang, here is to you, we are the oldest here,
Round let it go, fe^ede, if you like your cheer.

Enter Sertorio. Ser. My Lord.

Tyr. How now?

Ser. Ready my Lord.

Tyr. Sit merry. Exit.

King. Where ere I look these limbs are^ in mine eye.

Lap. Some wretch on whom he wrought his Tyranny.

Fid. Hard was his fate to light into his mercy.

Amorp. Peace, he comes.

Soft Music. Enter the Tyrant with the Queen, her hair loose, she makes a
Curtsie to the Table. Sertorio brings in the flesh with a skull all bloody,
they all wonder. Tyr. I perceive strangers more desire to see
An object than the fare before them set;
But since your eyes are serious Suitors grown
I will discourse; what is seen shall now be known.

King. Your bounty every way conquers poor strangers.

Tyr. You Creature whom your eyes so often visit
Held mighty sway over our powers and thoughts,
Indeed we were all hers.
Besides her graces, there were all perfections;
Unless she speaks, no music: till her wishes
Brought forth a monster, a detested issue
Poisoning the thoughts I held of her.
The Old King sends forth Amorpho. She did from her own ardour undergo
Adulterous baseness with my professed foe;
Her lust strangely betrayed, I ready to surprise them,
Set on fire by the abuse, I found his life
Cunningly shifted by her own dear hand
And far enough conveyed from my revenge:
Unnaturally she first abused my heart,
And then prevented my revenge by Art.
Yet there I left not; though his trunk were cold
My wrath was flaming, and I exercised
New vengeance on his carcass; and gave charge
The body should be quartered and hung up; it was done^,
This as a penance I enjoined her to
To taste no other sustenance; no nor dares
Till her loves body be consumed in hers.

Kin. The sin was great, so is the penance grievous.

Tyr. Our vow is signed.

Kin. And was he Lydian borne?

Tyr. He was no less, son to mine Enemy,
A banished King; Tymethes was his name.

Kin. Oh me, my son Tymethes.

Lap. Passion may spoil us: sir, we often have heard
Of that old King his father; and that justly
This Kingdom was by right due to his sway.

Tyr. It was, I think it was, till we called in
By policy and force deceived his confidence,
Showed him a trick of war and turned him out.

Kin. Sins boast is worse than sin.

Enter Fidelio. Fid. All Is sure, the guards are seized on.

Lap. Good.

Fid. The Passage^ strongly guarded.

Tyr. Holy sir, what is he?

Lap. Our brother, a poor Pilgrim, that gives notice
Of a Religious father that attends
To bear us company in our Pilgrimage.

Tyr. Oh, ho, it is good, it is very good.

Kin. Alas poor Lady, it makes me weep to see what food she eats.
I know your mercy will remit this penance.

Tyr. Never, our vow's irrevocable, never;
The Letcher must be swallowed rib by rib,
His flesh is sweet, it melts, and goes down merrily,
They discover themselves. Ha? what are^ these?

Lap. Speranza.

Tyr. Ha?

King. Villain, this minute looses thee, thou Tyrant.

Tyr. Pilgrims wear arms? the old King? and Lapirus?
Betrayed? confounded? oh, I must dye forsworn;
Break vow, bleed Whore, there is my jealousy flowne^.
He kills his Queen. Oh happy man, it is more revenge to me
Then all your aims, I have killed my jealousy.
I have nothing now to care for more than hell
'T had been if you had struck me ere she fell.
I had left her to your lust, the thought is bitterness,
But she first fallen; ha, ha, ha.

King. Dye cruel murtherous Tyrant.

They all discharge at him. Tyr. So, laugh away this breath,
My lust was nere more pleasing than my death. Dies.

Lap. As full possessed as ever, and as rich
In Subjects hearts and voices; we present thee
The complete sway of this usurped Kingdom.

Kin. I am so borne betwixt the violent streams
Of Joy and passion, I forget my state;
To all our thanks and favors, and what more
We are in debt to all your free consent
We will discharge in happy government.

Enter the Old Queen disguised, a Boy with her. Que. The peacefull'st reign
that ever Prince enjoyed.

Kin. Already a Petition? suitors begin betimes
We are scarce warm in our good fortune yet, what are you?

Que. Unworthiest of all the joys this hour brings forth.

She discovers. Kin. Our dearest Queen?

Que. Your poor distressed Queen.

Kin. Oh let me light upon that constant breast,
And kiss thee till my soul melt on thy lips:
Our Joys were perfect, stood Tymethes there,
We are old; this Kingdom wants a hopeful heir.

Que. Your joys are perfect though he stand not there,
And your wish blessed behold a hopeful heir:
Stand not amazed, it is Manophes.

Kin. How just the Gods are? who in their due time
Return what they took from us.

Que. Happy hour,
Heaven has not taken all our happiness;
For though your elder met ill fate, good heaven
Has thus preserved your younger for your heir.

Kin. Prepare those limbs for honorable burial,
And noble Nephew all your ill is lost
In your late newborn goodness, which we will reward,
No storm of fate so fierce but time destroys,
And beats back misery with a peale of Joys.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS.

