THE Pleasant and witty Play of the Cheasts renewed, with Instructions both
to learn it easily, and to play it well. Lately translated out of Italian into
French: And now set forth in English by James Rowbothum.

PRINTED AT LONdon by Roulande Hall, for James Rowbothum, and are to be sold at
his shop under Bow church in Cheap side.

1562.

LIBER AD LECTOREM.
HVne ego pingo iocu^ lusori fraud carente^
Caetera sunt variis omnia plena dolis.
Nobilis hic iocus est, vllas nec suscitat iras,
Atrae nec quicquam bilis inesse potest.
Caetera se^per habe^t fucos, hic semper (...)
Caetera fraus ornat, nullus in hoc dolus est.
Etsi flexibili ligno latrunculus omnis
Cultro excindatur, stetque carens anima
Hic tamen armati nunc militis induit arma
Belligerique gerit ligneus effigiem.
Sunt hic regis omnis qui suscepere regendi
Penthesilea quibus prima locata loco est,
Su^t comites, equites, elepha^tes, sunt peditesque
Ex quibus est acies ordine structa bono.
Ludite nunc reges, animis secludite curas
Regalique ioco tempora conterite:
Ludice nu^c proceres, nu^c anglica lude iuue^tus
Et mercatores ludite, lude puer.
Vxor lude, rogo, colludas atque marite
Et simul innuptae ludite pierides
Ludite ductores, ludat quoque miles in armis.
Ludite milltiae, ludite vterque domi.
Si quis in hoc abaco cupiat perdiscere quicqua^
Me legate vt le^^^ doctior esse queat.
W. Ward.

To the right honorable, the Lord ROBERT DVDDELEY Master of the Queens
horse, and Knight of the noble order of the Sarter, James Rowbothum wissheth
long life with increase of godly honor.
AS THE grave and waightye affairs of Princes (most honorable) require men of
profou^de knowledge and experience, which must daily consider and east in
their minds some good, wholesome and profitable counsel for the government of
the common wealth by good laws: so also must they for recreation sake,
surcease sometime from those extreme travails of the mind, and refreshe their
memory and careful heads with some recreatiue exercise meet for their
estate. And as there be for noble men noble pastimes (and invented first
only for the nobility) as feats of arms, turneys, fighting at the
barriers, runninge at the tilt, clean ryding of horses, with other like,
whereby the nobility of realms was first increased and great renown gotten,
and were done altogether with the strength of the arm and courage of the heart:
so is there also for the like, certain other witty inventions of plays or
games to recreate the mind withal, and are learned and exercised not with the
outward strength of the body, but with the inward force of wit and
intelligence, to the great sharpening of the ententiue parts of man's
understanding, the which I will not trouble your Lordship with in numbringe
them: but among so many as are used and exercised in courts of Princes, in
Lords, Knights, and Gentelmens houses, none (in my judgment) is more meet
for noble men, then the noble play or game of the Cheastes invented first by a
noble Philosopher, or as some think by the noble King Xerxes. Wherein if I
should declare perticulerly the wit, the invention, ye warlyke order, the
polityke conueyaunce, that great pleasure is taken in it, of them that have
practiced the knowledge of it, I should seem to tedious unto your Lordshippe:
but yet left I should pretermit the commendation of such a kingly game, I
thought it my duty to present your Lordship with this little book, teaching an
order how to play perfitly and to the advantage, with the names that both the
French men, Spaniardes and Italians call the Cheastmen by, and also the fashion
and ordering of ye chrast bourd, which was never before this time in our tongue
as far as I can learn with so good and compendious a way to learn the
same. And although I know that both your Lordship, with diverse other of ye
noble men and gentle me^ of this realm ca^ play excellent ly at this game of
ye Cheast, and have as deep knowledge therein as either French men, Italians
or Spaniardes have: yet because none ever attempted to put in writynge the
feate, wit, and policy that is in it, and that they understand. I was so
bold (having found it translated out of French into English after the form
and manner in all points as it is here printed) to choose your honor to whom
I might offer this simple present, trustinge that as your Lordshippe does
alwais gratefully accept more the giuers good will, than the value of the gift,
the same will receive this book into the number of those which other have
given unto your honor, although of greater importance, yet not of greater
good will. Which I doubt not but in many things you will delight to read, and
to consider when so ever occasion shall be offered to your lordship to play at
the same game, being a pastime without all tediousnes, malice, melancoly, anger,
gyle, or deceit, and has in it self a certain majesty both in the setting
of the men and also in naming them. Besides that it has formam instructae
acici and of a raunged battle the King placed in the middle as is seen by
the settinge of the men. The cause why, of whom, and when it was made, your
Lordship shall read in the beginning of the book which is a thing worthy to be
known, for that it is now so common lie used in this realm, as well of noble
men as of others of lower estate and degree, to the great quickening of their
wit and memory. Which game as it is kinglye and honest, and meet for diverse
sorts of men, so is it (in many men's judgments) not altogether
unprofitable for Captains, Conductours of armies, and common Soldiers. For out
of those wodden men may some knowledge be had how to march and set forth
Soldiers in the field, how to guard a King, and what forces ought to be in
the sides of ye battle, as in ye discourse of playing it, men may easily see.

Thus leaving to hold your Lordshippe with any longer Epistle, from the
reading of the book, I wish the same long life in health, with much
increase of vertus and honor. ()

Your Lordshippes to command James Rowbothum.

To the reader.
IT may peradventure seem strange unto some that any man should bestow his
labor and time in setting out such kind of books as this is, whereby men may
learn to play, when in deed most men are given rather to play then to study.
And because there may be alleged some reasons, why no man ought to allure any
unto games: some more curious then wise will by and by catch occasion if not to
condemn yet to disprove the travail and pains that has been taken in this,
and so think that either the author or the translatour might have been much
better occupied. Whose opinion and judgment I grant were true and good if it
were a book co^teinig any art of dise play, of cogging, or setting dyce, of
falshod in card play, or any other like sleights for the deceiving one another
or for sturring men to anger as such games do often times. But for as much as
this game or rather kingly pastime is not only void of all craft, gyle,
fraud, deceyt, color, swearing, staring, impacience, fretting, or falling
out: but also it breadeth in plays a certain study, policy, wit, forcast,
memory, with other properties, to make men circumspect not only in playing
this game, but also comparing it to a public government, or more properly a
batttel, all men as well Captains as soldiers, may pike out of these wodde^
pieces some pretty policy how to lead or conduct lively men in the field. For
this game has a certain allusion or similitude of a ranged battle, as by
order in placing the men and setting them forth in their march, it may easily
appear. The king is here as a king in the field placed in the middle of his
army, and has his well-beloved queen next unto him, and his nobility about
him, with the soldiers in the forfront orderly set. And although this be but
a brief instruction to teach to play, yet the onset being given, some other
will follow to amplify or to finishe this ingenious and pretty devise, that
thereby the subtelties and hidden gyles of this game may be more discovered,
with the manner how to play without bourd or men walking or riding on horse
back with as great delight and contentation as if they had the chestebourde and
men in their hands, which thing is done by diligent noting the place and
houses wherein each man stands, and whither or into what house he marches or
may march, every one having his way appointed him to go. And in the mean time
content your self with this, for I assure you the difficulty to express or
set out the types and figures of the men is so much and the chardges so
great, that as yet no man would ever gladly take in hand to prynt them.
Albeit Hieronimus Cardan' in his book de varietate rerum, gives a certain
form and manner, how to set out in print the cheste bourd and the men upon it,
according to the diversity of the colors black and white. But he that would
follow him should cut as many bourdes and diverse figures of men as the play has
diverse ways to be played, which would be intolerable charges. And
therefore (curiosity set a part) take in good worth these types and figures
here presented until some better invention be found. For I doubt not but
there be in England as good heads as either Italians or Spaniards, yt can if
they would invent as fine a way to plai at this game as this is: but yet when
a thing is begone, it is the easier and the sooner made an end of. Now they that
will play well at this game, must beware that they talk not with any other
standinge by, nor give ear to any that talks by, for then shall his senses
be occupied so with other matters that his enemy that plays against him will
with his diligence give him ye foil: for this game (as the best players say)
requires the whole man, and consequently all the senses. Take heed also that
the by standers (which commonly see more then the plaiers) do neither by
sign or word admonish your adverse party of any good or gaynfull draughte:
for that is one thing among many other that causes choler, and offends one
of ye plaiers, but it is such a kind of choler that passes away lightly,
far unlike ye dyse plaiers anger, for he fretteth, he fumeth, be curses, and
banneth the dyse, and despyteth his ill luck, and you at the chest, blame not
your men but your self, so that if you have a mate you say commonly, if I had
played thus or thus I had saved the mate, herein is no offense to any but unto
your self, and anon it is gone. Such and other like pleasure is there in
this game, being a most princely exercise, and full of good policy, and
quickenynge of a man's wit. These things considered, I thought it no labor
evil bestowed to occupy me self in the translation hereof, at times
extraordinary, when my more earnest studies and busynes were done: Thus fare
well gentell Reader.

The cheastes play.
The first Chapter.
THE principle is to know the pieces, to wit, the name, the number, and the
seat of every one. As for the fashion of the pieces, that is according to the
fantasy of the workman, which makes them after his manner. Some make them like
men, whereof the king is the highest, and the Queen (which some name Amasone
or lady) is the next, both two crowned. The Bishops some name Alphius, some
fools, and some name them Princes, like as also they are next unto the king
and the Queen: other some call them archers, and their are fashioned according
to the will of the workman. The knights some call horsemen, and they are men
on horse back. The Rookes some call Elephantes, cariyng towers upon their
backs, and men within the towers. The Paunes some call footmen, and they are
soldiers on foot, cariyng some of them pykes, other some harquebushes, other
some halbards, and other some the tauelyn and target. Other makers of Cheastmen
make them of other fashions: but the use thereof will cause perfect knowledge.

(Our English Cheastmen, are commonly made nothing like unto these foresaid
fashions: to wit, the king is made the highest or lo^gest: the Queen is
longest next unto him: the Bishop is made with a sharp top and cloven in
the mid dest not much unlike to a bishops Myter: the knight has his top cut
asloope, as though being dubbed knight: the Rooke is made lykest to the King
and the Queen, but that he is not so long: the Paunes he made the smalest and
least of all, and thereby they may best be known. This have I added hereunto
good reader for the better understanding and knowing of ye said cheastmen).

I will not therefore figurate them at this present: but only in speaking of
every piece particularly, I will name them according to the most frequent
phrase in the English tongue. To wit, the (king being the head of the play) I
will name king: the Queen (being the best piece in the game) I will name
queen: the bishops (being next unto the king and queen) I will name bishops: the
knights (being next unto the bishops) I will call knights: the Rookes (being
next unto ye knights and standing in the corners) I will call Rookes: the
Paunes (standing in a row before them al) I will call Paunes.

Of the Rooke, or Tower.
THe Tower is named amongst the Spaniards, Portingales, and, Italians Rocho,
which is as much to say in their language, as a Fortress, because it is a
great vpholdynge to the game, also the Towers are set in the vttermoste ends of
the Cheastbourd, as a strong rampire in the front. Their office is not to
remove but in necessity, and chiefelye for the succoure of their King.

Of the knight or horseman.
THe Horseman is also named, as representinge a man of Arms, which fights
on horsebarke, and his seat is next unto the Tower, from whence he must come
into battle, and place him self where he may most offend. For there is no
piece in the Cheastbourd that more readily may do hurt then he, because of his
marching forth, which is made from three into three places, to wit, from
white into black, and from black into white, and yet he ceasseth not to make
his assault or leap, although he be enuyroned, provided that he have room to
place him self in.

Of the Bishop or Archer.
IN the ancient time the French men named him Fool, which seems unto me an
improper name. The Spaniardes named him prince, with some reason: For (as
Prince of the blood) he is nerer unto the King and the Queen then any other of
the Cheastmen. And some name him Archer, because that their draughtes draw
always aside, and never forth right: as it is the office of a good Archer or
Har quebusier in war: which never planteth him self right against his
enemy, but in skirmishinge or in plain fight, make semblaunce to shoot at
one, and shoots at another, not remainynge long in a place. If our Cheasse
Archer have the passage open, he may go from one corner of the Cheastbourde
into the other. But as for the advantage of him, or of the Knight, it is little,
and has therein but the disposings of the game, in the which some times the
one is better then the other. Like as also there be players or gamsters, which
help them selves better with the horseman then with ye archer, and some other
contrariwise.

Of the King.
THe king is the head of the Conducte, According to the Spaniards, he has
liberty to assault three roumes or stepps, as he lists, yea he may make the
assault of the knight, so that he have not the way: but it must be then
whylest he is yet in his lodgyng, and that he is not removed, otherwise he can
make no more but one step. Although that in Italy the king (if he have the
way open) may run all the length of the Cheastbourd, or may remove a Paune,
to set him self in his place. And in France they cause him to make two steps
alonge his front. Provided that there be no pieces between him and the Rooke,
and set the rooke in the place of the king. Behold here his marchinges, and
his liberty, provided that he have had no check. And for to tell you the truth
the king was played none otherwise in the ancient time, but after the manner
of the Frenchmen, yea the most part of the Spaniards and Portingales (who are
esteemed the best players) did play it so.

Of the Queen or Amasone.
SOme name her Queen, other some Lady, it is the best piece on the
Cheastbourd, also she represents the Kings wife. Her lodginge is next to the
Kings, and has as great a train as the king. Briefly she represents a
Kings Lieutenant in an army: she does (when she will) the office of yerooks and
also of ye bishops. And because ye seldom the wives go to war, and that the
first that so much aduauntaged their kind (as to go thither and work
merueyles) were the Amasones, therefore some name her Amasone white, Amasone
black. But above all, the Players ought to keep her well, because that the
game is seldom won, after that she is once lost.

Of the Paune or foteman.
THe footeman is the rampire and the target of the great Cheast men, and by the
kings especialtie: For this cause that when he can proceed so well in war,
as to arrive at the last rank of his enemies, he is chosen and made the best
piece of the play, to wit, he is the Queen. And if in making himself Queen,
he can give check, he is so much the more to be esteemed. The marchynge forth
of the Paune, for the first time, is to make two assaults or leapes, if he
will, or one only, marchyng always right before him, and not aside. And the
best Paunes are next unto the King. Also, therefore when check is given to ye
king, the Paune can not pass the bars of his way for to succor him: that is
to say, if check be given to the King, the Paune can not march aside, be it
on the left, or on the right, for to cover his King: for his way is beset on
both sides, and can not go but right forth, and always step by step,
after his first marchyng forth, provided that his way be not stopped. It is
true, that in taking, he marches awrye one only step, of what side so ever
it be, and can not take that which is right against him. It shall be also best
for the Paune, not to auaunce him self much within the camp of his enemy.

The Checker or Cheastbourde, whereupon are placed the pieces, every one
according to his order.


Behold here the form of the Checker or Cheastbourde, and how the Cheastmen
ought to be placed in every house, whereof there are sixty four in all. To
wit, thirty two on either half or side, whereof the eight uttermost opposites
(or one against another) are full of principal pieces on both sides. The other
eight also next them on both sides are full of Pawnes. So that there are
thirty two pieces, which is to each player sixtene, whereof there be eight
great ones and eight little ones. And the rowmes where every one of them are
set, I will name Seats: the other which be empty, I will name them places or
houses indifferently. Thorough the which, (as well Seats as places,) the great
Cheastmen and small do run according to their order, be it in aduancinge or
reculinge, for to give the mate to the contrary King. For to be able to tell you
why there is so many houses, and why there is neither mo nor less, that
passes my intelligence. Neither has any man spoken of it. And I believe that
there will be found none other resolution but only the will of him that made
the play, of whom there are diverse opinions. Some say that it was Yerses:
and yet the Spaniardes do retain the name Aredres, albeit corrupted by the
mutation of s into d set before r.

Other some say that they were two brethren: The one named ^idie, and the
other Tirrhene, who being afflicted with great hunger and famine did invent
this play, to the end that in playinge of it, they might employe their
spirits so behementlye, that they might more easily pass the faminall
affliction. And in deed they passed the time so well, that they made but three
meals in two days.

General rules.
YOU must play no cast (or draughte) in vain, if it be not for necessity.

You must make not fault.

You must not be to hasty to play.

If you have a good draughte to make, look if there be not a better. If you
have advantage, you may well make a change, and yet not loose it.

If you have advantage, wherewith you may win the game, take good heed for
undoing your game, nor to abandone your king, for to win only a paune.

The principal thing that you have to do, is to set your king in a sure
place, when he marches forth.

The two Paunes which be on that side where the king is transported, ought
not to be removed, but in great necessity: for that, that often times the game
is lost by remouinge the Rookes Paune or knights Paune one room, because that
not there the contrary King finds the way of the mate.

You must go abroad with your pieces, and not keep them enclosed. It is good
that the two Paunes of the King and of the Queen be upon their fourth houses:
Yea, also those of the Bishopps.

It is to be noted, for the well understanding of the marching for the of the
Cheastmen, that the cheastbourd ought to be set in such sort, that the Rooke
on the right side be set in a white place, and take ye cheast men which you
will, white or black. Further, you must know the name of ye pieces and of ye
houses and places: for ye cheastmen which are of the kings side, be named the
Kings Cheastmen, and likewise the Kings houses, unto the midst of the
Cheastbourd: Because that from thence forward, those are the contrary Kings
houses. As for example, the Paune which is before thy King, is in the second
house of thy King: and if thou remove him one step, he shall be in the third,
or if he go as far as he may, he shall be in ye fourth house of thy King: but
afterward if he pass further, he shall be in the fourth house of the king of
thy contrary party. And so it is of all the other Cheastmen of that side.

The other side is that of the queen as well in cheastme^ as in houses: for this
cause it is needful to have before you a Cheastbourde with the Cheastmen, for
to see with your eye the art which shall be declared in this present treatise.
And after having presupposed the game you may begin after two sorts.

The second Chapter.
THE first manner is to begin with the Kings Paune. And the second is to
begin with the Queens Paune. The first (according to my judgment) is best.
That is to wit, to begin with the Kings Paune, as far as he may go. (I will
cause thee always to hold the white part.) And if thy contrary party play
his Kings Paune as far as he may, thou shall play thy kings Knight to three
houses from the kings bishop. And if he play his kings knight to three houses
from his kings bishop, thou shall take with thy knight his kings Paune, and if
he take also thy paune with his knight, play thy queen before thy king.



And if he retire his knight into the third house of his kings bishop, you
shall give him check with thy queen, in turning her away from thy knight the
which ye shall remove into the third house of his queens bishop. And he can
not play so well but that he shall lose his queen.





If in steed of taking thy Paune with his knight, he take it with his queen,
you shall take his with thine, which afterward shall be taken with his knight.
This done, thou shall give him check with thy knight in taking the Paune of his
queen's bishop, and therefore he shall be forced to loose his queens Rooke.



And if he take not thy Paune, but (to save his queen) places her in This 5
table follows the play three marked A. 2.
the third house of his queens bishop.

And if he remove not his Knight, but play his queen before his king, thou
shall take his knight with thy Queen: then he will play his Queen's Paune one
room against thy Knight, to the end that if thou remove it from thence, he
may take thy Queen. For this cause thou shall play thy Queens Paune as
far as he may go, and if he play the Paune of his Kings bishop one step,
thou shall play the paune of thy kings bishop as far as he may go, and if he
take thy knight with his queens paune, thou shall take his paune with that of
thine, and if he play his other knight to the second house of his queen, thou
shall remove thine to the third house of thy queens bishop: by that means
thy queen shall remain safe. And if ye paune of his kings bishop take thy
paune, you shall play thy knight to the fourth place of his queen for to take
her, and if he set her in her third house, thou shalt take his paune with
thine.



And if he take thy Paune with his This table is the continuatio^ of the first,
leuing the 2. marked with. B. 1.
knight, thou shall set thy queens bishop in the fourth house of thy kings
bishop, and in so doing he shall loose of force his knight: but if he take not
thy paune with his knight, he shall have lost his.



Thou shall play thy kings bishop This table follows the. 3. of an other
fashion tha^ the article of the. 5.
to the fourth house of his queens knight for to take her, and if instead of
taking her, she take thy bishop, thou shalt give him check with thy knight,
in taking the paune of his queen's bishop, then shall thou take his Queen, for
the gain is much greater then of the Rooke.



And if instead of placyng his queen in the third house of his bishop, he
This table follows the last before.
place her in the fourth, thou shalt set thy queen's bishop in the third room
of thy king for to take her.

And if he give the check with his queen in the fourth house of his Rooke,
thou shall cover it with thy bishop, by which means he can do no more but
remove her into the third house of his bishop, and thou shall play the Paune
of thy queen's knight, as far as he may go, for to take his queen, then he
shall be forced to set his queen in ye third house of his bishop, and thou shall
play thy kings bishop into the fourth house of his knight for to take his
queue, and if she take it, thou haste thine instruction in the last article
before. And he can not play but ill: for if it come to pillage (or spoil) of
queen's thou shall have still the advantage of the check of thy knight for to
take his Rooke. And therefore he shall be always the weaker both in great and
small pieces, as shall be declared in the article following.



And if he set his Queen in the This table is the continuatio^ of the 3. of
another manner then the other.
third house of his King, thou shalt yet give him check with thy knight,
according to the last instruction. But if he set her in the third place of
his Kings knight, (which is the best that he could play) ye shall spoil
together your queens, and then shalt ye give the check with thy knight, in
taking the paune of his queens bishop for to take his Rooke.



Another manner of playing.
IF thou have the draughte, thou shall play the kings Paune as far as he
may go. If he play so likewise his kings Paune, thou shall play thy kings
knight into three houses from the Bishop. And if he play his queens Knight
into three roumes from his Bishop, thou shalt play thy kings Bishop into
the fourth house of thy queens Bishop: If he play his kings Bishop into
the fourth house of his queens Bishop, thou shalt play the Paune of thy
queens Bishop one step: and if he play his kings Knight into the third
room of his Bishop, thou shall play the queen's Paune one step: If he
play his queens Paune one step, thou shall play thy kings Rooke in the
place of the Bishop: and if he play his queens Bishop into the fourth
house of thy kings Knight, thou shall set thy Queen in the third house of
thy queens Knighte, and shall win a paune, to wit, yt of his kings bishop, by
thy bishop, or yt of his quenees knight by thy queen. But if he play his
queens Knight into the fourth house of his Rooke, for to take thy Queen, you
shall take the Paune of his kings bishop with thine, saying check: then
shalt thou set thy Queen in the fourth house of thy queens Rooke, and if his
King take thy Bishop, thy Queen shall take his Knight. But if he take not
thy Bishop, but plaieth the Paune of his queen's bishop one step, you shall
play the Paune of thy queen's Knight as far as he may go: for if thou remove
thy bishop, thou shall either loose him, or thy Queen: by this means thou
shalt be stronger then he by one Paune, because that if he take thy Bishop,
thy Queen shall take his Knight, and if he will take her with his Queen, the
exchange shall be made by thy knights Paune, and so shall thou still be stronger
by one paune.



Another manner of playing. Ye must finishe the game.

I If thou play the first, thou shall set thy kings Paune in the fourth
house, if he play also with his Paune the same, then set thy kings knight in
the third house of thy Bishop, for to take his paune, if he do not save it.
The which he may do in three sorts: to wit, in placinge his queens
Knighte in the third house of his Bishopps, which is the best play: or in
saving him with his queens Paune, which is not so sure, because that the
passage of the kings Bishop is stopped: Or with the Paune of his kings
Bishop, which is the worste. If he save it with his said Paune of the
kings Bishop, thou shalt not fail to take him with thy Knight: and if with
his Paune he take thy knight thy Queen shall give him check, in making her
draughte unto the fourth house of his kings Rooke.



He may cover it with the Paune of his kings Knight, or set his King in the
second house. If he cover it with his Paune, thou shalt take with thy Queen
his kings Paune, which is in his fourth house, and shall say check. If he
cover it with his queen, thou shall take his kings Rooke with thy Queen, and
he will also take thy kings Paune with his Queen, and will say to thee
check. Then remove thy king into the seat of thy queen, and so he can do the
no hurt. And then he shall be forced to keep his kings knight or the rookes
Paune, that thou tokest of him. He will play then his knight into the second
house of his King, and thou shalt take of him his rookes Paune: So shalt thou
have great advantage then having of his one Rooke and three Paunes, when as
he has of thine but one Knight and one Paune.



If when thou haste given him check with thy Queen, he remove his King one
room forward, thou shalt take his Paune with thy Queen, and shalt say
check, and he will retire into the second house of his kings Bishop, for he
has non other shift: then shalt thou give him check with thy kings Bishop,
causing him to remove unto ye fourth house 3. answeri^g to the first.
of thy queens Bishop.



He will retire into the third house of his Knight, or else cover it with his
queens Paune, which is the better. If he return into the third house of his
knight, thou shall give him check with thy Queen, remouinge her one room,
that is to wit, into the fourth house of his kings Bishop, then has he
none other retracte or draught but the third place of his Rooke: therefore
thou shalt play thy queens Paune one step, giving him check by discovery
of thy queens Bishop: then shall he not have any wherewith to cover it, but
with his knights Paune, and thou shalt play the Paune of thy Kings Rooke as
far as he may go. He shall than be forced to play the Paune of his queen
as far as he may go, if he will not loose his Queen. Then if he play that
Paune as far as he may go, for to take thy Queen with his queens Bishop,
or thy kings Bishop with his queen's Paune, thou shall take his knights Paune
with thy rookes Paune, giving him double check, to wit, with thy Rooke and
with thy rookes Paune, and he shall be forced to retire into the second house of
his knight, but there thou shall give him check, setting thy Queen in the
fourth house of his Kings. The best then that he shall have to do, shall be to
cover it with his Knighte, the which thy rookes paune shall take, saying
check, and he will take thy paune with his Queen, by which means ye two queens
shall be spoiled. That done thou shall take his queens paune with thy Bishop.
And so shalt thou have still seven paunes, and he shall have but four, which
is a great disuauntage.



If in geuinge him check with thy 4 following the. 3.
kings Bishop, he cover it with his queens Paune, thy Bishop shall take
his Paune, and thou shall Ye must hold on this play.
say yet check. Then he will retire into the third place of his Knight. That
is to the end that thou give him not check with thy Queen in the fourth house
of his kings Bishop. By means whereof you shalt play ye paune of thy kings
Rooke, as far as he may go. He will play his rookes Paune opposite one step
only, which is the best that he could play. Thou on the other part shall
Figure.
take with thy kings bishop, the Paune of his queens knight: and if his
Bishop take thine, thou shall give check and mate, setting thy Queen in the
fourth house of his kings Bishop. But if he take not thy Bishop with his,
but play him in ye second house of his queen, thou shalt set thy Queen in the
fourth house of his queens Rooke, then shalt thou take with thy Bishop his
Rooke, and so shall thou win the game.



The third Chapter. 5. following the. 3.
Ye must hold on.



THE second manner of playing is to begin with the queens Figure.
Paune. If therefore thou begin, thou shall remove thy queens paune, as
far as he may go: and if he play that of his queen also, as far as he
may, thou shall play the paune of thy queens bishop as far as he may
go: and if he take it, play thy kings paune as far as he may go: he will
play then the paune of his queens knight, as far as he may, for to save his
other paune, and thou shalt play the paune of thy queens Rooke two steps:
and if he take it with his paune, thou shalt take his other paune with thy
kings Bishop: afterward he shall take of force that knights paune, in
playing thy queens Knight into the third house of thy Bishop of the same
side. Because that thou shall have three pieces prepared up on him against the
which he can have no remedy but to his loss and confusion.



But if he take not thy rooks paune Ye must hold on.
but play the Paune of his queen's Bishop one step, thou shalt take his
Paune with that of thy Rooke, and he will take thine with that of his Bishop.
Then shalt thou play ye Paune of thy queens knight one step, and if he
take it, thou shall take with thy kings bishop his knights paune, and shall
say check, of the which he will cover it with his queen's bishop, and with thy
Queen thou shalt take his other Paune.



And if he take thy bishop with his, thou shall take his with thy queen, and
shalt say check, and if he cover it with his queen, it will be no great
danger to spoil them both to together, because that the Paune of his queens
Rooke, being without company shall loose him self of force, if thou prepare
thither thy Knighte, or thy Bishop.



But if with his Bishop he take Ye must hold on.
not thine, but play his queens Knight to the third house of his Bishop,
for to take thy queens Paune, thou shall play thy queens Bishop to the
third house of the King: and if he play his queens Rooke in the seat of
the Knight, then remove thy Queen (out of the discouerye) to the fourth house
of thy queens Rooke, and if he set his Queen in the third house of his
Knight, thou shalt remove thy queens Knighte to the third house of the
Bishop.

This done, thy Bishop shall kill his Knighte, and his Queen shall put to
death thy Bishop, then thy Queen shall take his Rookes Paune who will set
him self out of the way for fear of feeling the heavy strookes of thy
queen, and in so doing suffers his King to fall into check, and yet for
some other considerations: yt which for to withstand, thou shall remove thy
kings Knighte into the second house of thy King, and then shall you serve thee
of thy Rookes, in loosynge the one for to win the other, and in so doing,
thou shalt not fail to surmounte.



The.iiii. Chapter.
How he ought to play to whom is given the advantage of a Paune.

WHEN the advantage of a Paune is given, it is the custom to take away that
of the kings Bishop, because that it is the best: then if thy contrary
party play his kings Paune as far as he may, thou shalt play also that of
thy King as far as he may go: he will remove his kings Knighte to the
third house of his Bishop, and thou shall play the Paune of thy kings
Bishop as far as he may go.



And if he take thy kings Paune with his knighte, thou shalt give him check
with thy Queen, causinge her to remove into the fourth house of his kings
Rooke: and if he cover it with the paune of ye kings Knight, thou shall take
his kings Paune with thy Queen, and shall say check, whereof he will cover it
with his Queen, and thine shall take his kings Rooke.



And if he give thee check by the discouerye of his Knight which he will
cause to remove into the third house of his kings Knighte, thou shall cover it
with thy kings Bishop, setting him in the second house of thy King. And if
with his Knighte be take thy Rooke, thou shalt play thy Queen to the fourth
house of his King. Then of force he will take her from thee with his, the
which thou shalt also take with thy bishops Paune, and his Knighte can not
save him self, so shall he loose the game: for thou haste the greater
advantage if thou can keep it well.



But if in steed of taking thy Kings paune with his knight, he take the Paune
of thy kings Bishop with his kings Paune, thou shall play thy queens
Paune as far as he may go.



If he take thy Kings Paune with A table following the first of the 4. Chap. by
another fashion.
his Knight, thou shall give him the check of thy queen here above mentioned,
setting thy Queen in ye fourth house of his kings Rooke, for to take his
Rooke if he cover it with the knights Paune, if not, if his King march forth
into his second house, thou shalt give him check with thy queen, which shall
com into ye fourth place of his king, who in retyring him self to ye second of
his knight for to escape from the check, shall of force lose his knight.



And if he give thee not check by the discovery of his knight, as I have told
thee (being the play according to ye second table of this chapter) but give
the check with his Queen in the fourth house of thy kings Rooke, thou shalt
remove thy King into ye seat of thy queen. And if he give thee not check with
his Knight at the second house of thy kings Bishop: thou shalt set thy
King in his second house. And if he take thy Rooke, you shall give him check
with thy Queens in the fourth place of his King.

From thence forth he shall loose: for his Knight can not escape without
being taken. So shalt thou have the advantage.



And if (after yt thou have played thy queens Paune, according as it is in the
fourth table) he take not with his Knight thy kings paune, but play the Paune
of his kings Knight, as far as he may go, for to succor his other Paune,
which is within the bars of thy camp: thou shall play thy kings Paune,
one step, for to take his Knight, whom to meet he will set his Queen
before thy King: for if thou would think to take his Knight with thy Paune,
thy King should be in check. Wherefore thou shall set also thy Queen, one
room before thy King, and he will remove his Knighte to the fourth house of his
Queen, which is the best draughte that he could make. And thou shalt play
the Paune of thy Queens bishop, as far as he may, that is to wit, above
his Knight, and if he give check with his Queen at the fourth house of thy
queens Knight.



Thou shalt remove thy King to the second house of thy kings bishop, then
he shall be forced to save his Knight in the second house of his King. And thou
shalt give him check with thy Queen, in the fourth house of his kings
Rooke. Wherefore his king will march into the seat of his queen. Then thy
queen shall take the Paune of his kings knight without danger, and also that
of his bishop, and therefore he shall loose: for thou have the advantage.



And if he give thee not check with his Queen, (as it is said in the seventh
table of this present chapter,) but for saving his Knight, set him in the
fourth house of thy queens Knighte: thou shalt remove thy queens Paune one
step, for to keep that his queens Knighte do not remove, and if he set
his kings Bishop in the second house of his Knighte (which is a good
draughte) cause you his Knighte to avoid, in removing the Paune of thy queens
Rooke one step.

Then his Knight will remove into the third house of his queens Rooke.
Afterward thou shall play thy kings Knighte to the third house of thy kings
Bishop, and if he put the Paune of his kings Knighte, one room further,
for to take thy Knight: thou shalt remove him into the fourth place of thy
Queen: then he may take with his Queen, or with his kings Bishop thy
kings Paune.

If he take it with his Bishop, thou shalt set thy Knight in the fourth
house of his kings Bishop, for to take his Queen: but he will remove her
one step into the third house of his kings Bishop. And thou shall take
the Paune of his kings Bishop by thy Queens Bishop. And if his Queen
take thy Knighte, thy Bishop shall take his. So shall he be forced, for the
safegarde of his Rooke, to remove him into the seat of the Knighte: for if he
did otherwise (in taking his Rooke with thy Bishop) thou shalt give him
check with thy queen, in turnynge her away from thy Bishop, the which
(not being able to take any moore the kings Rooke,) shall march one step
into the third house of his Queen, and thou shalt say, check: Whereof he
shall save him in the second house of his Bishop, because that otherwise he
should be mate at the first draught, playing thy queen in the second house of
his king, the which thou shall not cease to play, and shalt give him check,
of the which he shall save him in the third house of his Knight, also he can
not otherwise: wherefore thou shalt set thy Queen in the third house of thy
King: and if he take thy Bishopp, thou shalt cover his Queen with thy Kings
bishop, setting him in the third house of thy Queen: but if he take not thy
Bishop, but play his Queen to the fourth house of his kings Knight, for to
spoil together the Queens, thou shalt give him check with thy kings
Bishop, to the third place of thy Queen. And if his King march into the
fourth house of his Rooke, thou shalt cover thy Queen with the queens
Bishop, settinge him in the fourth house of thy kings Bishop, for to take his
Queen, whom he will retire into the third place of his kings Bishop, and
thou shalt set thy kings Rooke in the place of the Bishop. If he draw his
Queen from thence, thou shalt give him check and mate well and readily: for
albeit that he put his Queen in place where he may defend the check that
thou shalt give him with thy Queen in the fourth house of his King, it
behooves (for to make him retire) to set thy queens Knighte in the same fourth
place of the King, and then to give him check with thy Rooke, in such sort,
that he shall incontinent be mate.



The.v. Chapter.
How thou shall play, when thou have the aduau^tage of a Paune, and the first
draughte.

FIrst thou shall play the Paune of thy King, as far as he may go, and he
will remove his queens Paune one step: and thou shalt remove thy queens
Paune two steps. Then he will place his kings Knight, in ye third house of
thy kings Bishop, and thou shall set thy queens Knight, in the third house
of thy queens Bishop: and if he play his kings Paune, as far as he may,
thou shalt take him with thy queens Paune: and if he take thine with his
queens Paune, thou shalt spoil his Queen with thine, who shall also be
taken with his King, the which (by this means) can no further proceed. Then
thou shalt play the kings Bishop to the third house of his Queen: And if he
remove the Paune of his queens bishop one step, thou shalt set thy kings
Knight, in the second house of the King, and he will play his King to the
second house of the queens Bishop. Therefore thou shalt play thy Knighte
to the third house of thy kings Knight, and if he play his queens Bishop
to three houses from his King, thou shalt cause thy King to march into his
second house, from whence he will give the check by his queens Bishop,
settinge him in the fourth house of thy kings Knighte, the which thou shalt
cover by the Paune of thy kings Bishop, remouinge him one step: whereby he
shall be forced to retire, from whence he came last. And thou shalt remove
the Paune of thy kings Rooke one stepps. And if he come with his queens
Knight into the second house of his Queen, thou shalt play thy queens
Bishop to the third house of thy King, and if he play his kings Bishop so
far as unto the fourth house of thy queens Knight, thou shalt cause thy
Knight to retire to the lodging of thy Queen: and if he play the Paune of his
queens Bishop one step, thou shalt play the Paune of thy queens
Bishop one step, to the end that if he pushe his Paune one step more,
thou may also retire thy Bishop one step: but first he shall retire his
to the fourth house of his queens Rooke.

Then shalt thou set thy Knighte in the second house of thy kings Bishop.
And if he pushe the Paune of his queens Bishop, for to take thy Bishop,
thou shalt retire him into the second house of thy queens Bishop.



And if (in assailing to break thy defenses, or to put thy camp in disorder)
he play the Paune of his queens Knight as far as he may: thou shalt
overthrow his enterprise, in marchinge the Paune of thy queens Rooke one
step.



And if (in not being able to offend thee on that side) he go about on the
other part to play the Paune of his kings Rooke, even unto the fourth house
of it, it behooves that thou stay him for coming, in playinge also the Paune
of thy kings Rooke, one step. And if he play his kings Bishop into the
third house of his queens Knighte, for to take thine, which is in the third
house of thy King, suffer him to do it: for if he take thine, thou shall take
his with thy King: when therefore he shall have played his Bishop, to the
third house of his Knight: cause that thy Knighte, (which is in the second
house of thy kings Bishop) may remove into the third house of thy kings
Rooke, and he will take him with his queens Bishop, for to keep thee from
settinge him into the fourth house of his kings Knight. And thy Rooke shall
take his Bishop. So shalt thou have the advantage over him of two Paunes:
and also thy game shall be set in such sort that thou may easelye make
a Queen, of one of thy Paunes, of the kings side. And therefore thou can
not fail to win the game.



The.vi. Chapter.
How he ought to play to whom is given the advantage of a knight in the
stead of the paune of the kings Bishop.

IF he which plays against thee, play with one Knight only, and thou with
seven paunes, and that thou leauest away the Paune of thy kings Bishop. He
will play the Paune of his King as far as he may go: and thou shall remove
thy kings paune one step: and if he play his queens Paune, as far as he
may go, thou shall play thy queen's Paune as far also.



And if his kings Paune take thy queens Paune, thou shalt take his with thy
kings Paune.

And if with his Queen he give thee check in the fourth house of thy kings
Rooke thou shall cover it with the Paune of thy Kings Knighte. And if yet he
give thee another check with his Queen, in the fourth house of thy King,
for to have thy kings Rooke, thou shall cover it with thy queen. And by that
means he can not play his: for he should put him self in check.
Wherefore if you will both of you, ye shall spoil together your Queens: by
that means the advantage shall always be on thy side.



And if he take not thy queens Paune with his kings Paune, but remoueth him
one step, entryng within the bars of thy camp, thou shalt play abroad the
Paune of thy queens Bishop as far as may. And if he play the Paune of his
queens Bishop one stepe, for to defend his queens Paune, thou shall not
let to take him with thy Bishops paune, and he will take it with his, and
thou shalt play thy queens Knighte to the third house of thy Bishop.



And if he play the kings Bishop to the third house of his Queen, thou
shall take his queens Paune with thy Knighte, and if he give thee check with
his Queen, in setting her in the fourth house of thy kings Rooke, take good
heed to cover it with thy knights Paune, otherwise thou shalt play very
evil, in place of that, thou shalt march forth thy King into the second
house of thy Queen. And if his kings Bishop take thy Rookes paune, thou shalt
give him check with thy Knight, in setting him in the second house of his
queens Bishop, and therefore he can not choose but loose his queens Rooke,
or his Queen, if he took thy Knight with his kings Bishop.



But if after that thou haste played thy queens Knight into the third house
of the Bishop, he play not his kings Bishop to the third house of his
Queen: but play his kings Knight to the third house of his Bishop: or his
queens Bishop to the third house of the King, for to save his Queens
Paune, thou shall give him check with thy kings Bishop, setting him in the
fourth house of his queens Knight.



And if he cover it with his queens Bishop, thou shalt play thy Queen to
the fourth house of thy queens Rooke. And if he cover it not with his
Bishop, but set his King in his third house, his game shall be evil
appointed: for thou shalt play the Paune of thy queens Knighte one step.
And if he play his Queen into the fourth house of his queens Rooke, for to
avoid the check, which thou would give him with thy queens Bishop, in
setting him in the third house of thy Rooke. Thou shalt give him the said
check, and he shall be forced to set him self in camp at the third house, and
ye shall spoil together your two Bishops.



But if to avoid that check, he set his Queen in the fourth place of his
Rooke: thou shall set thy queens Bishop in the second house of thy Queen.
And if he take not his Queen from thence, thou shall give him check with thy
Knight, in taking his queens Paune, which is in the fourth house. And by that
means shall he loose his Queen. But in what sort so ever it be he can not but
play evil, your two plays being set, as is above, whereof the table follows.



The.vii. Chapter.
Another manner of playinge with the advantage of a knight, for the paune of
the kings Bishop.

IF he play his kings Paune, as far as he may, thou shalt remove thy
queens Paune one step, and if he play the Paune of his kings Bishop as
far as he may go, thou shall play forth thy kings Paune two steps.

And if he take thy kings Paune, with his bishops Paune, thou shalt give
him check with thy Queen, in remouyng her into the fourth house of his kings
Rooke, whereof he shall cover it with the Paune of his Knight, wherefore in
taking with thy Queen his kings Paune, thou shalt say check, and if he
cover it with his queen, thou may take his Rooke: but it is not the best,
for thou must take his Paune which is behind thy Queen, to the end that in
taking thine with his Queen, thou maiste retake his with thy queens Paune. So
shalt thou have the advantage free of a Knight.



And if he play of another fashion, to wit, his kings Paune two steps, and
thou thy queens Paune one step, and his queens Paune as far as he may,
thou shall play thy kings Knighte to the third house of the Bishop.



And he will not pushe his kings Paune upon thy Knight for to take It seems
that this play is false for his king had not stayed, and was yet in his white
house, which is out of the check of this lepe of thy knight, in the second
house of his kings bishop which is also a white house, and ioyninge a side to
that of his said king.
him: for thy queens Paune should take his, not withstanding if these two
Paunes take one another, and he take thine with his queens Paune, ye shall
spoil together your Queens: then shalt thou play thy Knighte into the
fourth house of his kings Knight, for to take his paune, which took thine. And
if he defend him by his queens Bishop, setting him in the fourth house of
his kings Bishop, or in setting his kings Knight in the third house of
his kings Bishop, thou shalt give him check with thy Knighte, in taking
the Paune of his kings Bishop, for in drawing him self out of the check,
to take his Rooke, than shall his loss be evident.



And if he pushe not his kings Paune upon thy Knight, but play his kings
Bishop to the third house of his Queen: suffer not his kings Paune to
descend upon thy Knight, and for to turn him away thou shalt make to him
an obstacle of thy kings Paune, removing him two steps. He will play the
Paune of his Queens Bishop one step, and thou shalt play the Paune of
thy Bishop as far as he may go, for to keep him from having the two
Paunes of his King and of his Queen, both two together.

By means whereof he will pushe his queens Paune one step, which is better
played for him, then to spoil one another, because that he is ye weaker in
great pieces. When therefore he shall have pushed his queens Paune one step
within the borders of thy camp, thou shalt set thy queens Bishop in the
fourth house of his kings Knight, for to take his Queen (the which for to
resist) he will remove the Paune of his kings Bishop, one step, which
will cause to retire thy Bishop to the fourth house of thy Rooke.

And if he play the other kings Knight his two steps, thou shall retire thy
Bishop into the third house of thy kings Knighte, and if he will break thy
bars in playinge the Paune of his kings Bishop one step: thou shalt
take him with thy kings Paune and if he take thy Paune with his queen's Bishop,
thou shall play thy queen's Knight into the second house of thy Queen, for to
hinder always that his Kings paune do not descend into thy camp, but if
peradventure he do descend after that draughte made, thou shall take him with
thy queens paune, and if his Bishop take thy paune, thou shalt take his
Bishop with thy Knighte, and if he take not thy paune with his bishop, thou
shalt take his other queens paune with thy kings Knighte. So shall he be
weaker then thou as well in great Cheastmen as in small.



The.viii. Chapter.
How he ought to play to whom is given the advantage of a knight.

IF thy contrary party play his kings Paune as far as may go, thou shall
play so likewise thy kings Paune: and if he play his kings Knighte to the
third house of the Bishop, thou shalt play thy queens Knighte to the
third house of the Bishop. He will remove his kings Bishop to the fourth house
of his queens Bishop: and thou shalt play also thy kings Bishop to the
fourth house of thy queens Bishop: and if he play the Paune of his queens
Bishop one step, thou shalt set thy kings Bishop in the third house
of the queens knight. And if he play his queens paune as far as he may,
for to break thy point, thou shalt play thy queens Paune one step, and
if he take thy kings Paune with his queens Paune, thou shalt take his with
that of thy Queen. And what thing so ever it be, hinder him always, if it be
possible, for taking of thy kings Paune: because that it is one of the
greatest strengthes of thy game.

If therefore he play his kings Rooke one step, for to hinder that with thy
queens Bishop thou do cover his Knighte, thou shall play forth thy kings
Knight to the third house of the Bishop. And if he set his queens Bishop in
the fourth house of his kings Knighte, thou shalt remove thy rookes Paune one
step, which will cause him to retire into the fourth house of his kings Rooke.
And then thou shalt play the Paune of thy kings Knighte as far as he may
go, in such sort that he shall be forced either to lose his kings Paune
(which thou shall take with thy kings Knight) or else his queens Bishop
(which thou shalt take with thy Knights Paune) if he retire not one room
backewarde.



But if (in taking with his Knight the Paune of thy kings Knight) he be
content to loose the same Knighte, for to win thy two Paunes, to wit, that
of thy kings Knighte, and then that of thy Rooke, which he will take with his
queens Bishop: thou shalt set thy Rooke in the seat of thy Knight in
the room of the said Bishop, and (if for to defend his Bishop) he remove
his Rookes Paune one step, thou shalt set thy Queen in his third house,
and therefore he can not hinder thee to take his kings Paune, and so shall his
game be in an ill order.



The end of the Cheastes play.
PRINTED at london by Rouland Hall, for Ia-Rovvbothum, and are to be sold at
his shop under Bow church. 1562.


