The most wonderful and true story, of a certain Witch named Alse Gooderige
of Stapen hill, who was arraigned and convicted at Darbie at the Assizes there.

As also a true report of the strange torments of Thomas Darling, a boy of
thirteen years of age, that was possessed by the Devil, with his horrible
fittes and terrible Apparitions by him uttered at Burton upon Trent in the
County of Stafford, and of his marvelous deliverance.



Printed at London for I. O. 1597.

To the Reader.
TIme has proved that by experience (Christian Reader) which S. John by the
spirit of Prophecy foreshewed; The Devil (says he) has great wrath, knowing
that he has but a short time: for this Prophecy is fulfilled, not only in the
outrageous fury that Satan uses in raising persecution against Gods Saints,
by his mischievous instruments, and corrupting men's minds by his wicked
suggestions, but also in tyrannizing, according to his limited power over them
by torments. This first kind of cruelty the former Ages have felt when the
third part of the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars were smitten by the Roman
Dragon, and stinged by the Turkish scorpions, and other locusts of the like
stamp: the other manner of villainy has showed her fruits too plentifully in
this our age in the cooling of Charity, and quenching of the Spirit, that our
Saviors Prophecy (which cannot be far off) may be fulfilled, When the Son
of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? And this last kind of tyranny
is too aparant amongst other instances, in the pitiful vexing of this poor
distressed child: And as the Holie-ghost has left such conflicts for the
spiritual warfare of his children, so has he not left them without weapons to
withstand the fury of their enemies* for in temporal persecutions and
afflictions they have Patience for their buckler, that they may learn to say
of them with Job, Blessed be the name of the Lord* and in all manner of
temptations of Satan, they have the whole armor of God, yea and those weapons
that are able to overthrow the Devils strongest holds, as shall well appear
even in this small Treatise. Concerning the strangeness thereof, it is left to
thy consideration (gentle Reader) and for the truth of it, if it should be
called in question, as not unlike* (for the abundaunce of false and frivolous
devises, broched in these days, a thing much to be lamented, do often times
abridge truth of her credit) besides that for the particulars, a hundred more
witnesses might be produced, than are here inserted, and diverse of them of good
worth and credit, the matter it self is well known to the right Honorable
sir Edmund Anderson Knight, Lord chief Justice of the common plees, as being
voluntarily confessed to him by the Witch, who was upon the same arraigned and
convicted before his H. at Darby, and therefore is not lightly to be excepted
against. Besides also, that it was compiled by a private Christian and man of
trade, who being with the boy almost in all his fits, did both take notes at
the present of all that was done and spoken, and conferred also afterward with
the witnesses of best judgment and credit, that he might be sure of that which
he had set down. In a word, I think there can scarcely be any instance
showed (the holy Scriptures excepted) whereby both the peevish opinion, that
there are no wiches, and the Popish assertion that only their priests can
dispossess, may be better controlled than by this. The first kind of people, I
rather think are to be pitied, than confuted, daily experience crying out
against their folly. The other may hereby see their too peremptory
conclusions overthrown, since he whose advise and help was used in this
matter, is very well known to be a faithful preacher of the Gospel, and so
consequently an enemy to Popery; wishing thee therefore so to regard it as
for the truth and weight thereof it shall deserve, and to reap such fruit by
it, as being well regarded it may yield, I bid thee farewell in Christ.

I. D.

AA


A report of the torments and deliverance of Thomas Darling, (a Boy of
thirteen years of age) that was possessed by Satan, at Burton upon Trent.
Upon Saturday (being the xxvii. of February) Robert Toone (dwelling in Burton
upon Tre^t in the County of Stafford, Uncle to this Thomas Darling) going to
Winsell Wood (which is distant from Burton about half a mile) to hunt the hare,
took the Boy with him; and being carnest in following his gain, lost him: who
(after he had a while wandered up and down, and could not find his Uncle)
returned home to his uncles house, where he soiourned. Being come home, he
wexed heavy, and afterward grew to be very sick, vomiting and casting up
what he had eaten at dinner: and so was got to bed. The next morning he had
sore fits, with extreme vomitings, that all which saw him, judged it to be
some strange ague. In the time of this extremity in these his fits, he would
many times point with his hand, saying; Look where green Angels stand in the
window, and not long after would often complain, that a green Cat troubled
him: which thing was judged by his friends to proceed of lightness in his head;
many other things fell out also in these times worthy the noting, whereof (in
respect of the unexpected event) there was no note kept. His sickines wexing
more vehement, his Aunt went to a Physician with his urine: who said he saw no
signs of any natural disease in the Child, unless it were the worms. His
sickness still increasing (notwithstanding any thing prescribed or ministered)
she went again with his urine to the Physician; who judged as before, saying
further, he doubted that the Child was be witched: which she (holding
incredible) imparted it to no body; rather imagining it to be (though some
strange, yet) a natural disease: as diverse also judged it to be the Falling
sickness, by reason that it was no continual distemperature, but came by fits,
with sudden staring, striving and struggling very siercely, and falling down
with sore vomits; also it took away the use of his legs, so that he was feign
to be carried up and down, save in his fits, for then he was nimble enough.
How he spent the time between his fits, it is worth the observing; his
exercises were such as might well have beseemed one of riper years; wherein he
showed the fruits of his education, which was religious and godly. With those
that were good Christians he took great pleasure to* confer; to whom he
would siguiste his daily expectation of death, and his resolute readiness to
leave the World, and to be with Christ: and all his love to the world, he said
extended thus far, that (if God had so been pleased) he might have lived to
be a preacher to thunder out the threatenings of Gods word, against sin and
all abominations, wherewith these days do abound. In these fits and such
like speeches, he continued till Mid-lent Sunday, being the xxi. of March. That
day (besides that his wonted fit took him) he began in other and more strange
manner to be vexed: for he sweyed downs as one in a swound. Forth with they
took him up, and laid him upon a bed: where (having layne some small space) he
arose up suddenly, striving and struggling in such sort, that it was enough for
two or three to hold him. Then fell he suddenly upon his back, and (lying in
such manner) raised up his legs one after the other so stiffly, that the
standers by could not ^^ow them in the hamme: and thus continuing a while with
grievous roaring, at last he raised himself up on his feet and his head, his
belly standing up much above his head or feet, continuing so a little space he
fell down upon his back groaning very pitifully. Then rising up, he ran
round on his hands and his feet, keeping a certain compass: after that
striving and struggling with groaning, he fell a vomiting, and then coming to
himself, said, the Lords name be praised. This was the first fit that he
had; and after this manner was he ordinarily handled during the time of his
possession (save that he did seldom run round in that manner that is
aforesaid:) which being thus ended, he fell upon his knees suddenly to prayer,
and that so pithily that the standers by wondered thereat, as much as they did
at his strange visitation, being no less comforted by the one, than they were
before grieved at the other.

The next day be had many fittes, in the whith he would often point at a
green Catte that troubled him, and still entreated his friends that were
preitut to pray for him. Between his fittes he requested them to read the
scriptures, which when they could not do for weeping to behold his misery,
they sent (at the boys request) for one Iesse Be that does dwell in Burton
upon Trent, who took the notes of the whole matter, and him the Boy after some
speeches entreated to read where he would: who read the xi. Chapter according
to Sa. John, till he came to the fourth verse, at which time the Boy was
overthrown into a fit like the f^^^ntes i^ which hes lasted commonly about
half a quarter of an hour: Iesse continued reading the xi. xii. and xiii. of
John's Gospel, and the first and second of the Revelation. During which time,
his fitts continued one in the neck of another. Which ending with a vomit, he
used to say The Lords name be praised: and many times, Lord Jesus receive my
soul. When Iesse either ceased to speak of any comfortable matter, or to
read the scriptures, the Boy was quiet from his fits: but when he was so
religiously occupied, they came thick upon him; which Iesse Be considering
and observing, told the Boys Aunt he suspected that the Boy was be witched.
Upon which occasion, (though she doubted of the matter) she told him as before,
both her going to the Physician and the Physicians judgment concerning the
Boys sickness, which he ouer-hearing, yet said nothing. The next morning, he
said unto the maid that made him ready, I heard my Aunt tell Iesse Be, that
I was bewitched: the same Saturday that my sickness took me, I lost my Uncle in
the Wood, and in the Coppice I met a little old woman; she had a gray gown with
a black fringe about the cape, a broad thrumd hat, and three warts on her face:
I have seen her begging at our door, as for her name I know it not, but by
sight I can know her again. As I passed by her in the Coppice, I chanced
(against my will) to let a escape; which she taking in anger said, Gyp with a
mischief, and fart with a bell: I will go to heaven, and thou shall go to
hell; and forth with she stooped to the ground. I stood still and looked at
her, viewing every part of her, meruailing what she stooped for; so I came
home, and she went to Winsell. Hereupon a more vehement suspicion arising some
judged it to be the Witch of Stapen-hill: others* because she was old and went
little abroad, rather thought it to be Alice Gooderidge her daughter, who was
had in great suspicion of many to be a dooer in those devilish practices, as
afterward it proved. Thus the boys fits continued daily from the 23 of March
till the eight of April, to the great trouble of his Aunt in looking to him*
and attending on such as came to see him, whereof many were of very good
account. When in his fittes he was deprived of the use of speech, he would
make signs of praying, with folded hands, sometime lifting them up, and
sometime striking them upon his breast: often times also in these fits, he would
suddenly and amazedly open his eyes, stating and shriking most pitifully,
clapping both his hands upon his face, not being able to endure the sight of
such fearful objects as he beheld. On this manner was he tormented in the day,
and had reasonable good rest in the night, except through some fearful
dreams; whereunto he was much subject. Being asked if he could remember what
he did when he made such signs? He answered, that sometimes he prayed, and
sometimes the Cattossed him up and down in a string. And thus for a good space
he could remember, and readily make relation of his troubles.

The Thursdaye before Caster (being the 8. of April) there came to see the
Boy Mistress Walkeden of Clifton his Grandmother, and Mistres Saunders his
Aunt; to whom when it was told what the Boy said conterning the meeting of a
woman in the wood, Mistres Walkeden (upon the Witches cursing, the Boys
sudden sickness, his strange handling, and the Physicians judgment) thought it
more than probable that the Boy was bewitched: and by the marks that he had
taken, perceived that it was Alice Gooderidge which had thus bewitched him; yet
making conscience to accuse her till it appeared upon sure proof, sent for her
into the Town to talk with her privately. When (with much ado) she was came,
they brought her into the chamber where the Bay was; at which time, the Boy
fell suddenly into a marvelous sore fit: which being ended, Mistres Walkeden
asked her if she knew that boy? She answered she knew him not. Many other
questions were asked; but in vain, for she would not confess any thing. Some
of the standers by, persuaded the Boy to serateh her: which he did upon the
face, and the back of the hands, so that ye blood came out apace: she stroked
the back of her hand upon the child, saying; take blood enough child, God help
thee. To whom the Boy answered; pray for thy self, thy prayer can do me no
good. Here by the way touching this use of scratching the witch: though it be
commonly received as an approved means to discry ye witch, and procure case to
the bewitched; yet seeing that neither by any natural cause, or supernatural
warrant of Gods word it has any such virtue given unto it; it is to be
received amongst the witchcrafts, whereof there be great store used in our
Land, to the great dishonor of God. But to our matter. When Robert Toone the
Boys Uncle and his Schoolmaster saw that mistres Walkeden could nothing
prevail with this bad woman, they took her aside; to whom (after many
questions) she granted, that she was in the Wood that Saturday which the Boy
spoke of, and that she saw no boy but Sherrats boy. Further they demanded of
her when she received the Communion? She said, a twelve month ago. And asking
what she received? She answered, her damnation. They asked her whether she knew
what she said? She answered again, what should I receive but my damnation? They
caused her to say the Lords Prayer and the Creed, which she huddled up with
much adoo: but when she came to these words in ye Lords Prayer, And lead us not
into temptation; and in the Creed either to Jesus Christ, The Holy Ghost, or
The Catholic Church, she would not say any of those words. After these
examinations, she departed to her own house. The next day he had many sore
fits; in the which because he would clap his hands on his face, and shrike
pitifully, they asked him the reason thereof at the end of his fit? He
answered that the green Cat which he saw had eyes like flames of fire; and
that caused him thus fearfully to hide his eyes: and that his pain (which he
endured) was very grievous, like the pricking* with daggers or stinging of
Bees, which caused his crying. As this his vexatio^ moved many that came to see
him to shed tears, so did it not a little grieve his Uncle Toone; who seeing
these fits to increase, thought it good that the Witch were brought before a
Justice: and so went with Iesse Be (the 10. of April) before M. Tho: Graysley
Esquire and Justice of Peace, craving his Precept to that purpose: which he
granted, and directed it to the Constable of Stapen-hill, to bring both this
Alice Gooderidge (which was almost 60. years of age) and old Elizabeth Wright
also, mother to this, Alice; who had bin 4 or 5. times before him on suspicion
of many such crimes. The Precept thus granted forth, they were brought before
Ma: Graysley; to whom she would confess nothing, save that she met a Boy
(which she thought to be Sherats boy, who had broken her a basket full of
eggs) in Abels Cloase, and (said she) if my words did him any hurt, I am
sorry: but that word Bell she did not remember that she used. The next morning
when the Boy should rise, his shirt was knit on diverse knots betwixt his legs:
and being asked how that came? He said be could not tell. All that day he
continued in senseles fits* with grievous groaning and fearful skreaming,
crying out; look where the Witch stands with three warts upon her face.

The next morning (being Saturday) about six of the Clock (at which time, his
Keepers thinking not the hour of his sits to be come, took no great care of
looking to him) he was upon the sudden thrown under the bed, crying
fearfully; Flames of fire flames of fire. Forthwith he got upon the bed, being
fearful and amazed in his countenance. About four of the clock (at which
time his fittes were wont to leave him) they did now take him in wonderful
fierce manner till midnight, with greater extremity than at any time before,
having sildome more intermission than to vomit and say (as it was his usual
manner in most extreamities). The Lord be praised. In these fits he shriked
pitifully and fearfully, desiring them to take away the black Cat. Both now,
and most times be made signs of prayer with folded hands, striking upon his
breast.

The 14. of April Sir Humphrey Ferrers and Master Graysley met at Robert
Toones, who caused thither to be brought Elizabeth Wright and Alice
Gooderidge, together with her husband and daughter. Master Graysley (after some
questions concerning his fits) commanded that the Bible should be delivered
into the boys hands; who began to read the first Chap. of S. John's Gospel,
till he came to the 4. verse: at which place (when he read) he was overthrown
into a most cruel Fit. Presently after which, the old woman Eliza. Wright came
into Robert Toones house; which so soon as M. Graysley understood, he caused
her to be brought into the parlor where the Child was: but she was very
unwilling to come in, crying, Alas that ever I was borne, what shall I do* M.
Graysley spoke loud to her, asking if she could do the boy any good* She
answered that her daughter had that at home, that she should do good with. He
caused her (with much adoo) to look upon the boy: which as soon as ever she
did, he fell into a strange and cruel fit: Lying upon his back, his eyes
standing staring open in fearful manner, his teeth set in his head, his arms
clapped close to his sides, and all the parts of his body quaking very
fearfully. M. Graysley bad her kneel down and pray for him; which she did,
but so as no body could understand what she said. Whilst she prayed, the fit
continued, and therefore they thrust her out of doors; which being done, the
boys fit ended presently. S. Humphrey and M. Graysley agreed, that certain
women should search the mother and the daughter severally, to see if they could
find any such marks on them, as are usually found on witches. The old woman
they stripped and found behind her right sholder a thing much like the vdder of
an ewe that gives suck with two teates, like unto two great wartes, the one
behind under her armeh^le, the other a handful off toward the top of her
shoulder: which when they had found, they put on her cloths again, leaving the
place bare, that it might be seen both of sir Humfrey, master Graisley, and
diverse others of good worth, as indeed it was. They bade her say the Lords
prayer, which she hudled up after her manner leaving out these words still
vnsaide, And lead us not into temptation: being then demanded how long she had
those teates, she answered she was borne so. Then did they search Alice
Gooderige, and found upon her belly, a hole of the bigness of two pence, fresh
and bloody, as though some great wart had been cut off the place. The Justices
examined her concerning the bewitching of the Boy, but she would confess
nothing. Then sir Humfrey took her to the boy, and asked him whether this were
she that thus bewitched him: he answered that it was surely she: then did sir
Humfrey did him scratch her, which when the boy offered to do, his hand was
presently benumbed and plucked to his side, and he tormented in every part:
four several times he assaied to do this, but still with like succes; he was
bidden to lay his hand on the standers by, which he did without difficulty.
Then proceeded they in examining her concerning her hurt: she said that she
went to fetch alittle meal on Easter even forth of the chamber, and coming
down a ladder, her foot slipped, and she having a knife in her hand, thrust
herself into the belly: they asked the judgment of a Surgeon, whose answer
was, that it was like to have been so a long time, for it was not festered,
and seemed to be sucken. Sir Humfrey charged her with Witchcraft about one
Michaels Cow: which Cow when she brake all things that they tied her in,
ran to this Alice Gooderige her house, scraping at the walls and windows to
have come in: her old mother Elizabeth Wright, took upon her to help; upon
condition that she might have a penny to bestow upon her god, and so she came to
the man's house kneeled down before the Cow, crossed her with a stick in the
forehead, and prayed to her god, since which time the Cow continued well. With
this she was urged by the Justices, and with the hurt upon her belly, how it
could be so, and her clo^hes not cut, whereto she made shifting answers, to
no purpose. Then put they her aside, and examined Oliver Gooderidge her
husband, and her daughter also, who were found to disagree in their tales
concerning that matter: whereupon sir Humfrey committed her to Darbie Jail,
but dismissed her mother.

The next day the boy had a very grievous fit, in which lying still a while,
he began to throw up both his feet suddenly, beating them against the
ground with great vehemency, and at length being in a trance, he spoke
saying, Do thou say thou art my god, and that I am thy son* Avoid Satan,
there is no God save the Lord of hosts. Pawzing a while, at last he said
again, And would thou have me worship a moulten calfe? I will worship
nothing but the Lord God, and him only will I serve. Again being silent awhile,
he said; Will thou give me three towns if I will worship thee* Avoid
Satan, it is written, I shall worship the Lord God only. And do thou say*
that if I will not worship thee, thou will torment me three times more; if thou
torment me three hundred times, yet can thou not touch my soul. After this
he was tormented three several times over every part of his body, which being
ended, he desired to go to the window, to refresh himself, being hot and
faint: there he praised God for his mercies, telling them that stood by, If
Satan came again, he would ask him many questions, and charge him with many
things, for he remembered what he had spoken as well as any that was present:
having thus rested about a quarter of an hour, he was thrown into two
several fittes, matchable with the former in cruelty, and at the last spoke
saying, I charge thee by the living God to tell me who sent thee. Do thou
tell me thy mistress sent thee? What is thy mistress name? Do thou say thou will not tell me before to morrow? And why I pray thee will thou not? Do
thou say thou will torment me twice more? Do thy woorst, my hope is in the
living God, and he will deliver me out of thy hands: having spoken these words
he was cast into two several fittes like to the former; which being ended, he
desired the standers by to join with him in humble and hearty prayer, and so
fell upon his knees, praising God, for that he had somewhat revealed his enemy
Satan unto him, and beseeching him to continue his goodness in manifesting
him more plainly. The standers by asked him what he heard and saw in these sharp
conflicts (for they neither saw nor heard any thing, but him replying and
answering) he told them that the great Cat tossed him up and down in a string,
and that a thing spoke to him with a voice small and shrill. The next day
about nine of the clock he was cast into a grievous fit, and being cast upon
his back, was bereft of al use of any part of his body, and at the length
spoke saying: Do thou say I am thy son? I am none of thine, I am the poor
servant of the Lord of hosts: and pauzing a while, he said, Do thou offer me
a kingdom, if I will worship thee* I will none of thy kingdom, for it is but
earthly. The Lord has reserved for me a kingdom in heaven. I charge thee thou
devil, In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy* ghost to tell
me what is thy name. Do thou tell me that thy name is Wrythe? I charge thee
tell me, what is thy mistress name* Do thou say anon? thou have always
been a liar, and the father of lies, and do thou say, that unless I will
^^^ship thee thou will torment me three times more than thou did before,
if thou torment me 3000. times more, my faith is so strong, that I will worship
none but the living God. These words being finished, he was cast into three
several fittes, with all the former torments, drawing together his joints and
sinews, and writhing him, with tossing and turning him very round most
pitifully; these fits and speeches continued about half an hour. After this,
he was cast into another fit, his eyes closed up, his legs lifted up as
stiff as stakes, and al his senses taken from him; which fit ceasing, he was
well, till twelve of the clock at noone, and then was cast into another fit,
lying flat upon his back, and lifting his feet up: at last he said, Do
thou say thou will give me a palace, and make me a king if I will worship
thee? Avoid Satan, I will worship the Lord only. Do thou say thou will
mittigate my torments, if I will worship thee? Avoid Satan, I will worship
none, save only the Lord God my Savior, my sanctister and redeemer. Do
thou say, that if I will not worship thee, thou will torment me thrice? Do thy
worst Satan, my faith stands sure with my God, at whose hands I look for
succor. Having uttered these and some other such words, he was cast into
three several cruel fittes; after the which he had rest till two of the
clock, at which time there came diverse worshipful personages, of purpose to
behold the manner of the childs so strange vexing; they caused him to read
upon the bible, which caused Satan to rage, so that he was cast into a fit
terribly tormented and vexed, as that it did much humble the beholders, and
move them to commiseration and pity, for the childs so distressed estate.
While these things happened, it was reported, that the old witch Elizabeth Wright
was in the town, a thing somewhat rare; for it is thought, that (except at the
time of her former examination) she was not so far in half a year before:
presently they sent for her.

In the mean season came in master Bagot the younger of Blithfield, wishing to
be an eye witness of these strange reports, requesting the boy to take the Bible
and read, he being unwilling to read himself, wished Iesse Be to do so
much, which he did* and when he came to the 4. verse of the 1. chapter of S.
John's gospel in these words, In it was life, and the life was the light of the
world, the boy was overthrown into a fit. About the end of which it was said
that the witch was come, whom before they had sent for, so that she was
presently brought in, and stripped by certain women, that they might see her
suspected place: whilst they stripped her, she cursed the day of her birth,
making great outcries, and using bitter speeches against all that offered to
accuse her. And being asked who brought her to Burton? she said, the devil:
being asked diverse questions she liked not, she would answer she did not
hear. Much adoo they had to get her to come near the boy, or to look on him:
and it had bin good for him if she had never come at him, for so soon as she
kneeled down by him, and cast her eyes upon him, he was suddenly taken with
such a vehement fit, as before he had upon the like occasion: This was more
grievous than many other; he lay upon his back, altogether deprived of the
use both of his members and senses; except his eyes, for they stood wide open
very fearful to the beholders: and all the parts of his body did quake and
shake like Aspen leaves. Whilst she was upon her knees at her devilish
prayers, the child was grievously tormented, therefore they thrust her out of
the doors. Which being done, he recovered himself, and his fit ended he said;
The Lord be praised: Mistress Dethicke also of New-hall came in to behold with
others these strange sights, at whose request, when Iesse Be read the first
chapter of the gospel after S. John* and came to the 4. verse, the boy was cast
into a fit like to those which before he had upon the like occasion.

In these his sittes, as also in those that he had after, he could neither
conceal what he said, or what Satan said to him. The next morning he had two
fits betwixt 8. and 12. of the clock, at which time Master Graisly came
again to see the child, and whilst he was there, there came in two men of
Stapen hill, near neighbors to Alice Gooderige, who said they came from Darbie,
and were intreted by her to tell Robert Toone, that if he would be good to her,
she would reveal the whole truth of the matter: and further, they offered him
their company thither on monday, which was agreed upon by the advice of M*
Graisly. But news came, that there was one which being skilful in discerning
of witches had bin with Alice Gooderidge at Darbie, and affirmed flatly that
she was a witch, offering to make open trial of it, and to cure the boy. This
offer Rob. Toone accepting of very willingly, a time was appointed for this
man's coming thither. But to return to the boy: about xi. of the clock, he
had a sore fit, with the increase of torments groaning very grievously, and
skreeking very pitifully, and being cast upon his back with his legs thrown
out (as commonly he was) at the last he vetered these words; Do thou say
that I am thy Champion? I will be none of thy champion, I am the servant of the
Lord of hosts. What offerest thou me a bag of money, if I will worship thee?
Avoid Satan, I will none of thy money, the Lord in heaven has money enough in
store for me. And do thou say thou will torment me twice more grievously than
before? Do thy worst Satan, my trust is in the Lord God. Do thou say thy
Mistress will have it so? I charge thee in the name of the father, etc. to tell
me what thy mistress name is. Do thou say thou will not reveal thy mistress?
with that Satan tormented him again, the which going away with a vomit, his
mother began to comfort him, exhorting him to put his trust in God: to whom he
said, My whole trust is in him; for the Lord has my enemy in a chain, and
keeps him in a compass, which he shall not pass. And having remained well
about half an hour, he was again pitifully tormented, and at the last spoke
these words: Do thou say thou will give me whatsoever I will ask thee if
I will be thy Champion? I defy thee, and all that thou offerest me, I will be
none of thy champion. I charge thee in the name of the living God to tell me
what thy Mistress name is. Say thou that thy Mistress has given thee a drop
of her blood to thy dinner, and that therefore thou will tell no tales of her?
And do thou say my faith is but weak? Satan, it is too strong for thee to
overthrow. Do thou say thou will torment me worse than ever thou have
done? Do thou thy worst, my trust is in the Lord my God. Forthwith he was
pitifully tormented: after which being asked what he saw he answered, the
green Cat (as he usually told them) asking angerly* did not you see her? Oh
quoth he this has been a grievous torment to me.* This ended, he desired
being hot and faint with the extremity of his torments, to be carried to the
window to take the air: where whilst he sat, there came in one, whose name
I Will pass over in silence; and being a stranger, began to examine the boy
concerning poetical and other school points; the boy was weary of his
company and conference, (as indeed he had great reason, being unfit for such
an occasion) and desired to be carried into another chamber, the which was
immediately done. But this supposed friend followed him, and renewed his former
speeches, uttering also an oath that grieved the boy exceedingly. The mother
understanding it, came and asked what the stranger said to him that so troubled
him? (for he wept pitifully) The party himself answered before the boy, I
spoke no hurt to him. No (quod the child) you bade me I should not dissemble,
saying that there was no witches: also you asked of me if I thought there were
a god? God bless me fro such co^forters: I pray you al pray for me that the
Lord would deliver me from this temptation: at which words speaking he was
overthrown into a cruel fit; which being ended, that man which thought there
was no witches departed. But master Eccarshall the Pastor of Burton being
present stays still comforting the boy and his sorrowful mother, persuading
him that if Satan spoke to him again he should not answer him, because he was
a liar, and endeavored by his words to make the boy believe him; these things
ended about two of the clock, he remained well till four: then was he
overthrown into four several fits one presently after another; the last
whereof was most intolerable, tossing and tormenting him very pitifully, it
seemed by his looks and gestures that the evil spirit spoke; but because of
master Eccarsalles advise, he kept a discontented silence, as he told
afterward to his mother, but she advised him, that if it should speak again,
he should not fear or forbear to answer it. About this time some meat was
prepared for him, but before he could take it, he was overthrown into a crueil
fit, wherein after that Satan had showed a while his rage, he spoke saying:
Do thou say that I shall worship thee? I will worship the Lord of hosts
only, I charge thee* In the name of the father, of the son etc. to tell me
what thy name is. Do thou say thou wile not tell me before to morrow? Thou
art a liar, I have ever found thee so, and I will not believe thee. Do thou
say thou will torment me far more grievously than ever thou have done? I care
not for all that thou caust do unto me: In the Lord is my trust, who will
deliver me when his good pleasure is: presently Satan tormented him according
to his wonted manner. After that fit was ended, and he had a while bin quiet,
Iesse Be persuaded him to be coragious, to take unto him the shield of faith,
and to offer Satan the combat. The child finding himself strong in the Lord
(whose assistance he had before obtained in his former conflicts) condiscended
to his motion: so Iesse read the first chapt. according to S. John till he came
to the 9. ver. That light was the true light, etc. at which words he was
overthrown into a marvelous sore Fit; which vexed and tormented him in every
part of his body: which being ended, Iesle asked him if he should read agaiue?
The boy answered cherefully, read on in Gods name: so he read til he came to
the 13. verse Which were borne not of blood, etc. At these words he was thrown
into grievous torments, like to the former: which ended, Iesse asked if he
should read still? The boy answered, proceed in the name of God. Then read he
the 14 ver. The same Word became flesh* etc. At which words he was tormented
the third time; yet not so vehemently as before. He proceeding forward read
till be came to the 17 ver. The law was given by Moses, grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ* Forthwith he fell into the fourth fit, the feeblest of any he
yet* had; satan no doubt finding his force quatling, and his fiery darts
quenched. So Ieste read on, the Child cheerfully and attentively hearkening
till he had finished the chapter without any trouble to him. The next day
(among other fits) he had one much more vehement than the rest, his torments
being increased and his strength so great, that two strong men were not able to
rule him. After this fit Iesse Be said; Come Thomas, shall we provoke him to
battle? To whom the child answered* yes very willingly. So they looked for
the Bible, but the boys Uncle had taken it to the Church. Then did the Boy
desire Iesse to resolve him in this doubt, whether it were hurtful for one to
eat or drink before he receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Being
satisfied concerning this Point, and casting down his head to call to
remembrance some thing else whereof doubted doubted* he was on the sudden
overthrown into a grievous fit, groaning and skreaming most pitifully,
turning as round on all four, as a pigge on a spit; and suddenly* (do what
the keepers could) he leaped up to the top of the bed, catching hold on the
testern with his hands and hanging by his arms notwithstanding his eyes were
cloased up: and being in this case, he said; do than say I shall hear news
within these 2. or 3. days? I pray God it be good news. He was at last cast
into a trance, uttering diverse such comfortable speeches, as in other his
traunces he did. This day there came one to them, having been (of her own
accord) with widow Worthington the good Witch of Hoppers (as they call her)
and told them, she said the Boy was bewitched; yet help him she could not,
except his mother or some of his nearest friends came unto her. The same answer
was given by a Witch about Couentrey to another, looking for some help in the
boys behalf. But the mother of the Child (detesting the devils help)
thanked those two for their kindness toward her, but sharply reproved them for
attempting a thing so unlawful. After these fits, he rested reasonable quiet
til the next day: when as about one a clock (seeming very well) he rceiued
some meat. But Satan showed himself to be a right satan, even a sore enemy
to the Child, (envying the good of his body, when he saw himself unable to
hurt his soul) did let his digesting of it (as many times he did) by casting
him presently into diverse fits; which as (usually all his fits did) lasting
about half a quarter of an hour, ended with a vomit. Many that were
Beholders of the Childs torments, little hoped that ever he could have lived
or recovered. But God be praised, that Satan's power is limited by him who is
Lord both of life and death.

*When these Conflicts were ended, Iesse Be said unto him, Thomas shall we
take the Sword with two edges, and bid Satan the Battle? The Boy (being
well acquaynted with the phrase) answered; If you will read, I will gladly
hear. So he read the first Chapter of S. John's Gospel* which whilst he was
reading* the child was overthrown into three Fittes. After these Fits, he was
very cheerful, and desirous to have the Book, that he might read himself:
which he did. And when he came at the fifth verse of the first Chapter of the
Revelation (for that Chapter he read) he was overthrown into a cruel Fit:
which being ended, he gave the Book to Iesse Be, entreating him carnestly
to read on forward. So Iesse Be finished the Chapter, and read also the second
and was never (in reading them* with any more of the Boys fits) interrupted.

Upon the one and twentieth of April, though betwixt nine of the Clock in the
Morning, and two in the Afternoon he had ten Fittes, yet the last of them
was most extreme; in the midst of it he would open his eyes amazedly, and
presently clap both his hands upon them, being overthrown into most violent
torments throughout all the parts of his body; and being cast upon his
back, he threw forth his legs fiercely, beating them against the ground
vehemently: and after that lying in a quiet trance, he opened his mouth,
saying; Do thou say that thou will give me a Crown, if I will worship
thee? I regard thee not nor thy Crown; for the Lord has reserved a Crown of
righteousness for me in Heaven.

Then (pausing awhile*) he spoke again saying; Do thou say thou will give
me Towns and Countries, if I will worship thee? Away Satan away, thou art a
liar, and the Father of lies; I will not believe thee: away. Forthwith his
mouth was cloased up, and his teeth set fast in his head, insomuch that he
labored to have opened them with his own hands, but he could not; yet when
he had remained awhile thus, the Lord (by his almighty power) opened his
mouth, and he boldly said; I charge thee (Satan) in the name of the Father and
of the Son.

At which word his mouth was fast closed again, yet was it not long before the
Lord (by his power) opened it again. So he proceeded, saying; I charge thee
tell me what is thy mistres name? Say thou thou will not? and do thou say
thou will torment me ten times more? No sooner were these words spoken, but he
was tormented above measure. Next day betwixt ten and one of the clock, he had
two ordinary fits, and at the loose of those, one extraordinary; in the which
being overthrown upon his back, with his accustomed torments, he vttred
these words Wouldll thou have me worship thee, thou liar, thou wicked wretch?
thou art the father of all lies. I charge thee get from me, away, away. These
words he vttred disdainfully, shaking his hands at him. And after he had paused
a while, he said, Do thou promise me all my desire* If I will worship thee?
Ah wicked tempter, I charge she in the name of the Father, etc. to tell me thy
Mistres name? These words he vttred with an interrupted voice: but repeated
them presently very courageously: saying also, And do thou say thy Mistres
has given thee a draught of her blood? I am glad of it: for then shall I know
her shortly. And do thou say thou will torment me twice more? At these words
he was cast into two sore fits; so that satan kept promise with him. His
torments caused him skreame very loud and groan pitifully, slinging out his
hands as though he fought with satan* and stamping fiercely, as if he trod
him under foot. This combat ended, he lay still about a quarter of an hour,
and then having been a while tormented, lying on his back, he said; Do thou
say because I vex thy mistres thou will torment me more? Which words being
spoke, he was cast into such torments, as were grievous to the beholders. And
having overcome the extremity of the same, he spoke (with his eyes shut)
saying; What, do thou say I shall worship thee* thou have no faith satan,
I will fight with thee with the word of the everliving god, Avoid, avoid; I
charge thee in gods name to get thee hence. Again after more fits he said;
what, do thou say thou will make me as strong as a Giant, and as rich as the
greatest Potentate in ye world, if I will worship thee? the Lord my God can
make me strong, and give me all good things. Having paused a little, be spoke
again, saying; do thou say if I will not worship thee thou will make me a
four-footed beast? that lies not in thy power, since God has made me a
reasonable creature: my faith satan is strong. And, do thou say thou will
torment me grievously for thy mistres sake? Forthwith he was grievously
tormented, crying out, A bear, a bear: his mouth was stretched out, and he
rored fiercely like a bear, crying out, he teareth me, he teareth me. These
torments ended, he lay amazedly, with the sweat running down his face. Being
again tormented, he spoke saying; will thou give me a land full of all
fruits if I will worship thee? the Lord in heaven has goods enough for me:
thou did send a be are thy helhound to torment me: thou did tell me I
should hear news within 2. or 3. days; do thou say thy mistres has
commanded thee not to be an hour from tormenting me, because I vex her? is
that thy news? At these words he was presently cast into grievous torments,
starting amazedly and crying out; Flames of fire, flames of consuming fire: he
threw away all things he could find by groping (for his eyes were shut) and
wownd himself close in the bed clothes. Scarcely had these torments an end,
but others began; wherein being grievously afflicted, he cried out, A fiery
dragon, a fiery dragon. These torments continuing, he said; now thou foul
fiend, now thou show thy self in thy likeness. Presently he struck both his
hands upon his face, shriking and crying fearfully, A fly, a fly. Being asked
what he had seen in these conflicts? he answered, many and fearful things,
but remembered them not; neither could tell he spoke, though he called to mind a
thing spoke to him. The 24 day about 11* of the clock he fell in to an extreme
fit, which s^ooke him pitti^ully in all parts of his body, making him to are
like a bear. Being asked after the fit what he had seen? he answered a great
bear came roaring upon him. Four fits more he had before 4. of the clock; at
which time Ma. Edw: Cockin came into the house, and finding him well, bade him
read the 12. of John: which he did, till he came to the 15. verse I am glad for
your sakes, that etc and then was he cast into a fit presently. Upon this there
came in another, disiring to see the like trial: so the Boy read till he came
to the 25* ve. I am the resurrection etc. at which words he was again
overthrown. This desire that many had to have the boy read, that they might
see him in his fits, sauou^d but of a tempting curiosity, and is not
warrantable. But to go on. The Boys torments continuing, Rob: Toone being
altogether without hope of his recovery; both because the Witch confessed
nothing, and the man that promised help failed, whereat he grieved exceedingly.
Many persuaded him to send to diverse Witches, which he refused; but his wife
purposed to attempt it, and sent for a messenger, who had before been employed
by others in the like business. He found the Boy in a fit when he came; and
thereupon uttered these words; who would suffer him to lie thus; and not seek
any help he could get? Whereuntoo, an honest man (not acquainted with their
purpose) answered; To seek help at a Witch, is wicked and dangerous. The
messenger was pricked in conscience with his speech, and would not go. To:
Toone was not a little glad they were stopped in so unlawful an enterprise.
This day also another had been with widow Worthington the Witch of Hoppers,
(unknown to the Boys Friends* and brought this answer; that unless the Boy
and his Friends believed her, she could do him no good: which thing they
detested.

The six and twentieth of April (after nine fittes in the morning) about one
of the clock he was overthrown into a very sore Fit, and in the same was
greeuouslye vexed and tormented. At the last he spoke thus; What do thou
say, if I will worship thee, thou will make me a God: but if I will not, thou will make me a toad? It lies not in thy power satan to make me what thou will; but in the power of my Creator. And do thou say thou will torment me
twice? do thy worst, the Lord is my trust, and I know he can and will deliver
me. Being then suddenly tormented, he did struggle most fiercely, roaring
fearfully like a bear, crying A bear, a bear; and by and by, A dragon, a
dragon. After this, he was quiet about a quarter of an hour and then (upon the
sudden) fell into the like torments, and spoke (as before) saying; do thou
say thou have brought me good news? I pray God it be. And do thou say if
I will curse God, thou will releease me of all my pains and torments? What
Satan, would thou have me curse my Creator, which spared not to send his
only begotten Son Jesus Christ out of his bosom, to shed his most precious
Blood for my Sins? Ah wicked Tempter, I charge thee in the name of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to tell me what is thy mistres name? Do thou
say, thy mistress has rewarded thee, and therefore thou will torment me
more than ever thou did? I care not for thee a Straw: what satan, seek
not to insult in thy subtle cruelties: for the Lord will release me from thee
when his god will and pleasure is; and so (with some more torments) this Fit
ended.

The next day he came that promised to cure the Boy, and to prove her plainly
(which was had in suspicion) to be a Witch. He wished Robert Toone only to
procure him a warrant to fetch her from the Jail: promising, as he hated all
Coniuration and Inchauntment, so it should be manifest what course he took
for effecting those matters. This day and both the next he had many sore
fits. Upon the last of April, beeween 9. and 3 in the afternoon he had 14 fits
At this time the witches liberty being procured, she came to Town, and was
brought to the Boy: to whom she said, God help thee my child; whereupon he
was presently cast into most strange torments, differing both in manner and
cruelty from the former. Three strong men could hardly hold him, he was so
strong; he shriked pitifully, blearing out the tung, and having his neck so
wrythen, that his face seemed to stand backward. This pitiful spectacle did
wring many tears from the beholders. So from 3. till 9. at night he had 27.
of these torments; and then they left him quaking and meruailously dismayed.
These fits being laid to the Witches charge: she answered, that she indeed did
vex the child, but if they would forgive her, it should cease. Two or three
went to Stapen-hill to see what the old woman did this while; suspecting she
had a hand herein: when they came thither, they found her on her knees; praying
(no doubt) to the devil. Upon the first of May, about 7. in the morning, he
was cast into a fit. This was the day wherein the Cunning man would make the
Witch confess, and a sennight after cure the Boy: so he sent for her from the
Town Hal to Rob: Toones, where many worshipful Personages were ready to see
proof of his skill. Being brought they labored to make her confess
voluntarily: to whom she answered, this was ye first that ever she committed;
and if they would procure her liberty, she offered to confess all the truth
freely. Presently her speech was interrupted, so that she could not speak*
but she prayed them to forgive her. Then the man seeing this would not
prevail, fell to trial of his conclusion: he put a pair of new shoes on
her feet, setting her close to the fire, till the shoes being extreme hot,
might constrayne her thorough increase of the pain to confess. This was his
ridiculous practice, she being throghly heated desired a release and she would
disclose al; which granted, she confessed nothing. Being therefore threatened
more sharply, she offered to reveal all privately to mistress Dethicke, and
going with her into a parlour; when she began to speak her wind was stopped,
so as she could not say any thing, but, I pray you forgive me. By this it was
xi. of the clock, and the boy had had 8. fits, and was brought into the
parlour where she was, who said, Thomas, I pray you forgive me, and be good to
me. At which words he fell into a marvelous sore fit. After which, the
company continued threatening and persuading her, but al she would say* was,
she was sorry for him, for she mistook him, thinking him to be Sherrats boy,
thinking to have bin revenged on him for breaking her eggs. When they saw they
could prevail no more, they sent her again to the Hall, and the company
departed: after which the boy had 8. fits.

The next morning went Jerome Horabin, Edward Weightman, mistress Caldwall with
other to hear what confession she would make. At whose coming she spoke thus;
I met the boy in the wood, the first saturday in Lent, and passing by me, he
called me witch of Stapen hill: unto whom I said, Every boy does call me witch,
but did I ever make thy arse to itch? Further she said, I pray you get help
for the boy, for Gods sake get help for the boy. Again she said, God give me
grace to confess the truth. And when she would have spoken on, she said, I
cannot, I cannot, my wind is stopped: Mistress Caldwall asked her if she would
be prayed for? Yes (quoth she) I pray you desire M. Eccarsall to pray for me,
that the Lord would open my heart, that I may speak the truth. The 3. of May
in the morning, Rob. Toone, Edw. Weightman, Rich* Teate and others, went again
to examine the witch, who confessed to them saying: The first satterday in Leut
toward evening I met the boy in the wood, and he called me witch of Stapen hill:
and I said again, every boy does call me witch, but did I ever make thy
arse to itch? forthwith I stouped to the ground, and the Devil appeared to me
in likeness of a little partie-colored dog red and white, and I called him
Minny, seeing that every boy calls me witch, therefore go thy ways and
torment this boy in every part of his body at thine own pleasure, forthwith
I strained every part of my body, enforcing my self to vomit, saying; After
this sort, vex every part of him. Further (said she) the dog followed the boy
to Burton, and as I returned from Winsell (whither I went to buie a groates
worth of eggs) he met me again, telling me he had fulfilled my request, and
at my yards end he departed from me; since when he has bin diverse times with
me at Darbie Jail, and these two nights at Burton Hall, and continually he
scratcheth my head, and scrapeth in the straw. Again she said, the boy will
not mend except you seek for help: you may have help enough: she would have
spoken further, but something stopped her throat, and she said, come out thou
foul serpent. From 8. til 2 the boy had 12 sore fits with pitiful groaning: at
3 came M. Hildersham of Ashby de la Zouch* with diverse other godly ministers M.
Hildersham after that by certain questions, he had made trial of the boys
faith, said openly, that howsoever the Papists boasted much of the power their
priests had to cast out devils, and the simple every where noted it as a
great discredit to the Ministers of the Gospel, that they do want this power,
yet did he profess there was no such gift in them, that though the Lord often in
these days, by the prayers of the faithful casts eut devils, yet could he not
assure them to cure him. To hold this faith of miracles to remainestill in the
church, is an opinion dangerous. That seeing to be passessed is but a temporal
correction, and such as whereby both the glory of God and the salvation of the
party may be furthered, it can not without sin be absolutely prayed against:
al which notwithstanding, that there is a good use of prayer in such a case,
and of fasting also, to procure that the judgment may be sanctified to the
beholders, and the possessed himself; yea to obtain that he may be delivered
also from it, if the Lord see it be best for his own glory. In which
persuasion, he being the mouth of the rest, they all prayed, during which time
the child was not interrupted.

Whereas Alice Gooderige said her familiar was like one William Gregory's dog
of Stapenhill, there arose a rumor, his dog was her familiar: wherefore he
with his neighbor master Coxe went the next day to examine her concerning this
report; and she said, my devil (I say) was like your dog. Now out upon thee
(said Gregory) and departed: she being further examined, said she had her
familiar of her mother. The sixth of May he had xii. fits in the forenoone,
and x. in the afternoon; these last were as grievous as any before. After one
of them taking the chamber pot, he started suddenly saying, look where a man
comes out of the chamber pot. In another fit he cried out, Flames of fire,
flames of fire: and in another he said, I see the heavens open. In the most of
these fits he bleared out his tongue very black, having his face wrythen
toward his back, groaning and shriking lamentably; being asked if he
remembered what was done; he said, it seemd to him he was wroong and tossed up
and down* after these fits he remained well til next morning. On friday he was
by 7 a clock cast into a fit; but about 8 he fell into marvelous strange
torments, both for continuance and extraordinary cruelty, his tongue thrust out
of his head, his mouth drawn awry, first toward one ear, then to another; his
face very strangely disfigured. In his extreamitie he made signs to the
standers by to pray; and himself by folded hands and other gestures, gave
testimony that the spirit of God was mightily laboring against his infirmities.

By and by his eyes opened, and what ever he caught he (as it seemd) threw it
against satan, and strait they being shut up again, so that he could not open
them with his fingers, which he endeavored, his mouth was opened, and he said,
O pray pray, never more need to pray; so the company joined in humble and hearty
prayer: but he hearing them not (though they prayed loud) said; why do you not
pray? Presently his mouth being shut, and his teeth set fast in his head, he
stamped (as it were) in triumph of Satan, and lifting his hands toward heaven,
stroke them with reverence on his breast. Satan's raging against him did
increase in such manner as caused the beholders to shead tears abundantly, for
they could no sooner imagine a ceasing, but strait his fit began again: and
this conflict lasted long, in which space, he often uttered these words; do what
thou can satan, this shall do thee no good: Is it so? and such like. And
after obtaining the use of his tung, he proceeded saying, Avoid satan, I have
upon my head the helmet of salvation, and I am girded about with truth. Jesus
Christ has shead water and blood for my sins, and I sweat but water. O Lord
thy apostles were whipped and scourged for thy truth, and they departed,
rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to suffer for thy names sake. And
now (O Lord) I rejoice that thou accountest me worthy to suffer these cruel
torments. Presently he fell into torment again; at the last lying on his back
quietly, he desired the standers by to sing the sixth psalm, and so they did,
he singing with them very cheerfully. While they were singing, he often was
interrupted and joined with them again toward the end: having lain in a
trance, so that they could scarcely perceive any motion, he said; I see the
heavens open, hearken, I hear a heavenly noise, and lying still a while, he
met with them at the 10. ver. And now my foes, that (quoth he) is satan and so
continued singing til the psalm was ended: all the psalm through he sweat
exceedingly, and dried his face as if he had not bin in his fit. After this, he
desired them to pray for him whilst he lay down and slept, and so fell into a
trance; having lain still a while, he fell to quaking and starting fearfully
saying: Do thou say my sins are great* Satan? The Lamb of God has taken
them away: diverse other interrupted speeches he uttered, and slumbered again.
At length he cried out, Wild horses, wild horses; they tear me, they tear me;
and then was he tormented over all the parts of his body. After that he slept
somewhat slumberingly, having a most heavenly and joyful vision. When he
awaked he looked cheerfully: and being asked what he saw in these trances, he
could not call any thing to mind.

This day he was cast into seven cruel fits exceeding all he had before: for
besides that his mouth was drawn awrie, and he in every part vexed, his
shoulder bones were thrust out of joint, with other torments most lamentable:
thus they ended, for he remained til xi. a clock grievously vexed, and almost
without intermission. In these his torments, being (for the most part)
senseless, he used to utter diverse interrupted speeches, some fearful, others
comfortable; the standers by being requested of him, to sing psalms and pray,
be many times had his ears shut, and his mouth stopped, so that he could neither
hear (...) speak, yet he would join with them in prayer and singing so long
as he could without interruption. When he was fully recovered, he looked very
cheerfully, giving God thanks for his assistance: they asked him many
questions concerning his trances, but he could remember nothing that was done.
On the nineteenth day of May he fell into trances mixed with torments, in
which as he suffered grievous pains, so did he utter many strange speeches,
sometime he was so wrested, that no beholder thought it possible for him to
live; sometime he lay so still, that there scarce appeared any sign of life in
him. After he had lain a while in a trance he said; Mr* Savior Christ Jesus
was tempted. and why then should not I be so? Pawzing a while he said, I
hear a voice from heaven, the Lord speaks to me: and pawzing again, he
held up his hands (his eyes being fast closed) and said, Look where my
brother Job is. Then opened he his eyes, but his mouth was fast shut: he would
have opened it with his hands, but could not: Then pawzing a little, he said,
no, no, I will not. The Lord has flatly forbidden it in his word: so lying a
while he said, heaven opens, heaven opens, I must go thither: then
clapping his hands for joy he said, I see Christ Jesus my Savior, his face
shines as the Sun in his strength, I will go salute him, and indeed he did
rise going apace, with such strength, that his keepers could scarsly stay him:
presently he fell a trembling and stamping, crying, a dog, a dog, for Gods sake
take away this dog* away with this filthy dog that came out of hell: and after
a pitiful skreaming he said; Oh Master Hildersham. I thought he would have
torn me in pieces, preach judgment against all sinners, flames of fire, flames
of fire; See Master Hildersham, preach and teach, Oh fast and pray night and
day. After these speeches, he clapped his hands, looking cheerfully, though his
eyes were closed, saying: Christ Jesus my Savior comes clothed in purple;
then seemed he (by his gestures) to embrace him, saying: Holy is thy name; thy
name (Lord Jesus) is to be exalted for evermore, I have seen such sights, O
Lord Jesus bless me from them. Presently he was overtaken again with fear,
saying: Do thou say this is the bottomless pit where the damned be?
Master Hildersham, we had need to pray, O preach and pray: strait after he
looked cheerfully even with admiration, saying: Thy name O Lord Jesus is to
be exalted above all things, thy name is to be blessed for ever. Lying a while
in a trance, he clapped his hands saying, Oh, oh, Christ Jesus my savior and
his Apostles: Then seemed he to embrace the Apostles, and worship our Savior
saying, O Lord Jesus thou sufferedst for my sake; thy name be praised, yea, I
say from my heart, thy name be praised. By and by turning his head, he pointed
saying, Look where Judas is frying in torments. After this he fell again into
a trance, and lay as he had bin dead, but spoke fearfully thus; Ah look in
this place of torments where drunkards are hanged by the throats, swearers and
filthy talkers by their tongues: and having spoken of other torments for other
sins, he said, O great judgments, great judgments, which words he uttered
so woefully, as if he had been in the jaws of hell; and on the contrary, so
comfortably, as if he had been in heaven. After this falling into a trance,
he started suddenly and said, Yonder comes mother Read Cap, look how they
beat her brains out, see what it is to be a witch: see how the toades gnaw
the flesh from her bones. O pray, pray, look what wailing, and weeping, and
gnashing of teeth yonder is: Lord show us thy mercy; take me by the hand
Master Hildersham* and let us go to heaven: thus this fit ended after half
an hour; being asked what he had bin doing, he answered, he had been*
sleeping, for he remembered nothing. Having been well about a quarter of an
hour, be fell into a quiet trance, and at length said: O Master Hildersham,
look where Gods chariot is come to fetch you and me, see how God loves us: by
and by he began to quake, and cried; Lo, lo, the green Cat comes out of
hell: then falling into a quiet trance, he said, look where the 7 churches
be, and presently he skritched saying; Lo, lo, 7 ugly devils, look, they go
down to the bottomless pit. Pauzing again he faith, See see how many kings
and rich men go to hell, even they that were so brave, and fared so daintily,
and were so stowt. After this he fell into a trance, saying; come M.
Hildersham, the Lord bids us come, let us go, and so he went on, and could
hardly be staid: but straitway his joy turned into heaviness, for he seemed to
have bodily combats with his spiritual enemy* These fits ended he remained
well a quarter of an hour: then falling into a sudden trance, he said with
trembling; Ha, ha, ha, I told you of this before, that after joy comme^th
sorrow. Look you how I am tormented. O that I could see my savior Christ
Jesus. Forthwith he arose clapping his hands with great joy, and said; Look
where he comes, thy name be praised, thy name be praised. Anon he had a
comfortable vision of the day of judgment; crying* alowd, The trumpets sound,
see fee, the graves open, the dead arise, and al men come to judgment; hark
how the Angels cry, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath. Then pauzing a
little he said, Look look how the wicked sly away like a flock of doves,
yet see a flame of fire ouertaketh them. After much variety of fits he cried;
a fiery Dragon, a fiery Dragon teareth me in pieces, oh he tears me, he
tears me: and with these torments did this fit end between twelve and one.
About three he fell into a trance and torments like the former: for after he
had spoken fearfully of the torments of the damned, he burst into pitiful
speeches quaking said; Look where seven devils are, look where a roaring
lion is. Then he fell into a quiet trance, and forth with clapped his hands,
saying; I see a milk white dove flying toward me* see where my Savior
comes, his face shines as the Sun. These words uttered, he was again
terrified, and so with some more torments and trances this fit ended. The two
days following he had many fits and some trances, uttering the like speeches
as before. The xii. of May he was removed from his uncle M. Saunders house at
Caldwall being 3. miles distant, where he had six fits. From the 13. to the
23. he was handled after his accustomed manner. The 23 of May, he was cast into
eighteen fits worse than the former; for his shoulder bones were thrust out of
joint, his mouth drawn awrie; and amongst other complaints, he cried out of
his legs, saying they thrust pinnes into them. And this is worthy the
observation, that commonly (upon the Sabbath) when the boy was remembered by
prayer in godly Assemblies, Satan did show his extremest cruelty. The 24.
and 25. he was tormented much like the day before. The 26. he was assaulted
more fiercely, both in respect of the number and quality of his fits and
torments, in which he did oftentimes cry out, saying; Look where satan
comes from under the bed: and oftentimes Thunder, thunder; Lightening,
lightening; Flames of fire, flames of consuming fire; A bear, a bear; A
dragon, a dragon; look where satan comes down ye chunney, look, look; for
Gods sake take me from him. And thus in these terrible fits this day passed.
The next day there came one John Dorell (a faithful Preacher of the Word) to
him; who seeing him in diverse of his fits, assured his Friends and him he was
possessed with an unclean spirit: telling him (out of S. James 4 chapt. verse.
7.) that the only way for his deliverance was to resist satan; in which if he
failed, he should sin against God: because it was a breach of a Commandment,
Resist the devil* etc. That for his further encouragement, he had a promise of
victory, in that it is said, he will or shall flee; That by the devil is not
to be understood only the temptations of the devil, but even satan's very
person. And proceeding to confirm the Childs faith in this Resistance, he
afterward exhorted his Parents and the whole Family to prepare themselves
against the next day to that holy exercise of Prayer and Fasting; alleging (to
put by all doubts) the words of Christ, This kind goes not out but by Prayer
and Fasting. Wheretoo they being very willing importuned John Dorell for his
presence and assistance. To which he answered, his assistaunce in Prayer and
Fasting they should have, but not his presence, as well to avoid note of
vaineglorie, as also for he saw no such necessity by reason of the Childs
strme faith: nevertheless giving them order for their Exercise, and appointing
them the help of a Book called The Enemy of Security, and putting them in
good comfort, he foretold them what interruptions were likely to follow by the
Euemies rage: and (says he) when you shall see these things come to pass
(which indeed fell out accordingly) then know ye for certainty as he is
possessed (which his Friends at Cawdwall stood in doubt of), so look that
deliverance is at the door; and therefore fame not in the midway. Thus he
departed. The next day, the Family with some others in the fear of God being
together, the holy Exercise of Prayer and Fasting was taken in hand: and (after
some Prayer used for the assistaunce of Gods Spirit, and praying for the
remission of sins) he was very grievously and often tormented; and (by
means of his fits and torments) much interrupted therein, spending much time
about the same. A Prayer against the temptations of Satan was used; and in the
beginning thereof he was presently taken with a dumb fit: and coming to
himself, he began to pray again; and his fits came again and again so often as
he came to any substantial Point. After a while he fell into a trance, and at
length a small voite came from him saying; Brother Glassap, we cannot prevail,
his faith is so strong, and they fast and pray, and a Preacher prays as fast
as they. After these words, he fell into a fit, and so into a trance, a voice
being heard from him (big and hollow) saying; Brother Radulphus, I will go
unto my master Beelzebub, and he shall dubble their tungs. Then beginning again
to pray, he fell into a fit, and after into a trance: afterward coming to
himself, he poynted toward the chimney, saying; Lo where Beelzebub stands,
and the witch by him. I charge thee in ye name of the Father the Son and the
Holy Ghost, to tell me whether this he she that did be witch me or no?
Do thou say it was she? Now the Lord (I beseech him) forgive her, and I
forgive her. Further he said; I charge thee in the name of the Father the Son
and the Holy Ghost to get thee from me, and come no more at me: for it is
written, Resist the devil, and he will fly from thee: and presently he said;
He is gone, he is gone. Then prayed he again, and (at the third word) was
thrown into a fit and a Trance: whe^rein a voice was heard from him (his
mouth being wide op^en, as still it was when these voices were uttered) saying;
Radulphus, Beelzebub can do no good, his head is stricken off with a word: but I
will go fetch the flying Eagle and his flock. Presently after these words, he
fell into another fit and a trance: and (lying so) said; I see an Angel in
the window, like a milk white Dove, sent from the Lord to be with me to
comfort and assist us: but that is nothing in respect of the Lord himself.

Then (beginning to pray again) he fell into a Fit and a Trance: in the
which one of the old voices was heard from him, saying; We cannot prevail,
let us go out of him, and enter into some of these here. This voice came
twice, and it made the Standers by afraid. Then (reading again) be fell into
a Trance: and the former voice was heard from him, speaking very hollowly (as
both those unnatural voices not uttered by himself were) and saying; I would
they were all gone but one that is among them: and then we should do well
enough.

Then he read again, and (being cast into a trauce) one of those voices was
heard, saying; There is a Woman earnest at prayer, get her away* One in the
Company (called John Alsop) answered alowd and said; We cannot spare her:
yet did none of them all that were there know that she was praying; till
(looking back) they saw her earnestly at prayer in a corner being behind them.

Beginning again to read, he was suddenly cast into a trance, and a voice
was heard which said; He shall be tormented till to morrow at night, do God and
you what you can: but Satan was proved a liar. Recovering, and reading
again, he was again snatched into his trance, the voice being heard again,
saying; We cannot prevail, we cannot prevail, their Church increases: at
which time came in two to join in Prayer with yt Company. After this, reading
again, he fell into a trance, and a voice was heard from him saying; Here
comes one of my people: with that they looked back, and were ware of a man of
bad life coming into the parlor; and albeit the Boy was in his fit, yet he
made signs with his hand to the Company to get him away; which one of them
perceiving did for Presently he awaked and read, and was interrupted by a
trance, wherein a voice said; Tear the book, tear the book: and with that
(although his eyes were closed) he snatched at the Book (which one had in his
hand) and tare forth one leaf of it: which thing also from that time till two
of the clock, he attempted in every of his fits; and being restrained (by
reason that one held the Book, and another his hands) he would bite strike
and spurn them with his feet at the beginning of his fits: wherein he was
far stronger than he was wont, and his torments more exceeding in greatness
and number. Between 8 in the morning and 2 in the afternoon his countenance
was strangely disfigured, his mouth set wide open, and sometime drawn awrie,
his face turned backward, and his arms and sholders thrust out of joint: in
which time he had one fit and trance, wherein a voice said; We cannot
prevail, for they will not be helped with Witches. Brother Radulphus we cannot
prevail: let us go to our mistres and torment her, I have had a draught of
her blood to day, Forthwith it ceased, and straight ways he was in a trance
again, and a small voice was heard, saying; I will stop thy mouth* I will stop
thy mouth: at which instaut he was so stopped in his throat, that the
Company thought he had been strangled. In another fit, a voice said; Your
prayers prevail not, they are not heard. Whereunto M. Rampam (Schoolmaster of
Burton) replied; Thou art a liar satan, for it is written: Wheresoever two or
three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them, etc.
About two of the clock he had a marvelous strange fit, tormenting him most
pitifully: in the end whereof he strained to cast with great vehemency, and
got up some fleame and choler; at which time, if he were possessed with two
spirits, (as it is probable he was) one of them went out of him. So from 2.
till 4. his fits continued but decreasing in strength, and being without
speeches. About 3. the Company perceiving him to be faint, persuaded him to
eat somewhat to refresh him: which he did (having touched neither meat nor
drink of all the whole day before): but before and after his meat he said the
Lords Prayer, and other Praiets in the Book (which he before had assaied to
read and could not) without any interruption. About 6, a clock (being carried
on his Keepers back, for he had no use of his legs of three months before) his
fit came upon him very suddenly, and he cried out like a bear. The standers
by betook themselves to Prayer. During this fit he had many miserable
torments, causing him to roar and shrike extremely. Many such senseless
trances on this day of his deliverance he had, as yielded no sign of life,
save that his heart might be discerned to pant a little. At last (being laid
upon his bed) anon he began to heave and lift vehemently at his stomach, and
getting up some fleame and choler, (poynting with his finger and following
with his eyes) he said; Look, look, see you not the Mouse that is gone out
of my mouth: and so poynted after it unto the furthest part of the parlor. Then
he fell into a quiet trance; which ended, he was well till 7. a clock: at
which time he and 2. or 3. more went to supper: and as he sat at the table he
fell into a trance, and was thence carried to bed; as he lay there, a Uoice was
heard, saying; My Son arise up and walk, the evil spirit is gone from thee;
arise and walk. Upon this accident his Keeper said; let us see if he can go
betwixt us. But he answered no; I can go of my self. I thank God: and so
(standing on his feet) went presently forward without any difficulty. And
considering with himself this blessed change of his miserable estate, (of his
own accord) he fell flat upon the ground, giving God thanks for his
wonderful deliverance; and that in such excellent manner, as was to be
admired in a child. But no doubt, the same Spirit which armed him with faith
and patience in the time of his torments, instructed him how to give thanks
and pray. Being thus fully recovered, he went presently into the town, that it
might appear what Jesus had done for him, to the praise of his glory, and
admitation of those that had, been acquainted with his marvelous visitation.

The next morning Robert Toone went to the Jail, and demanded of the Witch how
she did? O master quoth she, never worse i for I have had such an Ague this
night, that I had thought my ioints would have been torn in sunder. They that
dwelt by the prison, could* not sleep for the noise that was there that night;
so that it is like the devil was as good as his word, when he said he would
torment her.

After he was thus meruailously delivered, he stayed the next day at Cawdwall,
and from thence went to his grandfathers M. Walkedens at Clifton; whether the
aforesaid John Dorell repaired unto him, and counseled him to be now most
heedfull, least the unclean spirit returning, and his heart empty of faith,
bring 7 worse than himself with him, as our Savior expresses; assuring
himself Satan would strive to repossesse him.

John Dorell departing, the Boy abode at Clifton till the 5. of June, which day
he returned to Burton. There the 6. day (being the Sabbath) and the 7. he
spent in religious excrecise. The 8 the went to School, from whence satan had
long kept him. In the afternoon sitting at his book, he said unto his
fellows; if you will go with me into the Churchyard, I will show you a
strange thing. Whereupon they went into the School Porch, (which their Master
disliked not, because they had their Books in their hands) where after he had
walked a while, he sat down and said he was weary, and presently complained
of one of his legs* even crying out: which his Master hearing, came to him; and
remembering his former trialls, prayed, moving the Child to say after him, O
Lord for Jesus Christ's sake have mercy upon me. But he most cried, O my legs,
my legs. Here is to be noted, that how ever satan grievously assaulted him,
yet did he not once torment him, because he was not (as before) in him which
also some of the Boys words confirmed.

Being brought home to his Uncles, (many following and flocking after him) he
groaned pitifully, crying also, Daggers, daggers: and at length he said (with
a fearful countenance) I am afraid of Satan. The company did encourage and
comfort him against such temptations, persuading him to prayer; which thing he
performed with great difficulty, crying as before O my legs, O my legs. They
being instant upon him to pray, he poynted with his finger saying; What woman
is that which stands there: Still they urged him with prayer: and while they
expected it* he said; what a thundering is here? I cannot abide this thundering.
Then fell he into a trance, and having layne a while, a voice was heard from
him saying; He fell a little and I caught him. By and by awaking he rose up
amazedly and said; Where am I* I was even now in the school? but they told him
what had happened, so he came down from his bed; and feeling himself well, he
prayed and read a chapter quietly, and so remained well all that night. The
next morning the Boys Uncle thought it very convenient to labor by Prayer to
remove this heavy displeasure of God, and the danger of these temptations,
wherewith the Boy began agains to be assaulted: and to that end sent for two of
his neighbors, and spent an hour in prayer and reading the Scriptures. At last
as the Boy was reading, be stopped, saying; what woman is that which stands
there* They persuaded him to go on, and not regard the illusions of satan. So
he read on, and was presently cast into a trance: and after he had lain a
while said; Behold I see a Lamb, hark what the Lamb says; Thou did fall
and he caught thee: fear not, the Lord is thy buckler and defender. After this
he read on, and within a little space fell again into a quiet trance,
saying; Do thou say if I will worship thee, thou will make me understand the
secrets of all men's hearts? Anoyd Satan, it is hid from thee: the Lord only
is the searcher of the hearts and reins. Then did he read again, and
forthwith was cast into a trance, saying; What fair woman is this, that is
so gorgeously apparailed? Do thou say thou will give her me if I will worship
thee? Auyod Satan, I neither care for her nor thee: the Lord is my comfort,
and him only will I worship: the Lamb and the Dove desire not to be
worshipped, but thou alwaie desire worship. Again he read and fell in a
trance, saying; Do thou say if I will swear an oath thou will give me a
hundred pounds? Avoid satan. would thou have me take Gods name in vain? I
will not. He read again, and at the third word was snatched into his trance,
saying; would thou give me a bag full of gold and silver, if I will never
read nor pray unto God any more? Avoid satan, I neither regard thy gold nor
silver; the Lord and his Word is better to me than all the gold and silver in
the world.

They offered him the book again, and he falls presently into a trance,
saying; would thou have me tear the book? I will not tear it do what
thou caust: will thou tear him in pieces that continues reading? (he meant
Richard Teate, who read forward when the boy was interrupted.) Satan thou
can not touch him, the Lord will not suffer thee to hurt a hair of his
head. He was strait after these words snatched into his trance, and said*
Do thou bid me open my mouth? what if I do open my mouth? do thou say thou will enter into me? Avoid satan, thou can not enter into me, except the
Lord give thee leave; and I trust he will not. Again after this he falls
into a trance saying, come master Hildersham, let us six go to heaven: at
which time there were just six in the parlour. Then fell he again before he
could read two words into a trance, and said; what Satan, would thou have
me become a traitor? God defend. These words proceeded from him with great
vehemency and earnestness of spirit. Then pawsing a while he says again,
Do thou say, that when I am asleep thou will pluck out my throat? I care
not for thee; thou can not touch a hair of my head, except God give thee
leave. Again, being in a trance he said; do thou say thou will set the
house on fire and burn us all? do thy worst, Satan, thou can not touch our
souls. Then he read again, and at the second word started amazedly, saying;
look where the Bear comes, look look, do you not see how he comes
against us with open mouth? hark how he roareth, then said he, Avoid Satan,
and get thee hence: yea, I charge thee in the name of the everliving God to get
thee hence. They offer him the book again, and he read not three words, but
he was overtaken with a quiet trance; wherein lying a while, he said, Oh I
see a milk white Dove: the Dove says, Fear not, you shall have better news.
Again he began to read, and again he was snatched into his trance, and
said, Do thou say the Lord has given thee leave to enter into me. Avoid
Satan thou art a liar, I know he will not suffer thee to enter into me.
Again, after he offered to read, he was cast into a trance, and lying very
quietly he says: hark ho, look what a fair Dove is there: the Dove says
the devil uses enemies toward me: hark hark what the Dove says, thou
have an enemy here upon earth, that says thou art a dissembler, he shall
fry in hell torments, thine eyes shall see his judgments, for his sins do
smoke up into the elements, and do pierce the heavens. Then pawzing again a
while he says, hark what the Dove says, whersoeuer the glory of God is
showed, there is always some enemies to resist it. He began to read again,
but at the third word fell into a trance saying: what, do thou say thou will torment me? do thou say thou will carry me into a wood, and cast me out
at the window? My Redeemer lives, the Lord of hosts is his name, I fear
thee not; remember that Satan; and pawzing a while he says, M. Hildersham,
see see how the world passes away* yea it must pass away, it hastes on
apace. Then begins he to read again, and at the third word is cast into a
trance, and at length he says, See what a little of Gods word does, how it
chaseth him away: see see how Satan flies away. Again being about to read,
he started suddenly, and said this book is a flame of fire, and presently he
fell into a trance, saying, Would thou have me tear the Book? Avoid
Satan, I will not tear it. Then lying still and pawzing a while he said at
length; Look where the dove comes, hark what the dove says, The Lord thy
God has tied thy enemy Satan fast in a chain, unless thou fall again, he
shall never tempt thee, hold fast and forget not: the child continued his
speech saying: O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world, thy
name be praised, thy name be magnified and extolled for evermore.

Forthwith he opened his eyes, and taking the Book, he read very cheerfully a
good space. Then did he and all the company joining with him humble
themselves before the Lord God, glorifying and praising his holy name, for his
comfortable presence, and gracious assistance in this myraculous work* and so
having continued in prayer a good while, the boy at last arose, finding the
doves words true, and himself very well, both in mind and body, and so
(thanks be to God) he has remained ever since, which the Lord continue to his
own glory, the joy of the godly, and the childs comfort, Amen. Now the
Witch is dead, had she lived, she should have bin executed.

FINIS.
Shortly you shall have the true story come forth of those seven in
Lancashire that were possessed with unclean spirits. and all seven delivered
at one time by this man.

LABOR ET CONSTANTIA
printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London for John Oxenbridge dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Parrot. 1597.


