A SERMON preached before the Queens Majesty, by the reverend Father in God
the Bishop of Chichester, at Grenewiche, the.14. day of March. 1573.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Quam speciosi pedes euangelizantium pacem, euangelizantium bona. Romans 9.

Imprinted at London die Henry Binneman, for Francis Coldocke. Anno. 1573.

To the Reader, Thomas Brown wishes grace and peace.
Whereas among other learned and notable* Sermons preached th^^ Lent before the
Queens most excellent Majesty, and by her grace highly commended, I
understood by those that were present, that her Highness also liked very
well, and comm^nded most graciously that sermon which the learned and
reverend father in God, the Bishop of Chichester preached before her Majesty,
in so much that some noble Peers, and many other desired a copy of the same.
I partly to satisfy their desire* partly to signify some spark of my good
will and duty toward the author and preacher of thy^ Sermon, my very good
Lord (of whom I have received benefit) traveled so f^rre with those that
could pleasure me in this behalf, that I o^ length not only received notes*
but almost the whole discourse of that learned sermon, although not altogether
in such sort as it was by the reverend Father preached* yet as ^^gh there unto
as could be remembered. And for the benefit of other I have here publishe^ the
^ame, trusting that this my labor will be no otherwise construed than thus:
tha^ whereas I my self can offer as of my self very little or nothing at all
to the buylding of Gods Temple, I thought good to bring thereunto a goodly and
beautiful pyller made by a cunning and noble workman, which I trust for the
excellency thereof will be of a great many with plausible allowance joyfully
received, to whom for the greater increasing of their joy, I will say that
which Aeschines said unto the men of Rhodes, who wondered maruelously at the
oration of that famous Orator Demosthenes, being but said and recited by him
unto them: Quid inquit Aeschines ^i ipsum audissetis sua verba resonantem?
sentiens in Demosthene magnum Demosthenis partem deesse, ^i quae ipse dixit ab
alio recitarentur: Do ye marvel, said Aeschines, at this my rehearsal of
Demosthenes oration? what if you had heard him self sounding and pronouncing
his own^ words? Meaning thereby, that in Demosthenes great part of Demosthenes
was wanting, when that those things which he spoke were recited of an other. I
doubt not, but unto all, this my little travel will be acceptable: to them that
were present, because they shall again be put in mind of that which they
before heard, and so may more deeply consider the same: to those that were
absent, for that they shall hear that which before they heard not, and so be
made better learned unto salvation. And thus desiring thee good Reader* to be
thankful unto God for this and other good fruits of the laborers in his
vineyardes, I bid thee farewell, from Westminster the.vj. of April. 1574.

A godly Sermon preached at Grenewiche.
God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and show us the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto us: that his way may be known upon
earth, his saving health among all Nations, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.
REmember thy maker in the days of thy youth, Eccl. 12*
before the time of trouble come, and the years approach, of the which thou
shall say, I have no pleasure in them.

2 Before the sun, and the light, and the moon, and the stars be darkened,
and the clouds return after rain.

3 Before the keepers of the house do tremble, and the strong men do bovv, and
the grinders do cease, being fevve in number, and they that look out of the
windows wax dark.

4 And they shut the doors in the streate through the weakness of the voice
of the grinding: and they yvake at the noise of the bird: and all the
daughters of music de deaf.

5 Before the high ones do dread and shake in the way: The Almond trees do
blossom, and the Grasshoppers do stick^ up, and the Capers waste: for man
shall go to his long home, and the mourners shall go about in the streate.

6 Before the silver thread be lengthned, and the golden caul do shrink, and
the Pype be broken upon the spring, and the wheel upon the cisterne.

7 For dust shall return to earth from whence it was, and the spirit to
God which gave it.

Before I proc^ede any farther, I shall most humbly beseech you to pray.
THe Preacher king Solomon in the.ii. chapters going before, has reckened up
all the joys and pleasures, both of the body, and of the mind, and has
found by the wisdom of God, that they be all mere vanity and misery: for
he says, I have considered all the works that are done under the sun,
Eccl. 1. 14^
and behold all is vanity and vexation of the spirit. And thereupon takes
occasion in this twelfth chapter, to exhort every one to serve God in time,
before trouble come, or sickness grieve, or age press, or death carry us
away. For the body that is but dust, shall go again to dust, and the spirit
which is eternal shall return to God, as will more plainly appear by a
breef discourse and expounding of the Metaphors and dark speeches.

Remember thy maker in the days of thy youth. That is: Serve the Lord thy God
that made thee of nothing, and redeemed thee of worse than nothing, whilst
thou art young, strong, helthfull, rich, and merry.

Before the time of trouble come, and the years, of the which thou shall say,
I have no pleasure in them. That is: before poverty, sickness, loss of
fri^nds, banishment, persecution, and misery come upon thee, in the which
flesh and blood bath no pleasure.

Before the sun, and the moon, and the stars be darkened, and the clouds
return after rain. That is: Before thou fall to such extremity, that thou
not only do not take any joy or comfort of ye light of the sun, of the moon,
and of the stars, and other creatures which God has made for ye comfort of
man: but ye clouds return after rain, sickness grow upon sickness, grief
upon grief, pain upon pain, sorrow upon sorrow. These Metaphors do signify
trouble and sickness.

Before the keepers of the house do tremble. The body is called ye house, for
that as a man is lodged and dwells in his house for a time: So the soul or
spirit is lodged and dwells in the body as in his house for a time. The
hands be called the keepers of this house or body: for that, as the keepers of
the house do dress up the house, repair and defend the house from spoils
and breaches: So the hands do apparel, feed, repair, and defend the body
from spoils and inconveniences.

The strong men do bow. The legs be called strong men: for that as strong
men be porters, and bear burdens, and as posts and pillars do bear up
houses, and buyldings: so the legs of men do bear up the burdens, the
buyldings, the houses or bodies of men.

And thy grinders do cease, being few in number. The teeth be called the
grinders: for that, as the milstones do grind, bruise, and make small the corn
that is to be baked: Even so the teeth do grind, chawe, and make small the
meat that is to be baked or concocted in the stomach.

And they that look out at the windows wax dark. The windows he called eye
lids, the eyes be those that look out by the windows. For as they which are
in the house, are comforted and directed by the light which they see by the
window opened: so the powers of the body be comforted, and directed by the
light which they receive by the eyes, the eye liddes being opened.

And they shutt^ the doors in the streat^. The lips be called the doors,
for that as the doors do shut and close in all things that be in the house:
Even so the lips do shut and close the tongue, the breath, and all other things
that be in the house of the body.

And they wake at the noise of the bird. When men wax old, their brain
waxes dry, sleep fails, and then they rather ^^umber tha^ sleep, in so
much that the crowing of a cock, the chirping of a bird, or any little noise
will awake them.

And all the daughters of music be deaf. The ears be called the daughters
of music, for that the harmony and consent of notes and soundes, is tuned
and judged by the ear.

The high ones do dread and shake in the way. The upper parts of the body be
called the high ones, which in aged persons do crook and stoop, and as it
were shake for fear.

Before the Almo^d trees do blossom. The head is called the Almonde tree, and
gray hears the blossoms: for that as the blossoms do cause the Almond tree
to show all white, so the gray hears do make the head show all white.

And the Grasshoppers stick up. The shoulders he called the grasshoppers, for
that as the legs and wings of Grasshoppers do^ stick up, and appear above the
body: so the shoulders in lean and aged persons do stick up and appear above
the body.

And the capers wasted. The capers do here signify the reins: for that
Caparis is an has which is v^ry good for the reins. His meaning is, before
you be aged: for that in aged persons the hands do quauer and tremble, the
legs be faint and feeble, the teeth decay and f^ll out, the eyes wax dim,
the lips will not easily open and shut: they sleep little, and watch much
through the dryness of their brain: their hearing fails, they stoop, and
shake as they go, their heads be white, their shoulders stick out, and their
reins be wasted.

Before the silver thread be lengthened. The silver thread is the sinews
which do stretch and lengthen upon death, and they be called silver threades,
for that they be white like silver, and do hold, bind, and tie together the
bones of the body, which would else one fall from an other, as threads and
lines do bind together other loose things.

And the golden caul do shrink. The skin which covers and encloseth the
brain is called the golden caul: because it is yelow like gold, and does
enclose, and keep together the brain, as the caul does enclose, and keep
together the hear.

The pypes be broken upon the spring. The heart is called the spring, and the
Artery the pipe: for that as water having the beginning in the spring, does
flow out of the spring into the pipe, and from one pipe to an other to every
office in the house: so the vital spirits springing or beginning in the
heart, go out of the heart into the arteries, which be round and hollow like
cundite pypes, and run from one artery to an other, to all the parts of the
body.

And the wheel upon the cisterne. The stomach is called a cisterne, a lake,
or a poole. For so the Hebrew word does signify, and the liver is called the
wheel, the wrench, or plumpe: for that as waters do not spring in a lake or
poole, but either ^all by rain, or be gathered together by the industry and
devise of man: so meat and drink have not their beginning in the stomach, but
he put into it by the hand or mouth. And as by a wheel and wrench, or plumpe
and certain lines, men do^ plumpe and draw water out of the lake or poole for
their necessary uses: so the liver by the veins does plumpe and draw the
juice out of the stomach, and does alter and change it into blou^, and convey
it to the nourishment of the body.

For dust. That is, the flesh and bones, which were made of earth and dust
shall dye and rot, and return to earth and dust again.

The spirit shall go again to God, which gave it. That is (says the Chalde
Paraphrast) the soul shall go again to stand in judgment before the Lord
which gave it to man.

The principal lessons be these: First, that each one ought to serve God in
time.

Next, that trouble, sickness, age, and death be Gods bayliffes to arrest and
warn us of our duty to God.

Thirdly, that every one shall rise again, and give an account to God of his
doings.

The first lesson is contained in these words: Remember thy maker in the
daye^ of thy youth: in the which we are to learn: 1 First, what it is to
remember God. 2 Secondly, to note the cause that moves us to remember him. 3
Thirdly, the time and season of this remembrance.


The remembrance or duetifull serving of God.
IT appears by the course of the Scriptures, that to remember our maker, is
to believe in God, Romans 5. 10
and Christ Jesus, which gave him self to dye for us being his enemies, which
has quickened us being dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. 1.
who being once dead in the in^irmitie of the flesh, rose again with power,
ascended into heaven with majesty, Ephesians. 4. 8.
has led away Captivity captive, Ephesians. 1. 21.
and reigns in heavenly things above all principalities and powers, and
above every name that is named, not only in this world, but in the world to
come. Who by his flesh has taken away the division and separation that was
between God and us, Ephesians. 2. 15.
abolishing the law which was set against us in precepts and decrees. Who is
our peac^, Ephesians. ^. 14.
our advocate, and propitiation for the sins of the whole world. John. 2. 2.
By whom we have boldness, Ephesians. 3. 12.
and entrance with all confidence through faith in him. For as ther^ is no way
into the house but by the door: so there is no coming to God, but by faith in
Christ. A^t. 10. ^.
By this door entered Cornelius the Roman: by this door entered y^ Ethiopian
Eunuch. Act. 8. 37.
By this door Zacheus received y^ person of Christ into his house, and
salvation to him and his whole family. Luc. 19. 5.
By this door the Iaylor mentioned in the.16. Act. 16. 31.
of the Acts, received salvation to himself, and all his house. And Ambrose
Ambrosiu^.
upon the Epistle to the Romans. This was God his determination, that the law
surceasing, the grace of God should require only faith to salvation. And Basil
Basilius.
in his book de hu^ militate. The humble knows that he is void of true
justice, and that he is iusti^^ed by only faith in Christ. And Heze^hius
H^zechiu^.
upon Leuiticus, says: The grace of God is given of mercy and favor, and
received by only faith. And Chrysostom Chryso^.
upon the epistle to the Galathians. chap. 3. They said: whosoever stays
himself upon only faith is accursed. Contrariwise S. Paul proves that
whosoever stays himself upon only faith, is blessed.

And yet as fire ever gives light and heat, so true faith ever yields the
fear of God, and love of God. When S. Paul had first taught the Romans that
they were sealed and assured of eternal life by faith in Christ: Romans 12. 1.
After he ^eacheth them to yield them selves, a quick, holy, and pleasant
sacrifice to God, which is their dutiful serving of God. Ephesians. 1. 14
When S. Paul had first taught the Ephesians, that Christ is the earnest of
their inheritance, after he teaches them to put on the co^plet armor of God,
Ephesians. 6. 14
having the loins girded in truth, and having on the brestplate of
righteousness, and their feet shodde with the Gospel of peace, to take unto
them selves the shield of faith, and the helmet of salvation, and the sword of
the spirit, which is the word of God, and to pray and watch with all
perseverance. So when the Praecher had taught first the remembrance of God,
after he teaches the fear and love of God: Eccl. 12. 13
let us hear the conclusion of all, says he: fear God, and keep his
commandments, for that is the duty of each man. Now to keep God his
commandments, and to love God is all one as Christ teaches us in the 14. of
John. Ioh. 14. 12
If you love me, keep my commandments. To the same effect does S. Hilarie
Hilarious.
expound this sentence. Remember thy maker, that thou may reverence his
majesty mightily, love his goodness fervently, embrace his truth zelously,
and believe his promises faithfully. and also S. Augustine, August.
Remember thy maker, that is, remember his might, that thou maysts believe: his
mercy, that thou may hope: his justice, that thou may be fearful: his
goodness that thou may be thankful.

The cause which moves us to remember God.
THe cause which moves us to rememb^r God is employed in this word Maker. For
diverse good writers both old^ and new say, that this is the sense. Because
thou art made after the image of God, Totu^ es obligatus ad eius seruitute^:
Thou art wholly bound to serve him. The Image of God (according to S. Paul)
Ephesians. 4. 24
is nothing else but righteousness and holiness of truth: So that the Preacher
says thus much: God has made thee, and made thee just and holy, therefore
thou ought to serve him.

In the.20. of Exodus, Exo. 20. 2.
the Lord spoke all these sayings: I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shall have none
other God but me. In the 19. of Exodus, Exo. 19. 3.
God says to Moses: These things shall thou tell to the house of Jacob, and
declare to the house of Israel: your selves have seen what I have done to the
Egyptians, how I have carried you upon the wings of Eagles, and have adopted
you to me: if therefore you hear my voice, and keep my covenant. etc. In
the.5. chapter of Esaias, Esa. 5. 1.
My beloved had a vineyarde in a plentiful ground, and he hedged it, and
walled it, and pickte stones out of it, and planted it with good Grapes, and
builded a tower in the mids of it, and a wine press in the mids of it.
What could I have done (says he) for my vineyarde that I have not done: but
that I looked it should yield grapes, and it yielded wild grapes. I looked for
judgment, and behold iniquity: I looked for justice, and behold outcry. In
Micheas the.6. chapter: Mich. 6. 3
My people what have I done to thee, or wherein have I grieved thee? answer
me. Surely I brought thee out of the land of Egypt, I delivered thee from the
house of bondage, I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriah. Remember
therefore what Balak king of M^ab had devised, and what Balam the Son of Beor
answered him from Sittim unto Gilgall, that thou may know the
righteousness of the Lord, and what the Lord requires of thee: to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to humble thy self, and walk with thy God. And in
the.102. Psalm* Psa. 102. 1
O my soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me bless his holy
name. O my soul praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits,
which forgiueth thee all thine iniquities, which heals all thine
infirmities, which delivers thy life from death, which crowns thee with
mercy and goodness.

The grace and mercy of God has mad^ man just and holy. The grace and mercy of
God has brought man out of the hellish Egypt, and carried him upon the wings of
Angels. The grace and mercy of God has planted the vineyarde of his Church in
a fertile ground: has hedged it with his law: has walled it with his
sacraments: has picked out the stones of superstition and wickedness: has
builded a toure, and set watchmen, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Eua^gelists, and Pastors to keep it: has made a wine press of Princes,
Judges and Magistrates. The grace and mercy of God has set over his people
godly Kings and Queens, godly preachers and Ministers. The grace and mercy of
God forgiueth all their sins, heals all their infirmities, and gives them
the crown of mercy and goodness. The grace and mercy of God is the cause of
all blessings and goodnesses. Ier. 1. 17.
Every good gift, and every perfect gift (as says S. James) is from above
from the father of light.

Blessed be therefore God* Ephesians. 1. 3.
even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ. As he has chosen us in him
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame
before him in love, who has ^oreapointed us to be adopted through Jesus
Christ, unto him self, according to the good pleasure of his will to the
praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us accepted in his
beloved: by whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness
of sins, according to his rich grace, whereby he has been abundant toward us,
in all wisdom and understanding. And therefore he gives great and just cause
to every one to remember and serve him.

For since the father has entayled his lands unto his son, each son ought,
and a good son will honor, love and obey so good a father. Since a friend
has made a deed of gift of al his goods to his friend, each friend ought, and
a good friend will be kind and thankful to him and his again. The God and
father of heaven and earth has entayled and assured the land of eternal joy
to us bys children. Their good friend and brother Christ Jesus has given them
himself to be borne of a virgin, Mat. 1. 25
to hunger and thirst, to be spitted on and scurged, Mat. 4. 2.
to be rent and torn, Ioh. 19. 28.
to suffer death, and death of the cross, to hear the pains and forments of
hell, Math. 26. 67.
and Gods wrath. Ioh. 19. 1.
He has given them his holiness, John. 19.
his righteousness, his truth, his patience, Math. 27. 46.
his mercy, and the inheritance of his glorious kingdom. ^. Cor. 1. 30.
And therefore they ought to be obedient to so good a father, and to be
thankful to so loving a brother. The Ox does know his owner, Esa. 1. 3.
and the Ass his masters cribbe: and much more ought man to know the mighty
Lord, and merciful God. Ps. 103. 9.
The sun sets and rises: the Moon keeps his full, his wane and change:
the sea does ebb and flow: the earth yields grass and corn, and fruit
for man, as God has made them, and appointed them to do: And shall not man
labor and watch, pray and fast, be merciful, just, holy, and true, as God
has made him, and appointed him to be?

The froward says: we may do what we li^t: but the holy ghost says, Deu. 11.
32
thou shall only do that I co^mau^d thee. The Epicure says: Let us eat and
drink, and be merry, for to morrow shall we dye: 1. Cor. 15. 32.
But the holy ghost says: 1. Co. 6. 13
Meats are ordained for the belly, and the belly for meats: but God shall
destroy both it, and them. The reiecte says: It is as good to sit idle, as
work idle, and it needs not, or it boots not: But the holy Ghost says: All
these blessings shall come upon thee and take hold of thee, if thou shall
keep my word. Deu. 28. ^
Blessed shal^e thou be in the city, and also in the field: blessed shall
thou be when thou go forth, and when thou co^mest in: blessed shall be the
fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy
cattle, and all that thou set thy hand unto. But if thou do not keep my
law: Cursed shall thou be in the City, and also in the field: cursed shalt
thou be when thou go forth, and when thou come in: cursed shall be the
fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy
cattle: and cursed shall be all that thou set thy hand unto.

The time of our remembrance.
IN the days of thy youth. The Hebrew word Bakarah signifies youth, or a
thing chosen of the root Bakar. For that a young man is chosen, and apt for
any work, or any thing. So the time of ^ur remembrance is our young years,
our flourishing days, the time of prosperity, y^ time of this our life,
whilst we may be framed to remember God. Eccl. 11. 6.
In the morning sow thy seed: Eccl. 5. 7.
make no tarying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day: for
suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security thou
shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in the days of vengeance, for man
does not know his time, but as the fyshes that are taken in an evil net,
and as birds that are caught in a snare: so are the children of men besnared
in the evil time, when it falls upon them suddenly. Ecce venio sicut fur:
Apo. 16. 15
Behold I come suddenly like a thief: Blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his garments. Eccl. 9. 10.
What soever thy hand can do, do it by and by. For there is neither work,
nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go.
Work while day is, for night will come when no body can work. Ioh. 9. 4.
Cast thy bread upon the waters, for after many days thou shall find it. Give
a portion to seven, and also to eight: for thou know not what evil shall be
upon the earth. Genesis 6. 14
Noah builded the Arc whylest the wether was fair: G^. 41. 48
Joseph made barnes and grayners, and laid up grain and corn in the s^uen
plentyfull years. The Ante having no guide, Pro. 6. 7.
master, nor ruler, provides meat for her self in summer. Ecc. 18. 1^
Ante languorem adhi^e medicinam: Before sickness take physic, and before
judgment try thy self, and thou shalt find favor in the sight of God.
Mat. 25. 1.
The five wise Uirgins took oil in their vessels, with their lamps, and were
ready when the Bridegroom came forth, and went in with him to the marriage.
Luke 16. 8.
The Lord prayseth the unjust Steward, for that be had done wisely: and
Christ wills his to make them friends of the Mammon of iniquity, that when
they fail, they may receive the^ into everlasting tabernacles.

Now for our particular instruction: God has delivered England from foreign
bondage: the burden whereof as we may behold in our neighbors on every side,
so have we domestical glasses to see it in. How the Danes ouerrunning this
land caused the English men to ear and sow^ their land, and do all other
labors, and the Danes did use their wives, daughters and servants at their
pleasure: and if any English man had met a Dane upon a bridge, the English
man might not stir one foot before the Lord Dane was past: and if the
English man had not made low curtes^e to the Dane at his coming by, he was
sure to be sharply punished. The Normands having title by English blood, and
speeding by the good will of the most of English nation, yet burdened them
with great tribute and exactions, took to themselves the chief possessions of
the land, ordained new laws and new coins, overthrew the houses of the
Nobility, and filled all Churches with strangers.

God has delivered his English Church from the Romish Pharao, which did not
only keep it under with the burdens of Annates, Exo. 5. 4.
Electio^s, Preuentions, Totquots, Tollerations, Bulls, Seals, Signatures,
Smokefarthings, and Peter pens, and such like: But also loaded their
consciences with the straw and clay of superstition, Exo. 5. 7.
error, and ignorance.

God has carried the chief of England, the Nobles, Ministers, and many other
good folk upon the Eagles wings, through marvelous dangers, and miraculously
preserved them, as their own consciences do best know. 2. Re. 11. 1.
For remember what Athalia and her bloody priest Matham: 2. Re. 11. 18
what Balam of Italy and his persecuting kings Balaac and Sehon: Number. 22.
what his cruel Dukes ^absache and Holoferne: 2. Reg. 18. 19.
what Ado^ias, and Abisac had devised: Iud. 7. 1.
and what their Balamites answered them from Sittim to Gilgall, 1. Re. 2. 17
from the beginning of thorns and troubles, to the wheel and type of rule and
dominion.

God has planted his English Church in a pleasant, fertile, and healthful
soil: he has given it plenty of all manner of vittailes: he has endued it
with peace and concord above all countries round about it: He has hedged it
with his Gospel, the seed of grace, which sown in the ^urrowes of Christian
hearts increases and multiplieth exceedingly: Mat. 13. 3.
the precious jewel more dear to the godly, Matthew. 13. 45.
than all the treasures of the world: Ephesians. 6. 17
the spiritual sword, that cutteth the hearts, and parts the flesh from the
spirit: the heavenly Net, Matthew. 13. 47.
that encloseth, and brings together the children of God: the water of life
which washes away our sins: Apo. 22. 17
the sacr^d fire, Ier. 23. 29
that burns away the superfluous humors of worldely desires: the wholesome
leaven that seasoneth and edifyeth the soul: Mat. 13. 33
the sweet bread, that ^eedeth the man of God: Luke 11. 52
And the true keye that opens to us Christ Jesus, the door of the kingdom
of heaven.

God has buyld^d in it the sincere and substantial walls of the Sacraments
of Baptism and the Lords Supper, the seals of faith, the watch words of
Christian soldiers, the images of our Resurrection, and the pawnes of our
salvation. He has pickte out the stones of error and heres^e.

God has set over it Miriah* ^o set forth his glory, to cause his word to be
taught, to advance virtue, to punish vice, to be a nurse and fosterer of his
people, Esa. 49. 23
to write out his book, D^. 17. 18.
and to read on it continually, to keep his commandments, not turning from
them to the left hand, nor to the right. He has set over it many good
Moyseses, that many stand in the gappe, Ps. 106. 23
to turn away Gods wrath, to guide gods people in the wilderness of these
perilous days, and to judge them from morning to evening: Exo. 18. 35
and many good Aarons to ring the golden belles of the Law and Gospel in Gods
Sanctuary and Church, to present sacrifices of thanksgiving, Ecc. 45. 17
and to give light to Gods people by his word. He has pla^^d in it keepers
and watchemen, preachers and ministers, which fe^d^ his flock, plowe his
ground, and sound the trumpet of his word, so godly, so learnedly and
paynefully, as this (...) seldom or never has tasted the like. Although
Cicer^es dogs that should bark at the Romish^ wolves, begi^ to snatche at
the christian Belwethers.

He has made a winepresse of Judges, Justices, and Magistrates, to press the
husk of controversies and suites from the juice, vi^e from virtue, falshoode
from truth.

And al these has he done, to move us to believe that he is God almighty,
Genesis 17. 1.
the first and the last, Apo. 1. 17.
the God of Gods, Lord of Lords, D^. 10. 17.
and that besides him is none. To move us to fear the profoundnesse of his
riches, Deu. 4. 35
wisdom, and knowledge. Who is greater than our hearts, To. 11. 33.
and knows all things, 1. Io. 3. 20
who yields wrath in the day of wrath, Romans 25.
to every one according to the hardness of his heart: Psalm. 7. 13.
who if we will not turn, has when his sword, bent his bow, and prepared the
arrows of death. Deu. 32. 4
To love him as true and faithful, Io^l. 2. 13.
as gentle and merciful, who has not dealte with us after our sins, nor
rewarded us after our iniquities: But look how wide the East is from the
west, ^s. 102. 10
so far has he set our sins from us.

All these has he done to move us to seek the Lord with all our hearts, and
to be zealous in the truth of the ieolous God, which gives not his glory to
an other, which will have us all, Den. 4. 2^
or no part of us, Ex. 34. 14
and casts the luke warm out of his mouth. Esa. 42. 8.
To keep our spirits, souls, Apo. 2. 10.
and bodies pure, Le. 11. 44.
and without blame to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Th. 5. 48
To be faithful and constante that we may receive the crown of life: Apo. 2.
10.
To labor to overcome, Apo. 2. 18.
that we may eat of the hidden Manna, Ap. 3. 5. 1^
to be clothed with white array, and to be made pillars in the Temple of God.

All these has he done to move us to girde our selves with truth, Ephesians. 6. 14
to bind it about our necks, Prou. 3. 3.
and to write it in the table of our hearts, Eze. 13. 18.
to fly the soft pillowes of flattery, the painted cloak of dissimulation,
Psalm. 52. 4
the sharp rasors of slandering, and speak the truth each one to another.
Ephesians. 4. 25.
To arm our selves with righteousness, Ephesians. 6. 14
and to make good good, and evil evil, Esa. 5. 20.
darkness darkness, and light light, sweet sweet, and sour sour, To
put on the shoes of peace, Ephesians. 6. 15.
the chain that lincketh Christians together with the bond of love, Ephesians. 4. 3.
the Image of Christ^ graven in man's heart, Psalm. 132. 2. 3.
the sweet dew o^ Hermon, and the precious ointment of Aaron to the Levites
and servant of God. To move us to keep the garments of innocence, Apo. 16.
15
to labor the wo^ke of God in the day of this life, Ioh. 9. 10.
to cast ou^ bread upon the waters, Esa. ^8. 7.
to deal our bread to the hungry, to bring the poor that wander into our
houses, when we see the naked to cloth them, to loose the bands of
wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free, to
break every yoke of the ungodly, Esa. 58. 6.
to help the blind and lame the widow and fatherless, the staunger and
friendlesse.

All these has be done to move us like prudente Noah's, Genesis 6. 41
to bu^lde the arc of a good conscience before the flood of Judgment do
ouerflowe. Like provident Joseph's, G^. 41. 48
to lay up the grain of godliness in the barnes of our hearts, before the
dearth of mercy shall be. Like paynefull Antes to provide the food of the
soul, Pro. 6. 7.
before the winter of Justice approach. Ecc. 18. 18
Like tractable patients to take the preparatiues of repentance before the
pangs of death do come. Mat. 25. 1
Likewise virgins to have ready the lamp of faith, and the oil of virtue
before the bridegroom Christ Jesus do shut the doors. Luke 16. 8
Like good Stewardes to provide for the Tabernacle of heaven, before we loose
the office of this life. In the days of fair wether, of plenty of Summer, of
health, of opportunity, of this life, to remember our maker, and to serve him
dutifully. And thus much of the first principal lesson.

Trouble, age, sickness, and death, be Gods Bay^^ffes.
BUt the nature of man is so crabbed and froward, that commonly the mercies
and graces of God do little prevail with him, and therefore when man
forgetting the goodness of God, begins to wax secure and careless. God
has certain Bayliffes and scourges, as trouble, sickness, age, and death,
which he sends forth to arest them to come to his Court of Justice, th^re
to be warned of their duties, (...) for their offenses. As the holy ghost does
teach in the.28. of Deuteronomie, De. 18. 15.
by Moses: If they will not obey the voice of the Lord their God, the Lord
shall send upon them, trouble, cursing, and shame: The Lord shall make the
pestilence cleave unto them: the Lord shall smite them with poverty,
sickness, and cold, drought, blasting, and meldewe: the heaven that is over
their heads shall be brazen, and the earth that is under them iron. In the.32.
of Deuteronom. De. 32. 18.
Thou haste forsaken the mighty God that begatte thee, and haste forgotten the
Lord that made thee. The Lord then saw it, and was angry, and said, I will
hide my face from thee, and thou shalt be consumed with hunger, and burnte
with heat, and bitter destruction. I will also send upon thee the teethe of
beasts, with the venim of Serpents. Also he does complain by the Prophet
Ozee. Ozee. 2. 5.
Your mother has said, I will go after my lovers, which gave me my bread
and my water, my wool and my ^laxe, my oil and my wine. Therefore will I
stop her ways with thorns, and make a wall, that she shall not find her
paths. And by the Prophet Ierem. Iere. 15. 2.
Cast out this people, and let them depart? And if they say, whither shall we
depart? Then tell them: Thus says the Lord. Such as are appointed to death,
unto death: and such as are for the sword, to the sword: and such as are
for the famine, to the famine: and such as are for captivity, to captivity.
Genesis 11. 24
Nimrod and his adherents forgot God, and said one to another: Come let us
make brick, and burn it in the fire, and let us build up a City and a Toure
whose top may reach unto heaven, that we may get us a name: But God sent his
bailiffe Trouble, which arrested the^ with a writ of confusion, and confounded
their language, that one might not perceive another speech. Job. 1. 4.
Jobs sons forgot God, and made feasts every one in his course, but on a
day when they were eating and drinking in their elder brothers house, GOD
caused his bayliffe Trouble to arrest them with a writ of tempest, which smote
the four corners of the house, and killed them all. The people of Israel
forgot God, Exo. 17. 2.
and murmured for bread and drink: But God caused his Bayliffe trouble to
arrest them with a writ of war, for the Amalechites smote a great number of
them.

The people of Israel mere weerie of their journey to the land of promise,
Number. 21. 6
wherefore God caused them to be arrested with a writ of fire, which consumed
the uttermost part of the host.

The people of God blasphemed God, Number. 21. 6
but he caused them to be arrested with a writ of fyrie Serpents, which
stoong them so, that many of the people of Israel were destroyed. The
inhabitauntes of Judah and Jerusalem trespassed wonderfully, 2. Par. 36. 14.
according to all the wickedness of the Heathen, and polluted the house of
God, and mocked the messangers of God, despised his word, and evil used his
Prophets, wherefore the Lords caused them to be arrested and ^^ed with long
captivity: for they were led away prisoners unto Babylon. The ten trybes
worshypped strange Gods, ^. Reg. 17. 23.
and walked after the rytes of the Gentiles, and therefore GOO caused them to
be arrested, and fined with long captivity: for they were prisoners amongst
the Assyrians. 1. Re. 13. ^
Jeroboam King of Israel, hearing the words of the man of God which cursed
the altar in Bethell, stretched forth his hand, saying, lay hold on him: But
his hand withered, and he could not pluck it in again. 2. Re. 1. 1.
Okezias trusted in Belsebub of Esceron, and therefore he did fall out of the
Gallerie in the top of his house in Samaria, and dyed upon it. 2. Re. 25. 7
Zedechias did evil in the sight of the Lord, and Nabuchodonozer king of
Babylon slew his sons before his face, and put out his eyes, and bound him
in chains, and carried him prisoner to Babylon. 1. Match. 9 55.
Alcimus general to king Demetrius, commanded all the walls of the holy
house, and the monumentes of Prophets, to be pulled down: But he was plagued,
and his mouth was stopped, for he weas stricken with a palsy, and could no
more speak. Ualerian the Emperor cruelly persecuted the Christians, whom
Sapor king of Persia took in battle: and did not only lead him about with
a leace like a blood hounde, but also used him for a footstool to get upon
his horse. 1. Reg. 21. 13.
Achab caused Naboth to be put to death, for that he refused to sell him his
Uyneyarde: But both Achab him self was slain in battle, and all his house
utterly destroyed. 2. Match. 9 9.
Antiochus swelled in pride against God: but God smote him with an incurable
and invincible plague: the pain of the bowels (which was remedylesse) came
upon him, and he fell down from the Chariot that ran swiftely, and bruised all
his bones, and the worms came out of his body in abundaunce, and whylest he
was alive his flesh fell off from him for pain and torment.

They of the Church of Israel were unthankful ot GOD, and ascribed unto
Idols their bread, and their water, their wool and their flax, their Oil
and their drink: they gloryed in themselves, and made them Castles and Towers:
they were secure and careless, and gave them selves to eating and drynking,
and pastyme: They followed the wickedness of the Heathen, and mocked the
Prophets of God, and despised his word: They gave them selves to
covetousness and wrong: They grew in pride, infidelity, and contempt of
God: and therefore GOD did arrest them with Trouble, with pestilence, with
famyne, with sword, with fire, with serpents, with captivity, with
destruction.

We of the Church of England, are unthankful to God for our Treasures, and
Jewels, for our houses and lands, our unity and peace: his blessed word
and Sacraments, and many other his unspeakable benefits and rich
blessings of GOD. We think they come not from GOD, but from our Parents,
from our Friends, from our wit and cunning, from our ^^ppe and labor.
We build Castles and toures in the air to get us a name. So many heads, so
many wits, so many common wealths. Plato his Idaea, Aristotle's felicity,
and Pythagoras numbers, trouble most men's brayns. Wishers and woulders were
never good householders, deuisers and phansiers were never good Common wealths
men. Phaeton thought that he could have ruled Phoebus Chariot, but his body
was too light for the flying horses. Genesis 11. 4.
Nimrod thought he could have builded a toure to heaven, but he wrought
confusion upon earth. The bramble thought it could have shadowed all the trees
of Lybanon* but it brought destruction. Iud. 9. 15
These light Phaetons, these devising Nimrods, disturbing brambles, fancy
many chariots and forms, devise many toures and plats, and promise many
shadows of common wealths, but the end of all is in^idelitie, confusion and
destruction. The figtree would not leave his sweetness, Iud. 9. 9.
the olive tree his fatness, the vine his wine, wherewith he did cheer both
God and man: neither should we leave the sweetness of unity, the fatness
and substance of religion, the wine of obedience, which do please both God and
man, and be carried away with the brambles of infidelity and confusion.

We grow secure and careless, we eat, we drink, we buy, we sell, we plant,
we build, we pastime, and make merry. Every one looks that an other should
serve God, they care not to serve God them selves. Job. 1. 5.
They think that Job should pray and sacrifice for them. The spiritual men
(say they) should keep hospitality, the spiritual men should see the
people taught, should give alms, should live according to their profession:
most true, and therefore should Gentlemen, and Noble men keep hospitality,
should see the people taught, give alms, live according to their profession.
For all be, or ought to be spiritual men. I know not whence that distinction
of spiritual and temporal men came, I suppose from beyond the Alps. The
word of God does acknowledge no difference of man but spiritual or carnal:
1. Cor. 3. 1.
and carnal none should be. You are (says S. Peter to all generally) a chosen
people, a regal priesthood, a holy nation, that yo^ should show fo^rth the
virtues of him that ^ath called you out of darkness into marvelous light. But
these that be called spiritual men have their liuinges for the said purposes:
and so have they whom we call temporal men also. Their lands be not their
own, they have them not of their friends, ^. Cor. 4. 7
they have them from God, who gives to every one according to his ability,
and requires again a reckening according to his receipt: Mat. 25. 15
for one talent of the servant and labourer: for two talentes of the farmer
and merchant: for three talentes of gentlemen and knights: for mo of the
Nobles and Counsaylours: for most of the Princes: whosoever has most living
and authority, is most bound to walk in the fear of God, and to see such as
be under his government brought up in the knowledge and fear of God. For every
one is Gods Steward, Luc. 16. 1.
and every Steward is bound to make his account, according to his receipte,
and charge.

We despise Gods word, and mock^ his Ministers, we blaspheme God, and abuse
his holy name, we worship strange Gods, our belly, our purse, our birthe, our
lands, our wit and authority: we trust more to Beelzebub of Ecceron, 2. Reg.
1. ^
and Apollo of Delphos, to co^iurers and southsayers, than to the Prophets,
and Apostles. Every man hunteth his brother with a net: Mich. 7. 2
Every man hunteth after Nabothes vineyard. 1. Reg. 22. 17.
Such as have Lordshippes and Manours, long after Naboths little field. They
that have to much, or spente too much, long after the vyneyardes of poor
Parsons and Uicars, and other that labor full truly in God his vineyarde.

We swell in pride and contempt of God and man, disdayning one another,
contemning one another, and are sorry that an other does live or thrive by us:
And yet we think that God can not, or does not see it. Genesis 3. 7.
We are clothed with the fig leaves of authority, of parentage, of
friendship, of self love, of flattery, dissemblyng, and our own fancies.
Genesis 11.
Well, our language has not been confounded: our houses smitten down: Exodus
17. 2
the Amalechites have not prevailed against us in war: Nabuchodonozor has
not killed our children before our faces, 2. Reg. 25. 7.
bound us in chayns, carried us away captives: we have not been stricken with
palseis: 1. Match. 9
let us not despise the great patience and long suffering Romans 2. 4.
of God. We know what has been: God knows what may be, and shall be. But be
these things as they shall be, yet if these two bayliffes can not find us, God
has a third Bayliffe, Bayliffe Age, which will find us out, and cause our
strong men or legs to bow, the keepers of our house and hands to tremble,
our grinders and teeth to decay, those that look out of the windows and the
eyes to be blind, the doors and lips to shut, sleep to ^ayle, the
da^ghters of Music and ears to be deaf, the Almond tree and head to be
white, the high ones and shoulders to stick up, the capers and reins to
waste: for all these when we f^ele them in our selves, or see them in others,
be Gods bailiffs to warn us, and tell us that it is time for us to prepare our
selves to begin to remember, and serve God.

But some can use them selves so cunningly, Ma^h. 4. 3
that Bayliffe trouble shall never find them. For if he seek them with
poverty, they will make stones bread rather than want. They will lord up their
corn and wares, until the poorer sort has sold, and then sell it at their
own price, or keep it until it be rotte. They will varnishe their wares, and
make them show fair to the eye, though never so bad to the use: or they will
leave their natural and lawful travel, and use unnatural and unlawful
multiplication of money: or they will sell their lands and live by usury: or
they will set their lands upon the last, and stretche them from six pound a
year to six score pound a year. Or they will make all fish that comes to
net by S^a or by land, or they will transporte corn, butter, cheese, and all
kind of good necessaries, and that to them that neither love Gods word, nor
this country: or they will sell their lands three or four times to be sure.

If trouble seek the^ by loss of friends, they can comfort them selves with
the commodity that they reap of their friends goods and lands, after they
have worn black a while.

If trouble seek them by displesure, they will say that white is black, and
black white: they will run with the hare, and hold with the hounde: they
will carry fire in one hand, and water in another: They will play Ait, Aio,
Negat, Nego. They will leave truth, justice, and equity, and play the
English Coliar, who first met King Henry the sixte soldiers, and was beaten
of them, for that he said he served king Edward the fourth: Next he met king
Edward the fourthes soldiers, and was beaten of them, for that he said he
served king Henry the sixth: Afterward he met a third hand of men, to whom
he answered he served the Devil, who when they had him be gone in the devils
name, so he answered he would: for quoth he, I have bin beaten of king Henry's
men, and king Edwards men, for answering that I served the one, and then the
other, and now I have said I serve the Devil, I go without hurt, he is the
best master I met with this morning. They will leave their duties toward
God, their Prince, and their country, rather than by displeasure to fall into
trouble.

Some partly by the goodness of nature, partly by diet and exercise* partly by
medicines, will order their body in such sort, that Bayliffe sickness shall
not find the^. And some with fair and pleasant houses, with their warm and
soft apparel, with their choice of meats and drinks, with their several
pastimes and recreations will cherish bayliffe Age in such sort, that he shall
little or nothing grieve them. Mary yet God has one sure and trusty Bayliffe,
Bayliffe Death, which never fails him. For he never returns, Non est
in^entus in baliua mea, but brings corpus cum causa. Be he old, be he young,
rich or poor, Lord or Lady, Knight or Emp^roure; he keeps them without
bail or maynprise. This Bayliffe can neither be deceived by subtlety, nor
allured by beauty, nor corrupted by money, nor withstoode by strength.

When death comes there is no way to escape: Be it to day, be it to morrow,
it will be, it is a debte, it must be paid. Strive man never so much, this
sentence definitive of God shall never be reuersed, earth thou art, Genesis 3. 16.
to earth thou shalt. Live you never so long, you must say with Job: Job. 17.
13
The grave is my house, darkness is my bed, I said unto rottenness, you are
my father: I said unto the worms, you are my mother, you are my sisters.

What say some, I have in bank a hundred thousand pounds, my plate, my jewels,
my lands are worth as much: and yet must you say: The grave is my house,
darkness is my bed: yet must you say to rottenness, you are my father, and
to the worms, you are my mother, you are my sisters. But I am able to ouerrule
any case in the law, I am able to be an Ambassador through the world, I have
the knowledge of all toungs and learning. I am able to serve any Prince in the
field, I am able to be of Council with any Prince Christian. Yet must you
say, the grave is my house. etc. I am a gentleman, a Noble man, I came in with
the conqueror, I can fetch my pedigree long before the Conquest, a King was my
father, a Queen was my mother, a King my brother, a Queen my sister: yet
must you say, The grave is my house, darkness is my bed: yet must you say to
rottenness, you are my father, and to the worms, you are my mother, you are
my sisters. For the silver threads and sinews shall stretche, your golden caul
and brayne-skinne shall shrink, your spring and heart, your pipes and Arteries
shall fail, your cisterne and wheel, your liver and stomach shall be dried up,
and consumed, and man shall go to his long home, and duste to earth, from
whence it came. And now follows the third principal lesson.

That each one shall rise again, and give an account to God of his doings.
THe earth is a mistress unto us of our resurrection: whose trees, flowers and
herbs do dye in winter, and revive in summer. The day, the month, the
year, the spring, the summer, y^ winter, do pass^, and return again, and
teach our resurrection. We our selves once in.24. hours do as it were dye in
sleep, but the morning awaketh us out of sleep, and shows us a manifest
token of our resurrection. But we marvel how the dry and rotten bones can be
fetched out of the Sea, out of the earth, out of the ashes again. He that
fetches the sun out of his cave every morning: ^e that (as it were)
quickens the dead Moon every month: Number. 17. 8
he that caused Aaron his rod, that had been many years dried, in one night
to bud, blossom, and bear ripe Almonds, can also bring ye dry bones out of
the grave, sea, and ashes, and cause them to hear ripe and perfect flesh. And
why should we doubt, that of the rotten body a perfect body may spring, since we
see by daily experience that of rotten corn perfect corn does grow, and that
of rotten seeds and kirnels perfect seeds and kirnels do come, which be
clothed with stalk, husk, and leaves: and this mortality shall put on
immortality, 1. Cor. 15. 53.
and this corruption incorruption. John. 5. The hour shall come, Ioh. 5. 25.
when all that be in the grave shall hear the voice of the Son of GOD, and
shall come forth. Romans 8. Romans 8. 11
If the power of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he
that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies.
For as in Adam all do dye, 1. Cor. 15. 22.
so in Christ all shall be made alive. Apo. 10. 11
Apoca. 20. I saw (says S. John) a great white throne, and one that sat on
it, from whose face fled away both heaven and earth. I saw the dead both
great and small stand before God. For the sea gave up her dead that were in
her, and death, and the grave gave up the dead that were in them, and they
were judged every one according to their works. Whosoever was not written in
the book of life, were cast into the fire. As S. John Baptist says, Mat. 3.
12.
he has his fan in his hand, and will make clean his floor, and gather
his Wheat into his garner, but will burn up the chafe with unquenchable
fire. Math. 13. 30.
In the time of Harvest, in the end of the world, the Sun of man shall send
forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom, all things that
offend, and them that do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of
fire, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: Then shall the just shine
as the sun in the kingdom of the father. Math. 13. 47.
The kingdom of Heaven is like unto a draw net, cast into the Sea, that
gathers of all kind of things: which when it is full, men draw to land,
and sit and gather the good into vessels, and cast the bad away: so shall
it be at the end of the world. The Angels shall go forth and sever the good
from the badde: and shall cast the^ into the furnace of fire, there shall be
wayling and gnashing of teethe. When the Son of man comes in his glory,
Math. 25. 31.
and all the holy Angels with him, then shall be gathered all Nations, and he
shall separate them one from an other, as a shephearde separateth his sheep
from the Goats. And he shall set the Sheep on his right hand, and the
Goats on the left: Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come
ye blessed of my Father, enherite ye the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world: Then shall he say to them on the left hand, Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. And therefore S. Paul's rule to the Corinthians is very necessary,
where he says: Let every man take heed, 1. Cor. 3. 11
how he buyl^eth, for other foundation can no man lay, than that which is
laid, which is Jesus Christ. And if any man build on this foundation, gold,
silver, precious stones, timber, ^ay, or stubble: every ma^s work shall be made
manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by the
fire: and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. If any man's
work that he has buylt upon, abide, he shall receive wages, if any man's work
burn he shall loose. Behold the Lord will come with fire, and his chariots
like a whirle wind, that he may recompense his anger with Esa. 66. 15
wrath, and his judgment with the flame of fire: for the Lord will judge with
fire and with his sword all flesh. Thou after the hardness of thy heart,
which can not repent, Romans 2. 5.
heapest unto thy self wrath in the day of wrath, and of the just declaration
of the just judgment of God, who will reward every one according to his works,
that is, to them which by continuance of well doing, seek glory and honor,
and immortality, eternal life: But unto them that are contentious, ^ disobey
the truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguishe, upon the soul of every man that does evil. For we
must all appear before the tribunal seat of Christ, 2. Co. 5. 10
that every man may receive the things that are done in his body, according to
y^ he has don, whether it be good or evil.

Learn therefore to remember your maker in the days of your youth, for either
trouble will come, or sickness will come, or age will come, and death will
come, and we shall rise again, and the Judge will come, which will neither
show favor or mercy, nor receive money, nor allow repentance. Here let every
soul repent whilst there is place and time for mercy: for there is only
time and place for justice. The day of judgment shall come, in the which pure
hearts shall more avail, than fair words, and a good conscience than great
Treasure. And though some man think that that day is far ^ence, let him be
sure, that his last day is not far hence: And look how this his last day in
this world shall take him, so shall the last day in the next world find him.
For such as he dies in this day, such shall he be judged in that day. And
therefore S. Hierome Hiero.
says well, whether I eat or drink, or what soever I do, me think I hear
this sound always in my ears: Surgite mortui, and venite ad iudicium, Arise
ye dead, and come to judgment. Psa. 66. 1.
God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and show us the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto us, that in the youth of this life we may be
thankful to the merciful and gracious God, for ^is infinite mercies and
blessings: And that we may learn to believe in him as almighty, to fear him
as just, to love him as merciful, to be zealous in his truth, holy and
constant, that we may girde our selves with truth, put on the brestpla^e of
righteousness, the shoes of peace, take the shield of faith, the sword of
the spirit, which is the word of God, and the helmet of salvation, and to
watch, and pray with all perseverance, that we may keep the garments of
innocence, labor the work of God in the day of this life, yield the sweet
grapes of judgment, cast our bread upon the waters of the poor, that when
Christ Jesus shall come to judge both quick and dead, we may be deemed the
good corn to be laid up in the grayner of bliss, the good fish to be put
into the vessels of glory, and live for ever with God the father, God the
son, and God the holy Ghost:

To whom be all honor, praise, and glory, both now, and eu^rmore.

Amen.

